S5776 12306553 59278
SOME REMARKS Upon a late Pamphlet, Entituled, AN ANSWER TO THE Scots Presbyterian Eloquence. WHEREIN The Innocency of the Episcopal Clergy is Vin∣dicated, and the Constitution and Government of out Church of Scotland Defended, against the Lies and Calumnies of the Presbyterian Pamphleters. Deut. XXXIII. 29. Thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their High Places. Psal. V. 9. For there is no Faithfulness in their Mouth, their Inward Part is very Wickedness. IMPRIMATUR, Dec. 20. 1693. Guil. Lancaster. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball over∣against the Royal-Exchange in Cornhil. 1694.
TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Arch-Bishop of Glasgow May it please Your Grace, HOW soon I entertained any thoughts Publishing a Discourse of this Natur in Vindication of our Church and Cle gy, I was easily determined to send abroad under Your Lordships Protection. You ha been such an Eminent Sufferer and Confessor
those woful Calamities of our Church and Nation, have been Persecuted to such a height, both in Per∣son and Reputation; meerly for the Defence of our common Principles, that you may justly challenge the Patronage of such a Treatise as your due. Your Merit having justly Advanced you to such a Dignity in the Church, as to be a Father of the Clergy; I therefore presume you will not decline to Espouse any thing that is Writ in a just Defence of their Innocency. The most of those Persons, whose Vindication I have here undertaken, have sometimes lived in Your Graces Diocese, are perso∣nally known to you, and you have had frequent oc∣casions to search into the whole course of their Life and Conversation, so that I dare the more boldly Appeal to your Lordships Impartial Judgment, if what I have said here in their Vindication be any more than is Just and Reasonable; and what the severest Judge will readily acknowledge to be their due. While the Enemies of the Church are at Work to Calumniate and Accuse the Clergy; your Grace being placed in such an Eminent Station, could not well expect to escape the Censure of their Ma∣lice. The Office you bear in the Church, and the Sacred Character you have stamped upon you, ex∣pose
you more Remarkably to the Malice of such Vermin as despise Religion▪ and trample upon all that's Sacred. But your Lordships Character and Merit is so Universally known, that what∣ever Malicious Reports are Raised upon you by the Enemies of our Church and Religion, deserve no a particular Confutation. However, your Grace has been pleased to gr∣tisie your Enemies so far, as to take some Notice of their Calumnies and has Annexed to this Trea∣tise such an irreragable Assertion of your own In∣nocency, as cannot fail henceforward to sop the Mouths of your most inverterate Enemies. My Lord, I don't question but you are alway ready under your Troubles, to practise that Chri∣stian Doctrine of Patience, you have so often Re∣commended to others, and I hope God, in his own good time, will pu an end to these Nationa Judgments, and recal your Lordship srom you Exile, to be again an Ornament to our Church, and to assist in the Rebuilding of the Second Tem∣ple, and making it more Glorious and Beautisul than the former; that to the Excellent Constitu∣tion of our Church-Discipline, we may have added a set Form of Prayer and Devotion, and then our Church shall again Flourish as a Palm-Tree, and
forever after be immoveable as a Rock. So beg∣ging your Lordships Paternal Benediction, I am with all Duty, MY LORD, Your Graces most Obsequious and Faithful Servant. W. S.
TO THE READER. THE most effectual way of Un∣dermining Religion, is to bring those who propagate it into dis∣grace and contempt▪ If once we Receive bad Impressions concern∣ing the Lives and Morals of our Teachers, we will not readily hearken to their Exhortati∣ons of Piety and Morality. The Authority of our Spiritual Guides is at an End, if we fancy them to be addicted to those very Sins and Vices, which they so vehe∣mently Preach and Exclaim against, and de∣nounce woful Judgmens against all that pra∣ctise them; we easily believe that they are not in earnest with what they profess; and we are Tempted from hence to conclude Religion to be a meer Cheat and Imposture.
This Method of subverting Religion has been always thought so successful, that if we look back into the History of former Ages, we shall find, that since the first Plantation of Christianity, it has been the constant practice of all its Ene∣mies to Slander and Revile those that did pro∣mulgate it, to accus them of the grossest Im∣moralities they could imagine; thinking by this mans to give such a fatal stroke to the Christian Religion, as to prevent its Conquest over Judaism and the Pagan Worship. Was not the Author of our Rligion himslf, the Holy and Blessed Jesus, Reproached with the Title of a Glutton and a Wine-bibber? Were not all his Followers, evn in the first and purest Ages of Christianity, chargd with Atheism, for contemning the Worship of the Heathen Idols; with incestuous Mixtures, and with eating Chil∣drens Flesh in their Holy and Sacred Mysteries? This Heathnish and Abominable Practice of calumniating our Adversaries, seems to have been copied by most of the Sectaries of the Christian Religion; but I think, by none more exactly than our Presbyterian Dissenters, who have never failed to lay out all their Industy and Wit, in contriving Forgerie and Calumnies a∣gainst both Clergy and Laity of the Orthodox Communion.
In our late Civil Wars, when the Presbyteri∣an Schism prevailed over this whole Island, when the Churches both of Scotland and England were quite overturned, and the Clergy Persecuted and Exposed to the greatest Hardships of Poverty and Want; their Persecutors, to justifie this their Cruel and Barbarous Usage of them, did indu∣striously represent them to the credulous▪ people, as ignorant of their Profession, and highly scan∣dalous in their Lives; loading them with the most Villanous and Immoral Crims they could think of. Thus were the whole Body of the English Clergy at that time maliciously assaulted, and accused of all the Crimes their Enemies could invent against them, as appears from the Centu∣ries of Sandalous Ministers complained of to the Parliament, Anno 1646. So likwise in their present Persecution against the Church of Scotland, they revived their Old practice of Slandering those whom they had most unjustly Persecuted. When they had Rabbld th Clergy from their Churches, and Acted such Villanies and Indigni∣ties upon their Persons and Families, as the most Savage Barbarians would have been ashamed of; the Noise of this Persecution spreading abroad, they found it convenient to Publish and Divulg
all the Lies and Calumnies they could invent a∣gainst our Clergy, lest they should seem to have  them without any ground; and think∣ing likewise by this Stratagem, to exasperate and rais the Indignation of all good Christians a∣gainst them, upon account of those heinous Vil∣lanis with which they maliciously charged them. Such Usage as this could not fail to Exercis the  of the Clergy, to see themselves so njuriously Prsecuted and Reviled. But they had thi for thir comfort, that they received no worse Usag than their Master had done be∣for thm; It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord; if they have called the Master of the Hous Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Hous∣hold? But thanks be to God, th Lives and Conversations of the far greatest art of our Clergy are so apparently Pious and Exemplary, so exactly conform to the Character they bear of bing Spiritual Guides, Buning and Shining Lights, that as the Calumnis of their Adversa∣ries, cannot much injure their Reputation in this World, so far less will thy be able to di∣minish that Eternal Reward laid up fo them in the Life to come.
However, when the Clergy are thus malici∣ously and unjustly Slandered and Reviled, Reli∣gion does often suffer thereby; and therefore in thi Case, I think it is the Duty of every Christian, to Espouse the Interest of Religion, and to Vindicate the Clergy from those Asper∣sions their Enemies load thm withal. There is not a more certain fore-runner of A∣theism and Irreligion in a Nation, than a con∣tempt of the Clergy; and it may justly provoke God to remove his Candlestick quite from us, if we suffer his Ministers and Ambassadors to be Treated with such Reproach and Contmpt; it is a shrewd Sign we have no great Respect for a Prince, if we affront his Ambassador. Although I am not in Holy Orders my slf, yet I have such a Veneration and Esteem for that Sacred Function, that it raises my Indignation to a great height, to see Ingenious and deser∣ving Men Buffoon'd and Ridiculed, meerly for their having devoted themslves to the Holy Ministry, for having Received the Title of being Christs Ambassadors to his Saints here on Earth. Were they of any other Profession, their Parts and Piety would make them to be much Regard∣ed by all Men; but because they have entred into the Office of the Holy Ministry, that Office
which our Saviour did not disdain to take upon himself, and his Holy Apostles Gloried in, they must therefore suffr all Indignitis and Affronts, nd be Treated with greater Contempt and Ig∣ominy than the meanest Artizan. Is not this to Crucifie afresh the Lord of Life nd Glory, to put him again to opn shame, to Mock him, and to Spit upon him, as the Jews id bfore his Crucifixion? For whatever Indig∣ity we offer to his Ministers here on Earth, he akes it as done to his own Person; He that de∣piseth them, despiseth him that sent them. It was tis Respect alon which I have for the Ministe∣al Function, that moved me to Write these few Remarks upon a late Scurrilous Libel against our Clergy, Publishd by an obscure Anony∣mous Author, who sems to be more influenced by te Spirit of Malice and Envy, than of th Christian Rligion. I was not a little concernd o see so many Eminent and Deserving Men thus injured in  Fame and Reputation, and tha among Strangers to whom they were wholly unknown. Were these Stories Published only in thir own Country, where the whole course of thir Life is sufficiently known, they might bid defianc to he utmost Malice of their Enemies; and to An∣er any such malicious Libels against them
thre, would be altogther superfluous. Bu when thse Rports are propagate amongst Stran∣grs, who have no personal knowledge of the Mn who ar thus abused, it is ncessary to Write somthing in their Vindication, and to prevent Peopl's being farther imposd upon by such Lis and Calumnies. This Author hath Writ a scond Part of the Treatis which is her , but that bing already takn to Task by another Hand, I take no Notice of it. My businss is only with his first Pamphlet, wherein I have sufficintly shewn his Gross Prvarications and Falshoods, and confuted all the Shadows of Reasoning tat ly scattered in his Book. My present Circumstances would not allow me to make an exact inquiry concrning all the particular Persons whom h hre Accuses of Immoralities, I being at too great a distance from the Places where they do resid. But I have pick'd out the most considerable instan∣ces; thos Persons whom he chargs with the most Atrocious Crimes, and in his Accusa∣tions against them, I have evidntly provd him guilty of the highest Malice and Injustic; which I think, is sufficient to Ruin the Cr∣dit of his Book in the rst of the Instances a∣mong all Sober and Judicious Mn.
THE CONTENTS. Introduction. THE Uncharitableness and Inhumanity of this Author's De∣sign. Pag. 1 This method of Writing inconsistent with the Principles of our Religion, and the Laws of Humane Society. 3 The occasion of publishing the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence. 5 Chap. I. THis Author's Reflections upon the Church of England, and so of he Ministers of State, considered. Pag. 9 Episcopacy established in Scotland, not by the force and tyranny of our Ru∣lers, but by the consent and approbation of the whole Nation. 10 The Bishops in Scotland investd with full Authority belonging to Bishops. 11 A short account of some of our Church Judicatories, Kirk-Sessions, Presby∣teries, and Synods. Ibid. These Judicatories shewn to be no Encroachment on the Episcopal Power. 12 Our Author's disingenuity in his slanderous Reflections upon the Clergy. 13 Some few of the Episcopal Clergy offering to joyn with the Presbyterians, can be no sufficient Vindication of the Lives and Morals of the Presbyte∣rian Party. 14 Te Episcopal Clrgy have charged the Presbyterians with nothing relating to their barbarous Persecution, but what they have been ablc to prove from irrefragable Authorities. 15 Episcopacy the first Government of the Church of Scotland after the Refor∣mation, and never there by Law abolished, till the unhappy Civil Wars nder the Rign of K. Charles the First broke out. 16 occasion of settling Superinendents in the Church of Scotland upon the Reform. 17
The Superintendents invesed with the whole Episcopal Authority and Juris∣diction over the Clergy of their Diocesses. Pag. 18 The Mission of the Superintendent's plainly different from that of other Ministers▪ Ibid. Te Superintendents no ways Temporary as to their Office, but only as to the Nam. 19 The Superintendents giving an account to a National Synod of their Dili∣gence in their Functions, no Argument against their being Bishops. 20 T Enacting of these Pnal Laws against th Presbyterians, which this Author has scraped together, occasioned meerly by the frequen Rebellios of that Party. 21 T Nation had sufficient ground to Enact these Laws against the Presbyte∣rians, from their Treasonable Practices under the former Rigns of K. James the Sixth, and K. Charles the First. 22 at this was the true occasion of Enacting these Penal Laws, appears from our Author's on Concessions. 23 s been the constant practice of the Presbyterians to▪ shelter their Trea∣sonable Designs under the Name of Religion. 24 The Sufferings of the Presbyterians no ways promoted by the Episcopal Clergy. 25 The Ministers of State nder K. Charles's Government sufficiently Vindi∣cated from our Author's aspersions of Cuelty. 26 A short Narrati of the Proceedings of the Council against son▪ Ministers turned out in 1662. 27 Chap. II. THE Presbyterians have justified the Murder of the Archbishop of S. Andrews in the face f Authority upon several occasions. Pag. 29 Mitchel's Execution justified. 30 The making the Inclinations of the People the Standart of the Church-Govern∣ment, is of very fatal consequence to the iterest of Religion. Ibid. T Presbyterians having made more Insurrections in the Kingdom, in bealf of their Church-Government, than te Eiscopal Church have thought fi to do▪ is no argument that Presbytery is more popular in Scotland than Episcopacy. 32 This last Convention having abolished Episcopacy, and established Presbytery▪ is no good argument, that the Presbyterians ave the majority of the Na∣tion on their side. 33 The Methods used by the Episcopal lergy for reclaiming the Dissnters shwn to be very effectual, since at the time of K. James's Indulgence there were fw or no Presbyterians but what joyned in Communion with the Episco∣pal Church▪ 3
The Prterian Practice in vilifying our Saviour's Prayer, altogether in▪ excusable. Pag. 35 The malicious Characters this Author gives of the English and Scots Gen∣try, as well as Glergy. 36 The etling or abrogating matters of Religion in compliane with the humours of the Populace, stands directly in opposition to the propagating of the Christian Religion. 37 The disingenity of this Author and his Party in calling the English Com∣mon-Prayer-Book Popery. 39 The lawfulness of observing Anniversary Days of Human Institution as∣serted. Ibid. The Murder of K. Charles he First justly chargeable upon the Presbyterians in both Kingdoms, and not upon the Nation in general. 42 The behviour of the Scots Presbyterians' towards K. Charles the Second upon his advancement to the Throne. 46 That the English Convocation acted upon far better Grounds in refusing an Union with the , than the Scots Assembly in rejecting the Addresses of those few Episcopal Clergy who addressed them, proved by several Reasons. 47 It is from the Civil Magistrate the Church derives all her Temporal Privi∣ledges, bt e is in no wys the Fountain of Spiritual Power. 50 account of the King's Supremacy in Scotland, as it is there Established by t Laws of the Kingdom. 52 The Church has the sole Power in Matters purely Spiritual, but the Clergy are equally subject to the Civil Authority, and liable to the same Punish∣ments with the Laity. 53 The Papists▪ and Presbyterians extend the Church's Authority beyond its true Bounds, in claiming an Exemption to the Clergy from Secular Punish∣mets till they be first condemned by the Church. 54 The Church of England guilty of no breach of Promise, in refsing an Union with the Dissenters upon the Terms proposed. 56 The Presbyteria Miisters ave often assumed to thselves a Power of making Peace and War. Ibid. The Presbyterians not without some ground stigmatized with the Reproach∣ful Term of New Gospellers. 57 Chap. III▪ IT is not strange to see Persons, after they have murdered, robbed, or any way injured their Adversaries, to endeavour likewise to blacken them i their me and Reputation, the better to palliate their own wicked Actions against them. Pag. 58
The Innocency of our Clergy sufficiently Vindicated from this  Asper∣sions, since in this present Persecution against them by the Presbyterians they cannot instance in four of their Number, against whom they could find th last prtence to deprive them for Immoralities. Pag. 59 Many of our Clrgy sufficiently Vindicated from this Libeller's accusations by the Author of an Appendix to a late Treatise, Entituled, An Apology for the Clergy of Scotland. 60 Dr. Canaries fully Vindicated from the Calumnies brought against him by this Accuser, and the Accuser's malice and disingenuity fully detected. Ib. An account of Dean Hamilton's Process, and his being absolved tfrom by the Privy-Council, and the Criminal-Court. 62 Our Author's great mistake concerning Mr. Boyd. 63 A full Relation of the Process concerning Mr. Hugh Blair, ad of the in∣direct ways and means usd by the Presbyterian Party to stain his Repu∣tation. Ibid. The Story of Mr. hisholm truly rlated, and he clered from this Ca∣lumny. 68 This Affair of Mr. Chisholm's, a singular Instae of the Villanous Arts and Practices of the Presbyerians to bring Contempt on the Episcopal Clergy 71 Mr. Waugh a Presbyterian Minister vindicated from the aspersions of this Lieller. Ibid. Another Mistke of our Author's, concerning Mr. Gregory's being Minister at Torboulton. 72 The notorious Falshood of the Rlation about Mr. Pearson. Ibid. A Vindication of Mr. Lawson Minister at Yrongray. 72 A Testimony of Archbishop Cairncross in favour of Mr. Lawson. 75 Another Testimony in his favour by the Presbytery of Dumreis. 76 Archbishop Paterson his Letter, Vindicating himself from the Asprsions of this Libeller. ▪ 77, 78 A Vindication of Archbishop Caioss. 83 Declaration of Mr. Richard Scot, and Mr. Henry Knox. 85 T Conclusion. 87
SOME REMARKS Upon the ANSVVER TO THE Scots Presbyterian Eloquence. In Vindication of the Clergy of Scotland, from the Calumnies thrown upon them by the Author of that Pamphlet. WHEN I irst Read the Answer to the Scots PresbyterianThe unch ritablness and inhuma nity of th Authors d sign. Eloquence, I coness I was perfectly amazed to think, that any sort of Men could be so Wicked as to shake off all ties of Humanity and Religion, and Write in this Scurrilous and most unchristian manner. This is such a mthod of An∣swering Books, as I believe was never yet heard of. The very Heathens and Infidels would blush at such Practices; and what an Age must this needs be in which our Lot is cast, that Christians, who profess to own that Pure and Holy Religion, should openly and avowedly Act such thing▪ as the most Barbarous Nations would b ashamed to commit. To Rae
ogether a parcel ofWicked and Prophane Stories, and to charge them upon Men, (most of whom are known to be of an untainted Fame and Reputatlon) and this without so much as one Witness to avouch for the Credit of what he says; this is such a piece of Impudence and Villa∣ny, as is not easily to be parallel'd. Does our Author think, that his bare Authority in aslerting these Lies and Aspersions without any other proof, is sufficient to blemish the Reputation of any Man of Worth and Credit? Or can he possibly imagine, that any Men of Sense and Reason are so easily imposed upon, as to believe these Calumnies to be true, unless he had been more particular in the circumstances of time and place when most of these matters of Fact are said to be done, and had produced the Testimony of some Famous and unexceptionable Witnesses to evince the Truth of what he says? In the very beginning of his Pamphlet he de∣clares himself an inveterate Enemy to the Church of England, and to the whole Episcopal hurch of Scotland; and yet ater he has thus Proclaim∣ed an open Hostility, can he be so inconsiderate as to think, that any judici∣ous or unbyassed Reader will give the least Credit to what he says against the most obnoxious Member of their Society, unless he brings very clear and undeniable Evidence for his Assertions? It cannot be denied but that ome two or three of those Men whom our Author thus Libels in his , were obnoxious to cenre in their Lives and Conversations; but it is very unreasonable that the Vices of these particular Members should be thrown upon the whole Society, since the Church did take all imaginable care to purge her self of these Vicious and Corrupt Members, and did actually  and depose or Scandals and Immoralities some of those Clergy-men whom this Libeller here accuses, but whether for those Crimes he  them with, I cannot positively aver. This I am sure of, that the mo  of them, who were thu censured by the Church, could never be gilty of some of those things alledged against them in this Pamphlet. Our Athor in several of his instances has quite outdone his Malice, and has been so inconsiderate in the inventing of some of his , tha the bare Relation of the circumstances of the Story is a suicient Conutation of the whole matter of fact. or although a Man may be so Wicked, as to be guilty of that unnatural Act of Sodomy, yet unless he be in a Fit of madness to the highest Degree, 'tis hard to be imagined that he could either be so publick, or so indiscreet in his Com∣mission of it, as to be convicted by 88 Witnesses, as this Libeller would have us believe, Pag. 64. So imprudent is he, in contriving some of his Forgeries. For this is such an Act of Folly and Imprudence, that I can hard∣y think any reasonable Creature could be guilty of it; since not only the hame of his Crime, but likewise the danger of being capitally punished
for it, would be sufficient Motives, if not to terrisie him from the sin, ye at least to engage him to privacy in his Wickedness. But as 'tis true, that some of the Clergy here Accused by our Author, have been guilty of some immoralities that cannot be excused; yet his other instances where he attempts to slander the Reption of some in∣nocent and worthy persons are as notoriously false, as you shall see y ad by when I come to consider the several instances more paticularly. However, I think these innocent Gentlemen are not in great hazard of susfering much in their Reputation by the malice of tis Author; for his Pamphlet is all over stuffed so with the spirit of Gall and Bitterness, that his Testimony cannot be of any great weight among serious and so∣ber Men. He is not satisfied to bel out all his Vomit against the Clergy of both Nations; but he likewise  upon all the Laity of the Epis∣copal perswasion both in England and Scotland, and represents them as Men void of all manner of Religion, who instead of frequenting the Re∣ligious Assemblies, do haunt Bawdy-Houses, and are Drunk in  andPag. 1. Ale- Houses. And here I cannot orbear taking Notice of this Barbarous and Inhumane way of Writing, how destructive it is to all humane Socie∣ty,This Methd of Writing  with the  of  Rligion, and th La of Humane Socity. and how inconsistent with the principles of that innocent and harm∣less Religion we all profess to maintain. It teaches us to be quite of ano∣ther spirit, ''To render no Man Evil for Evil, but to bless them that urse ''us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute s. The Spirit of the Gospel is so far from countenancing such Wicked practices of Slandering and Reviling one another, that it requires us, when we know our Brother to be taken in an Offence, to endeavour to reclaim him in the spirit of meekness, by private and brotherly Admonitions. But alas! this New method of converting Sinners, which our New Gos∣pellers have taken up, is such, that instead of reclaiming, it rather har∣dens and emboldens the Wicked in their Impieties. I do seriously wish the Authors of such Libels would but consider a little the general interest of Religion, and bethink themselves what advantage the affod the Enemies thereof by such unchian practic; fr  a scandal must it needs prove both to Jews and , against our mo Holy Religion, when they see those who profess to  it, accusing one another of such gross immoralities as could hadly be acted among any who firmly believe the Existence of a Dy. Thy must nds be Tempted from such practices to conclude, tht all our  i a meer Cheat, and that we outwardly profess wht we do not inwardly believe; since our behaviour towards one another is such, as if we did not really believe there is a God in eaven to reward the Good, or punish the Wicked Doer. Our Primitive ors used this  in
of their Religion against the Heathens, that it was Pure and Holy, harmless and innocent, and that its Doctrine was more effectual in re∣claiming Sinners from their Wicked Courses, than the Principles and Di∣ctates of all the Heathen Moralists. This they insist much upon in their Apologies; and it was certainly one of the most successful Arguents in making Converts to their Religion; for we find that by this Argumen many Heathens were perswaded to leave their Superstitious Rites and Customs, and to embrace the Chistian Religion as the most Pure and Holy, and that which advanced the Princlples of Humane Natue to the highest pitch. But can we ever expect at this rate to make any Converts to our Religion, when its Enemies do see us daily accusing one another of such Crimes as the most Barbarous Nations do abhor. Nay, so far are we from gaining any New Proselytes thereby, that I'm confident this Practice of Libelling our brethren does tempt such of our Religion as are not firmly perswaded of the Truth thereof, to desert and ridicule it. We may easily foresee of what pernicious consequence this Practice will at last prove, if we but consider how greatly Atheism and Irrigion does already prevail among us Is it not the general Humour of but too many in these Nations to Laugh at all manner of Revelation as a meer Art of Priests to captivate and delude silly people? They look upon Religion as a thing mean and despicable, and far below the concern of such great Masters of Reason, as they pretend to be. Nay, we are come to such an indifferency in matters of Religion, that many of our Laity do look up∣on it as a piece of Grandeur and Bravery, to trample upon all that's Sa∣cred and stamp'd with a Divine Character. Don't we see them daily endeavouring to expose the Clergy to Ignominy and Reproach, to re∣trench and diminish their Revenues, to represent them as Abject and Vile Persons, as the refuse of all the people, and even to Rob them of those Spiritual Priviledges with which our Saviour has invested them, and of which no Mortal can justy deprive them? And it is no small encourage∣ment that our New Libellers afford these open Prophaners of Religion to persist in their Wicked courses, of exposing the Clergy and consequently Religion it self to Scorn and Derision; for unless the Clergy be had in that Esteem and Respect by the Laity which their Sacred Function does rquire, 'tis impossble that ever Religion can flourish among us; they will never hearken to their Precepts, that have not a due Reverence for their persons. So that, if we have any concern for Religion, we ought above all things to be tender in blemishing the Reputation of Clergy men; since it tends so much to the detriment of Religion, and renders their Ministry altogether ineffectual among the people▪
But this Method of Slandering and Reviling our Brethren is not only  to Religion, but is likewise destructive of all Humane Society. For where such practices are permitted, it must needs beget Rancour and Ma∣lice, Envy and Revenge among the people, and this will at last end in Blood ad Confusion. The most innocent person can have no Fence for his Reputation against such Wicked practices as these; for suppose any prophane Rn should have the Malice to Accuse any of us of being Guilty of gros Immoralities in private, and offer no  to avoch for the Truth of his Accusations; what method can we propose in this Case to purge our selves from these Aspesions? For my pat, I know no other way but to Appeal for our Innocency to the Testimony of those who are most acquainted with the whole Course of our Life and Actions▪ I wish the Author of this Pamphlet may Reflect a little upon the mischie∣vous consequences of such Practices, and considr what mischief he does to Religion meery to gratie a little Humour. I know he endeavours to excuse hims by pretending that the Epis∣copalThe occsion of publis te Sots Presbyan Eloquence. Party were the Aggressors, and that they were  to use these Weapons only in their own defence. As for th fw Reflexions on par∣ticular persons which are contained in that  our Author pre∣tends to Answer; I consess I never did approve them; but when I consi∣der the occasion of Publishing this Treatise, I cannot deny but they had great provoction to what they did. When the Presbyterians were car∣ying on their Persecution against the Clergy of , it w their constant practice to summon them before their Courts of Judicature, and there produce Libels against them, containing all the false Accusations their Malice  possibly invent▪ of th being , Ignorant, and  in their Pris, the Od Cant that was used aginst our Clergy, by the Presbyterians in their mer  in both these Nations These Libels were Read pubickly in their Courts in the pre∣sence of a great many , and this on purpose to expose the Clergy to the gter Contempt among the Vulgar. The P thus Accused very patiently hd their Lils▪ and desired Witnesses might be adduce o prove the least  of Fact thee Libelled against them; and when they complained of this Barbarous way of procing, that a Court of Juice shou'd suffer Libels to be Read  them without any Accuser to own, or any Witnesses to prove them; and on∣ly begged of their Judges that they might be allowed to  Reputation, and to purge themselves from these Calumnies, by the Te∣timony of a few of their Neighbours of the best Fame and ; that so these  Lies might not be kept  Record as an Eternal Reproach to their Memory. This small  was denied them, and
th Judges very civilly told them, they were not concerned to inquire into the Libels produced against them, (notwithstanding of which they caused them to be Read publickly in their Courts, that the Vulgar might have thereby Oppotunity to mock and ridicule the Clergy; a most horrid Act of iniquity!) but only whether they had complied with the Civil Government, and given Obedience to the Acts of the Conventin  Lstates. And yet after they had declined to search into these Libels, thy Ordered them to be inserted into the Registers of their Couts, as being one of the Grounds of the Deprivation of the Clergy, though not so much as ever Attempted to be proved; where they are still pt on Record, as a Publick Monument of Infamy and Disgrace to our Clergy; and the Author of this Pamphlet has the im∣pudence to qute these Records as an Evidence against them. Now this is such a horrid and babarous Act of Injustice, as I am confident, was never heard of among the most Babarous Nations; and yet it is so certain True, that I my self was Eye Witness to several instances of it, and dare Challenge the most impudent of their Party to disprove this matter of I'act as here Related. The  did not rest satisfied with thr Attempts to ren∣der the Episcopal Clergy odious in Scotland, by their Unchristian Pra∣s of inventing malicious Libels against them; but likewise at the same time they were Persecuting them at home, they industriously Printed and Dispersed Papers here in England, representing them as Men vicios in their Lives, and ignorant in their Profession. So that after all this Barbarous and Cruel Treatment which our Clergy suffered from the , it was no wonder that some of their Friends should be Tempted to  their Quarrel, and to expose their Adversaries in their  and Natural Colours. But these kind of Practices where they are  with Spite and evil Designs, I must needs own, ought to be  of in neither Pty: since the only Essect they have▪ is to propagate our Animosities and Divisions, and to enlarge our  so as to make it altogether incurable. However this may su o let you see the Presbyterians were the first Aggressors, and if they still pst to Write at this Scurrilous and Obscene Rate, 'tis to be feared they may provoke some Writers for the Episcopal Par∣ty to ight them at their own Weapons, and then perchance they may have god Reason to be weary of such Practics. The Design of this Treatise, which our Author pretends to have given him just occasion for writing in this obscene and calumniating manner, was not to blemish the Reputation of any particular Person, by reflecting on  Morals, or ripping up the Sores and ailings which any one may
have chanced to be guilty of through the Infirmity of Humane Na∣ture. No, this had been a most Unjustifiable and Unchristian Thing, since the Precepts of our Religion teach us to cover and conceal the  of our Brethren. And it were very unjust to Upbraid one that i a good Man now, with the Escapes to which the Frailty and Weakness of his Youth did expose him: We ought rather to rejoyce and glory in his Conversion, that through the Assistance of the Divine Grace he has been enabled at last to ovrcome all the Temptations of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and to rescue himself from the Paws of that Roaring Lion, which goeth about seeking whom he may devour. We are all of us, alas! but too much exposed to the Frailties and Infirmities of our Nature, and so have no great cause to Insult too much over the Fallings of our Brethren; especially when they are so far from persisting in their wicked Courses, that they heartily repent of the Wickedness they have committed, and endeavour now to do that which is lawful and right, that they may save their Souls alive. And all the Instances in this Book, con∣taining Personal Reflexions upon the Life or Morals of any, do not amount to above two or three, which I have ground to believe were slipt into the Book without the consent or privity of the Author. But the true design of this Discourse was, to inform the World what great Damage did accrue to Religion, by the ridiculous manner in which our Presbyte∣rians are wont to handle all Matters that are Sacred; how they infuse into the Minds of the People sordid and mean Notions of the Great and Eternal God; how they often fright many into an unreasonable Despair of God's Mercy, by the horrid and extravagant Notions which they en∣tertain of the great Mystery of our Redemption, and how by their ridi∣culous and nauseous Stuff which they vent in their Prayers and Sermons, they expose the Sacred Mies of our Religion to Scorn and Derision. And I think the doing of this is so far from being a Crime, that it is ra∣ther a Duty incumbent on us, to forewarn People of the fatal Consequen∣ces that such Methods must needs have among us; that all good Men, who have any real concern for Religion, being informed of these things, may contribute their Endeavours for preventing that Deluge of Atheism and Impiety, which has already begun to overflow these Nations, and may justly be imputed to the Principles and Practices which these kind of pretending Gospellers have propagated among us; and that being made sensible of the great Danger to which Religion by such Practices is expo∣sed, may for the future discountenance all such Men as without any Com∣mission from God do usurp the Authority of his Ambassadors, and by their Drollery and Ridicule prophane all that's Sacred. Yea, I doubt not but Charity, even to the Presyterian Preachers themselves, partly moved
he Author to expose those extravagant Expressions in their Sermons and Books; accoding to that of St. Augustin, Haec  misericorditer irride, ut iis rdenda ac fugienda commendes; Do thou mercifully deride these Errors in Men, that thou mayest move themselves to deide and shun them. This, methinks, is a pious and commendable Design enough; and if the Author of this pretended Answer had but followed this method, and offered to prove against the Episcopal Clergy, what some of their Wri∣ters have done to a Demonstration against the Presbyterian Sect, that in stead of Preaching the pure and sincere Wod of God, they filled-their Sermons and Instructions with nothing but nauseous Stusf and Nonsense; I say, could he have proved these Things against them, and had he ab∣stained fom his Calumniating Aspesions, his Vindication of his own Party would not have been so generally condemned. But being sensible of his Weakness on that side, and that any Assertions of that nature in Prejudice of our Clergy could be easily conuted, he was esolved to attack them in a more Revengeful manner, and to alledge Things against them, which▪ though most of hem are as notoriously false as the other, yet he knew could not be so easily disproved. For in this case, as I said before, when a Man is accused of being guilty of some Scandals and Immoralities in his ife, and not the least Evidence brought to prove these Accusations; the on∣ly way left him to purge himself, is to appeal for his Innocency to the Testi∣mony of those that have been most acquainted with the whole series and course of his Life. But had he offered to urge any thing against them relating to the Matter of their Doctrine and Sermons, he very well knew that was a thing too Publick and too Notorious to Falsifie in, and that they could bring a Cloud of Witnesses against him to declare, that they Preah nothing but the Pure and Sincere Gospel of Christ, and Admi∣nister hi Sacraments with that Gravity and Sincerity that becomes the Infinite and Eternal Being, whom they represent here on Earth as his Ambassadors, and whose Covenants they seal in his Name, that they never approach the Throne of God but with the greatest Reverence and Devo∣tion, dclaring by the outward Prostration of their Body, what great and noble Thoughts they entertain of their Almighty Creator, and of he Sacred Offices they are about.
CHAP. I. HAving thus given you my Thoughts very freely of the General De∣sign of this Pamphlet, I shall in the next place trouble you with a few Remarks on the Particulars contained therein. As for our Author's Dedication, which, I suppose, he designs for a piece of Wit, I can dis∣cern nothing in it but what is mean and silly. His malicious Reflexions upon that Prelate, whom he so scurrilously Treats in his Dedication, and elsewhere, are nothing but a meer Brutum fulmen, and cannot in the least wound the Reputation of so great a Man, he being a Person endued with such excellent Parts, and his Merit having advanced him to such a Cha∣racter in the Church, that it puts him far beyond the reach of the greatest Malice of any such Scribler. In his Preface, he very civilly ComplimentsThis Author Reflexions upon the Church of England, and some of the Minist of State, co sidered. those Members of the Church of England, who promoted the Design of the Comprehension with the Dissenters, and tells them, that in his many Reflexions on the Church of England, he does not intend them, but understands only that Faction which opposed His Majesties desire of Uniting his Subjects, and goes under the Title of Ceremony-Mongers. It were to no pur∣pose to relate here the many venomous and ill-natured Reflexions on the Church of England, which are scattered in all the Pages of this Pamphlet. But by what he says in his Preface, we may plainly see, that he declares War against the most considerable part of the Church, as being Enemies to all Religion, and betrayers both of our Religious and Civil Rights. And although he's pleased to call them a Faction only of the Church, yet he must own them to be such a Faction as are the greatest part, and con∣sequently the fullest Representative of the Society, since by their Interest in the House of Convocation they opposed the Alterations that were then designed to be made in our Offices. In the same Paragraph he inveighs bitterly against the Chief Ministers of State here in England, who, upon the Application of some of the Episco∣pal Clergy to this Government, were pleased, out of a Compassionate sense of their Miseries and Oppression, to espouse their Interest, and en∣deavour to procure them a Redress of their Grievances. These Men he represents, as having been formerly Instruments to bring us under Popery and Slavery; and whether this be not such a Reflexion on the present Govern∣ment, as does concern it to Punish severely, I leave my Reader to judge, since to accuse the Chief Ministers of State under any Government of
such odious Crimes as Enslaving their Country, is a direct Insinuation against the Government it self, as if it, by employing such kind of In∣struments, did really design those Mischiefs against the Nation, with which they upbraid their Chief Ministers of State. And here I cannot enough admire the Impudence of this Author, to quarrel with the English Peers for medling in the Affairs▪ of the Church of Scotland, when he very well knows, that the greatest Encouragement and Support the Presbyterian Party in that Kingdom have, is from the inluence of some foreign Presbyte∣rians. And I would gladly know why an English Nobleman has not as good Right to concern himself in the Affairs of our Church as any Dutch Presbyterian. But to take off all Church of England men from having any Pity or in otland, t by  rce and ranny of  Rulers, t by the  and robation the whole  Compassion upon the Distressed State of our Church, he endeavours to perswade them, that the Constitution of Episcopacy in Scotland is so very sar disferent from that of England, that although our Clergy are Sufferers sor the Primitive and Apostolical Government of Episcopacy by Law established in that Nation, yet they cannot be said o suffer for the Go∣vernment and Discipline of the Church of England, and so not deserve that Fellow-feeling and Countenance which some worthy Members of her Communion are pleased to shew them. His first Instance, to shew the derence betwixt the two Consttutions, is this, That ours in Scotland was  upon us by the Tyrnny of our . Now suppose his Assetion were tue, yet, methinks, 'tis a very odd consequence, that two Constitutions must needs be disferent in their Nature, because disferent means were used to setle them in a Nation. Could not the Tyranny of our Rulers have forced upon us the same Constitution with that of England, as easily as one that is disferent. But his Assertion is as notoriously false, as the Conse∣quence he endeavours to draw from it; for in the Insancy of the Reforma∣tion our Church was governed by Bishops and Suprintendents, and that form of Government was appoved of by the Unnimous Consent of the whole Nation, both Clergy and Laiy*. And as to these later Times, ourAnno 1572. rl. 3 Jac. 6. . 45, 46, c.  Perth ss▪ in Aug . publick Records of Parliament can yet testifie, that the Episcopal Go∣vernment was so far from being sorced upon the Nation against their Will and Consent, that it has been established and confirmed by Twenty seven successive Legal Paliaments. It's known that at the Restoration of the Royal Family, the whole Nation having long groaned und the Yoke of , they were very desirous to have their Primitive and Ancient Government of Episcopacy restored, that they might be rescued fom the Tyranny and Confusion of the Presbyterian Anarchy, under which ty had so severely smarted during their Usurpation; and a great many of the Clergy, I am sure the whole Diocese of Aberdeen almost to a Man, addessed Hi Majesty upon this account.
His next Instance is, That Presbytery being▪ Engrafed with our Refor∣mation,The  in Scotland  th sl Authoriy  o Bshops. Prelacy could never attain to a kindly nor plenary Possession: And to prove this, he instances in our retaining of Kirk-Sessins, Presby∣teries, and Synods, even under Bishops. That the Presbyterian Go∣vernment had no Settlement in our Church for many Years ater the Reformation, I shall hereafter prove, to the conviction of the most Obstinate. But that Presbyters had a great Hand in Reform∣ing us from the Errors and Superstitions of the Romish Church, both in Scotland and other Nations where the Reformation happily pre∣vailed, is what we do not deny. But does it hence follow, that because Presbyters were more instrumental than Bishops in Promo∣ting that great Work of the Reormation, that therefoe the Presby∣terian Government ought to be Established wherever the Reforma∣tion obtains, and that of Episcopacy overturn'd? Or because Pres∣byters had the Happiness to be concerned in so good a Work, does that therefore Authorize them to Usurp the Sacred Ofice of a Bihop, without bing duly Called and Ordained thereto, by those whom our Saviour has appointed to convey that Authority? Although some Bishops may chance to be backward and negligent in doing their Duty, as those Popish Bishops ho opposed the Reformation, yet 'tis altogether unreasonable that the whole Order should suffer for the Crimes of some particular Members of their Fraernity. What our Author means, by saying, Episcopacy never attained to a Plenary Possession among us, I do not well apprehend; or 'is plain the Constitution of our Episcopacy is such, that th Bihop is nve∣sted with the sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction within his own particular District; the whole Presbyters of his Diocese are subject to his Authority, and own him for their Chief Governor in Matters purely Spiritual; there is no Act of Discipline put in exe∣cution by the Inferior Clergy, but by the Allowance and Approba∣tion of their Diocsan; and I think this is such a full and plenay Pos∣session as may justly entitle them even to a through Setlement. As or his Instances of our Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteri, Synods Pr∣vincial and National, because this is a part of our Constitution not so very well known here in England, I shall trouble my Reader wi this short account of them. That which he calls the Kirk-, i a Court of Judicature established in every Parish, consisting of the Miniser and some few Laicks of good Reputation that ae his Pa∣rishioners, whom he associates to himself for giving him inormation of the Manners and Conversation of his People, that so he eceiving from these Men exact Information of the state of is Parish, all scan∣dalou
and vicious Persons may be brought to condign Punishmnt. The Presbyteries are a sort of Judicatory under the Episcopal Con∣stitution, consisting meerly of the Clergy; or every Diocese is di∣vided into several Presbyteries, each of which consist of about 12 Ministers or thereby, some of them being more numerous than others. This Judicatory meets at least once a Month, and their chief business is, to consult and advise about Affairs relating to their several Churchès, and to examine the Qualifications of those that design to enter upon the Holy Ministry, the Bishop never admiting any to Holy Orders, but such as have their Approbation after several Exercises done before them. If there happen any Matter of great Consequence and Importance in any Parish, which the Minister is not willing to meddle in without the Advice of his Brethren, he bings it before this Judicatory, and laying open the whole matter to them, desires their Counsel and Direction how to proceed in such a weighty Affair, of Punishing an obstinate Offiender who refuses to submit to the Censures of the Church. This kind of Judicatory was not indeed known in our Church till near 26 Years after the Re∣formation. The Synod is a Convocation of the whole Clergy of a Diocese, with their Bishop, who meet twice every Year to consult about Matters relating to their own particular Province. National Synods, commonly called General Assmblies, (consisting of all the Bishops and their Deans, together with the Moderators of the seve∣ral Presbyteries in their respective Dioceses, and one Commissioner from each Presbytery joyned with the Moderator,) are called by the King Pro re natâ, to Deliberate concerning the Affairs of the whole National Church▪ In the Provincial Synods, the Bishop takes care to examine, i the several Presbyteries be diligent in their Duty of Punishing Offenders; and if ny of the Clergy be obnoxious to Censure, he they are Prosecuted or their Misdemeanors. Now ese Judicatories are so far rom being prejudicial to theThee  shwn to b n  n the  Power. Bihops Powr, that they are rather a great Assistance to them for promoting he Discipline of the Church, and upon that account wee irst Erected with the Consent and Allowance of the Bishops hemselves, they judging it very proper and convenient not to do any thing of great consequence to Religion, without asking the Ad∣vice of their Clergy how they should behave themselves in a Matter of so great Importance. And these Courts could not be look'd upon as any Encroachment upon the Episcopal Power, since they so entirely depended on the Bishops Authority, that without his Con∣sent no Act of theirs could be valid. But I think truly the Discipline
of our Church is none of the things most to be blamed; for we have some remains of the Primitive Discipline as yet among us, which are to be found but in few National Churches at this day, as appears from the Vestige we have of that Ancient custom of Com∣municatory Letters among the Bishops of the Primitive Church. And as there is some Resemblance of it amongst our Bishops, by dimissory Letters; so it was still in force among the Inferior Clergy, who were obliged to receive none into their Congregations, till they first brought ertificates from the Minister in whose Parish they for∣merly Lived, testifying, that during their residence among his Flock, they had behaved themselves Christianly and Soberly, and that e knew nothing against them, why they might not be admitted into any Christian Congregation; without this they were never allowed to have the benefit of the Sacraments. Had not he Presbyterians by their Tumults and Commotions envied us the happiness of having the English Liturgy settled among us, the Contitution and Disci∣pline of our Church was such, as made us inferiour to few Natio∣nal Churches▪ And here I cannot but wonder at the Impudence of that Party, that although they refused to joyn in Communion up∣on any Terms with the Episcopal Church, as by Law Established; yet they would take upon them to hinder them from settling a∣mong the Members of their own Commnion, such a Form of Wor∣ship▪ as they thought most agreeable to the Word of God, and con∣sonant to the practice of the Primitive Church. Our Authors transient Reflexions upon the Clergy are dressed upOr Autors disingenuity in his ▪ ous▪ Rlexi∣ons upon the Clergy▪ in such Scurrilous and Obscene Language, as must needs make any Man of a Viruous Education blush to Read them; and therefore lest I should offend the Ears of the modest Reader by Repeating them, I shall pass them over in▪ silence, till▪ I▪ come to consider his Third Part, and a present only take Notice of those things in the Book which relate either to matter of Argument or matter of Fact. And here I cannot omit his great protestations of his Ingenuus and fair Daling in this Work, whereby he thinks the more easily to cap∣tivate unthinking Readers into a belief of his Lis and Calumnies. He pretends o have inserted nothing but what he has Received from Credible Hands, but he thinks it not fit to gratifie his Reader with an Account of the Names of those Cedible Persons whose Authority he avouches for the Truth of his Aspersions. Had he given us the Names of the persons, with attested Declarations under their hands, asserting the Truth of these things alledged against some of our Clergy, we could have then known of what Credit and Authority
the Testimony of those Persons ought to be had, and it had been an easie matter to convince the World of the Falsehood and Forge∣ry of his Calumnies, and to purge those innocent persons from the Slanders cast upon them, out of meer Malice and Envy. But as or our Authors Ingenuity in his Collection, he has scraped together a great many Stoies, many of which are most notoriously False, and have not the least shadow of Truth in them, as I shall ater∣wards make appear; and for the proof of some of them, he Ap∣peals to Records, where no such thing is extant or to be seen, as I have had particular occasion to enquire. Some of his Accusations re against such of the Clergy, as were either Suspended, or De∣posed by the Church for their Immoralities, and yet this Author im∣putes the Faults of these Men to the whole Society, and is so disin∣genuous as not to acquaint his Reader with the Censures passed upon them by the Church. Others again are Passages related of some Clergy-men, who ived under the Presbyterian Government, du∣ing the times of its last Usurpation in that Kingdom, which this Author is pleased to charge upon the present Episcopal Church, and whether this be Fair and Ingenuous▪ Dealing, I appeal to any unbyas∣sed Reader. This Author insists much upon the Address presented to their Ge∣neralome few of he Episcopal  off∣ring  with , can  no  Vindication of  Lives an  e  Pary. Assembly, by some of the Episcopal Clergy, desiring to be admitted into a share of their Church Government. This he urges as a sufficient Vindication of the Lives and Morals of the Presbyte∣rians, or at least as an Argument that these Episcopal Addressers were no Honest Men themselves, who desired to be associated with such Knaves as they  the Presbytrians out for. This Address was op∣osed by a great part of the Church of Scotland, most of them look∣ing upon it as unlawful and altogether inconsistent with the Prin∣ples of Christian Communion, to joyn any ways in Communion with thos whom they owned to be notorious Schismaticks, as long as they persisted in their Schism; so that it was but a few of the Clergy that were concerned therein, and this they urge in their own Defence. That notwithstanding the Nation was in a distracted tate and Condition, yet it concerned every individual Christian, especially Clergy-men, to lend their Assistance for the punishing of candalous and Vicious Persons, and therefore, that although the Presbyterians had Usurped the Government of the Church; yet the Episcopal Clergy, who still retained possession of their Churches, might, consistently enough with their Principles, joyn ith them in he puishing of contumacious Offenders; specially, since they
were not obliged by this Act of Union, to concur with them in their Presbyterian Ordinations, or to own their Authority in mat∣ters purely Spiritual; but only to Unite with them as a Company of Laicks impowered by the State to Inflict censures upon obstinate Sinners. These were the Terms proposed to them by the Civil Government for carrying on this Union, and this they think they might have lawully done, without owning so much as the validity of their Ministry; and I am sure, much more without being obliged either to approve of, or to enquire into their Lives and Conversa∣tions; since in matters of Religion the bad ives of Christians is never a sufficient Ground for separating from their Communion, if it be in all other Respects lawful. The design of the first part of this Pamphlet is to shew, That theTh Epsco∣pal Clrgy have charge th Presbyte∣rians wth nthing rla∣ting to , but what  hav ben  Ako▪ . Episcopal Party bear an inveterae Mlice against the Presbyterians, and thereore their Testimony ought not to be of any Authority in these Accusa∣tions whih they bring against them. But our Author, if his Spirit of Revenge had not been too predominant, might have saved himself all this trouble, since the Episcopal Party do not oer to urge any thing against thm upon their own bare Authority, but what they can evidently prove from Authentick Recods, and from the Ate∣stations of Men of nspotted Fame and Credit, who were Eye∣Witnesses to mny of the Villanies and Injuries done to our  And this I am certain, they have already done beyond th possibi∣lity of a Conutation in the Case f he Affliced Clergy, nd som other Discourses which they have Published relating to their lat Barbarous Persecution. Late I ought not to call it, since it Rages almost as much now as ever. It's tru, the Clergy are not so much exposed to the Rage and ury of the Rabble, as they were (by whose instigation is very well know) not very long ago. But their Miseries are far fm bing at an end▪ they stil remin in Exile from their Churches and Houses, are exposed to all th Miseries of Pover∣ty and Want, have not the least  of  wherby they may gain Bread to  their crying ;  Misrie▪ do daily increase upon them, and whih is most discouraging, they have no prospect of Deliverance.  pray od may enable thm p∣tiently to undergo this Fiery Tryl, to withstand all the Tempta∣tions of Interest and Worldy Poiticks, and to remain firm and stedfast in asserting those Priniples of our Reigion, for which they at presen suffer; that so having no other aim before their Eyes, but to keep a Conscience void of Offence, both towards God and Man, thy my have a well grounded hop of Receiving at la, as a
Reward of their Sufferings, that Eternal Crown of Glory which Christ hath purchased to all those that suffer for well doing. But let us pursue our Authors Thread of Discourse, and see what first Go∣vrnment of th Church of Scotland af∣ter he , and  Abo∣lised  nhappy Ci∣vl Wrs un∣der the Rign of K. Chales brok . the Grounds are whereon he Accuses the Episcopal Party, with in∣veterate Malice against the Presbyterians. And the first instance we meet with of this kind, is, That they were the First Aggressors, and impugned the Governmnt of the Church of Scotland by Presbytery, which was the first it had after the Reformation. It is not a little sur∣prizing to see what pains the Presbyterians take to delude the ig∣norant people into a belief, That our sirst Reformers Condemned and Exploded the Ancient Government of the Church; and that it was no less Odious to them than the Romish Superstitions. When there is nothing more plain rom History, than that at the beginning of the Reformation, there was not the least Controversie about the Church Government, and the Bishops who did not oppose the Re∣formation, were lest in full possession, not only of all their Temporal Dignities, but likewise of their Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction. Suc of the Bishops as persisted in the Romish Errors and Corrup∣tins, were not allowed to Exercise their Spiritual Authority over the Clergy, but some of the Reformed Communion, under the Name of Superintendants, were placed over their Dioceses, and in∣vested with the whole Episcopal Jurisdiction and Authority over the Clergy of these Provinces, who were obliged (as appears from the Acts of our National Synods Spotsw. Re∣fut. Libel. de Reg. Eccl. Sco. p. 21.) to pay to their Superintendents, all the Canonical Obedience that is due to other Bishops. And by a Commission of the Assembly met at Leith in January 1572, the Go∣vernment of the Church was declared to be in the Arch-bishops and Bishops, and their Elections to be made by the Dean and Chapter; which Declaration was ratified by Act of Parliament theIbi. p. 26. sme year, and likewise by a General Assembly held at Perth in gust thereafter. Till the year 1575, about fifteen years after the gal settlement of our Reformation, there was not the least distur∣bance in the Kingdom about the Government of the Church, that Mr. And. Mlvil returning ifrom Geva, where he had been bred up with the Presbyterian Parity, began to raise Commotions in the Church, by attempting to have the Geneva Model Established in . But a fuler Account of the Government of our Church after the Reformation, you may see in a Treatise Published by Arch-bishop Sposwood upon this Subject, and Entituled Refutatio Li∣belli de Regimine Ecclsiae Scoicanae; and likewise in a late Discourse, ▪ where the same Argument is at Large considered, and in which it
is undeniably proved from the Records of Parliament, that Episco∣pacy was not only the first Government Established in our Church, immediately upon the Reformation, but wha is more, that although the Episcopal Authority was frequently Weakned and Interrupted by the popular Insurrections of the Presbyterian Party; yet it was never by Law Abolished in that Kingdom, till the unhappy Civil Wars broke out under the Reign of King Charles I. In the year 1592, when they pretend their great Idol of Parity was Erected, there was indeed a greater Jurisdiction and Authority allowed by Act of Parliament to Presbyteries and Synods, than what was Granted them before, which the King was forced to yield to, to put a stop to the many Seditions and Commotions raised by Melvil and his Accomplices. But yet notwithstanding this, the Bishops did still continue to exist by Law, and in all Parliaments they did Sit and Vote as the first of the three Estates, as appears from the Re∣cords of these Parliaments. And in the year 1596. Lslie Bishop  Ross dying at Brussels. Mr. David Lindsay was presented by the King to the Bishoprick the very next year; which is a plain demonstra∣tion that at that time Episcopacy was look'd upon as existent by Law; all which is made out very plainly and evidently in this Apo∣logy, But our Author will by no means allow th Superintendency Esta∣blishedThe occasion of settling S∣perintendants in the Church of Scotland upon the R∣formation. in the Church by our first Reformers, to be a Species of Prelacy. And his Reasons are; first, That those Superintendents had the very same Form of Ordination with other Minister. Before I proceed to consider the force of this Objection, it will be needful to premise something concerning the occasion of this Institution. At the beginning of the Reformation it was not thought safe, that the Popish Bishops, who still adhered to their Errors and Supersti∣tions, should be allowed to exercise their Spiritual Jurisdiction in the Church, and therefore they were excluded therefrom, and others of the Reformed Communion, being Vested with Episcopal Au∣thority, were surrogated in their stead, and called by the Name of Superintendents; the Sees of the Popish Bishops not being Esteemed void, but supplied by Protestant Superintendents, who did not en∣joy any of the Temporal Priviledges and Honours annexed to the Bishopricks. For although the Popish Bishops were restrained from the exercise of their Spiritual Power, yet such respect was had to them; that they were allowed during their Lives to possess all the Revenues of their Bishopriks, and to Sit and Vote in Parliament as Peers of the Realm. But such of the Bishops as went along with
the Reformation, were allowed, not only to enjoy all their Tempo∣ral Priviledges, but likewise to exercise their Spiritual Authority in the Church, and no Superintendants Named for their Diocefes, as was for those of the Popish Bishops. Now, although we should grant our Author, that their Form oThe  with the whole E∣pcopal Au∣thrity and Jurisdicton  the Clr∣gy of their Dceses. Ordination was not diferent; yet it cannot be denied, that they were invested with the whole Episcopal Authority and Jurisdiction over the Clergy of their several Dioceses, which is the only Bugbear in Episcopacy, with which the Presbyterians pretend to Quarrel, because they Usurp Lordship and Dminion over their Brethren, They were cloathed with full Power of Ordaining Presbyters, of Suspending and Deposing them from their Sacred Function, of cen∣suring and punishing the Clergy, according to their several Crimes; and all this they were Authorized to do Spotsw. Resut. p. . 21. without asking the▪ Ad∣vice, or Consent of the rest of the Clergy, which is more than our Bishops at present do. ‖ All Appeals from Presbyters and the In∣feriour Clergy, were to be made to the Suprintendents; they were† Ass. at St. Johnston Sess. 2. July 26. 1563. to decide all Controversies in the Discipline of the Church, to pre∣side in Synods, and to direct the Church Censures inslicted by the rest of the Clergy. All the Presbyters within their Dioceses were required, under the pain of Deposition to be subject to their Govern∣ment and Authority; and were not allowed without the consent and approbation of the Superintendents, to transact any thing of moment in the Church. So that they were invested with the whole Power and Jurisdiction that belongs to Bishops; and this, methinks, should be enough to stop the Mouths of the Presbyterian Party, who (as I have already said) exclaim against nothing in this Sacred Order, but the Authority which Bishops are allowed to have over the rest of the Clegy. And as for their Ordinaion, it seems at lest, that it was different. from that of other Ministrs, since those who were Nominated to be Superintendants; were chose out of the Number of such, as had already received the Orders of a Presbyter, and yet upon their E∣lection to a Superinendency, they were again solemnly set apart by Prayer for hat Oice. Now it cannot be imagined, that they should again receive the same Orders of a Presbyter, which had been already conferred upon them; and therefore this second Mis∣sion, mentioned upon their being chose Superintendents, can be meant of nothing else but Episcopal Consecration, or something in the sense of the Church at that time, equivalent to it. They ad long before received the Ordination of Presbyters; and now
when they were Elected Superintendents, they were set apart forHi, in Mi∣nistrorum ordinem an∣te coaptai, ad hoc  munus so∣lennibus auspiciis de stinabantur, destinai e∣ligebantur, electi su∣ctionem ini∣bant. Spotsw. Res. Libel. p. 3. that Office, by certain solemn Rites and Ceremonies, which is a plain Demonstration, that they were in a manner Consecrated a∣new to that Sacred Function. Besides, it is not to be conceived, how they above other Presbyters, could be invested with this Power of conferring Orders, and▪ exercising other Acts of Jurisdiction which belong only to Bishops, unless it▪ were by having this Epis∣copal Authority conferred upon them, by the hands of other Bi∣shops, and this they could without any difficulty obtain, from the hands of those Bishops in Scotland, who had imbraced the Reformed Communion. However, it is not peremptorily said here; that the Ordination of Superintendents to the Episcopal Ofice, was alto∣gether anonical: It is enough for our purpose, that they being of new, solemnly set apart for a more eminent Oice in the Church, The Clergy and Laiy had such a regard for the piscopal Order, That they considered the Superintendents as such; and payed the same deference to them, that formerly was due to the Bishops▪ so that, tho their distinct Ordinations would not b mad evident from Hitory to be Canonical; yet their Power was undoubtedly Episcopal. There is nothing more notoriously false, than what this Author urges in the second place against the Superintendents, That their ways tempo∣rary as to their Offic, but only as to the Name. Spotsw. ist. . 150▪ 160. Office was Temporary during the Exigence▪ of the Church. For in the Form of Church Policy, which the Protestant Clergy offered to the Parliament in the year▪ 1561, one of its Heads is concerning Su∣perinendents, and it is there appointed, that the Election of Super∣intendants in after times, should be stricter than the present cir∣cumstances would allow; and the last Head of that Policy pre∣scribes some conditions to be kept in future Elections of ; which is an evident proof, that our first Reformers did not look upon the Office of Superintendents only as a Temporary thing. The Name I grant indeed to have been temporary, and to have lated no longer in the Church, than during the Natural Lives of the Popish Bishops. For while they were alive, their Bishopricks with respect to their Temporalities, were not esteemed vacant; and the Protestants who were set over their Dioceses, were called by the Name of Superintendents; they not being invested with the Temporal Priviledges of a Bishop, but only with the spiritual Au∣thority and Jurisdiction belonging to that Office; but upon the Death of the Popish Bishops, we find, that whosoever was present∣ed to any of these Dioceses now falling void▪ by their Death, they
were not presented under the Name of Superintendents, as thy had been formerly, while the Popish Bishops were alive; but had now the Title of Bishops given them, and were invested with all the tem∣poralties, annexed to the Bishopricks. Thus it is we sind in the In∣fancy of the Reformation, both Bishops and Superintendants con∣temporary in the Church; but in a few years after, we have no mention of Superintendents, and all the Governours of the Church go under the Name of Bishops. And this, I should think, were e∣nough to convince any unbyassed Reader, that in those days the Office of Episcopacy and Superintendency were both the same. The Third Argument which he brings against the Superinten∣dents,The Super∣ntendants giving an Account to a National Sy∣od of their diligence in their Functi∣ons, no Argu∣ment against their being Bishops. is, That they were accountable to the Presbyters, which is altoge∣ther inconsistent with Episcopacy. Although Bishops at their first Insti∣tution, were invested with an Absolute Power over their Flocks, independent of any Authority, but that of Jesus Christ their Head, and were accountable to none for their right Administration of their Office but to him alone. Yet in after Ages, by a mutual compact among themselves, they did agree, that for the better pre∣serving the Unity and Discipline of the Church; each Bishop should be accountable for his Administration to the whole Colledge of Bi∣shops. And therefore although the Bishops should yield up some of their Right, and for the entertaining the better correspondence with the Clergy of their Dioceses, condescend to give them an Account of their diligence in the Offices of their Function, yet this could not be supposed to degrade them of their Office, or make them to be no Bishops. We grant, that the Superintendents did yearly give an Account of their Diligence in their Functions to a National Synod; but this Synod consisted of none but the Superin∣tendents, and Bishops of the other Diocees, and of the most Eminent of the Presbyters, who were allowed by the Superintendants, to sit in that Meeting. There was no Minister permitted to be a Member of that Synod, till he was first approved of, by the Super∣intendants,Spotsw. Re∣fut. p. 22. as a person sitly qualified to judge of such matters as were brought beore that Assembly. And I would willingly know of this Author, whether the Superintendants were any more a∣countable to this National Synod, than the Bishops who went along with the Reformation, and notwithstanding of this their being ac∣countable, were still looked upon as Bishops, and left in full posses∣sion of all their Temporal and Spiritual Rights, which they en∣joyed before the Reformation? And if those Men, who were ac∣knowledged on all hands to be Bishops, were as much accountable
as the Superintendnts; then it is no Argument that the latter were no Bishops. The next instance which this Author brings of the Episcopal Par∣ty,The Enact∣ing of these Penal Laws against the Presbyterians which this Author has scraped toge∣ther, occasio∣ned meerly b the frequent Rebellions of that Party. their bearing an inveterate Malice against the Presbyterians, is a long Enumeration of the Laws and Statutes made by King Charles II. and his Parliaments, for suppressing the many Seditions and Rebel∣lions raised against his Government by the Presbyterian Faction. He sums up all the Acts of Parliament made against that Rebellious Crew; and these he highly aggravates, as the greatest instances of Cruelty in any Government. But as to this point, the Learned and Worthy Sir George Mackenzie has quite stopt the Mouths of this clamouring Party, by his excellent Treatise, wrote in defence of the proceedings of the Government of K. Charles II. against the* Vindication of the Go∣vernment in Scotland, during the Reign of K. Charles II. Presbyterian Dissenters. He has there given us a summary account of the mild and calm Methods used by the Government to reclaim this obstinate Party, who were even hardned in their Rebellious Principles. He shews, that the enacting of these Penal aws against them (which this Author has scraped together) was nothing but what the Governours of any Nation would have been, out of abso∣lute necessity, forced to do for its safety and security. He has col∣lected the most considerable of the pretended instances of Cruelty against particular persons, which the Presbyterians do now most grievously complain of, and do mostly insist upon in their Railings and Belchings against the Government. To all these instances he has given such a full and satisfactory Answer; that every impartial Reader must needs own and acknowledge, that these persons met with no severity, but what their Rebellious and Treasonable Actings against the Government did justly deserve; that the punishments in∣slicted upon them, for their opn and avowed designs of subverting the Monarchy, were conform to the Laws of the Nation, and the proceedings in their Tryals very fair and legal; and that the Me∣thods of proceeding in our Criminal Courts of Scotland, (which this Author so grosly belies pag. 30. 31.) are the fairest and justest, and the Pannas indulged the greatest advantages for their own de∣fence, of any Nation in Europe. All which he has clearly demon∣strated to the conviction of every disiteressed person; who upon Reading the History of these times will be apt to say, that the mild∣ness and clemency of that Government towards the Rebellious Se∣ctaries was its greatest Cruelty. So that it is but Labour in vain, for this Author to be so sull and copious, in relating these sufferings of his Party, unless he can disprove what Sir George Mackenzie, and
others have demonstrated against them, of their being guilty of such srequent Seditions and Rebellions against the State, as would have provoked the mildest Government on Earth, to have quite extirpa∣ted them. But all the Attempts which either this Author, or another, who pretends to Answer the Vindication of K. Charles II. Govern∣mnt, makes that way, are only some weak esforts upon Sir George's personal ame and Reputation, which are sounded upon such a Rock, as the greatest Malice of this party is not able to undermine. His admirable qualities of Learning, Loyalty and Religion, have so justly recommended him to the Favour and Esteem of all Virtuou and Ingenious Men, that for these Scriblers to Attempt the blemish∣ing of his ame; is to as little purpose, as the Dogs barking at th Moon. What this Author alledges against Sir George's ingenuous dealingThe Nation had sufficient ground to e∣nat  Laws against the Presbyte∣rians, from thir traso∣nable  th  Rgns of K Ja. 6.  . Ch. I. in his Vindication, of Printing some Fanatical Covenants and Declara∣tions, published by the Presbyterians, and the urging these as  ground or enacing those severe Laws against them; although the Laws wer made long before the publishing of thse Declarations; I say, what he alledges on this score is most notoriously false. For these Covenants and Declarations, were only annexed to Sir Gorge's Vindication of the Government by the Publisher, and that with design to let the World see, with what impudence this Party did accuse the Govern∣ment of severity, when it appears from their own Authentick De∣clarations, that they were still pesisting obstinately in their Wicked and Rebellious Practices against the State. There was no necessity of recurring to these Posteriour Declarations of Rebellion, to justi∣fie the making of these Laws against the Presbyterians; since their former Treaonable Actings, under the Reigns of K. James VI. and K. Charles I. were sufficient grounds to direct the Wisdom of the Nation, to enact such Laws as might tend most o suppress the sedi∣tion of Rebels, and secure the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom▪ Their srequent Insurrections against K. Jams VI. in laying violent hands on his person, at the Castle of Ruthven in the year 1582, and keeping him Prisoner thre, for several Months together; in raising an Army against him in the year 1585, in the South parts of the Kingdom, and advancing therewith streight towards Strlin where the King then was; and in tumultuously getting to Arms at Edin∣burgh, and there Besieging the Session-House, where the King and his Counsellors were met together; and by that Insurrection had like to have done considerable mischief, had not their Rage been stopt by the Loyalty of some Citizens, who instantly Assembled together
in Defence of the King's Person; and the many other Commotions they raised against his Government by their Seditious Libels and Ser∣mons; besides that the whole Reign of King Charles the First, that mot just and clement Prince, was nothing else but a perpetual Suc∣cession of Rebellions raised against him by these Presbyterian Vota∣ries. I say, all these Instances of their Treasonable and Rebellious Practices in former Times are suficient Grounds to justifie the Na∣tion, in Enacting such aws as might best prevent these Disturban∣ces for the future, withou having any recourse to these After-Monu∣ments of their Rbellion to justiie the Proceedings of the Govern∣ment against them. However the Reader may easily judge from these Covenants and Declarations, whether any Government or Society can possibly subsist where such pernicious Principles and Pra∣ctices are tolerated. But that it was meerly the frequent Rebellions of this Party a∣gainstThat this was the tre occasion of Enacting these Pnal Law, ap∣pears from our Athors own Conces∣sions. the State, which occasioned the Enacting of these Laws against them, does partly appear from this Author's own Conces∣sions. For, Pag. 1. he owns, That their Field meetings, which they had under pretence of Religion, were called by the Parlia∣ment, Rendevouzes of Rebellion: And Pag. 14. he grants, That after the Deseat they received at their Insurrection of Bohwel-bridge, the Prisoners were all set at Liberty upon this only Condition, of gi∣ving Bond never to rise in Arms agains the King on any pretence whatso∣evr; and yet a great many of them were still so harden'd in their Rebellion, as to refuse their Liberty upon such easie Terms. And yet, methinks▪ these were no very hard Conditions som such a per∣secutiug Government as they are pleased to represent it; but from hence we may easily perceive, that the whole Design of the Go∣vernment and its Ministers in Enacting these Laws, was only to se∣cure the Peace and Quiet of the Nation, and by all the calm Me∣thods imaginable to reclaim these deluded Creatures from their Sedi∣tious and Treasonable Practices against the State. And after Argil's Rebellion in the Year 1685, which threatned nothing less than the ut∣ter ruine of the Monarchy, ad in which the whole Presbyterian Party were engaged, when Argile himself was made Captive, his whole Forces dispersed, and many of them taken Prisoners, and so lying at the Mercy of the Government; yet such was its Clemency towards them, that besides those who were killed in the Skirmishes betwixt the two Armies, I'm confident there were not four in the whole Nation that suffered Death upon that account. So mercifully were they then dealt with, although now they complain of the
greatest Oppression! Again, Pag. 15. our Author confesses, That a Party of the Presbyterians did declare King Charles the Second to have forfeited his Right to the Crown, and to be no more King, and at the same time, because of his Vicious Life, they Excommunicated him; which this Author expresly justifies them in, by saying, They had more Ho∣nesty than Policy in ding so. And whether the Tolerating such kind of Practices as these be not altogether inconsistent with the safety of any Government, I leave my Reader to judge. Can the mildest Government on Earth wink at such open and avowed Designs of subverting the Monarchy? Can it suffer a number of deluded Peo∣ple to range up and down the Country like as many wild Bears, threatning Destruction to the State and all its Ministers, declaring it Lawful to Murder all such as had any Hand in the Government of the Nation, and putting these Threatnings in Execution against some of the oyal Subjects? Can it be imagined, that any Govern∣ment should Tolerate such pernicious Courses, and so destructiv of its own Security, without endeavouring to bring the Ringleaders and Incendiaries of this Rebellion to condign Punishment? And after this account of the occasion of the Presbyterians Sufferings, I hink I may very confidently appeal to any disinteressed Person, whe∣ther the Episcopal Party had not very good reason to complain of their present Persecution in Scotland, as being more Grievous than any Treatment the Presbyterians ever met with; since what they susfered, (and are pleased to call by the Name of Persecution,) was always for their Rebellion and Treasonable Conspiracies against the Government. But what the Episcopal Party do now suffer, or have suffered since this Revolution at the Presbyterians hands, is meerly for Maintaining and Asserting the Principles of our Religion, and Adhering to the Communion of the Catholick Church, without which they can pretend no just Title to the Priviledges of the Gospel. Although there is nothing more clear and evident than that whatIt  he conant practic of the  to  their  un∣r th name of Rligion. the Presbyterians suffered under the late Reigns was meerly for their Rebellion; yet this Author has the confidence to perswade us, Pag. 13. That all their Sufferings were upon the account of Religion, and at the Instigation of the Episcopal Clrgy. If the Presbyterians will needs cover their Treasonable Designs against the State always with the Name of Religion, and when they are punished for Rebellion, pretend that they suffer for Conscience-sake, who can help it? But it is evident from the Laws enacted against them, and the Punish∣ments inflicted upon some of their Party, that whatever Pretences
they might make to Religion, yet the State took notice oly of their Rebellion. If they, under a pretence of judging it unlawful to hear the Episcopal Ministers preach, shall abstain from Church, and meet together (sometimes all of them in Arms) in their House and Field-Conventicles, the better to carry on their Designs against the State, and there Preach nothing but Treason and Rebellion; and if the Government upon this account shall strictly prohibit all such seditious Meetings, and punish those who frequent them; can this, I beseech you, be called Susfering for Religion? And yet this is the very case of our Presbyterians; for their Meetings were Prohibited by Act of Parliament, chiefly upon account of the Sedition and Rebellion vented in them. But this is no new thing in our Presbyterians; it has been not only their constant Practice, but likewise of all other Seditious and Ambitious Persons, in subverting the Government of a Kingdom, in overturning States and Nations always to cover their wicked Designs of Rebellion with the specious pretext of Rligion. To amuse and delude the vulgar sort of People, they publih in their Declarations, That they design nothing by their Attempts, but the good and safety of Religion, when in the mean time any thinking or considering Man may clearly perceive, that they have no other De∣sign or Aim before their Eyes, but to promote their own wicked and ambitious Ends. Now to deal with Religion in this dissembling and hypocritical manner, to shelter their villanous Designs under the Pa∣tronage of the Just and Holy GOD, is suh a contept of Religion and all that's Sacred, such an Act of Wickedness and Villany, as the Divine Justice cannot easily Pardon. Upon what Ground our Author alledges, That their SufferingsT Suffr∣ings of th Prsbyteri∣ans no ways prmoted by th Episcopa Clrgy. were at the Instigation of the Episcopal Clergy, I cannot radily con∣jecture. I am sure many Instances may be brought to prove the contrary, where the Clergy have interceeded with th Government in behalf of many of these Rebels who were most obnoxious to Punishment, and by their importunate Intercessions have saved their Lives, thinking by these calm and mild Methods to recaim them from their Errors and strong Delusions. Indeed the Event proved far otherwise, for in our late Distractions, these Men, who had been so mercifully dealt with, were the most furious and violent in carrying on the Commotions gainst the State, and the Persecution againt the Clergy. Nay, their Ingratitude was such, that they alone occa∣sioned the rabbling of those very Clergy-men, who had formerly been so instrumental in rescuing them from the Gallows▪ But I would willingly ask our Athor here, Whether he can charg any of our
Clergy with Petitioning the Government for the Execution of any of these Rebels, as the custom was in former times when Presbytery had Usurped the Government both of Church and State. Many Instances of this kind might be here produced to shew the Cruelty of the Presbyterian Party, how their Teachers during the late Civil Wars did often Petition the Committee of Estates for a speedy Exe∣cution of the Prisners, when they were all of them Men of extra∣ordinary Woth and Integrity, and had no Crime alledged against them but Loyalty to thir Prince, as was done by the Commission of the Kirk  a Prth in the Year 1645; and how they have perswaded the Generals of their Armies to put those Prisoners to the  of the Sword, who had surrendred themselves upon Quarters asked and given, as they did after the Defeat of Monrose by David Lsly at Philiphaugh in the same Year 1645. For the FootVid. Spirit of Calumny. in Montrose's Army surrendred themselves upon Quarters, which the General readily granted; but the Presbyterian Ministers, who were then in the Army, were highly enraged that Quarters should be given to such Wretches as they, and declared it to be an act of most sinful Impiety to spare them, and so by their Importunity they prevailed with D. Lsly to suffer the Army to be let loose upon them, and cut them all in pieces. Many such Instances of their Cruelty might be here produced from the History of these Times, but I pur∣posely forbear to mention any more of them. This, I think, is all that is needful to be said here in Answer toThe Minsters f State un∣dr King Charles's Govrnment, sufficiently vindicated fom our Au∣thor's Aspr∣sions of Cru∣lty. our Author's First Part, since Sir George Mackenzie in the above∣named Treatise has already demonstrated to the satisfaction of all disinteressed Persons, that what the Presbyterians suffered under the former Reigns was occasioned meerly by their own Rebellion, and could not in any justice be imputed to the severity of the Govern∣ment. And the same Reasons that justifie the Government in En∣acting these Laws against the Presbyterians, wil likewise Vindicate those Noble Persons who were employed either in the State or Army undr that Government, from the Aspersions of Cruelty thrown upon them by thi Scribler. If the Government be endangered by the Tumults and Insurrections of a Party, must the Ministers there∣of overlook such dangerous Practices, and not put the Laws in execution against the Incendiaries of these Commotions? Though I am certain it was done with the greatest Tenderness and Lenity imaginable by those Gentlemen whom this Author in his Pamphlet accuses of the greatest Cruelty. Most of the Persons concerned in the Administration of Affair under that Government, especially
those whom he chiefly vents his Malice against, Pag. 26. are known to be Men of such Worth and Merit, that our Author does his Party no small prejudice, by letting the World know, that their Practices have been such, as to provoke Men of that Honour and Quality to be their Enemies. But before I put an end to this Chapter, I must consider one Parti∣cularA short Nar∣rative of the  of the Coun∣cl against some  rned ou in 166. more which this Author urges as an Instance of the severity of that Government, and where the Parties that did Susfer cannot be so  said to have susfered for Rebellion, though they may justly enough be charged with an obstinate and peevish Contpt of the lawful Commands of their Superiors. It is Pag. 6. were he says, That by the Instigation of the Prelates, the Council by thir Act, Octob. 1662. turned out 300 Ministers out of thir Churches, without ither Accusation, Citation, Conviction or Sentence, or a Heaving allowed them. To answer this Objection, there needs no more but a true Narrative of the Matter of Fact, which I shall here set down as briefly as I can, and then leave it to the Judgment of my Reader, whether this Matter, when truly represented, can be with any rea∣son urged as an Instance of the Severity of that Government. In the Year 1649. when there was no King in our , and the Pres∣byterians at liberty to act as they liste, the Right of Patronages was abolished by Act of Parliament; and after the Restoration of the Royal Family, there was an Act of Parliment in the Year 1662, restoring this Right to the Patrons, and requiring all the lergy to take Presentations from them, under thē pain of orfeiting their Churches. But that the present Incumbents, who had entered to their Churches without a Pesentation from the Patron, might not sustain any Damage by this Act, it was threby providd, That the Patrons should give Presentations to none but to those Persons who were in actual possession of the Churches, and had entred thereto by the Call of the People. There were severl Pesbyterian Ministers who refused to give any Complince with this Act of , and would take no Presentation from the Patron; and therefore theVid.  Privy-Council issued out a Proclamation, requiring all the Clergy comply with this Act of Parliament, and declaring the Placs of those void who refused to yield Obedience thereto. Upon which the Non-Compliers of their own accord (so that there was no need  of Accusation or Sentence against them) abstained, after the Time limited by the Act, from the Exercise of thir Ministry, and te Patrons took care to present others to the vacant Churches. But I cannot see the least shadow of reason, why this Act should b urged a
an Instuce of so great severity in the Government, since there was not the least harm thereby intended to the Clergy; the design of the Act was only to secure the Rights of particular Persons which had been icroached upon in the Presbyterian Usurpations; for the Ministers that had been in possession of their Churches before the Year 1649, and had received Presentations from the right Patrons, were not included in this Act, but remained in their Settlements as before; and such as were now willing to own the Right of their Patons, by taking Presentations from them, were allowed to keep their Churches, and the Patrons obliged to give Presentations to them, and to none else if they were willing to accept of them. So that whatever may be objected against the Uncanonicalness of the Proceedings against them, (though even that may be justified, since all the Bishops concurred with what was done by the Council in that matter,) that their Sentence of Deprivation ought to have been pronounced by a Spiritual rather than a Lay-Court, and that th Bishops were more competent Judges to deprive them of the Exer∣cise of their Miistry than the Privy-Council; yet I am sure there is not the least ground to urge it as an act of Severity in the Govern∣ment, since these Ministers were permitted to keep their Churches upon such easie Terms, and the mildness of the Government to∣wards them was such, that many of them, notwithstanding they absolutely refused to comply with this Act of Parliament, or own the Authority of their Bishops, were indulged by the favour of the Bishops to keep peaceable Possession of their Churches, although this Author maliciously insinuates, that all their Sufferings were occa∣sioned by the Instigion of he Prlates. But a uller Account of this you have in a late Discourse▪ Entituled, An Account of the late Esta∣blishment of  Government by the Parliament of Scotland, Anno 1690. Pag. 14.
CHAP. II. OUR Author in his Second Part conines himself to a particu∣lar Consutation of the Treatise, Entituled, The Scots Presbyte∣rian Elquence; but before he bgins to take it to task, he's very high in his Pangyricks upon the Lord,  and Mlvil. I don't incline to make any particular Relexions either upon the Parts or Integity of these two Lords, the Tree may be easily known by its Fruits: but this I must beg our Author's leave to say, That as for their share in this babarous Pesecution of our Clergy, let them use all the means imaginable to conceal it from the Eyes of Strangers, let them deny it never so impudently, yet their own Consciences, and the starving Ophans of many of our poor Clegy, will appear as dreadful Witnesses against them, in that Great an Terible Day, when they are calld to give an Account of all their Actions, whe∣ther good or bad. And all the harm I wish them is, that they may at last seriously reflect upon the great Injustice and Barbarity of thei Proceedings towards our Clergy, that so by their unfeigned Repen∣tance they may Atone for these Crimes, and save their Souls in the Day of the Lod. In the next place, he accuses the Author of the Presbyterian Eloqunce,The  hav justisied te Murder of the Archbi∣shop of S. An∣drews in the face of  upon  ocu∣sions. for asserting a great many Untruths in his Book; and▪ p. 36. he instances in that, of charging the Presbyterians with the Murder of the A.BP. of St. ; or (says he) the Presbyterians were so far from ap∣proving it, that thy refused the  to those conerned in it, parti∣cularly at the Scos  in . What Abhorrence the Presbyterians in Holland had of this barbaous Murder, I cannot well say; but this I'm sure of, that our Presbyterians in Scotland were so far from detesting it, that they generally approved of it as a most Noble and Glorious Action; and I dare boldly affirm, that never one of the Party there refused to admit the Murderers to their Sacra∣ments, or ever offered to inflict any other Censure upon them for this heinous Villany. On the contrary, it is notorious how most of the Presbyterians that suffered for their Rebellion in Scotland did justifie this Murder in the face of Authority, and commended it as an act of good Service done to God and his Church in delivering them from such an Oppressor. This our Author's impudence ca
hardly serve him to deny boldly enough, and therefore he's satisfied rather to recriminate the Matter upon the Episcopal Party, by charging the Privy-Council of Sctland with Hanging five Men in Ma∣gus-Moor as the  Murderers, though never one of them ad seen a Bishop. These Men were punished by a lawful Authority, and conform to the Laws of the Land; for though they were not the Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, yet they were noto∣riously guilty of Treason and Rebellion against the Government; and these Crimes being sufficiently proved against them, and they justifying and approving of the Archbishop's murder, I think it was no breach, either of the Laws of God or Man, to make them a publick xample for the terifying other wicked Offenders, and se∣curing the Peace of the Society for the future. He says likewise, That the Council hanged Mr. Mitchel for shooting atPage 37. the said Archbishop, though he missed im. But although this VillainMitchel's Execution justified. happened to miss of his Design against the Archbishop of St. Andrews, yet the Bishop of Orkney being then in Coach with the Archbishop, was unfortunately wounded with the same Shot, which occasioned his Death, tho not very shortly after. Now I can hardly think, that any good Man would ever offer to condemn the punishing of such a Villany; and rally I very much wonder, that this Author regards so little the Credit and Reputation of his own Party, as to oer so publickly to countenance or excuse such Villainous Practices, as have justly ren∣dred that Party odious to the whole World. What he alledges about the Earl of Rothes and the Council their promising Mitchel his Life upon Confession, is nothing but a meer Fiction: For I am credibly informe, that they solemnly declared before the Justice Court, That they never made him any such Promise; and certainly if they had, they were all of them Men of more Honour and Integrity than to have retracted it. This Author is at a great deal of pains to prove, that PresbyteryPage 39. is moe popular in Scotland than Episcopay, which has ever been muchThe making the Inclina∣tions of the People the Standard of Church Go∣vernmnt, is of very fatal consquences to the  of Reli∣gon. insisted upon by the Presbyterians as a great Argument for the Law∣fulness of their Government, as if any Principle or Doctrine were the True, because agreeable to the Inclinations of the People. If this be the Standard of Truth, why was not Christianity exploded, and Heathenism still continued, as being more suitable to the Humours of the People? This is such a Foundation for the Truths of our Re∣ligion, as will go near to subvert all its Doctrines; since many of them are so far from being popular, that they are downright Ene∣mies to Fleh and Blood, and oblige us to abstain from all those
Worldly Pleasures which we so greedily pursue. 'Tis but a bad sign of the weakness of a Cause, when they flee for shelter to the fickle and unconstant Humours of the Vulgar; when they betake themselves to such weak and frivolous Arguments in defence of their Government, 'tis a shrewd indication they are at a loss for better to produce. This new Method we have taken up to promote Reli∣gion, by establishing nothing that is contrary to the Inclinations of a People, may chance to have more fatal Consequences than we at present seem to be aware of. The settling the Government of the Church upon such a slippery Foundation, disposes People to look upon it as a thing altogether indifferent and ambulatory, so that each Nation may set up what form of Church-Government they please. But if we consider a little the Nature and Constitution of the Chri∣stian Religion, we'll soon find that the Government of the Church is not of such an ambulatory Nature, and that it is a very essential part of the Constitution, yea so essential, that it is not in the power of Man to alter it. For God having established his Church as a So∣ciety, and invested it with peculiar Priviledges belonging thereto; he must be allowed to have settled and established a distinct Order of Persons for the governing it, and for admitting Members to a right to all those Priviledges which he has appropriated to the Mem∣bers of the Society. And if he has separated a certain Order of Persons for this Office, and impowered them, and them alone, to seal his Covenants in his Name, it must needs be Sacriledge in the highest degree for any to usurp that Office, without a due and le∣gal Call from those whom God has appointed to conveigh his Au∣thority. And God can never be obliged by the acts of those Persons whom he never authorized to represent him, no more than a King can be said to be under any obligation to ratiie the acts of any one that usurps his Authority, and falsly pretends to be his Ambassador. So that to alter the Government of the Church from what it was at first constituted by our Saviour, is nothing less than to undermin the whole ground of our Salvation, since we can have no Title to the Benefits of the Gospel, but as we are Members of Christ's Church here on Earth; and we cannot pretend to be Members, unless we b admitted into the Society by those Persons whom God has delegated to that Office, and intrusted with that Power. But notwithstand∣ing the impertinence and weakness of this Argument in Vindication of the Church-Government, yet since our Author insults so mightily upon it, I shall comply with him so fr as to consider the grounds of his Assertion; only I would caution the Reader never to lay stress on
such kind of Arguments, as are altogether incompetent, and of no force to prove the Truth of any Principle of Religion. For there is no Doctrine which is in it self false, that can be justified by ne∣ver so general a reception of it; and therefore, it can be no Argu∣ment of the lawfulness of any form of Church Government, that it is the most agreeable to the Inclinations of the People. All his Evidences to prove, that Presbytery is more popular inThe Presby∣terians ha∣ving made more Insurre∣ctions in the Kingdom, in behalf of their Church Government, than the E∣piscopal Church have thought fit to do, is no Ar∣gumt tat  is more  in Scotland,  Scotland than Episcopacy, amount to no more than this, that the Presbyterians have made more Insurrections in behalf of their Go∣vernment, than the Episcopal Church ever thought fit to do. And that this is not sufficient evidence enough to prove their point, will easily appear from hence. The Principles of our Presbyterians with respect to Monarchy, are of a very large extent; they make the Supreme Power of the Nation accountable to his Subjects, and allow he may be resisted and Dethroned for his Male-Admini∣stration. So that, if the Sovereign shall at any time think sit to mke such Alterations, either in Church or State, as do not exactly quadrate with the Wild Humours and Fancies of that Party; then they instantly betake themselves to Arms, and resolve to involve the Nation into Blood and Confusion, rather than fail of having their unaccountable Humours gratified. But the Episcopal Church of that Kingdom have greater restraints upon them; they own, in Consormity to the Laws of the Rea, and to the Laws of God in his irst Institution of Government; that the Supreme Power is irre∣sistable, and cannot for any Male Administration be Dethroned by his Subjects; that if he be guilty of any Illegal or Unjustifiable A∣ctions in his Government, he is accountable to none for them, but to God alone. And therefore, although the Sovereign should chance to stablish such Constitutions, either in Church or State, as are contrary both to the Laws of God, and the particular Laws of the Realm; yet by reason of their strict Obligations to absolute submis∣sion, they are not at Liberty to Rise in Arms, and assert their Rights that are thus encroached upon. They may indeed vey lawfully refuse their actual concurrence and compliance with these sinful Con∣stitutions; but to resist or Dethrone their Sovereign upon that Ac∣count, is what they are not able to Justifie, either by the Laws of God, or the Laws of the Nation. This is, and has been the con∣stant Principle and Doctrine of our Church; and if any of its Members have Acted contrary thereto, they have in so far deserted the Principles of their Church, and slighted their Sacred Vows and Obligations, and therefore ought in Conscience speedily to return
to their Duty. The Reason why the Episcopal Church Act more submissively to the Lawful Powers than the Presbyterians, is not, that there lie stricter Obligations to Obedience upon the one Party than the other; no, they are both subject to the same Laws, are obliged to own the same Prince; and are under the same Obliga∣tions and Ties of Conscience to submit and adhere to him. But the difference lies here, that the Episcopal Church make some Con∣science of performing their Duty, and of Walking answerably o their Vows and Obligations; and resolve, in Conformity to their imi∣tive Ancestors; rather to suffer Pesecution than be guilty of Re∣bellion. On the contrary, the Presbyterians sacrific al Duties to the Interest of their Party; and where that is concerned, make light of all Obligations: So that, whoever considers the diffe∣rent Principles of both these Parties, will never conclude from hence, that Presbytery is more popular in Scotland than Episcopacy, meerly, because there have been more popular Insurrections for it, than for the other; since the Presbyterians think it lawful to Rebel upon that account, and the Episcopal Church look upon it as al∣together unjustiiable to resist the lawful Powers upon any account, even of Religion it self. As for what our Author urges concerning the great Party thatThis lst Convntion having abo∣lis d Episco∣pacy, and establishd Presbytry, is no good Ar∣gumnt, that the Presbyte∣rians have the majority of the Nation on their side. appeared for the Presbyterian Government in this last Convention, which Abolished Episcopacy, and Established Presbytery; I shall plainly make it appear, that this can be no Argument, that they have the Majority of the Nation on their side. At the time when this Convention was called in Scotland, the Affairs of our Nation were in such a distracted condition, as made the Event altogether uncertain; and upon this account many of the Episcopal Gentle∣men who were wont formerly to be Members of Parliament, thought it safer to keep out of publick business, and therefore refu∣sed to be Elected by those Shires and Burroughs whom they used always to represent in Parliament. Nay, some of them were so averse from being Elected themselves, that they would not so much as be present to Vote at the Election of othrs, thinking it to be a direct breach of their Ties and Oaths to the Government, and particularly that of the Test, to meet or consult about the Aairs of the Nation without the consent of the King. So that at many of the Elections one third part of the Members concerned therein refused to be present, and the Episcopal Gentlemen declining to be Elected, there was no opposition made to any that would stand; and this was certainly the Reason why more Presbyterian Members
rept into this Convention, than ever durst appear in the like As∣sembly bfore. But notwithstanding this great advantage the Pres∣byterians had in these Elections; yet even in the Convention, had not the Episcopal party been divided among themselves about the Civil Government, their Adversaries could never have gained any ground upon them, in altering the State of our Church. For ma∣ny of the Episcopal Nobility and Gentry being dissatisfied about the lawfulness of the State Revolution, withdrew from the Conven∣tion of Estates before the Affairs of the Church were considered; and this you must needs suppose, was no small diminution of the interest of the Episcopal Church in that Convention, and enabled the Presbyterians to do there as they pleased. And so I think this short Account of the State of our Nation at that time is sufficient to convince the Reader; that although Presbytery was Established by that Convention; yet it by no means follows, that the Majority of ou Nation inclines to that Government. 'Tis known to any who are the least conversant in the Affairs of our Country, that the per∣sons who are mostly drawn away with the strong delusions of that party, are but of the meaner and vulgar sort, and those only in the Western parts of the Kingdom; but the greatest part of our No∣bility and Gentry▪ are Men of more Judgment and Reason, of a freer and more Noble Education, than to be so infatuated, or de∣luded by vain and imaginary Dreams. And therefore to clear them from this imputation of Meanness thrown upon them by this Author, and in his own Phrase, to cut the Throat of this Objection once for all, that we may not be hereafter any more stunn'd with the Noise hereof; I could have subjoyned hereunto a LIST of all our Nobility that are not Popish, and have Ranked them ac∣cording as they are affected, either to the Episcopal, or Presbyte∣rian Government; but being at such a distance, cannot have it ex∣act. And if it were not a thing of unsufferable Toil, and of little or no moment, to make an exact List of the Gentry of the Na∣tion, I could shew a far greater Disparity among them, with Re∣spect to this Affair, than could even here appear in the List of the Nobility, and yet it might be evident from it, how vastly conside∣rable the Episcopal Interest is among them, beyond that of the Presbyterian. Another of the untruths with which this Author charges his Ad∣versary,Pag. 42. is, for asserting, That the Episcopal Rulers and Ministers used all Christian and discreet Mehods to gain Dissenters. And why our Author should have so much Malice as to deny this known Truth,
I cannot well imagine, for 'tis certain, that the behaviour of theThe Methods  by the Epscopal  for  he  sewn to be vry  sin t the  of K.  wre w or  bt what yned in Communion with the  Curch. Episcopal Clergy towards the Presbyterian Dissenters, was truly Christian and Brotherly; they used all fair and discreet Methods to reclaim them from their Errors and Delusions, and their endea∣vours that way were, by the blessing of God so successful, that at the time when K. James Granted his Indulgence to his Subjects, there were scarcely any Presbyterians in the whole Nation (xcept a few Wild Camerans, who betook themselves to the Hills) that did not actually joyn in Communion with the Episcopal Church▪ their very Teachers came punctually to Church, and attended up∣on the Ministry of the Episcopal Clergy; they were constant Hearers of their Sermons, and frequently Received the Sacraments from their Hands. Now I would gladly know of our Adversaries, what plausible Reason they can give for deserting our Communion, after the Promulgation of this Indugence, when they thought it lawful to joyn with us before. What excuse can they pretend for o groundless a Separation, to separate from a Communion, which they themselves owned to be lawful, by their joyning therein? Our Constitution still remained the same; there was no Alteration in it, that could afford them the least pretext for leaving our Com∣munion; and Episcopacy can never be urged in their Defence, since by their former practice, they declared it lawful to Commu∣nicate with Bishops. Methinks, that if they had any true Notios of Schism, they might soon perceive how  of it lies against them upon this score, and it concerns them highly to Vindi∣cate themselves in this point, and to shew that, by separating from a lawful Established Communion, which thy themselves by oyn∣ing with it, owned to be lawful,  in which there were no  Terms required, they were no ways guilty of Schism. Pag. 43. He accuses his Adversary of downright Lying, becauseT  pra∣ctice in Wird or  Py∣er altother . he asserts, That the Presbyterians ve justled out, and  the Lord' Prayer, and Abolished the Reading f the Scripturs in Churchs; and yet with the same Breath, he confesses the Assertion to be true, and endeavours to Vindicate their practice therein. He alledges the frequent Use of the Lord's Prayer, is a meer prophaning of it, and upon this Account, he thinks the Presbyterians may totally ab∣stain from the use thereof; which is such an instance of Venera∣tion to Sacred things, as is not often to be met with; that because a Sacred thing may sometimes chance to be abused to Superstition, therefore we must altogether slight and contemn it. May not we upon the same ground likewise abstain from Worshipping God,
since the Divine Worship has been prophand by the Heathenish Superstitions, in paying that Adoration to inanimate Creatures, which is due only to the Eternal and Infinite Being? But the Pres∣byterian practice in this contempt of our Saviours Prayer, is so ve∣ry ridiculous, and many of their party have uttered such Blasphe∣mous Expressions concerning it, that they deserve no small Rebuke. And I don't see how they can well Vindicate themselves from what is charged upon them by the Author of the Presbyterian Eloquence, that when a Presbyterian Minister was Staged before one of their own Judicatories for this Blasphemous Expression, That if ever our Saviour was Drunk, it was when he composed his Prayer, they would not so much as enquire into the Truth of this Accusation, not∣withstanding it was brought before them, by a person of known Honour and Integrity, who had been one of the Judges of the Na∣tion, and offered to prove the Truth of his Accusation, by the Te∣stimony of such Witnesses as could not be well rejected. Now methinks, that although their concern for punishing such Blasphe∣mous Expressions had not influenced them, yet at least the deference they owed to a Man of his Character and Quality, ought to have engaged them to take this matter into their cognizance, and make some enquiry into it; and what excuse they can pretend for this Neglect I cannot apprehend, the matter of Fact being so Notori∣ous, that there was no denying it? Their Abolishing the Reading of the Scriptures in Churches is likewise so generally known, that our Author does not offer to deny it. It is customary in the Church of Sctland, that always at the beginning of Divine Service, the Clerk is appointed to Read two or three Chapters, in the Old or New Testament, for the Instruction of those who come sooner to Church than others; that their thoughts being taken up with hear∣ing the Holy Scriptures Read, they may have no occasion to spend that time in gazing about them in the Church, or entertaining one another with trivial Discourses; and this the Clerk continues to do, till the usual time that the Congregation be fully met. This pra∣ctice the Presbyterians have quite Abolished, and instead of the Scriptures, have set up their more Sacred Oracles, the confused Farce of some of their Sermons, which they Order to be Read, for the Edification of their Auditors, till the usual time that their Sermon begins. The Mali∣cious Chara∣ctersthis Au∣thor gives of the English and Scots Gentry as well as Cler∣y. Our Author Pag. 47. Quarrels his Adversary, for saying, That the Author of the Brief and True Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland; bestows the Characters of Godless Miscreants,
infamous Parricides, Sorcerers, and incestuous Apostates upon the Scots Gentry, as well as Clergy. And although he will not allow the truth of this in that Author whom he endeavours to vindicate, yet he himself is so very civil as to Treat them at the same scurri∣lous rate in many places of his Book. As for the Clergy, he spares none of their Rank or Order, but represents them all as the worst of Men, and belches out his Vomit against them in such obscene and scurrilous Language, as any modest Man would have been ashamed to utter. The Episcopal Gentry both of England and Scotland he represents as Robbers and Murderers; as generally Pro∣phanePage 23. and Debauched; as Men void of all manner of Religion,Page 38. who, in stead of freqenting the Religious Assemblies, do haunt Bawdy-houses, and are drunk in Taverns and Ale-houses. But it isPage 13. no wonder he should Tret our Clergy and Gentry at this rate, when he has not the least respect to the Sacred Persons of our Prin∣ces; them he represnts as waowing in their Sins and Uncleanness, and avowing their Adulteries as Sodom. And what Treatment the Author of such Villanous Relexions does deserve, I leave the Reader to judge. To Treat the Sacred Persons of Princes and Prelates, the Anointed of the Lord, in such a scurrilous manner, to wound the Reputation of Men of known Honour and Integrity at this rate, is such a piece of illany as can hardly receive a sufficient Punishment. Can any Man that is not totally void of Religion write in this Inhu∣mane and Unchristian manner? To represent all that differ in Prin∣ciples from them as worse than Infidels; this is such an act of Malice as I believe was never practiced among Heathens or Barbarians, and it is no small  to our Religion, that any who call themselves by the name of Christ shoud be guilty of such barbarous Pra∣ctices. This Scribler endeavours, Pag. 52. to answer an Objection whichThe settling or  Matters of Religion in comli∣ance with th Humurs of th ,  in  to  he . his Adversary brings against their new and unheard-of Practice, of settling and abrogating Matters of Religion, even those that are most essential, according as they are either agreeable or contrary to the inconstant Humours of the Vulgar. His Argument runs thus; That upon the same Grounds our Presbyterians in Scotland declared Epis∣copacy to be Anti-humane, Christianity must be Anti-humane in Turky, and Protestantism in France and Spain; and therefore ought in all Equity to be rejected by them, they being contrary to this new Standard, the Inclinations of the People. This Argument a ri is so very conclusive, and presseth our Author so hard, that in stead of Confuting, he is forced to yield to it; and he very fairly grans,
that if Christianity or Protestantism be contrary to the Inclinations of the People in these Parts, they may rejet it as Anti-humane, and it ought no ways to be imposed upon them. I wish this Author would but consider a little, whither this Principle of his carries him, what absurd and pernicious Consequences he is forced to grant, and what great disservice he does to the Interest of Religion meerly through a blind and mistaken Zeal for his own Cause. It seems strange to see Men so hurrid away with the Spirit of Contradi∣ction, as not to discern such plain and obvious Consequences. Is it possible at this rate evr to mak any Convrts to the Christian or Reformed Religion, except where it alrady gnerally prevails? And how the Christian Religion could at first be propagated through the World according to this new Principle, is a thing impossible to con∣ceive. I would gladly know of this Aor, what Arguments he can posbly bring to convert these Heathen Nations to the Chri∣stian, or to prswade th Popish Countris to mbrace the Reformed Religion? They can  retort upon him his own Argument, That the Christian Rligion being contrary to the Inclinations of th Pople in thes Parts, they ought to declare it to be , and no ways to  it, and how our Author can well evde the forc of this Argumnt I do not apprhend. If the Inclinations of the People must needs be the Standard of Truth, I'm sure we can have no hopes of their Conversion, since they a by this Principle obli∣ged to persist in their Idolatris and Corruptions, and the Popish Countries must still adhere to their Errors and Superstitions. If any of them desert their Errors, and mbrace the true Religion, then, according to our Author's Hypothesis, they embrace what is Anti∣humane, and what they ought to rject as being contrary to the Inclinations of the People. The only thing our Author comforts himself with in this matter, is, that he's conident the Pople of these Countris can never declare the Christian or Protestant Rligion to be contrary to their Inclinations. But upon what Evidence he grounds his Confidence, I cannot easily imagine. Does he fancy, that the generality of the People in Turky, and these othr barbarous Nations, are more inclinable to the Christian Religion than to their own Idolatrous Corruptions? Do they not declare against our Reli∣gion as a downright Cheat and Imposture? And do not those of the Romish Communion look upon our Reformation as a meer Innova∣tion? And what Encouragement this Author affords these Enemis of our Religion to continue in their Errors and Superstitions, I leave ay serious Reader to consider; he has taught them a new Principle,
by which they may easily evade the force of all the Arguments we can bring for their Conversion. I find our Author her taks notic of on of his Adversaries Ob∣servations,The disinge∣nuity of this Author and his Party in calling the English Com∣mon-Prayr Book Popery. wher he says, That the new Gospellers call the Common-Prayer Boo Popery; and this he is so far from denying, that he endea∣vours to justifie the Charge. Now to se Men pretend to the Spirit of Moderation towards Adversaries, and yt in the mn ti be guilty of such an Overt Act of Malice and Disingenuity is not a little amazing. I dare appeal to this Author's own Conscience, that he knows a sensible and a vast difference betwixt the English Liturgy and the Romish Mass-Book, and yet he's so disingenuous as to per∣swade the silly and ignorant People, that they are both the same. I'm confident he knows our Liturgy contains no Prayers either to Saint or Angel, and that all our Prayers re directed to the true and sole Object of Divine Worship, the  and Etrnal God. We have no Prayers of Intercession or Mediation but which ar addressed to the Lamb of God, who sits at the right hand of the Father to ake Intercession for us; all our Forms of Prayer are composed of such emphatical and comprehensive Sentences, are framed with such a tendency to raise and elvate the Dvotions of the People, that it is beyond the Art of Man to bettr them. But this has been the con∣stant practice of the Presbyterian Party, to represent every thing as Popery that is not in all Points agreeable to their Enthusiastical Dreams; they endeavour to infuse into the Minds of the People dis∣mal and frightning Notions of Popery, and then the better to expose their Adversaries that dier rom them to the rage and fury of the Rabble, they brand them with the odious Name of Papists; which is such a piece of Malice and Dingenuity as I believe is peculiar to the Party. In the same Page we have a Vindication of the Presbyterians for of -day of . not observing the Anniversary of King Chrles I. his Murder. And the reason of their so doing, our Author says, proceeds from a Prin∣ciple, that no Human Power can oblige them to violate the Fourth Commandment, which says positively, Six days shalt th work. This is indeed a new Comment upon the Fourth Commandment, and such as few of our Expositors have been so happy as to light upon. GOD out of his Etrnal Wisdom thought it indeed to sepa∣rate a seventh part of our Time for his own Worship and Service, and to establish the Sabbatical estivity in Commoration of that Great and Omnipotent Work of the Creation, when he rested from framing the Glorious Fabrick of this Universe; and out of his great Bounty
towards the Work of his own Hands, he allowed us the other Six days of the Week for carrying on our Worldly and Temporal Con∣cerns. But was it ever beore dreamed, that this Indulgence of Time for our private Labours was such a strict and positive Precept, requiring us to spend these Six days so entirely in working, as if we were not at liberty to set apart any portion thereof to worship God either for publick or private Mercies upon any occasion vouchsafed unto us. We ought not indeed to spend this Time in idleness and vanity, and when we ar not taken up about the Service of God, we ought to be diligent in following our private Labours and Callings. But if we employ any portion of this Time either in publick or pri∣vate Exerciss of Devotion, in glorifying God for some Personal or Nationl Blessings conferred upon us, or in deprecating his Wrath for our crying Sins and Abominations; this is so far from being a breach of God's Commands, that it is what he repuires and expects at our hands▪ and has been the constant practice almost of all Na∣tions in the World. Do we not find that the Jews, besides the Festi∣valsGodwyn's Moses and Aaron, Pag. 138. appointed them by their Lawgiver, observed a great many un∣commanded Feasts and Fasts, which hey themselves had instituted as Anniversary Commemorations of some signal Deliverances? The east of Purim was instituted by Mordecai in remembrance of theEsther, . 9. delivery of the Jews from aman, who maliciously sought the De∣struction of them. And the Feast of Dedication was instituted in remembrance of that great Mercy which God shewed unto his People, in delivering them fom the Tyranny of Antiochus, and the Idolatry which he had forced upon them, setting up the Idol of Ju∣piter in the Temple of God, and abolishing the true Worship of God. It was appointed by Judas Maccabaeus as a Yearly Festival, to be observed from Year to Year for the space of eight days. Besides these, they had several other Feasts of Humane Institution, of which we ind frequent mention in Scripture. We see likewise, that the Romans had their Feriae, and their Festi Dies; the Feriae, which were instituted to the Honour of their Gods, they observed so Sacredly, that it was a heinous Crime to do any manner of Work on them; on these Days it was unlawful for them Terram ferro tangere, as Ser∣viusServ. in Virg. p. 86. Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16. tells us. These Feriae were either Stativae, unmoveable Feasts, and appointed always to be kept on a certain Day; or Imperativae, which were Arbitrary, and solemnized upon such Days and on such Occasions as the Magistrates and Priests thought most expedi∣ent. And the Practie of the Christian Church in this matter is so notorious, that, besides their frequent occasional Festivities, the
greatest Mysteries of our Religion have been Celebrated in  Anniversary Solemnities hrough all the Ages of the Church; which is a most effectual way to prevent these Articles of our Faith from being subverted by Hereticks. And thus we see, that this practic of observing Anniversary Days has been constanty received not only in the Christian and Jewish Churches, but likewise among the Ha∣thens; it being as it were a Principle engrafted in umane Natu▪ to return a suitable Tribute of Praise and Thanks to the Supream Go∣vernour of the World, for disposing and ordering the Events ther∣of in such a manner as tends most to his own Glory, and the Wel∣fare of his peculiar People. So unhappy are or Prsbyterians in their Schism from the Catholick Church, that in many Doctrins and Customs wherein they difer from us, they run in a diect oppo∣sition to the Practice and Judgment, not only of the Catholick Church, but likewise of all Mankind; so fond are thy  own singular Opinions. What this Author urges in contradiction to this Universal Prac of observing Anniversary Days, is of no consequence▪ fo although there may be none of the Six on which some remarkale  not happened, as he alledges; yet it does by no means follow,  should have no time left at all for Work. 'Tis not to be suppod, that God requires such constant Exercises of Devotion from u, as to im∣pede the necessary Works of Humane Life; 'tis true indeed, there is no Dispensation of the Divine Providence, but what is accompa∣nied with such Wisdom and Prudence as deserves to be admired and adored by all Rational Creatures, but yet there are some Acts thereof so signal and so remarkable in their Events, that they require a more solemn acknowledgment at our hands, and deserve to be more fre∣quently Commemorated by us. And the appointing of st Times for Commemorating these more signal Dispensations of Divine  must be left to the prudence and discretion of the Governo of the Church, who are the most proper Judges of wat concerns the publick Worship; and we are not to suppose them so  in the conduct of Affairs, as to separate such an unequal share of  Time for the publick Worship, as would render Devotion bu∣som to the People, and altogether inconsistent with the ▪ of Humane Life. And if any private Person can, by entailing  Charity upon us, engage us to observe an Anniversary Day for the commemorating of his Charity, as this Author grants he may, I  no reason why our Superiors either in Church or State may not with far greater Authority oblige us Yearly to Commemorate some signal
dispensations of the Divine Providence, that have been designed by God, either as a punishment or a Blessing to us. But our Author being somewhat jealous, lest this neglct of the Presbyterians to observe the Anniversary of K▪ Charls I. his Mur∣der,The Murder of K. Ch. I.  upon the  in both King∣doms, and not upon th Na∣tion in . should prompt the World to believe, that they appove and  the same; he therefore endeavours to perswade us, that nei∣ther the Scots nr English Presbyterians had any hnd in bringing him to his Death. But their Rebellious and Inhumane practices towards that most clement Prince, are too Notorious for the Party now to think to conceal them; how many Insurrections they Raised, both against him and his Father is but too well known; and when they forced him to Grant Concessions, which were no small encroach∣ments upon his Prerogative and Honour, yet nothing would satisfie their capricious Humours, but the overturning both of Church and State. If we but look back a little into the History of these Tragi∣cal times, we shall find, that the Presbyterians in both Nations were the chief Instruments of obstructing the peaceable and quiet Reign of that Religious Monarch, and of bringing at last, that fa∣tal stroak upon him. Was it not they, who sowed the first Seeds of all thes Wars and Confusions, and having Treasonably associa∣ted themselves together, Rose in Arms against his Majesty, under a Wicked pretence of Reformation? And having reduced im to such Extremities, that he was forced to throw himself at their Mecy; ow basely did they Treat him? For when the King escaping from the Siege of Oford, committed himself to their Army at Newark; the irst thing thy ford him to do, was to command his Gover∣nour of Nwark to deliver up the City, and Mitrose, Huntly and Mackdonld, and all others that were in Arms for him in Scotland, to disand. ad not the King been advised to these Courses, he might have happily prevented all these fatal consequences that fol∣lowed thereupon; but His Majesty was now redud to such cir∣cmstances, that it behoved him to Grant whatever they pleased to demand. And afterwards, in the Parliament of Scotland, which met at Edinburgh in  1646- when the Question came to be de∣bated, whether they should own the King, or recall their Armyr. Bur∣nets Mmoirs of the Dkes of Hamlton Pag. 284. from England, and leave him to the English; the Presbyterians opposed the King's Affairs with no little Fervour and Zeal. The King's party in Parliament was at first so considerable, that had the queion been proposed at the downsitting thereof, the business had been carried for the King, by at last Thirty Voices, as some of the ing's Friends did then compute, by trying the Pulse of the Com∣missioners.
but for far matters should go for the King, the Pres∣byterians were very busie and industrious, in drawing away many that adhered still to the King's Interest; and for this end Pubish∣ed a Declaration, tending to keep in with the English Parliament, and not to own the King. And by their Interest in this Parlia∣ment they got it Enacted, that their Army should withdraw out of England, and leave the King to the English, without any Conditions for his Interest. Now the Guilt of this Act cannot in Reason be imputed to any but the Presbyterian Party, and no ways to the generality of the Nation; because, as to the Nobility, the ThirdBishop G∣thries Histo∣ry of the Ci∣vil Wars i Scotland, MS. part of them was not present at that Sederunt; many having been excluded for their known Affection to the King, and others upon other pretexts▪ And some withdrew from the Parliament of their own accord, being on the one part resolved not to comply, and on the other loath by their dissent to offend the prevailing Faction, lest they should inroach upon their Fortunes. And as for the Gentry and Commonalty throughout the Nation (Ffe and the Wstern shires being expted) there were a hundred to one tht abhorred it, and would never have instructed thir Commissioners that way, but were so overawed, that they durst not challenge them. But the opposition of this Party to the King's Affairs will further appear, if we consider their Behaviour, with Relation to the n gagement in Scotland, for Rescuing the King's Person. In Apr 1648, the Parliament of Scotland being informed of the Rude and Barbarous Treatment which the King received from the English  . Parliament and Army; and hearing that they had made him Priso∣ner in the Isle of Wight; they Voted, That they sould demand the King to be brought from his Prison to London, or thereabout in Honour, Freedom and Safety. And having for this ffect dispatch∣d Lieutenant Collonel Marshl to the Parliament of Englnd, with a Remonstrance of their Breaches; they concluded and oted a Levy of 300 Foot and 600 Horse, of which De  was made General. But the Presbyteians expressed very grt dislike of, and solemny protested against all hat was resolved▪ nd sent strict Orders to all their Disciples, that they should on he last Sabbath of May keep a Publik Fast▪  ist tat Corse▪  them withal, not to comply in any sot or  this evy, under pain of the Highest Censure; and their Ministers did in the mean time, Thunder▪ Curses▪ against all who should joyn in this n∣gagement. And when the Noblemen and others in Command over the Army, were hasting to bring orth  Rgiments, that
they might Mar into England; a great Number of Western peo∣ple Assembled in Arms against them at Mauchlin, under the Com∣mand of some Presbyterian Ministers, Viz. Mr. Will. Adair, Mr. Wil▪ Guthry, Mr. Gabril Mwel, and Mr. John Nevoy. MiddletonDr. Burne bid. p. 353. being sent against them with some Troops of Horse, these Mini∣sters parlied with him, but were so violent, that they would needs Fight it; but the ight lasted not long, for Middleton in an instant put thm all to the Rout; and yet dealt so mercifully with them, that such as he took Prisoners, he dimitted without any suffering. The Army under the Command of Duke Hamilon being Marched into England, the Gen. Ass. met at Edinburgh Jnly 12▪ and Publish∣ed a Declaration against the Army, proving the sinfulness and un∣lawfulness of the Enggement. And upon Notice, that this Army Gu∣thries Hist. was Defeated by Cromwel at Preston in Lancashire; the West Coun∣try upon the first Notice of this Defeat, got instantly to Arms, with a design to cut off the remainder of this Army, and upon the Head of this Rebellious Multitude, were Mr. David Dick, and the rest of the Presbyterian Ministers in those parts. Thus did they Treat that oyal Army which had Assembled themselves together, to Rescue his Majesties Sacred Person from the hands of his Cruel and Blood-thirsty Murderers. Here we have a clear view of the Behaviour of the Presbyterian Party towards the Royal Martyr K.  I. how they acted against his Majesties Interest, in a direct opsition to the whle ody of the Nation. When the whole ingdom▪  tose who had formerly been deluded by the rest of the , with the alse and Hypocritical pretences of Refor∣mation, did unanimously embrace the King's▪ Interest; the Presbyte∣ians were so far from being snsible of their Sin and Folly, that they ted aainst him with the utmost Rigour of Malice and En∣. And ye tese Men ave now the Considence to protest, They  no hand  inging him to his Death, as if the History of these es were qui , and no publick Monuments of their Trea∣nable and Rebllious Actings against that Prince remaining to  ternal  and Reproach. But this is not all the countenance and encouragement these Bar∣barous Paricides Received from our Presbyterians. For when the ws came to Scotland of a Treaty, begun betwixt the King and Parliament of England; Mr. Rob. Blair and Sir John Cheesly were  . sently dispatched away, by Order of the Presbyterian Ministers to joyn with Cromwel, in obstructing the Treaty. And upon their Arrival there wih two other Commissioners, Viz. The Earl of
Lothian, and Will. Glendinning, fro the Committee of Estates, Cromwel began to shew himself for crushing the Treaty; he drew up his Army towards London, and sent in a Remonstrance to the Parlia∣ment, shewing his disallowance of the Treaty, and craved Justice (as he call'd it) to be done on the King. Now these Presbyterian Commissioners not only concurred with Cromwel in this Remon∣strance against the King, but likewise remained at London, during the whole time of the King's Tryal and Execution, and never of∣fered to Remonstrate against the Unjust and Unnatural proceed∣ings against his Majesty. They did indeed send down to Scotlan, for Instructions relating to the King's Tryal; and they were Or∣dered to endeavour the procuring a delay; but in the man tim to be cautious not to offend the prevailing Party in gland. I know the Presbyterians will here pretend, that the Guilt of this Act cannot be charged upon them solely, since their  from the Kirk Acted nothing in reference hereto, but in conjun∣ction with the Commissioners from the Committee of Estates. But here we must consider, that the Committee of Estates did now wholly consist of the Presbyterian Party; the rest of the Members not daring to appear, by Reason of their known Affection and Loyaly to their Prince. For when the Scots Army was Defeated by Cro at Preston▪ many of our Noblemen and Gentlemen were  killed in the Action; others to a great Number taken Priso∣ners, and such as had the Fortune to make their escape, were or∣ced either to abscond or  the Country, to avoid the severities with which the Presbyterian Paty, who now had Usurped the Go∣vernment of the Nation, did persecute all such as were concerd in this Engagemnt for the Defence of the King's Person. And by this means the Presbyterians got the whole management of the af∣fairs of the Kingdom into teir ▪ and acted there as they Li∣sted; so that, although the Committ of states as well as Com∣mission of the Kirk, sent Commissione to concur with the Kings Murderers in England, yet the Guilt and shame of this Act, cannot in any Reason be imputed to the generality of the Nation, but on∣ly to the Presbyterian Crew, whose actings have always tended to bring their Country into Disgrace and Contempt. From hence, I think it clearly appears, that the Horrid Murder of this Royal Martyr, is justly chargeable upon none of our Na∣tion but the Presbyterian Sectaries; and the like may be made evi∣dent, in Relation to the Kingdom of England, that the Presbyte∣rians and other Sectaries of that Nation, were the only Actors of
that dismal Tragedy, and did most cruelly Persecute the Church of England and its Mmbers, for persevering in their Allegiance and Duty to their Sovereign. But let us in the next place see what the behaviour of this PartyThe  f  Scot  to∣wrd: K. Charles II. pen hi . was towards K▪ Charles II. upon his advancement to the Throne; for our Author tells us, That what they suffered on his Account every body almost know. That our Presbyterians did consent to the pro laiming of Charles II. King upon the News of his Fathers Murder is true, but their Loyalty in this point, was clogg'd with such Re∣stictions and Limitations, as was not asie for the King to comply with They for'd him, before his Admission to the Crown, to Sign a Dlaration, signifying his Penitency for the Sins of his Fore∣fatrs, in opposing the Work of God, and his own in so long fol∣lwing thir ootsteps, with a Resolution to accomplish and  the Covenant, in all its ends and purposes, which also for the more , they caused him to take and Swear. And because his Majesty did at  refuse to Sign this Declaration; the  of the Kirk did on the 1 of August 1650 Publish a  commonly called the Act of the Westkirk, wherein they  they will not Espouse any Malignant Party or Quarrel, and that they will not own the King nor his Interests, otherwise than ith  Subordination to God, and so far as he owns and prosecutes the ause of od, and disclaims his and his Fathers opposition to the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise disowns all the nemies thereof. And in prosecution of this Declaration, when the Kingdom had resolved to call home K. Charles II. and for that End had admitted to favour, those who formerly were ba∣nished the Court and Nation as Malignants; this gave the Zealous and bigotted Covenanters so great Offence, that they protested a∣ainst all the present proceedings, and declared that they had,  to the solemn eague and its ends, admitted to the Throne , who was an Enemy and Opposer of the quiet of  and irk. And this Rigid Party having drawn to a  in the West, in the year 1650, Oct. 17. they Penned and  a Paper, which they called a Remonstrance of the Gentlemen,  and Ministers attending the Forces in the West, which they delivered into the Committee of Estates, and from which af∣terwards they got the Name of Remonstrants. Hence we see how this Merciful Prince was Treated by them in the very infancy of his Reign; and what further disquiet and disturbance they afterward▪ occasioned him, is but too Notorious, from the many Insurrections
they raised against his Government, and which occasioned the En∣acting of those Laws, the severity of which they now so grievously complain of. What these Suferings were which this Author al∣ledges the Presbyterians met with for adhering to K. Charles II. I must confess I am altogether ignorant of, unless he means, that some of the more moderate of their Party were willing to own the King after he had taken the Covenant, and therefore upon that ac∣count suffered in the common Calamity with the rest of the Nation, when Cromwel with the English Army invaded our Kingdom, de∣feated our Forces, and oppressed all that stood in any sort suspected of the Crime of Loyalty. But it is evident from the History of these Times, that the generality of the Presbyterians were so far from being forward in owning the King's Interest, that at the same time when Cromwel was so successful in the South of Sctland, as to have all besouth Forth under his Dominion, great numbrs of them were assembled in Arms in the West, and remonstrated against the Na∣tion for owning the King's Interest. And this much of the Loyalty of our Presbyterians. This Author, Pag. 53. to justifie the Procdings of their lateThat the English C∣vocation aced upon fr btter Grounds in rsusing an Union with the , than  Scots As∣smbly in re∣jecting  Addresses of those fe Episcop.  them, prove by  Rsons▪ General Assembly, in refusing to admit some of the Episcopal Clergy into a share of their Government upon the Terms desired by K. William, urges, That they did nohing but what the Church of England Convoction had done  them, who  to admit th  on the same King's dsire. It were no small presumption in me to offer any Vindication of the Proceedings of those learned and worthy Meembers of the Convocation in England, who at that time opposed the designed Comprehension of the Dissenters; but I think I may be allowd to say, that they wnt upon far better Grounds than our pretended General Assembly, who refused to re∣ceive such of the Episcopal Clergy as condescended to address them upon that account. I am not concerned here to enquire into the awfulness of what these piscopal Addressers did, in desiring to be united with the Prsbyterians in the Government of the Church, I shall not here so much as enter upon that Question. My business at present is, only to shew, that the  of Scotland are ar more inexcusable in denying the Request of these Episcopal Mini∣sters that addressed them, than those of the English Convocation who obstructed the Union with the Dissenters upon the Terms that were then proposed; and my Reasons are these.
First, The Dissenters in England never offered any Address to the Convocotion, declaring their Willingness to return to the Churches Communion, upon her laying aside the use of these innocent Cere∣monies which they pretend they cannot in Conscience comply with. Had the Presbyterians given but the least intimation of their readiness to abandon their Schism upon the making of these Altera∣tions, the Clergy perhaps, to further so desirable a Work, might have easily been induced to grant them some Ease as to their unreasonable Scruples about those harmless Rites used in our Worship, which tho' indisferent in their Nature, yet are very signiicant in their Use. But it is to no purpose ever to expect to reclaim the Presbyterians from their Schism upon such Terms, since they declare against the whole Body of the Common-Prayer, and the Order of Episcopacy, as un∣lawful; and therefore to make Alterations in the manner of our Wohip, which could have no other esfect but to create more Ene∣mies to our Communion, was no ways consistent with the Prudence that is required in Ecclesiastical Governours. Now this is what the Scts Assembly cannot urge in their Defence, since those of the Lpiscopal Clergy, who had the freedom to joyn with them in the Government of the Church, Petitioned them upon that account, and declared their readiness to concur with them in maintaining the Discipline of the Church, and punishing scandalous and contuma∣cious Offenders, which were all the Acts of Government they de∣ired to share with them in. As for their Presbyterian Ordinations, they did indeed declare positively against them, and refused to joyn with them in any such Acts as they thought to be direct Encroach∣ments upon the Episcopal Power. But, Secondly, There is another Reason which may have influen∣ced the nglish Convocation to oppose the Alterations in the form of our Worship, which K. William did then desire them to make, and that is, Te Preservation and Safty of the whole Liturgy. They were t that time sensible of the fatal overthrow of their Neighbouring Church of Sctland, how the Order and Constitution of its Govern∣mnt was uite overturned by the Presbyterians, and not only the Bihops turned out both of their Spiritual and Temporal Rights, but  the greatest part of the Clergy most barbarously Treated, nd driven from their Houses and Churches. This cruel Treatment which their Brethren in  received from that Dissenting Party, might jutly aarm the English Clergy to expect the same Usage from the Pesbyterians here, as soon as they could thrust themselves into  power of doing thm any mischief. And therefore considering
the great Interest the Presbyterians had in that irst Parliament ater the Revolution, it was no ways safe for the Convocation to consent to the Dissolving of the present Act of Uniformity, lest they should meet with such Obstacles in establishing another, as they were hard∣ly able at that time to grapple with. The Presbyterian Members of that Parliament were so numerous, that had the present Act of Uni∣formity been once dissolved, they would have thown in so many Stops and Hinderances against a new Establishment of the urgy by Act of Parliament, they would have started so many new Scruples of Conscience to be solved about it, and by this means occasioned such infinite deys therein, as would have made the Re-settlement of our Liturgy, a ting almost impossible. If the Parliament had offered to ratisie the Service-Book with the Alterations the Convoca∣tion should think fit to make therein, before they Dissolved this pre∣sent Act of Uniformity, I cannot tell but many Members of that Convocation might have been prevailed with to Consent to some Alterations in those indisferent Ceremonies the Presbyterians so groundlesly exclaim against; that for the future they might not have the least pretence for continuing in their notorious and wretched Schism. But for the Convocation to consent to the Dissolving the present Establishment, without having any security for another, is what none could expect from any prudent or reasonable So∣ciety. Thirdly, The Convocation in England might perhaps be the more remiss in promoting an Union with the Disenters upon the Terms proposed, because they saw no probability of preserving thereby the Unity of the Church, as long as the Presbyterians profess to own no common Principles of Unity with us, that may still oblige them to remain in the Communion of the Church. Unless they acknow∣ledge our Bihops to be the Principles of Unity, and that it is neces∣sary for every one that intends to continue a Member of the Catho∣lick Church to be united in their Communion; I say, unless they own these Catholick Painciples of Unity in common with us, we can have no security that they will remain ours any longer than their Interest, shews them their Duty. And therefore an Union with them upon any other Terms, in stead of preserving the Unity of the Church, would be a ready way to enable them to make a greater rent and breach in our Communion, whenever they should see it their Interest again to erect Altar against Altar. But our Scots Assem∣bly could have no such Pretence against those few Episcopal Clergy that esired to be United to them in a share of the Government.
They were willing, I suppose, to own the same common Principles of Unity with the Presbyterians, in reference to the Discipline of the Church, that is, to be governed by the major part of all their Assem∣blies, and to submit always to what is carried by a Plurality of Voi∣ces in their Meetings; though sometimes they themselves, when they see it for their Interest, destroy this Principle of Unity, so funda∣mentally neceary to all Democratical Societies, and allow the lesser Number to preponderate the greater, as in the Case which happened in the Synod of St. Andrews, an. 1591, about settling a Minister at Leuchars. And this methinks is enough to shew, that the Church of England had far more reasonable Grounds to oppose the Comprehen∣sion with the Dissenters, than the Scots Presbyterians had to reject the desire of the Episcopal Addressers. But this Author will needs have the Disadvantage appear wholly on the Church of England's ide, and therefore we must consider a little the Reasons he brings for his Assertion. His first Reason is, Because the King is really the Fountain of all their. Church Power, as aving the making of the Bishops, and does still remain Head of thir Church; whereas he hath actually renounced Name and Thing in Scotland, where the whole Ecolesiastical Jurisdiction is by Law settled in the Church. The King is indeed owned by the Church of England to be in his own Dominions Supream over all Persons, and in all Causes Civil and Ecclesiastical; but that he is the Fountain of all their Church Power, is what I believe the most Erastian Principled among them never dreamed. Their 37th Article asserts the con∣trary in as plain words as can be desired, where it is said, ''That they give not to their Princes the Ministring either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments, but that only Prerogative which they see to have been always given to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself; that is, That they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whe∣ther they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil Doers. From whence 'tis plain, that the Church of England in her Articles allows the Civil Magistrate no Power or Jurisdiction in Matters purely Spiritual; he cannot Administer the Sacraments, nor Consecrate either Bishops or Priests, neither can he inflict any Spiritual Censures upon obstinate Offenders. The Civil Power may for strengthening the Hands of the Church, and making her Discipline the more dreaded and re∣garded, inforce her Spiritual Censures with Secular Punishments, but can lay no claim to the Power of the Keys as his own Right.
It is from him the Church derives that Power of having Civil Penal∣ties inflicted on such as contemn and despise th Ecclesiastical Cen∣sures; as in the case of Excommunication, which renders the Party excommunicated obnoxious to Temporal Imprisonment, and inca∣pacitates him from carrying on any Suit or Action in the Civil Courts. The Church cannot by her own Authority use the Civil Sword to punish the stubborn and evil Doers; and therefore in so far as the Civil Magistrate extends the Churches Jurisdiction to some Secular Matters, and impowers her to inflict Civil Penalties for the better preserving of her Ecclesiastical Discipline, the Clergy must own the King to be the Fountain from whence they derive this Power. But as for their Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction, which only can be called properly the Church Power, they derive it from a higher Ori∣ginal, from God himself, who is the true ead of our Church, and it cannot be conveyed to us by the Hands of any Lay-Person. God has instituted a distinct Order of Men in our Church, whom he has authorized to transmit this Spiritual Power down through all the Ages of Posterity, that there might still be a constant Succession of Pastors and Governors in the Church to administer his Wor and Sacraments to his People. And it is from this Sacred Order of the Divine Appointment that our Clergy derive their Spiritual Power; it is from their hands they receive Holy Orders, and a Power of Ministring in Holy Things, and none but they alone can Divest them of this Authority. Our Author's Expression, of the King's having the making of the Bishops, is somewhat ambiguous. If he means, that the King is al∣lowed by the Church of England a Power to Consecrate and Sepa∣rate the Bishops for their Sacred Function, it is such a notorious Falshood as needs no Confutation, the practice of the Church to the contrary being so visible. But if his meaning is, That the King has Power to Nominate any Clergy-man to a vacant Bishoprick, it is no more than what they themselves allow to the Laity in their popular Elections. And if the Laity in these Elections may be al∣lowed to Nominate their own Pastor and Spiritual Guide, I see no reason why the Church should be blamed for allowing the King to Nominate and Recommend to them a Person itly Qualiied for the Sacred Office of a Bishop, especially since 'tis to his Bounty they owe all the Temporal Priviledges and Honours which are annexed to the Episcopal Sees.
The same Power in the external ordering of Spiritual Matters,An acco of the King'  in Scotland, as it is  b  with which the ing is Invested by the Constitutions of this Church and Nation, does likewise belong to him by the Laws of Scotland. e has the Power of Nominating the Bishops, and 'tis by his Autho∣rity the Clergy of that Kingdom are allowed to meddle in Secular Matters, and to inlict any Civil Penalties upon such as dspise their Spiritual . What this Author alledges about the Resinding of the whole Supremacy in Sctland by Act of Parliament since this Revolution, is a gross mistake▪ as may easily appear fom this short Narrative thereos. By the 129th Act, Parl. 8. . Jams VI. the King's Royal Prerogative of Supremacy over all Estates, as well Spi∣ritual as Temporal▪ is acknowledged and ratiied; and it i dclared, That none shall dcline the ing's Power in  Premisses under the pain of Treason. Thereafter by the . A, 2. Parl. K▪ Charls II. there is an Expication of this Act and Prerogative, whereby it is declared, That whatever Constitution the King sall make concern∣ing the ording and disposing of the external Government of the Church shall be obeyed as Law. This last Act was thought to give he King too much Power, since he might thereby have abolihed the Government of the Church by his own immediate Authority, and so there was some pretext for Rescinding this last Act, and it is Rescindd by the first Act of the second Session of Parliament of . Wlliam; but the irst Act is not Rescinded, and there was an  Order to the Commissioner not to consent to any Act in prejdice theeof. So that the King then, by virtue of the first Act, continues to have a Supremacy over all Esates Ecclesiastical as well Civil, and over all Pesons and Causes thereto relating, and th Clergy of Sotland ar as much bound to own this Supremacy as those of . ere I cannot but observe how visibly the Dis∣loyalty and  of this Paty to all Civil Government does ap∣pear. Thy endeavour, under pretence of lodging all Ecclesiasti∣cal  in t Church, to divest the King of that Power in the externl ording of Church Matters, which does duly belong to him as being the supreme Governor within his on Dominions; and yet they ae so sar from settling the whole Ecclesiasical Juris∣diction in te hands of Spiritual Persons, as they pretend, that they have not so much as one Judicatory but what does consist of at least  as many Laicks as those who pretend to be Ecclesiasticks. They  not allow the King so much Power as to Convocate the Clergy so the  of Matters about Religion when he thinks fit, or to ommand them faithfully to discharge their Duties and Functions, which he may lawfully do by virtue of his Civil Power over their
Persons as his Subjects, and yet they allow the Lay-Elders in their General Assemblies to share with them in the Authority of inlict∣ing Spiritual Censures, which properly belongs to none but Spiritu∣al Persons; and their indulging the Laity this Power in spiritual matters, is more than what they can well account or, according to the first Institution of th Ministry. In their General Assemblies there is no Minister dprived of hi function, no Sentence of x∣communication passed, no eretick condemned, nor any thing of moment transacted, but what thir Lay-Elders share in as much as their Teachers; and yet is the King should  any such Power in their Meetigs, they would be apt to ly in his Face as an Op∣pressor and Persecutor of the Cause of God; but methinks they might at least indulge him the  of being one of their Ruling Elders. That the Church has Power of calling her Assemblies, and exer∣cisingTe Church  th sole Powr in  pure∣ly Spiritual, but the Cler∣gy ar qual∣ly subjct t the Civil Au▪ , an liable to the same  wth the . er Discipline in some extraordinary Cases, even contrary to the Command of the Civil Magistrate, is what we do not deny, as this Author is pleasd to alledge. The Apostles and Primitive Chri∣stians did in a direct opposition to the Roman Emperours and Jew∣ish Sanhedrim, frequently meet together to perform the Religious Exercises of Devotion, and determine such Controversies as then happened to arise among their Bethren, and this they did with∣out thinking, that they encroached in the least upon the just Rights of the lawful Powers then in being. And what was lawful for them to do, is still lawful for the prsent Chrch in the same Circum∣stances; for the Magistrates being now Christian, can Intitle him to no grter Power in Church , by Virtue of his Civil Au∣thority, than what did bong to the Heathen Magistrates. The Church may indeed upon prudent Moives, indulge the Christian Magitrate a greater Power of  in Ecclesiastical matters, than wht had been  or afe▪ to intrust the Heathen Emperours wih; but this Power which the Church Grants to the Magistrate, does no ways belong to him by  of is Civil Authority; it is only Indulged im by the Church, in prospect of his Temporal Protection; and thereore,  he instead of a Nursing Faher to her, shall turn an oppressing , or when the Church shall see it any way necessary sor the well being and safety of Religion, she may recal it again at her pleasure. But as we allow the Church to have the sole Power and Authority in matters purely Spiritual; so we deny, that any such  Jurisdiction belongs to her, as to exmpt the Bodies of the Clgy,
from Subjection to the Civil Powers. They owe their Sovereign the same Duty and Obedience with the rest of his Subjects, are as much under the Jurisdiction of his Civil Courts, as liable to the Temporal punishments which he inflicts, as the persons of the Lai∣y; sor otherwise the Civil Magistrate could have no security for hi Government. We do not allow the Clergy to be Judges of every thing done. by themselves in the first instance, which is the height of the Popish Usurpation and Supremacy, and makes Church-men no Subjects. And herein it is, that we differ from the Presbyterians in asserting the Jurisdiction of the Church; they together with the Pa∣pists carry it to such a height, as to claim an exemption for the Clergy of their not being answerable to the Civil Courts of the Na∣tion, but only cognizable by themselves; they deny the secular Ma∣gistrate any Power to punish the persons of the Clergy, for Rebel∣lion and Treason preached openly from their Pulpits, or any other Crime, till they once be Convicted of the Crime and Condemned therefore, by a sentence of an Ecclesiastick Judicatory. That this is, or at least was always wont to be, the constant Principle of the Presbyterian Party is so Notorious, that I admire this Author should ever attempt to conceal it. Was it not their proceeding to practice upon these principles, which gave the first Rise to that Act of Par∣liament in K. James VI's Reign, ratifying the King's Supremacy? For one Mr. And. Melvil a Presbyterian Minister, having declaimed requently against the King, for which being called before the Council, he boldly declined the King and Council as Judges in prima instantia of what is Preach'd in the Pulpit, even tho' it were High Treason, and so he fled into England. Whereupon the Nation Assembled in Parliament in the year 1584, in a just Resentment of thse Seditious Doctrines and Practices, did pass the abovementioned Act of Supremacy; and it was by Vertue of that very Act that Mr, Ja. Guthrie a Presbyterian Minister, was anno 1661 hanged for declining the King's Authority. The Presbyterian Ministers de∣claimed against and reproached this Act of Parliament, and in op∣position thereto, one of their Number Mr. Dav. Black, having Railed against K. James and Queen Elizabeth from the Pulpit as Enemies to God, being called before the King's Council, he not nly declined the King's Power of judging him, until he was first Condemned by his Brethren, but United most of the Ministers of Stland most tumultuously in his Defence; and some of them who were then residing at Edinburgh, stirred up the multitude to such a
Rage and Fury upon this occasion, that they presently leap to Arms, and came to the Street in great Numbers crying, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, it shall either be theirs or ours. And ta∣king their March streight to the Session-House, where the King andSpotsw. Ref. lib. p. 65. his Counsellors were then met, would in all probability have forced the Doors (which upon the Noise of the Tumult were shut) and done no small mischief, were it not that, by the Providence of God, a Loyal party drawn together by the Deacon Conveener of theBishop u∣thries Hst▪ Trades kept them back for a while, till their Fury cooled a little; and in the mean time the Earl of Marr called from the Castle, a Company of Musqueteers to Guard the King's Person; upon the Notice whereof the multitude chose to disband, and went away as confusedly as they met. And whether such practices as these be not directly to invade the Temporal Sword, and Usurp the Power of the Civil Magistrate, I shall leave the Reader to Judge. And if the Popish Bishops be guilty of the like practices with the Presbyte∣rians, in encroaching upon the Rights of the secular Magistrate, it ought not in Reason to reflect upon the Bishops of the Reformed Communion, since it is what we can be no more accountable for, than for the Barbarous and inhumane practices of the Presbyterian party, because they pretend to be our fellow Christians. It is to these unjustifiable principles and practices of the Papists and Presby∣terians, that we owe all the encroachments that have been made upon the spiritual Power in these later days; for the Popish Clergy together with the Presbyterians, not being satisfied to assert only the independent Authority of the Church in matters purely Spiritual, have endeavoured to extend its Jurisdiction so far, as plainly to encroach upon the Rights of the secular Magistrate, and to subject the State to the Church, not only in Spiituals, but likewise in Tem∣porals. And this on the other Hand has Tempted many of the Lai∣y in these later Ages, (when Men are degenerated into such an in∣differency and lukewarmness about matters of Religion, that they look upon the Temporal concerns of this World, to be of fa greater Value and Concern, than the Eternal Interest of our Souls) upon all occasions to grasp at the Rights of the Church, and to Rob her of that Spiritual Power and Auhority ith which our Saviour has invested her independently of any humane Authority, and which to Usurp from her is Sacriledge to the highest degree. The second Reason our Author bring to prove the Church of England to be in the blame, for refusing an Union with the Dissen∣ters, is, That they believe most of the things in Controversie to be indiff∣rent,
whereas the Presbyterians look upon them as unlawful; and thatThe Church of England the guilty of no breach of promis, in rsusing an Union with th  upn  rms propo∣i. the Church of England were under promise to King James to have done it. That the Church of Englnd had reasonable grounds to oppose an Union with the Dissenters upon the Terms then proposed, I think I have sufficiently evinced already. And that they are guilty of any breach of promise which they made concerning it, while King James was here, is what cannot well be alledged, since they were always willing to receive them into the bosom of their Church, and to Grant them all imaginable ease, as to their unreasonable Scruples which might be consistent with the safety of their Church and Communion. But to abolish the use of those Innocent and instructing Rites in our Worship, meerly to satisfie the groundless scruples of the Presbyterians, when they do not so much as offer to return to our Communion upon these Terms, is what no reason∣able man can well expect. Our Author in this Paragraph seems to Tx the Episcopal Clergy with being addicted to Arminianism and Socinianism. As for the latter, I'm confident there are few of them ainted with these sort of principles; they entertain the true No∣tions of the Son of God, of his Divinity, his Incarnation and Pas∣sion, according as they are revealed unto us in the Holy Scriptures. And as to the controverted Doctrines about Election, Reprobation, &c. They are careful to observe St. Paul's Rule, not to be followers of Arminius in these things, any further than he is a follower of the Doctrine of our Saviour and his Apostles. That the Presbyterian Ministers have often assumed to themselvesTe  Mi∣nsters have  to  a Powr of making  nd War. a power of making Peace and War, and have declared Engage∣ments to defend the King's Person, Honour and Prerogative, which were made by the Parliament without their consent, to be unlawful, is so well known, that I think there needs no great Rhetorick to convince us of the Truth thereof, although this Author very confi∣dently avers the contrary, Pag. 56. If we but Read the History of the late Civil Wars under King Charles I. we shall find, that in all these proceedings, the Parliament or Committee of Estates ap∣pointed thereby to Govern the Nation, never acted any thing in Relation either to Peace or War, but in conjunction with the Ge∣neral Asembly or Commission of the Kirk; or if they chanced to pass any Ats without their consent, they were instantly declared o be unlwful and of no Obligation. And to prove the Truth of this we need no more but consult their proceedings, in opposing he King's Affairs in the year 1648. for when the Parliament of Scolnd had resolved on an Engagement for delivering the King's
person from his Imprisonment in England, did not the PresbyterianBurnets Mmoirs of the Dukes of Hamilt. p. 337, 339▪ Ministers prescribe some Articles to the Parliament, for carrying on this War against England, and because the Parliament did not com∣ply with their desires herein, they solemnly protested against all they had resolved on, and thundered Cures and Damnation against all who did not oppose this Engagement. Pag. 59. This Author is highly displeased with his Antagonist,The Pesby∣teria s not with u sme ground stig∣matized wih the rp oach∣ful Term of New Gospl∣lers. for throwing upon the Presbyterian party the reproachful Term of New Gospellers; and he cannot apprehend what can be found in the Presbyterian Writings to ground this Accusation upon. But I think ruly, when we conder the Nature of most of their Difcour∣ses upon Religion, the whole Tenour of their Sermons and Preach∣ings, it is not without some ground, that they are Reproached with this distinguishing Character. I do not say, that they main∣ain wholly a New and a Singular Gospel, but I am sure they have so disguised the Gospel of our Saviour, from its Ancient Purity and Simplicity, that what they Preach, is vastly different from the Do∣ctrine of the Purer and Primitive Ages of Christianity. They have corrupted most of its Doctrines, with their Rude and Indi∣gested Notions; they have transformed the Meek and Calm Spirit of the Gospel, into a Spirit of Bitterness and Revenge, instead of converting their Swords into pruning Hooks and plow shares; they, to propagate their excentrick Notions of Religion, maintain it law∣ful to resst the Supreme Powers, and rather than fail of their de∣signs, to imbroil Nations into perpetual War and Bloodshed. And this mehinks is quite another Gospel from what our Saviour has taught us in his Holy Scriptures, where we have not the least en∣couragement to propagate Religion by force of Arms, or any such indirect means. There we find nothing more frequently inculcated to the Christian Converts, than a Spirit of Meekness and Humility, of Brotherly Love and Charity, and to live peaceably with all Men as much as in us lieth. We are not taught from thence, to prose∣cute with the utmost Rigour of Malice and Revenge, all such as differ rom us in the last matters about Religion, but we are rather exhorted to reclaim them from their Errors, in the Spirit of Meek∣ness and Charity.
CHAP. III. I Come now to our Author's Third and Last Part, where he has is not strange to see Persons, after they have murdered, robbed, or any way in∣jurd heir ,  endeavor  to blackn thm in thir  and ,  btter to  own wickd Actions  thm. heaped together a parcel of such Villainous and Prophane Stories, of such manifest Lies and Forgeries, as do plainly shew the Author to have abandoned all sense of Morality and Religion, and o have prostituted his Conscience meerly to gratisie his Malice and Re∣venge. After he has in he ormer parts of his Book, almost in every Page, reviled the whole Body of the Episcopal Clergy and Gentry both in Egland and Scotland at a most ignominious rate, re∣presenting them all as Drunkards and Whoremongers, as wallowing in all Sins of Uncleanness and Impurity, he now  the Persons of some particular Clergy-men in Scotland, whom he endeavours now to wound in thir Reputation and Honour, as his Party have already done in their ives and ortunes. It is no ways strange to see Per∣sons when they have either murdered, robbed, or any way injured a Man, to endeavour to blacken him in his Fame and Reputation, to represent him as the vilest Monster, that so they may the better pal∣liate and excuse their own wicked and hellish Practices against him. Could we ever expect that the Prebyterians, after they had once at∣tempted, frequently threatned, and at last accomplihed in a most barbarous manner, the murder of tha great Primate Bishop Sharp, that they should, after this unparallel'd Villany of theirs, allow him the Character he desevedly bears of a Religious, Prudent, and Godly Prelate? Could we imagine they would deal more tenderly with his Reputation than they had done with his Life? On the contrary, we had good reason to expect that they would charge him with all the notorious Villanies their Malice could invent, as this Libeller very civilly Treats him, Pag. 64. So that we have no great reason o wonder at this insatiable Malice of our Presbyerians, that after hey had raised a most furious Persecution against our Clergy, thrust hem from their Spiritual Cures and Preferments, robbed them of heir Temporal Fortunes and Estates, and cruelly treated their Per∣sons, by murdering of some, and wounding of others; that their Malice should not stop here, but likewise extend it self to their Fame and Reputation, the most precious Jewel we possess; I say, we need not much wonde a his, since i is no more han what was neces∣sary
to crown their glorious Work of Reformation, that they might not only theeby the more expose the Persons of our Clergy to fur∣ther Ignoniny and Contempt, but likewise might have some shew or pretence to colour their own barbarous Practices against hem. It is a sufficient Vindication of the Clergy, whose Lives and Con∣versaionsThe  of or Clergy sufficienly vindiced srom this Li∣bllr's asper∣sions, since in th present  aganst thm by the , ty cannot Instance in  of their number, a∣gainst whom they could find the  pretnce to deprive thm for Immora∣lities. this Author so maliciously attacks, at least of all those who are yet alive, that in this present Persecution against them, raised and carried on by the Presbyterians with all the fury and malice that was possible, there were few or none of them deprived for their Im∣moral Lives and Actions. Their Adversaries not only persecuted them in their Persons, but likewise endeavoured to blacken them in their Reputation by all the hellish Arts they could contrive; they framed Libels against them, stuffed with all the groundless tories they could possibly scrape together, and with all the Lies and Forge∣ries their Malice could invent; and yet after all these indirect mans used by them to stain the Reputation of our Clergy, I verily believe, they cannot instance in four Persons against whom they could ind the least pretence to deprive them or their Immoralities. And this methinks, were enough to detect the falshood of this Villain's Forge∣ries, and to vindicate those of the Clergy whom he here assaults from the foul Aspersions he so invidiously throws upon them. I these of the Clergy had been in the least obnoxious in their Lives, could they have possibly escaped so critical a Censure of their Ene∣mies, when they sifted all their Acquaintances for Stories against them, and ripped up their Lives to their vey infancy, and when nothing else could be found blameable in the whole course of their Lives, they charged some of them with their Juvenilia, and even those they re∣presented under a great number of aggravating Circumstances which never had the least shadow of Truth. Had I the good fortune of being acquainted with all the Clergy, who are here libelled by our Author, or a convenient opportunity of corresponding with these places where they resided, I could fairly undertake to disprove this Accuser in most of the particulars of his Forgeries. But since I am at present deprived of the Advantages of such a general Correspon∣dence as this requires, I must in this Vindication conine my self to such of the Clergy as I have either the happiness of knowing, or have had occasion more particularly to enquire into the History of their Lives. And from what I shall discover as touching this Li∣beller's disingenuous and unfair Dealing with respect to these Clergy, the Reader may easily guess how fairly and candidly he treats their
Brethren, and what credit is to be given to his Calumnis and Asper∣sions upon them. What I designed upon this Subject, is in a great part anticipated▪byMany of our Clergy sufi∣ciently vin∣dicated from this Libeller's accusations, by the Au∣thor of an Appendix to a late Trea∣tise, entitu∣led, An A∣pology for the Clergy of Scolaud. a late Treatise concerning our Scots Asfairs, entituled, An Apology for the Clergy of Scotland, where the worthy Author in an Appendix to his Book has vindicated many of our Clergy from the Libels brought against them by this petty Scribler, and has given such true and just Characters of them as all that know them will readily acknowledge to be their due. To this Appendix therefore I shall refer my Reader for an Answer to a great deal of what concerns the third Part of this scurrilous Libel, not being willing to repeat here what is so excellent∣ly said by tht Author in vindication of our Clergy. I shall only here subjoyn such further Matter for their Vindication from this Libel∣ler's Aspersions, as the Author of the Appendix had not then the op∣portunity of knowing▪ and has since come to my hads. And first, As for Dr. Canaries, against whom the bent of thisDr. Canaries fully vindi∣cated from the Calumny brought a∣ginst hm by this Accu∣ser, and the Accuser's Malice and  fully . Accuser's maice seems to be chiefly levelled, although I never gave the least crdit to this abominable Story charged upon him in this Pamphlet, as knowing him to be a Man of a vituous and exem∣plary Life; yet because the Libeller so confidently appeals for the truth of his Story to the Registers of , I had the curiosity to send hither to a wothy Friend of mine for an Extract out of the Registrs concening this matter, not doubting but our Author had consulted the Rcords himself beore he made so publick an Appeal to them. Th Answer I received was to this purpose: That as for Dr. 's Affair, after all the Researches could be made into the Records of the Kirk-Sessions and Presbytery of Dundee, there was no mention of it to be ound there, and the Ministers assured him ne∣ver any thing of it was Recorded, so that he could not send me any Extract of it as I desired. And he says, That it is great Impudence in the Author of this Pamphet to appeal to these to gain credit to that abominable Story; as it is likewise most notoriously false what this Author alledges, That the Doctor was constrained to flee; for he averrs it as a certain truth, That there never was any Sentence pro∣nounced against him, and this (he says) all the Ministers of the Presbytery can attest. He likewise says, That his very Accusers there do utterly deny that there was any such thing as a Form of Baptism used, which is so considently asserted by this Villain. He tells me, he was credibly informed, That the Fanaticks in that place had been at pains to sift these Accusers of the Doctor, and that Mr. Spalding the Presbyterian-Intruder there had sent some of his
Followers to examine them concerning this matter, and after all they were brought to Mr. Salding himself, but never would acknowledge any such thing as the Pamphleter records. He concludes his Letter thus; That he must do Dr. Canaries the justice to testifie, that he was as ittle tainted with Intemperance as any he knew of his age. And this Testimony ought to be of the greater weight with us, that it comes from one who was intimately acquainted with the Doctor, and had all the advantages of knowing exactly the whole Series and History of his younger Years When that Passage of the Doctor was Examined before the Pres∣bytery of Dundee, the Doctor received an Acquittance from the Presbytery, clearing him from having any accession to that Scandal given by these two young Gentlemen who were in his company, and accosted the Women in the Fields. And notwithstanding th malice of the Presbyterians hath aggravated that Story into a heinous Villany, yet the true and real Ground of it was no more than this, That these two young Gentlemen being in company with the Doctor, run from him to some Women in the Fields, and undecently thrust their Hands under their Clothes. When this Answer to the Presbyte∣rian  was published, Mr. Castairs a Presbyterian Minister tod Dr. , that he was inormed by Mr. Spalding the Presby∣terian Preacher at Dundee, (the place where this Story had its rise,) That there was no ground for this malicious Calumny against the Dotor; and that if the Doctor pleased, he would write to Mr. Spal∣ding for an account of it, which he thought would be such a Vindi∣cation of the Doctos Innocency, as the most malicious of his Ene∣mies coud not well withstand. Mr. Castairs having wrote to Mr. Spaling, who snt him up some account of it to London; he sent a Letter to the Dotor, acquaining him, That such an account was come fom Mr. Spalding to London, (though not as yet to his hands) wherein the Doctor's Innocency was sufficiently cleared from this malicious Slander. This Letter from Mr. Castairs I suppose the Doctor hath in his possession; but Mr. Castairs sent not afterwards to the Doctor Mr. Spalding's Letter, for what reason I shall not here enquire. Hence we may see how fairly and candidly the Docto has been treated by this malicious Scribler, and for no other reason that I can conceive, but his being employed by a part of the Clergy of Scot∣land to Negotiate their Affairs with the present Government, and the vigorous opposition he always made to the Designs carried on by the Presbyterian Party for overturning and subverting our Church▪
I shall not here resume what the Author of the Appendix above cited brings in further Vindication of the Doctor's Innocency, as that he un∣derwent two fiery Tryals before the Presbyterian Judicatories in Scot∣land, one before the Privy▪ Council at Edinburgh, which consisted then wholly of Presbyterians, who are still by far the majority at the Council-Board; the other before a Meeting of Presbyterian Teach∣ers at Selkirk; by both which he was acquitted, and not one instance of Immorality laid to his charge. On the contrary, the Presbyte∣rian Ministers offered cordially to receive him into their Society, if he would but renounce his Principles of Episcopacy. I think there needs no more be said in the Doctor's Vindication; if he but appeal for his Innocency to the Testimony of those who have known the whole course of his Life and Conversation, he may fairly bid a de∣fiance to the most inveterate malice of his Enemies. Page 64. He charges Dean Hamilton with Sodomy, and says, HeAn ccount of Dan Ha∣milton's Process, and his being ab∣solv'd there∣from by the Privy-Coun∣cil an  Criminal ourt. was convicted of it by 88 Witnesses; and again, Pag. 73. he accuses him of buggering a Mare, lying wih several Men's Wives in Hamilton, and several other Immoralities, among which is his profering Bestia∣lity (I suppose our Author would have said Sodomy) to a young Man in London of this Author's own Acquaintance. These Crimes, he says, were proved against him before the Criminal Court at Edinburgh, but he having bribed the Judges, the Tryal was put off. As for these last Crimes, Buggery, Adultery, &c. the Dean was never so much as ac∣cused of them, so far were they from being proved against him, as this Libeller falsly alledges; and it is the height of Impudence in him to arraign the whole Justice of the Nation at this rate, for conniving at such gross and scandalous Immoralities as the most barbarous Na∣tions detest and abhor. Is it possible for any man of sense to be∣lieve, that the whole Judges of a Nation can be so degenerated in their Morals, as to be bribed or corrupted by such a vile Wretch as this Dean Hamilton must needs have been, had our Author's Calum∣nies against him been tre? The Dean was indeed accused of the Crime of Sodomy, and upon that account was cited first before the Privy-Cuncil, and afterwards before the Justice-Court at Edinburgh; and all Witnesses that could be had were examined against him, but they not proving any thing of the Crime upon him, he was fully absolved from it by both those honourable Courts. And my Infor∣mer assures me, that he has seen the Sentences of Absolution passed upon this Affair by both those Courts; the one signed by Duke Ha∣milton as President of the Council, and the Clerk to the Privy∣Counil; the other signed by the Justice General, and the Clerk to
the Justice-Court; and these Sentences of Absolution are to be seen at this day in the several Registers of those Courts. Now, after the Dean was so publickly absolved from the Guilt of this Crime, it must needs argue a great stock of Impudence, and nothing less of Ma∣lice in this Author, to averr so confidently, That he was convicted of it by ighty eight Winesses. Whether he was really guilty or not of such a Villany, God and his own Conscience can best tell; it has been the misfortune of several pious and innocent Persons to be alsely accused; but however, since he did so openly Vindicate him∣self from the Guilt of this Crime, the Laws of Christian Charity oblige us to look upon him as Innocent, till we have better Evidence to the contrary, than the Aspersions and Calumny of a malicious and virulent Scribler, who has declared himself an Enemy to all those that have ever been vested with the Authority of Christ's Am∣bassadors. In the following Page Page 6. Our Author's great mi∣stake concern∣ing Mr. Boyd. he mentions one Mr. Byd a West-Country Parson, whom he affirms to have got his Mid with Child, and, to have been taken in the Act by some of his Parishioners, and thereupon to have deserted his Wife, and run with the Whre o England. In this our Author is so fr mistaken, that I am credibly informed, there never was an Episcopal Minister of that Name in the West of Scotland since▪ the Year 1662, except one Mr. Robert Boyd Minister at Carmu∣noch, who although upon some other accounts he was once Libell'd in Bishop Leighton's time and absolved, nothing of the Libel being proved, yet never any thing like Adultery was laid to his charge, and at present he lives in  with his Wife under a virtuous and commendable Character. In the same Page our Libeller assaults the Reputation of Mr. HughA full Rel∣tion of the Procss con∣crning Mr. Hugh Blair, and of th indirect ways and means used by the Prosby∣terian Party to stain his Reputation▪ Blair Minister at Rutherglen, concerning whom he has these Words; That he ws a cmmon Drunkard and Swearer, and at last got his Maid with child, or which he was suspended about a month by the Bishop; but having bribed one Macfarland to marry the Whore, and say the Child was his, he was restored again to his Office, though the thing was proved before the Bishop by many Witnesses who had seen them lying together; and it was also proved, that the Woman owned it in her Labour, and that her Hus∣band had confessed it. I have chose the rather to set down our Author's Words at large, because they contain a complication of as many Lies as Words. That Mr. Blair is either a Drunkard or Swearer, was not so much as alledged against him in all his Process, which not∣withstanding was caried on with the height of Malice and Envy. That he got his Maid with child, is a most notorious Lie, as I shall
convince you by and by, as it is likewise false that the Bishop ever suspended him on that or any other account. That Mr. Blair bri∣ed one Macfarlnd to marry the Whore, contains no less than two maifest Falshoods; for First, There was never one Mcfarland men∣tioned in the whole Process; and Secondly, The Whore lives still unmarried to this day. That the thing was proved before the Bishop by many Witnesses that were examined about it, is likewise a noto∣ious ntruth, or of above an hundred Witnesses that were exa∣mined about it, not one of them deposed that they saw him as much as speak to her after he put her out of his Service, far less to hae the least scandlous carriage towads her. That he Wman ned it n her childbed, and that her Hsband confssed it, are of the same strain with the rest of these Calumnies, and have no greater shadow of Truth; for when the Hussie was in Childbed, she decla∣red one Donld Fergn to be the Father of the Child, who owned t as his, and maintained it as long as the Child lived. As to the Husband's confessing that he was bribed to own the Child, I have already told you, that the Woman was never known to have a Hus∣band, and that she lives unmarried at this day. But that you may be the better able to understand the whole of this Afair concerning Mr. Blair, take the History of it as ollows▪ Mr. Hugh Blir being indebted for some money to one James Mac∣farland of Kik-town, his own Cousin-German, and Mr.  having occasion to wrie to him frequently about it▪ st a Sevant of his called Donald Frguson with the Letters; and thi  stay∣ng some times all night at Mr.Blair's House, had occasion to ebauch Mrgaret Drew one of his Maid-servants, and got her with Child, hich so soon as Mr. Blair was informed of, he put the Hussi out of his ervice. Then Commissary Fleeming his Lady living in Mr. Blai's Parish, and having had a former Grudge against him, laid hold on this occasion, and dealt with the Whore to father the Child on Mr. Blair. And for that end, she and the Fanatick Party in Glasgow gave her a sum of money to own it; (which can yet be proved by the Hussie's own confession, and by other Witnesses that were privy to it;) pon which she goes to a Minister in the Presbytery of Glas∣gow, and affirmed Mr. Blair to be the Father of her Child. The rumour of this coming to the Archbishop of Glasgow his ears, he forthwith appointed a Visitation of the Church of Ruteglen, where Mr. Blair was Minister, to be in April 1663, and caused the Wo∣man  Drw to be summoned thereto. She appearing before he Prebytery▪ declared, That Donald Ferguso was the Father o
her Child. Wherepon Mr. George Milne Minister at Campsie, in whose Parih this Ferguson lived, was ordered to summon him to the next Presbytery Meeting; who compearing freely, owned him∣self to be the Father of the Child, and did satisfie the Discipline of th Church at Gavan for the said Scandal, where both of them con∣fessed the Child was begotten. When the Child was presented to Baptism, this Ferguson did the duty of the Father, and did likewis maintain it as long as the Child lived▪ Commissary Fleeming's ady being disappointed of this her design against Mr. Blair, set aother on foot of Libelling him; and po∣cured from the Archbishop a second Visitation to be kept at his Church of Rutheglen by the Presbytery; where all hi Pahioners that had any thing to say agaist his Life and Conversation, were in∣vited to come freel and declare it: Yet even then his whole  cleared him of all Imputations both of Doctrine and Con∣versation. ut our Presbyterian Lady's malice restd not so, for she procured a third , against which time she had provided one Willia Robison, a Smith to his Trade, and a prosligate vicious Fellow in his Morals, to give in a Libel against Mr. Blir, and ac∣cuse him of several Immoralities. This Fellow had been a Serjeant at the Insurrection of -bridge; before which time Mr.  and his Kirk-Sssion had frequently censured him for , Swearing, Breach of the Sabbath, , and Whoredom; so that the Archbishop and Presbytery could not admit him as an Accus. And this necessitated the Lady to set up one John Widderspon a Taylor to subscribe the Libel against hi, who was a Bastard-relation of her own, at that time her servant, a young man not one and twenty Years of Age, having no Family, and not worth a Groat; yet not∣withstanding all these just Exceptions against him, to give the Lady satisfaction, he was sustained. But after more than two years Pro∣cess before Synods, Sub-Synods, Presbyteries, and te Examination of above an hundred Witnesses, there was not one Titl of the Libel proved agains him; even although no Witnesses were rejected, but all admitted, even Informers themselves, and one John Stevn, whom Mr. Blair proved to be a Mad-man, was dmitted Cum Not, as the whole Synod and Presbytery of Glasgow and their Registers can tstifie. But all this failing them, the Lady again set on the Whore, and gave her more money to retract her former judicial Confession, and to her the Child on Mr. Blair De novo. Many Witnesses were pro∣cured▪ by her, to prove that Mr. Blair bribed the Hussie with money. But all Proof failing, and she having thereby mde her self Inamous,
the Archbishop, together with the whole Diocese, after three years Process, finding nothing of the Libel proved, nor any ground to trouble him further, did absolve him from the whole Libel and Po∣cess; all which the Registers to this day do bear, and all the Mni∣sters of the Diocese yet living can attest. In this Process Co∣sary Fleeming and his Lady, their Oaths being taken, did confess that they had set out both William Robison and John Widderspone to accuse Mr. Blair, and given them money for that end; and this is contained in their Original Depositions upon Oath, subscribed with their own Hands. The Commissary's own Original Deposition sign'd by himself, owns that he was instrumental in perswading William Robison to accuse Mr. Blair to the Presbytery, but denies that he knew any thing of Widderspone's doing it till ater he had be∣gun it. I have thought it to trouble the Reader with an exact Copy of Commissary Fleming's Deposition upon Oath  this matter, because it contains a further confirmation of what I have already said in Vindication of Mr. Blair's Iocence, and is a full discovery of the malicious and indirect means that were used by the Presbyterian Party to stain his Reputation. Here follows the Depo∣sition. Glasgow, May 1. 1684. SIR William Fleeming Commissary of Glasgow being called, compea∣red, and his Oath being taken, did acknowledge he  William Robison to go in and inform the Presbytery against Mr. Hugh Blair, but that by the Oath he had made he knew nothing of Widderspone's doing any thing of that kind until he had entred on it. For Provest Bowman, he never called r him nt Mr. Hugh Blairs business so far as he remembers. He called r Provst arvey, and nquired at him what he knw anent Mr. ugh Blair, and he having told me what he knew, I answered, Why tn you must be ready to depoe according to your knowledge when . And in the very like fashion he sent for Baily Fleeming, according  his mmory he thinks: he called for James Cuming, and took Inquisition of wh he know anent Mr. Hugh Blair, and asked, Whether he would be a Witness r Iformer, or ither, and that e found satisfaction in neither, and that according to his memory all this was after the Visitation, but can∣not be . He remembers nothing anent William Scot Weaver positively, and that by the Oath he had made he said, That William Robi∣son should be at no loss by any Expences he should be at, but that he
never off money to Winesses that he can remember, and that he never threatened any Witnesses to come in against Mr. Hugh Blair. He sent for Thomas Wilkie, and asked him what he could say? And when he told him, he had him be ready, as he should answer to GOD▪ to tell the Presby∣tery. And dclares as to the Insortive part, and as to the getting of an Acuser, he does not judge himself bound  Law to give an account of his private Methods and Transactions , especially seeing the Presby∣tery required all the Hèrtors and others to inform what they could against Mr. Hugh Blair, but Ex superabundanti, for the Committee's satisfa∣ction he had declared Ut supra sic subscribitur. W. Flyming. The Commissary in the end of his Deposition says, That having interrogated Thomas Wilkie what he could say against Mr. Blair, perswaded him to be a Witness against him, implying as if this Wilkie could have discovered some material thing concerning Mr. Blair▪ whereas Thomas Wilkie's Deposition upon Oath is rather a Vindication than an Accusation of Mr. Blair's Innocence. He not only denies that he ever knew Mr. Blair guilty of any undecent thing with this Husse; but swears positively that he heard Mr. Blair affirm, That if this Woman were with Child, he should take all ima∣ginable care that she might appear and satisfie the Discipline of the Church for the Scandal. His Examination upon Oath signed by himself take as follows. Glasgow, Dec. 26. 1683. THE whilk day Thomas Wilkie being admitted Witness and Interro∣gate, if he did see Mr. Hugh Blair riding before Margaret Drew on an Horse towards Edinburgh? Deponed thereto Negatively. 2. Being Interrogate, if he did see them sup together in James Borland's at Black∣burn? Deponed thereto Negatively. 3. Being Interrogate, if he heard Mr. Hugh Blair say, if Margaret Drew were with Child, he should secure her Fees  his hand for her Compeirance? To which he deponed Affirmative. Sic subscribitur Thomas Wilkie.
I think I need say nothing further in Mr. Blairs Vindication; whoever cosiders what is already said on that point, will be fully convinced of his Innocence as to all these Calumnies brought against him by this Libeller, he is not the first whose Fate it hath been to be maliciously and innocently slandered. I have not the happiness of being of Mr. Blairs acquaintance, but the Character under which I have heard him always represented by his Brethren and Neigh∣bours, sews him to be a Man of a Virtuous Life, and of such Learning and Parts, as no Cause needs be ashamed to own him for one of their Confessors. The next instance of which I shall take Notice, is Mr. JohnThe tory of Mr. Chis∣olm truly related, and e cleared from this Ca∣lumy. Chisholm Parson of Lisly in Teviotdale, whom this Libeller Accuses in these Words; That he having got his Maid with Child, bribed a Mason to Marry her, and own it, but the Woman afterward going to a Field Meeting in the Neighbourhood out of Curiosity, was so stung in Cnscience, on hearing the Famous Mr. John Welch Preach against such Immoralities, that she cried out to the disturbance of the Worship, that she was undone Eternally, and voluntarily confessed her Crime; for which she was pursued by the Episcopal Clergy, and imprisoned a long time, th' she still owned the Guilt; and the same was also Attested by her Brother, who had been privy to his Villany. This instance does furnish us with such a Notable Discovery of this Author's sincerity, and the Spirit of his party, that I very much wonder he had not the sense to pass it over, it reecting such Scandal and Disgrace upon the whole Fa∣ction; and really it is hard to determine, whether the Impudence, Malice, or Folly of this Author be most discernible in it. For this whole Affair having Ministred matter of so much Talk to the whole adjacent Neighbourhood where it happened, upon the singular dis∣covery of this calumnious Cheat of the Presbyterians, it could not possibly escape the knowledge, either of this Author, or his Infor∣mer; and yet so blind is the Spirit of Rage and Malice, that ou Author would needs publish this instance, as one of the Scandals of the Episcopal Clergy, when he very well knows, that all the Scan∣dal of it returned with a Witness upon their own Heads. But it ems the contriving this sham had cost them so great pains, that they were unwilling to lose the Fruit of so much Labour, even tho' the Mystery was now unfolded; hoping by such aspersions at least to impose upon Strangers, as before they had done for some time on the Neighbourhood, till that overruling Providence, which most requently exerts it self in the Vindication of oppressed Inno∣cence, brought to light that hidden Work of Darkness. The Story in  s thus.
Mr. Chisholm had a Servant Maid in his House who happened to be with Child; she being conveened before the Kirk-Session decla∣red who was the Father of her Child, the person on whom she Father'd the Child owned it to be his, and both she and the said Father did Pennance for this Scandal, according to the usual Cu∣stom as was enjoyed, and thereupon Received the Churches Ab∣solution. Mr. Chisholm upon his Maids falling into this Scandl re∣moved her from his Service, and afterwards the Lady Cherrietres (a Zealous Presbyteian, and who would not let slip any occasion, of bringing Reproach on the Clergy, and rendring that Sacred Pro∣fession odious to the World) being, as appears rom the sequel of the History, put upon it by the paty, hires this Woman to be her Servant; and by some Arts or other prevails with her to say, that Mr. Chisholm her late Master was the Father of her Child. And to make the thing more clamorous, they perswade her to go to a Conventicle where Mr. John Welch Peached, and there by all the hypocritical sorrow she could counterseit, to pretend her self to be under an intollerable Remorse of Conscience for concealing the Sin of her Master. The Noise of this no soonēr went abroad, than the Neighbouring Clergy took notice of it, and appointed the Wo∣man to be Summoned to the Meeting of their Presbytery, whom, when she appeared, they interrogated, whether she owned what was commonly Reported she had said concerning Mr. Chisholm's being the Father of her Child? She answered she had said so, and that she now adhered to it, and that it was a Truth, that Mr. Chisholm had committed Fornication with her. This her bold Ac∣cuation did not a little amaze all those who had any familiar ac∣quaintance with Mr. Chisholm, whom they had always Esteemed a Man of an inoffensive Life, having been of an unblameable and ex∣emplary Conversation. His Brethren however in the mean time, because of the Scandal, did suspend him from the exercise of his Ministry▪ and used their utmost endeavours with him, to bring him to a Confession of his Guilt, and to perswade hm to dimit his Of∣fice, his Ministry being, upon the Account of the Scandal he had fallen under, rendered altogether useless. But after the Process had been long depending, and he still continuing under the Suspension of the Exercise of his Ministry, did notwithstanding unalterably persist in his Pleading not Guilty, and did by such serious Protestations Remonstrate his Innocence to his Brethren, that they firmly believ∣ed him to be very much injured in this Affair. He told them, i was not to save his preerment that he stood so much to the Vindi∣cation
of his Innocence, but that his personal Reputation being high∣ly wronged in this matter, and especially, there being so much Scandal and Reproach cast upon the Sacred Office of the Ministry upon his Account, he thought himself bound in Conscience to en∣deavou all he could, to have this Affair throughly Canvassed, that e might clear not only his own Reputation, but likewise the Mi∣nisterial Function of this great Scandal so maliciously thrown upon them. After this, some of Mr. 's Friends being throughly per∣swaded of his Innocence, thought sit to make Application to the Civil Power to take the matter under their cognizance; and spoke to the Sheriff of the place, that he might take some effectual course for having the Mystery of this whole Affair unfolded. The Sheriff sends for the Woman, and tells her, he had very good ground to suspect that what he Reported of Mr. Chisholms, being the Father of her hild was a eer Calumny and Forgery, she having at first decla∣red another Man to be the Father of the Child, and this Man ha∣ving owned the Child to be his, and they both having done Pen∣nance for the Scandal accordingly. She still persisting to say Mr. Chisholm was the Father of her Child, the Sheriff told her, there was no other way to clear this matter, but by her Oath, and there∣fore required her to hold up her Hand, (the way of Administring an Oath in Scotland) and solemnly to declare, whether Mr. Chishlm was the Father of that Child or not? The Hussie holds up her Hand, but finding that the Sheriff seemed to be in earnest to tender her the Oath, she presently pulls back her Hand, and resuses to De∣pose. The Sheriff, having from this her behoviour good ground to believe there was some Cheat in the business; proceeds to threaten her with the Torture, if she did not instantly disclose to him the whole Mystery of tis Affair. Upon this the Hussie presently con∣sees, that Mr. Chisholm was not the Father of the Child, but that the Lady  (a Zealous Bigot for Presbytery) having ta∣ken her into her Service, prevailed with her to Father it upon Mr. Chishlm, and that the thing might b the more publick, to do Pen∣nance for it in a ield Conventile. The Sheriff sends forthwith or the Lady  and  er, and after having throughly Examined the matter, an  her Guilty, he Fines her in the sum of above an hundred and  pounds Sterling▪ In this we have an excellent proof of our Authors Fair and Candid Dling, of which he so faithfully  his Reader in the close of his Preface; and it likewise affords us a singular instance of the dis∣ingenuou
Arts and Villanous practices of that Party, who neverThis Affair of Mr. Chis∣holm's, a singula in∣stance of the Villanous Arts and Practices of the Presbyte∣rians to bring contmpt on the Episcopal Clergy. stick at any thing, nay, not the most Hellish and indirect means they can conceive, to stain the Reputation of their Adversaries, and to bring them into Contempt. As for the Truth of the story as I have here related it; I had it from a very Grave and Worthy per∣son, who then lived near to the place where it happened, and was Eye-Witness to a great part of the Tryal, and so had all the advan∣tages of knowing the Truth of this Affair. But this whole Story is so notorious and so very well known in that place of the Country, that I'm confident, our Adversaries can never have the Face to de∣ny it. Bsides, there was a very remarkable accident; some may perchance call it a Judgment from God, that happened in a short time after the discovery of this notoious Cheat, which made the whole story the more taken Notice of. It was concerning the La∣dy Cherrietrees, who had been the Author and occasion of all this trouble to Mr. Chisholm, and had peswaded his Maid to Father her Child upon him. For one of her own Confessors, a Presbyterian Minister, (his Name is but too well known) coming upon some occasion to lodge at her House, during the short time he stayed there, he committed Uncleanness with one of her nearest Rela∣tions and got her with Child; and both he and the young Gentle∣woman did Pennance for this their Sin of Fornication in a Field Conventicle, held upon the same Hill, where the Lady Cherrietrees had obliged Mr. Chisholms Servnt Maid to publish him as Father of her Child in their Presbyterian Congregation, and that it might bing the greater Scandal upon the Episcopal Clergy, to do pub∣lick Pennancè for it there. You my be sure such a remarkable , as this would not  without a critical Censure from all the Country ound aout. Pag. 79. Our Libeller mis a little of his Aim, for instead ofMr. Waugh a  Ministr, Vindicated from the As∣persions of this Liller. an piscopal Clergyman, e fails soul upon one of his own party, a  Minister; however I think I'm in justice bound to st down what Information I have of that Assair; and to Vindicate the injured Memory, even of a Prebyterian Minister, from the Calumnies and Aspersions of those of his own Faction. His Name is Mr. Waugh Curate of Borrost , whom thi Author airms to have Ravshed his Wifes Nee. m told indeed, that he was slandered with Adultey, and that a Woman Father'd a Child up∣on him, but she was neither a Married Woman, nor his Wives Neece; however, of this Accusation he purged himself by Oath, before the Presbytery of , as is to be seen in the Registers of that place.
In the next Pragraph he mentions one Mr. Gregory Curate oAnother mi∣stake of our Authors con∣crning Mr. Gregories bing  at Tor∣bolton. Torboltoun, who, he says, was taken in the Act of Uncleanness on a Dunghil. Whereas I'm inform'd, there was none of the Name of Grgory, Minister at that place. Mr. James Gillspie was Minister at Torbltoun, and Mr. Alexander Gregory Parson of Air. But they are both Men of an untainted Reputation, and were never so much as slandered with such a Crime, and far less convicted of it. The next whom he Attacks, is Mr. Pearson, Curate of Pasley, whoThe notorious  of the Rlation a∣out Mr. Pearson. he says, was seen in his own Garden committing Indecencies with his Wife. Whereas Mr. Pearson was three years Minister at Pasley, during all which time his Wife was never in Pasley, nor nearer to it than Burnisland in Fyfe, which is about fifty miles distance; and this all the Presbytery and Parish of Pasley can attest. The next I shall take Notice of, is Mr. Lawson Minister at Yron∣gray▪ whom this Libeller Accuses for procuring Souldirs to be Quar∣eredA indica∣tion of Mr. Lawson Mi∣ster of Yrongray. on his Parishioners, till they were quite eaten-up, and fr informing against his Parshioners, and causing sevral of them to be Hanged. The Falshood of this Accusation is so manifest, that Mr. Lawson chal∣lenges his Accusers to Name any one of his Parish▪ that were hang∣ed, during the twenty years of his Ministry at Yrongray, except one Gordon, who suffered for his Notorious Rebellion. And he was so far from procuring Souldiers to be Quartered on his Parishioners, that by his Intercessions with the Government in their behalf; he actually saved many of them from Fines, Imprisonments, and other Legal punishments to which they were obnoxious, for their frequent Rebellions against the State. For the Truth of this he Appeals to the Testimony of James Jewine of Crockmare, Tho. Smith of Drum∣claye, James Grier in Dalwhaine, and others in the Parish of Yron∣gray, whom he protected from being Fined, and of John Welch of Cornlee, for whom, when he was Condemned to die for his Rebel∣lion, Mr. Lawson, by his Interest with the then Archbishop of Glas∣gow, obtained first a Reprieve, and afterwards a Pardon. In the ext place he Accuses the said Mr. Lawson of bing Drunk at Dumfreis, and in is return omewards quarrelling with some Drunken Coun∣try people▪ who beat him and made him Bleed, and that upon this Ac∣count, he caused five young Men to be Hanged, as being the Persons that did assassinae him. Now, the Villany as well as Falshood of this Ca∣lumny, will clearly appear from the short Narrative I shall give you of this Transaction. Some of Mr. Lawsons Parishioners being cited to appear before the Commissioner of that County to take the Test, (o which they had a great Aversion) the said Mr. Lawson, at their
intreaty, went to the Church of Traquair, the place where they were appointed to meet, to request the said Commissioner to Grant them a delay. Here he stayed, from Ten a Clock in the Morning till about five at Night, and prevailed with him to shew all possible kindness to his Parishoners, and to set the Imprisoned at Liberty. After which Mr. Guthry Minister at Keir, and Mr. Lawson went to Yrongray together, not fearing any hurt. They met with none to quarrel with by the way, (as this Scribler impudently avers) but came peaceably to Mr. Lawson's Stable Door. Mr. Guthry did sit on Horseback till Mr. Lawson should send forth his Servant to take in their Horses; but he being about to enter his own Gate, was n∣countred by two Men, one of which Wounded him in the Head twice, calling him Papist Dog. Mr. Lawson intreated them to Rea∣son the matter with him, rather than to shed innocet Blood; to which they at last yielded, and entering his House with him, seem∣ed to be grieved for what they had done, and after a short stay, they went away peaceably. Six of Mr. Lawson's Neighbours hear∣ing of the Cruelty done him, came instantly to see him; and about half an hour after, these blood thirsty Villains returned, (after some converse had with Rob. Currer in Dalwharne and Agnes Ferguson) and entering Mr, Lawson's House, dragg'd him sorth without his Gate, and shut the Doors after them, keeping his Wife and Children, with his Servants and Six Neiḡhbours within. They Guarded the Doors with charged Carabines, threatning Death to any that should offer to come forth; while in the mean time, they were Murthering him without Doors. Peter Stranger, (alias Hutcheson) the principal Actor in this Tragedy, hearing Mr. Lawson call upon God to be merciful to his Soul, Rebuked him, saying, O Blasphemus Dog! What have you, or any of your Godless Party to d with God? In fine, having bro∣ken one Sword upon his Skull, he borrowed another from his Neighbour; with which two Swords, he gave him twenty eight stroaks; and supposing him to be Dead, lest him weltering in his Blood with seventeen Wounds, the Marks whereof are to be seen in his Body at this day. The Names of those who were Witnesses to this Tragical Action, are Tho. Ferguson of Hallbil, John Rabson of Newark, John Grier in Brae, Robert Findlay in Undy-hill, Jams Ed∣gar in Gateside, James Grier in Burns. And notwithstanding these Witnesses did see Mr. Lawson dragg'd out of his ouse, and ater∣wards wallowing in his Blood; yet this Author does most impu∣dently aver, that no Man came near to Mr. Lawson's ouse, and that neither his Wise nor Servants saw any Man come thither that
Night▪ This is a proo of our Author's Ingenuity, of which he so oten boasts throughout his Pamphlet, pretending to abhor the Me∣thod of inventing Lies, and to have inserted nothing but what he received from credble hands! It is likewise a most Notorious Falshood, That five young Men wer brought to Mr. Lawson, and that he Swore these were the Men that Wounded him, and did thereupon demand Justice. The ground of his story is thus. After the Murther of the Archbishop of St. , and feveral Violences done to the rest of the Clergy and other oyal Subjects; the King with Advice of his Privy Concil, com∣anded his Forces to apprehend the Rebels whereever they could  them, or to kill them if they made any Resistance. Next day ter the Wounding of Mr. Lawson, there was a narrow search made hroughout the Country for such Rogues, and the Souldiers falling on a Party of them that made Resistance, four of them were illed upon the spot, and two apprehended and Hanged near the Chrch of Yrongray. But those were none of them that were a Mr. Lawson's Wounding, and therefore it is the height of inju∣ice, as well as impudence, to impute any thing of this to Mr. Lawon, he having no hand in it, and they suffering justly for di∣strbing the Peace of the Kingdom. Mr. Lawson was so far from hirsting ater the Blood of his Persecutors; that when Peter Stran∣er the principal Actor of this Tragedy was apprehended in Dum∣reis, and Mr. Lawson being called for by my Lord Dunmore, to eclare whether that was the Man that Wounded him or not; he urning to the said Peter Stranger; said, if you be the Person that Wunded me, the Lord sorgive you, and I forgive you. Whereupon, although he was Imprisoned for his Rebellion, yet he was never pursud by Mr. Lawson; and is yet alive, and in some place of pub∣lik Trust in that Kingdom. Again Mr. Lawson is accused of Covetousness, and of having exa∣ted 500 l. of his Parishioners; which is an equal Falshood to the . or upon account of the Cruelties done by the Presbyterian Party, to the Clergy in the West Country; there was an Act made in K. Charles the II. his Reign; that if any Clergyman was injure in his Body or Goods, the Parishioners should be obliged to ay 50 Marks Scots. This was Enacted fo preventing the Cru∣eltis and Outrages of the Presbyterian party. The King's Advo∣cate haring of the Barbarous Usage of Mr. Lawson; caused the Freeholders of the said Parish, to be cited before the Privy , for  of the said Fine▪ Mr. Lawson was so concerned
hereat, that not being able to Write himself, because of his Wounds▪ he caused a Letter to be Writ to his Grace the then Archbishop of Glasgow, requesting for the mitigation of the ordinary Fine in such Cases. And this his desire was Granted, and the Parish only Fined in a 100 l. the fifth part only of the Sum alledged by the Libeller. For the Truth of this Mr. Lawson Appeals to all the Freeholders▪ i Yrongray, being near thirty in Nuber. Now I would ask our Author, if in all this carriage of Mr. Lawson's, there be any thing that savours the least of Blood Thirstiness or Cruelty, wherewith he so maliciously charges him? But I don't much Wonder to see Mr. Lawson thus Calumniated by them; for they had committed such Acts of Cruelty upon his person, as they could not but be ashamed of; so that the better to slur over their Cruelties against him, they found it necessary to represent him to the World, as the greatest Monster of Cruelty and Immorality, and therefore, they not only accuse him of Thirsting after the Blood of some of his Parishio∣ners; but likewise of being Drunk and Kissing his Wives Maid. Mr. Lawson now Aged about 55 years was ever charged; Nay, not in his younger days, with any thing of that Nature. But sor his urther Vindication from all thse and other such Aspersions, as this Libeller has maliciously slandered him with; I shall subjoyn two Testimonies in his Favours sent me, with this Information. The first is of Archbishop Cairncross, who was for the space of 17 years his Fellow Presbyter, and afterwards his Diocesan. It is as fol∣loweth▪ London, August 28. 1692. I Alex. Archbishop of Glasgow do hereby Testisie, that Mr. James Lawson Minister of Yrongrey in the County of Galloway, and Dio∣cess of Glasgow in Scotland, is  very Orthodox and Zealous Prot∣stant, and of good Esteem in the Church for his Pastoral Gifts, and Pious and Exemplary Life in his Ministry. And as he was forced away from his Church and Family, by the Bararous Cruelty of a set of Presbyterians in that Nation; so I do heartily recommend him to the tender Favour of all good and well affected Persons; especially to the Reverend and Pious Clergy of the Church of England, as a Person qualified to do Service in that Caurch, as God in his Providence shall afford him occasion. Given under our Hand and Seal the time and place aforesaid. Alex. Glasguen▪
The other Testimony is that of his Neighbouring Clergymen, the Reverend Brethren of that Presbytery, whereof he was a Member. At Dumfreis June 17. 1690. WE Undersubscribers Ministers within the Presbytery of Dumfreis iu Scotland,, do Testifie and Declare, that the Bearer hereof Mr. James Lawson Minister at Yrongray within the said Presbytery, hath lived within the Precinct thereof, twenty five years and an half, and his behaviour hath been such as became the Gospel, and his Doctrine such as became a Godly Minister, decrying Romish Doctrines and Pra∣ctices, when in greatest Vigour in this Place; and that for his Zealous, Faithful and plain Dealing, in the Service of his Master; he was Wounded and left for Dead, by some Ruffians, at his own House, upon the Eighteenth of February 1685. Wherefore we earnestly desire, that he may have just Encouragement in such places as he shall happen to com to, and be permitted to Pass and Repass about his lawful Affairs, without Molestation; since nothing moves him to Travel abroad, but the Confusions Raised by an insolent Rabble in this place. That the Pre∣misses are of certain Truth is Attested, Day and Place above Written by. James Glendinning Minister at Traquair. Ja. Litle Minister at Tinwald. Jo. Malcolm Minister at Holy∣wood. A. Kincaid Minister at Terregles. Mr. Alex. Meldrum Minister at Dunscore. Mr. Rob. Gardner Minister at Rerick.
Since this malicious Libeller hath, in this his Scurrilous Pamphlet, Published so many Base Calumnies, and Diabolical Lies, against that most Reverend and Worthy Prelate, Dr. Patterson Archbishop of Glasgow, I have taken occasion here to insert his Grace's Letter, (containing a Full and Pathetick Vindication of himself,) which was sent to me by a Reverend and Worthy Friend of mine, enclosed in this following Line. London, October 17. 1693. SIR, I Hear that you are to Publish the Animadversions that you made upon one of the Libels printed against the Scots Clergy. The Methods lately taken to ruin that Order of Men in Scotland, are as Unjust as they are Diabolical. It is a good while ago since I knew who was the Author of that Scurrilous Book, and this made me think that the Archbishop of Glasgow needed no Apology against the Attempts of such a despicable Wretch; yet it's possible, that what is once made Publick may fall into the hands of several Persons who are very apt to be abused, and therefore I have sent here enclo∣fed the Letter that the Archbishop wrote to me upon occasion of that Inamous Pamphlet. I let it go abroad the rather, that I am so seriously appealed to in the Letter it self. I give you my hearty Thanks for your solid Confutatio of several malicious and obscene Lies propagated by that Calumniator. I continue in all Sincerity and Affection, Your Real Friend and Servant. For my wor∣thy Friend Mr.—
Edinburgh-Castle, Jan. 21. 1693. Reverend Brother, WE may say with Hezekiah, This is a Day of Trouble, and of Rebuke, and of Blasphemy. Just now (when I am ordered to remove out of these Three Kingdoms, and so to part from my numerous Family, and ten Motherless Children, when they most need my Care,) I am surprised to find in an obscene and virulent Pamphlet; (written undoubtedly by one of the First-born of the Father of Lies, who dares not own his Villany, Entituled, An Answer to the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence:) Some Paragraphs and Pas∣sages impudently painting me, as one of the most impure and  Wretches that ever was cloathed in Human Flesh; which, if true, should justly expose my Name to Infamy, and my Life to Justice, as the most vie, prophane, and sacrilegious Monster, that ever bore a sacred Character: Which I no sooner read than I fell on my Knees, and, as the same good King ezekiah did with Senache∣rib's blasphemous Letter, I spread it before the Lord in Prayer, and in the innocence of my Heart, and integrity of my Life, I appealed to him or a just Vindication; not that I needed it amongst them to whom my Life and Manners are known, but only amongst such as are Strangers to me, and to this Kingdom; upon whom this impu∣dnt Son of  designs to impose. Not only the sense of Religion and Purity, but even my Native Modesty, (sor attesting of which, I do appeal to all the Men and Women in the World with whom I ever conversed, whom I ear∣nestly obtest ingenuously to declare, if ever they heard one single obscene Word drop from my Tongue, or ever perceived any im∣modest Insinuation either directly or indirectly in my Actings or Practice▪) made me read these obscene Passages with great aversion and horror; most of which, I declare in the Presence of GOD, I never heard, nor read to be said, or done by, or charged upon any Mortal, till I found them there asserted as things notoriously known of my self, by this infamous Monster of Prophaneness, as well as of villanous and impudent Lying. Modesty will not allow me to repeat them, since they deile the Air, and needs must pollute the Eyes of Readers, and Ears of Hearers, and therefore to convel and  them, I shall only say this; That if the wicked Author will be
so just to himself, and to his Party, as to come out from behind the Curtain, pull off his Mask, and prove any of these infamous Arti∣cles or Passages he asserts against me by two, nay by any one single Witness or Person of known Virtue and Probity, and of irre∣proachable Fame, I shall not only offer my Name to Infamy, but my Life to Justice; and to encourage him so to do, I hereby promise him as a Reward; and shall find him good Surety for it, (tho my Circumstances are now very low) of Two hundred Pounds Ster∣ling, (and perhaps the silly Author needs such a charming Bait) if he shall prove any single Article or Instance of those infamous and diabolical Aspersions and Calumnies. Now, if after this open Appeal and Challenge, and offer of this Reward, he shall not ap∣pear and avow himself the Author, nor make at least any one Article of his many Instances against me appear to be true, I shall then leave it to all mankind, to judge if he is not the most wicked, impudent, lying Villain, that ever put Pen to Paper, or if I need any further Vindication; especially considering, that he asserts so many Persons to be privy to those impure and obscene Passages, so that he cannot be straitned for want of Evidence and Witnesses, and is very sure that the present Judges (for I shall decline none) will not prov Partial upon my side. I render devoutly Thanks to GOD, who hath continued my Life thus long, and granted me this opportunity thus to appeal and charge this wicked Author, that so I may satisfie the World of my Innocence, and that this may remain as a solid Witness sor me and my good Name after my Death against a Spirit of Lying and Calumny, which (as formerly against our pious and worthy Prede∣cessors) is now like to go sorth, enraged and rampant, against those of my Perswasion, Order and Character, from such who have long made Lies their Refuge. Dear Brother, You know I have lived long in this Church and Kingdom, and have born a greater and more eminent Character, both in Church and State, than my weakness and imperfection did deserve; you know also I did not want many, and some of great uality and Power, who sometimes have been Enemies to me, so that had  been such an abominable, wicked, and notour Monster, as this infamous Scribler endeavours to paint me, I had been as certainly as justly thrust out from the Counci Table, and the Sacred Episco∣pal Office, with disgrace and infamy; for nothing could have
supported such a villanous Wretch from feeling the Justice of this Church and Nation. You have long conversed with me, and I appeal to you, and to all my Reverend Brethren, Bishops, Pres∣byters and Deacons, to whom I am known, nay to all mankind with whom I ever conversed, and I conjure you and all them to de∣clare to all men, when occasion offers, as in the fight of our great and omniscient Judge, if ever you or they heard or perceived any manner of impure, or so much as an immodest Word or Insinua∣tion to flow from me, and I am ready to stand or fall at that Bar accordingly. There is a Party of Men in the World who Treat us, as some Persecuting Heathens did the pure Primitive Christians, whom they sowed up in Skins of Wolves, Bears, and other Savage Beasts, and then hounded out their bloody Dogs to devour and tear them in pieces; is it not enough that our Sacred Order is abo∣lished, our selves turned out of our Livings and Benefices, (so that many of us (alas) are reduced, with our numerous Families, to a state of starving,) that our Persons are assaulted, and beaten in the open Streets of our Capital City; our Houses rifled, our Families abled out? Nay, after all this the Malice of some is not satiated, till Hell and Calumny are called up against us; and our Reputation must be blacken'd, and our good Names torn, by the most impu∣dent Falshoods and Calumnies which Satan can invent, and his true Offspring publish and propagate,; but, Thanks to our GOD, there will be a Resurrection of blacken'd and murder'd Names, as well as of martyr'd Bodies. You know I have drawn much of the Odium and Spite of a Party upon me, by opposing their Errors, their Schisms, their Rebellious and Treasonable Principles and Practices, with all the Reason and Interest I was Master of; though in stead of endeavouring to take away any of their Lives, (which this Libeller also lays to my Charge) I have been at pains to save many of them, and have actually prevailed for saving of the Lives of several deluded Crea∣tures of that Party, which can still be attested by themselves. I grudge not my Lot, in having my Name thus assaulted and torn by such little ridiculous Scriblers and Calumniators; it were an in∣tolerable Pride in me to look for better Treatment than our dearest Saviour, the Holy Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and noble Army of Martyrs had before me; or than the Primitive holy Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops encounter'd, of whom the World was not worthy; such as St. Athanasius, St. Chrysostome, Narcissus Bishop
of Jerusalem, and others, great and blessed Souls; whose sacred Names, and innocent Lives, have been attack'd and blacken'd by the foul Mouths and lying Tongues of Hereticks, Schismaticks, and impudent Calumniators; and some of them after the same manner, and with the same fulsom Lies as I am; the Disciple is too proud, who looks to be better Treated than his Master; and that Servant is too sawy, who would needs be better used than his Lord; who by the then Scribes  Pharisees, was said to be in Covenant with : I can comortably say with the holy calumniated An∣cient, Quisquis , ddit mrcedi . I doubt not the sober Presbyterians will be as angry at, and dissa∣tissied with, this infamous and anonymus Scibler and Calumniator, as we are; as knowing there can be no more ready nor effectual Method advanced to promote Atheism, and to ruine all Religion, than by Lies and Calumnies to invade and blackn the Honour and Reputation of the Clergy and Pastors of the Church; and who∣ever, and of whatsoever Perswasion he is that dares follow it, can have nothing of Veracity, nor of the meek Spirit of the blessed JESUS, nor regard to the Honour of our  Rligion in him. As for me, I shall bring no railing Accusation agaist thi impius and obscene Calumniator, nor against any of his Party; but shall only say, as Michal the Archangel did to this Scrible's Master, tht Father of Lies, when he contended and disputed with him about the Body of Moses—The Lord rbuke thee. I thank GOD I have learned to Pray with the Church, That Gd ay forgive all my Ene∣mies, , and Slanderers; and particularly to grant Repen∣tance and Mercy to this sad pitiful Wretch, who is so palpably abandon'd of GOD, and given up to a  course of Lying. When he reads and pondrs Psalm 52. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and Psalm 120. throughout, he may by a serious and recollected Meditation, through the Divine Grace and Blessing▪ be brought to Repent; as he would avoid the heavy Wrath and Judgments there threatned against him, and his way. Dear Brother, I writ this in haste, being crowded with many Thoughts and Affairs here in Prison ere I part for Holland; and can have leasure to say no more at present, but to beseech you to cause Print and insert this Letter (which (I being to go to Sea) may prove the
last I shall write to you,) in the Answer that is to come abroad, for the Vindication of those concerned in that infamous Defamatory Libel. GOD ever keep you in his Truth and Fear, and under his most holy Care. I am, Reverend Brother, Your most Affectionate Brother, and Servant, Sic Subscribitur▪ Jo. Glasgow.
As for what this Author Libels against Bishop Cairncross late Arch∣bishopVindication of Arch∣bishop Cairn∣cross. of Glasgow, I need say nothing further in answer to it, but insert the Vindication which he himself wrote of his Innocence, and caused to be printed at Edinburgh, for it contains such a full and sa∣tisfactory Answer to all the Particulars Libelled against him in this Pamphlet, as plainly discovers the malice and wickedness of the Author. It is as follows. A Vindication of Dr. Alexander Cairncross, late Arch∣bishop of Glasgow: Written by himself. WHen at first I found my self Reproached, (in a late Pam∣phlet, Entituled, An Answer to the Scots Presbyterian Elo∣quence,) I neglected and contemned it, not only because I was con∣scious to my self of mine own Innocency, and that it is no small pain to any man of an ingenuous mind to be raking among Calum∣nies, and penning Apologies or Vindications of himself: But likewise because the Author of these infamous Aspersions on the Episcopal Clergy hath discovered all along such a strain of imbitter'd Malice, that I presumed they would obtain little credit or belief in the World. For it is notour to all, that because the Author of a late Pamphlet, Entituled, The Scots Presbyterian Eloquence, alledged some Presbyte∣rian Ministers guilty of undecent Sayings or Expressions from their Pulpits; therefore this Authr in his Answers resolving both to re∣criminate and surpass him, hath both studied and acted his utmost Revenge, in representing some of the Episcopal Clergy as not only guilty of undecent Sayings and Expresfions, but also guilty of vitious Lives and Practices; and whether true or false he values not, if his Malice be but satisfied, and they so reported of in this World. But now considering that a good Name is a tender and choice Blessing which every man in justice to himself should defend and preserve, and that there is too great an aptitude in most People's minds to entertain and believe evil Reports of others, I have thought it by these few Lines to make my just Apology, as in the sight of GOD, against the Calumnies cast upon me in that Pamphlet. Now the whole Paragraph relating to me in that Pamphlet is this: [Mr. Alexander Cairncross Curate in Dumfreis had a lusty Maid∣servant named Grier, who was got with Child in his service, and in her Travail refused to tell who was the Father of it, but sent to her Master to tell her what she should say; who thereupon sent his Servant, a young Boy
called Tait, that owned the Child, and hath kept him in his Service ver since; and that he bing Moderator of the Presbytery, received a Letter from Mr. Menzies thn Curate of Carlaverock, renouncing his Conformity to Episcopacy, and among other Reasons mentioned, that it was so much adapd o bring in Popery, of which he Familiariy bewixt Curats and Papists was a demonstration: At which  sid Mr. Cairncross was so much surprisd, tha in a Fury he started up, and said, Wh. he Devil, will we all ,  Mr. Menzies is ! sor his ,  upon the matter. What is that, said the rest? Are ye stupid , answered he, hat  this very ck of time that the  are our necessary ; bu sinc it is so, lt him be gone  rst in th Muntains, which h must do whn he Bond coms, or ; and seeing he is such a Fool, I had rther  were nged  I should nger any Ppist anent  f Controversie abut our Opinis. e ws  made Archbishop of Glasgow, and urned out by King James, being esteemed the best of Scots , and it seems could not go the full length his neces∣sary Friends would have had him.] ere are two plain matters of Fact, and both base Lies and Ca∣lumnies; sor as to the sirst, That I having a lusty maid named Grier  Svice, wh  o tell he Father of her Child ▪ &c. I answer, Fist, Immediately after I heard that Woma  was suspected of being with Child, I discharged hr boh fom my ouse and Service; and rom my just Resentment against her, I pocured fom the Magistrates her Imprisonment for some weeks, in te which Pison, and when se was brought beore he -.  puickly conessed, That  Sharp, Commis∣sar- in the Town, ad committed  with her, and wa  of  Cild; and the said  Shrp being summoned, compeard  te Sssion, and confessed himself guilty wih her, and ownd  Child; and boh of them mde publick Satiction on the publick Place of Repentanc hree  Days in , nd  of : All which is Recordd in  Regiser of he said Session. And, Secondly, For te Boy Tait, [ i is alldged I sent o her in er Travailing,] he cme not to my Srvice till eight Years thereaster; she having satissied and brought orth her Child in the Year 1671, and he entering to y Svice in 1679, before which time I did never see him in the  to my knowledge.
As to the second, That he being Moderator of the Presbytery of Dum∣freis, received a Letter from Mr. Menzies then Curate of Carlaverock, rnouncing his Conformiy to Episcopacy; at which he was so surprised, hat in a fury he started up,  the Devil, will we all go mad, &c. This is likewise a bse and horrid Untuth: For first, Mr. Mnzies sent me no Letter, but being preent in the Presbytery, exhibited to th publick Meeting that hi Paper of Renunciation; and ater Reading and closs Resoning upon it, he pressed to have it insert in the Pres∣bytery Register, which all the Bethren out of a Tenderness to him refused, pesuming that he had been imposed upon by others, and that in a litte time he mght alter both his Couse and Opinion; which accordingly thereafter ell out, or in an. 166, he pubickly acknowledged his Failzior for his sormer Renunciation, and returned to the Exercise of his Ministry nder Episcopal Government, I being then his Bishop. Secondly, In that Paper which he then ex∣hibit and is yet to be seen, Mr. Menzies aldged, That he had heard that Expession before (of Papiss being ur nssary Frinds) rom one of the piscopal Clergy, but where, or by whom, or whe∣ther true or fase, God know. But as for the Oath and Expressions here alledged uttered by me▪ I appeal to the Consciences and De∣clarations of Mr. Menzis himself, and of all the Brethren then pre∣set, Whether they heard me utter that Oath, and these Expreions here Libell'd and Alledged? And though many of the said Mini∣sters be yet alive, viz. Mr. Rird Sc then Miniser of Kirkbem, Mr.  Minister of . Mr. ohn  Mini▪ ser of , Mr Hnry Knox Minister of , Mr.  Ly Mnister of , Mr.  Minister of Kilprick▪ Mr. Willia  Minister of Nw , and several others, whom I may presume were presnt at that time, to whose Testimony I do appea; yet they being all absent at this time from this place of , except Mr. Riqhard Scot and Mr. Henry Knox here present▪ these two have given in the following Declaration subscribed under their Hands. WE Mr. Richard Scot late Minister of Kirkbean, and Mr. Henry Knox late Minister of Terreagles, being formerly Members of the Presbytery of Dumfreis, and being personally present at that Meeting of Presbytery, wherein Mr. John Menzies then Minister of Carlave∣rock did publickly exhibit to that Meeting his Paper of Renunciation of his Conformity with Episcopacy; Do hereby Testifie and Declare, That we did not hear Dr. Alexander Cairncross late Arcbishop of Glasgow, and
then Moderator of the said Presbytery, utter the Oath or Expressions here Libelled and Alledged. Sic Subscribitur, Mr. Richard Scot late Minister of Kirkbean. Mr. Henry Knox late Minister of Terreagles. And if any thing more were requisite, I am ready to Depone upon my solemn Oath, That I am altogether free and innocent of all these former Calumnies and Reproaches. How much then the Author of this Pamphlet hath kept his Pro∣mise and Fith given to the Publick in its Preface, (that he would int nothing relating to the Lives of the Episcopal Clergy but what he had from credible Hands, and his abhorring the method of inventing of ies,) let the World judge: Only I wish the Author seriously to consider, how Inhumane and Unchristian it is to Perse∣ute some of the Episcopal Clegy with new Cruelties, seeing their present and past Sufferings might sufficiently satisfie, yea satiate the Malice of their bitterest Enemies. And because ye cannot Extir∣pate them from off the Earth, ye labour to make them Unsavory upon it: Remembe there is an infinitely Wise and Just GOD above, who will exactly and impartially Judge all our Words and Actions; and I heartily pray, That GOD may never be provoked to turn back your Reproaches upon you, as Neh. c. 4. v. 4. As also, I would have you to consider how much Reigion it self is exposed, and Prophanity and Atheism encouraged, by represent∣ing Men of Sacred Offices as Vicious and Scandalous in their Lives: For thus Jlian the Apostate resolving to extirpate Christianity, ighted the methods of Persecutions and Cruelties used by some for∣m then Emperors against the Christians, but caused Reproach, and accuse the Ministers and Profesors of that Holy Religion as gty of all the Vices and Lewdnesses that might render them and tir Scred  odious to the World. And therefore it was a Pous Saying of King Chrles I. to one asking Liberty from him to Write and Pblish the Weakness and Failziors of some Ministers thn in opposition to His Majesties Interst; No, said the King, for in s doing, Rligion it self ill suffer. And however your Calumnies and Deamations may be credited among the Credulous or Prejudicate Vulgar, yet I presume by this way you will not gain many Proselytes among those that are Good and Wise: or who, that are endued with the common Principles
of Justice and Charity, will believe men guilty of gros Crimes upon your bare and naked Narration, wihout adducing the Atte∣station of any Witnesses, or yet ay seeming or just Proof? Or who, that is endued with the sense of Reigion and Godliness, can approve of the methods of itter Malice, Revenge, and Unchristian Calum∣nies, so contrair to all the Rues of Humanity and Christanity, fo upporting and promoting of any Party or Interst whatsoever? And as equal Tenderness is to be had to a man's Reputation as to his Life, I allow you to search and examine my Conversation and Life hitherto, and Treat me but by the Rules of common Justice, and I am Proof against your Malice. What we have already observed concerning our Author's maliceThe Conclu∣sion. and disingenuity in these Instnces we have taken notice of, may srve, I think, as a sufficient Caution to all ingenuous and impial Readers, not to lay too great stress upon the Calumnies and Asper∣sions of this Author, nor to entertain any the harder Thoughts of our Clergy for being bespattered by the Pen of this virulent Scribler. For the candid Treatmnt which these Persons I have mentioned have met with in this Pmphlet, may in a great mesure enable us to judge what Credit and Authority the ret of this Au∣thor's Aspersions on our Clergy ought to have, since he deals so basely and difingnuously in all these Instances. He invents Stories which he cannot sind the least shadow of Truth to justisi, for the Truth of some of his matters of  he appeals to Records, where there is not the lest mention of thm to be found; ny, he sticks at no∣thing so he but can serv hi main End and Design, which is to backen the Fame and Reputation of our Clergy, and to render their Sacred Function odious to all Mankind. I pray GOD to give this Author a dep sese of the Villany of this his Design, that h may Repent in time, and sve his Soul before it is too late. It is a Scandal and a Reproach to our Religion, that such Hellish and Diabolical Practices, as this Author uses, should be so much as heard of in any of those places where the Name of Christ is invocated; such kind of Practices are so Inhumane, and so contrary to the Spi∣rit of Christianity, that they must needs make the Authors and Abetors of them stink in the Nostrils of all Good and Religious Men.
All that I have urther to add now, is only to beg my Reader's Pardon, for detaining him so long in searching into the Rubbish of a parcel of Prophane and Lewd Stories. I must needs own it is no very pleasing Task to me, to be raking into such a Dunghil; but finding the Reputation of some of our Clergy very much injured among Strangers, by reason of the Calumnies and Aspersions of this obscure Writer; I thought my self obiged, from the Duty I owe to my Country, and from th Respect we all ought to have for the Sa∣cred Charactr of Christ's Ambassadors and Ministers, to contribute my small Endeavours for asserting and vindicating the Oppressed Innocence of our lergy, and for detecting the Malice and Falshood of this Libeller's Asperions. In which I hope I have been so success∣ful with this small say, that after perusal thereof, every Disinteres∣sed Peson will readily acknowledge, That the Author of this Viru∣lent Libel against our lergy has been totally acted by the Spirit of Malice and Envy, and has dealt so basely and disingenuously in all his Relations which I have had occasion to search into, that his bare Accusation can be of no Authority against the most obnoxious Member of any Nation or Society. FINIS.
