T3224 R10730 13293208 98863
Iehovah Iireh Merito Audiens, praeco Evangelicus An Angell from Heaven, OR, An Ambassadour for CHRIST, Descending from God, Ascending unto God, law∣fully dignified, compleately qualified, HEARD (VVith Religious devotion) reporting his AMBASSAGE. To the honourable Societies of the Inner, and Middle TEMPLES: On Sonday the Eleventh day of December 1642. The sub∣stance whereof is commended to publicke view; By Edw. Tuke. LUKE 2. 13.  And suddenly there was with the Angell, a multitude of the heavenly Hostes praising God and saying, 14. Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth peace, good will to∣wards men. London printed for T. W. 1642.
To the Worshipfull, well devoted & his much Honoured friend M. Iohn Cave Councellor at Law and of the Inner-Temple Worthy Sir, THE Rabbins to maintaine Tradition, usually distin∣guish Gods Holy Law, into the Law written; Torah she baccathubh and Torah she begnah Peh; and their Talmud or Doctrinall, is no other then an elucidation or exposition on Gods Law written, saith Elias Levila in Tisbi: And to take  or Traditioe, as we use the word in the Church, pro quavis Iustitutione quae ecclesiâ traditur, it may as justly referre to Propheticall and Apostolicall Truths, and by consequence, not to be Abrogated: 2 Thes 2. 15, 1 Cor. 2. 15. 3, 4 As to those things whose circumstances make them mutable and whose observations is therefore free, and not of absolute necessity as Act. 15. 28 29. 1 Cor. 11. 2. Of this Sermon, you had first an unwritten Tradition or (as the Iews say) the Law spoken, The errors which may be found in it, are with tolerable mo∣desty better to be answered, in that it was given me (as they say their Tradi∣tion) in the Night, for I thinke, there is no man that shall attempt and act matters of high and usefull consequence from houres stollen from his pillow, but may now and then be taken napping▪ But such as it was, being given me to deliver, it was more then Reaso∣nable I should deliver to them, for whom it was Given; yea to do that, was Causa sine quâ non; besides Gods providence and spirituall permission; Your Patience an particular Admission, There was law to command me, the law of necessity, and necessity of preaching, against which I know no law, and I must aknowledge, I had a conscionable Motion to it at that time. It appertaines to all, lawfully called and duly authorized, to preach Gods word, And though I am yet (by Gods will) Fortunes Dwarf,  (Religiously be it spoken) and so, not commended to any proper Pastorall cure; Yet in Saint Pauls first chapter to the Romanes verse 14. I can read my Duty; To which the Syrian gives a word of such Important obligement; as may supply others (aswell as those of necessary invitation) with a paraphra∣sticall Commentary upon this subject: mehhaicbh euoleakrz, I am indebted to the pulpit, or in Duty to the office of a Preacher. From this Ground I spake, and spake my Conscience God bearing me
witnes; and from Gods Bearing me witnes, I writ; and Here you have the Law written. I must note unto you Sir, that I do not with reall Freedome expose my self to the presse, much lesse, to the Torturing Rack of the worlds harsh Censure; learning it self stands in White sheets and I think no publick penance is volun∣tary; Mine is not such, yet if it suffer such, and look not too pale, the matter is lesse; White is a Symboll of Innocency and Purity, and these is some comfort∣able mitigation, to be perswaded; It doth penance. The Sinfull Censurers of the Times, are as Locusts in Aegypt; I speak not double when I say Arbeh is nor strained from Rabah, Multitudes from Numbers; Some for Paul, some for Apollos, some for Lephas; From the in∣crease of these Numbers, are drawn many Heads, which some call Divisions: These like wormes, live upon the Government, and eat out the very Hart of the Tree, or as Flies in summer, putrify the sweetest sustenance. Sir, These send me to you; for the Declension of an age from primitive vertue, could not suffer me to come forth without Protection; an hundred to one, These are many: you may please in this matter to be all one to me: That one is that I wish for my singular esteem of you, makes me account these Plu∣ralists nullius numen, nothing. To be short; Your Love, next unto Gods Hand, lead me to the Temple, at that Time, and your Approbatory Testimony, compells me to prize my poor Fortunes dexterity, that hath fitted a Dedication correspondent to my desires Direction, at this Time. The Almighty God of heaven and earth, whose property in Divine Nature is to be mercifull above offences, quicken you by his Spirit, to an heavenly Emulacia to study the Principles and Desires of his Truth, and (as farr as con∣cernes you) the Churches safety; inclose you in the volume of his Book; and Gather you into the Bosome of his Son, in whom is only True Blisse, and of whom. By Faith and Holines (in this life) you shall be assured at the Resurrection of the Just; when God by his Spirit or soft and still voice, in a lesse minute then any man dies here, shall unite the Spirits and Bodyes of all: When and Where God is All in All. And though his Church on Earth (as at this time never so militant) be sad round about, and his Children under Clouds and pillars of fire; yet Sursum Corda lift up your hart, and eyes unto the Hils, those mountaines of Delive∣rance above; Take every day two or three Turnes up and down Iacobs ladder, by humble Meditations and Faithfull Ejaculations, Trusting unto your Re∣deemer with Godly perseverance; And let the Troubles, be what can be, for
Condition and Duration▪ so long as there is Elijah an holy and devout soule; God will be in the Cave. It is my security in this Busines to have thought upon your Candour; when you have kindly accepted this, you free me not of all; for in Gratitude I owe you service, and in Duty prayer, Whilest I am a lawfull Ambassadour for Christ, EDVARD TVKE. From my Study December 19. 1642.
HOnoratissimis, sagaciter per sapientibus, literis mansuetioribus Diser∣tissime locupletibus, sacrosanctâ Doctrinarum veritate (Anglicanae Ecclesia fideliter extrutâ) Accuratissimè Fundatis Roberto Berkley, Roberto Foster, Francisco Crawley, Iurisprudentibus, militibus, & Iudicibus, omni observantiâ colendis, vene∣randis. Et claritate virtutis excellenti, ingenuè Dapsili, Arte & legibus comptis∣mè, integerrimè{que} valenti, Regales causas, scientissime Oranti Radolpho Whitfield, militi, Necnon, Generosi sanguinis, utrius{que} Templi, Iuris Candidatis, culti oris facun∣diâ, & venustissimo Ciceronis lepôre Relucentibus & Fragrantibus; suavilo∣quentiâ Festivissimâ, uberrimâ{que} sententiarum supellectile (aurei instar Flu∣minis) exuberantibus; Humanitatis laude urbanioris, antecellentibus; officiorum studiosioribus; Iuvenibus. Hunc suum, Meritò Audientem Praeconem Evangelicum, In Concione (oratione impolitâ apud vos, praelectâ, Decembris undecimo Domi∣nico, habitâ,) Munusculum Levidensae, ad perpetuum (in calestibus) vestrum Monumentum & emlumentum Theologicâ laureâ minimè Doctoratus, suppliciter, verecundè, nec minùs ru∣bicundè summo candore, Offert, Addicat, Consecrat{que}, Decemb. 19. 1642. EDVARDVS TVKE Presbyter Humillimus.
CHRISTS Lawfull AMBASSADOVR. THese meditations Infant-like unable to walke or talke by themselves as Pyrrhus in Plutarch silently and humbly intreate your Attentions, I can∣not passe the ing of Rabbin Josibar, Iehudah in Pirkabboth, he that learnes of young men like a man that eates un-ripe grapes, or drinks Wine out of the Wine-presse. But hee that learnes of the Ancient is like him that eates ripe grapes and drinks wine that is old: And it is Plinies direction; for more gene∣rous wine of the old Vine Tree (Antiquity was famous and had respect in those dayes,) Ex vetustioribus vitibus vinum melius, novellis Copiosius. And should I by Synechdochen understand Baptisme, for the sum of S. Iohn Baptists Doctrine, I hope I could not offend in humility to professe with Apollos, Act. 18. 25. That I understand only Iohns Baptisme. And therefore I submissively salute you in his Apology unto Christ whom he indeavoured to put of comming to his Baptisme with his , I have need to be baptized of thee, and commest thou to me? but patiently suffer it to be so now, Me to preach and you to heare the word of the Lord, delivered unto you, from the, 2 COR. 5. 20.Now therefore we are Ambassadours for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray in Christs stead, be ye reconciled to God. MY Text in its body represents a Church and State in an ordinate unity under one head, or Domuni quandam conventionis, a cer∣taine House of Parliament, the debatements though various, yet intend the Churches happinesse and determine in peace. The King and Lord Spirituall of the upper House in Heaven inti∣mates the Treaty for the setled blisse of the Soule, is content though stabdd and
pierced through with the sharp speare of daily transgressions, and insufferable injuries to passe his pardon without mans peccavi or demand, and not upbraid∣ing our oblivion and want of gratitude endeavours by all continued Clemency, to seeke us yea seeke to finds us who first lost him by sending this unparralleld Em∣bassage of peace. Now therefore we are Embassadours for Christ, &c. The Poets faine the Chariot of the sunne in respect of its foure diversities to be drawne by foure horses: at his rising it is redd, at the third houre bright, at noone hot, at Evening cold; the fiction I stand not to dispute, only in this Text I can perceive foure wheeles as of a Chariot; running much like those foure last Articles of faith, upon which wise men by rumination walke, and safe∣ly rest, whilest fooles runne over and over throwe. First, Read here the Communion of Saints, which may be gathered hence, we are Ambassadours sent to that purpose. Secondly, See the forgivenesse of Sins, if ye repent, while God beseecheth, and we pray in Christs stead▪ Thirdly, Expect the bodies resurrection properly, and the soules Metaphori∣cally and accidentally from the grave of death, sinne, and hell, which is perfect∣ly assured to the utmost of this lifes capacity, if ye be reconciled; therefore bee reconciled. Fourthly, Taste that all good, and good of all, life everlasting God, the rest of the rest, therefore be yee reconciled unto God▪ But I have here 4 other wheeles very usefull and not unfitly made fast to this Charriot. 1. Is Magnificens Christi in presbyterio Majestus, Gods power and Maje∣stie in his Ministery, We are Ambassadours for Christ. 2. Affectio providens, Gods provident love to his people, as though God did beseech you by us. 3. Here is Religiose unita societas, an unanimous and religious society, Christ by his Ambassadours, the Ambassadours in Christ, request your Christian conjun∣ction, unto Christ, We pray in Christs stead▪ be reconciled. 4. Here is indefatigabilis & immutabilit satie as, an unwearied and un∣changeable saciety of Gods mercy and your peace, if ye be reconciled,  un∣to God; Now therefore wee are Ambassadours for Christ, as though God did be∣seech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead to be reconciled unto God. The first word now, stands as Abraham in his Tent dore, attending the comming of Angels from God, such as these textuary Embassadours, and serves now to instruct us of an orderly succession of Legats from God unto a strange people, and it opens the doore unto Christ too, and signifies his speciall appointment of Shepheards over his flock, as Bishops, Pastors, and Apostles, to guide, feed, and instruct them, now therefore we are Embassadours, saith Saint Paul. And this word now, by an holy and Apostolicall derivation is present with us to confirm our office and authority, and to injoyn you obedience and submission
to the watch man and his word for your soules, now therfore we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray in Christs stead, be yee re∣conciled unto God From this Illative , therefore, I might argue a consequent ne∣cessity of the Ambassadours comming, and your entertainement of his person and Message, as also, I might hence yeeld a reason invincible, of your spirituall life, by dying to the night of sin, and rising to the day of righteousnes, propounded unto you, as a matter of great justice, from the death and Resurrection of our Saviour Iesus Christ, ver. 13. as also, the meanes of accomplishing that death and this Resurrection, which this therefore seemes to imply, as the complement of your salvation, when in religious obedience, hereto you approve the dignity of the Minister over you to that effect, or to effect that, & excellentiam Ministerij, as Beza notes it, the excellency of the Ministerie, and thence termed the word of reconciliation, ver. 19. But having more than two words to speak, I speak of these two little more, though laid in my way like stones, not of offence, but defence, and as the Basis of a chiefe corner stone, fetcht hither from the bottome of the earth, or Moses rock, which being polished, fitted and squared by sufficient explication, might prove solid grounds, for erecting us lively stones in Gods building, by faithfull applica∣tion; Now therefore we are Ambassadours. In the first five words, are five se∣verall parts of speech, which Grammatically stood upon, would help me to avoyd the tongues confusion, by which the whole worke suffers, and goes not forward, but omitting that, as also the subject, copulate, and redicate, which logically, this first affirmative proposition affords, I will apply my sale somewhat, to the concurrence of those wheeles, on which the Text last ranne, and not liking many divisions in the Temple, please to observe in the moving of the first wheele, Deputationem nostram, our Deputation, we are Ambassadours, 2. Reputationem nostram, our reputation for Christ; In the turning of the second wheele, note 2. First, Commissionem, our commission; Velut Deo vos precante per nos, as though God did beseech you by us. Secondly, Conditionem, the Condition▪ Oramus nomine Christi, wee pray in Christs stead, in the third or three quarter wheele, take notice of the subjects Vos yee, be yee. 2. The subject, reconciliation, Vos reconciliamini, be ye reconciled: in the last wheele, as it turnes round, see the object, God, whom I have read signified, by a wheele which turnes ever and never ceaseth turning, Vos reconcilumini Deo, be ye reconciled unto God. Thus reverently saving to my Text, the Acclamation of Elisha unto Elijah▪ in his rapture, to a blessed translation, my Father, my Father, the Charriot of Is∣rael, and the horse-men of Israel, I shall now upon these particulars, or some of them, sometime sit, and sometime stand, and in this devided Order. First, of the first. Wee are Embassadours, various and as valuable are these high Titles of ho∣nour various which the great God of HEAVEN and Earth, hath collated
upon the Heralds of his Law and Gospel which are Bridles to command and curbe the scorne of the contemptible world, nor can any eye be so Dimme and fleshly covered though overspread with a Scirrhosis but may discerne those titular respects to be tutelar protects of such his Ambassadours and Messengers as the Apple of his owne eye: They are silver keyes which lead the Coveteous Christian to the golden treasure hidden in the field: be it only Titulus isis. And it Quasi Titan illuminating the minds of the men or lesse Ignorant, as the sunne doth the world, but they are many, and like Pilates superscription in Hebrew, Greek, & Latin, to point the Iew, Gentile and Christian to Christ and his Crosse, for which we are Ambassadours. Ambassadours, honourable men, and of Gods Privy Councell, fellow Com∣moners with God, yea Angels too: and this testimony, we receave in either Te∣stament. Expositours meane the judging high Priest, when Ecclesiastes the 5. & 6. tis said, say not before the Angell; and the Jews propound that Angell, which came up from Gilgal to be Phineas the high Priest, Iudg. 2. & 1. And so Beza renders those Angells before whom a woman must be covered in the Church, to be the instructing Ministers. The Angells of the seaven Churches, we say Bishops, (whereas others that cannot speake out, with Shibboleth,) call them superintendents. And because we preach the Unity of one full Church Celestiall and Terrestriall under Iesus Christ, we participate by the counterchange of names, of the nature of Angells. An Angell in Heaven is a Celestiall Priest and an Ambassadour in Earth is well stiled a Terrestriall Angell. We are those Angells upon the ladder of Iacob, Iesus Christ, ascending by prayer for the people, by, and to his Divinity, and descending by Doctrine upon the people, by his Humanity, though Coucht under the flatt stile of an Ambassa∣dour in the text. Nor is this relation of so late newes as to cause your eares to itch, but rather tingle, in dicbus illis, even in the old time before us this Doctrine was preached, the use discovered, the abuse corrected; the old world were Au∣rium tenus up to the eares in water, and perished as by an heavenly. Dropsy, for not obeying & esteeming Noah an Ambassadour frō God unto them: the lust∣full Sodomites were (for wickednes almost matchlesse) matched, being consumed by flames, and generally overthrown by one burning fever, for that they hear∣kened not unto righteous Lot their Ambassadour. Since ever there were a people God hath continued away of practise with that people either immediatly or me∣diatly, extraordinarily or ordinarily, sometime by inspiration, sometime by dreames, sometime by prophesy, sometime by visions, and sometime by revela∣tion, all which in their Order & end considered, were as so many Embassadours from God the great King, and as so many testimonies of his mercy and love to the people, even from Moses the great Prophet, unto Malachi the lesser, the line hath runne direct, to point to the greatest of all Iesus Christ, whom Saint
John Baptist exactly aymed at with his . Behold the lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world. Not a word without an Article to leade us to the person and Actions of Christ, for whom being come and ascended we are Ambassadours. In this place, I may without digression observe Gods holy and wise Oecono∣micall Method: untill the Law was published, God revealed himself and his will by Apparitions and Inspirations of Prophets; but Miracles and visions apparant∣ly decreased as there was an augmentation of his holy Scripture; so Ʋrim and Thummim at the captivity ended, and nothing was assigned to the Priests dutie, but to teach the Law when the Prophet Malachy finished the Prophets; and Esaiah the 8. 20. the people are informed to what they must look and stand, even to the Law and to the Testimony, and are evidently admonished to re∣member the Law of Moses from which they might conclude; no more expecta∣tion of Angells, Prophets, dreames or visions, untill the comming of that great Prophet indeed Iesus Christ, so lately pointed at by his forrunner Iohn the Baptist. From this course we may gather the Complement of the Law, the ceasing of further visions, of oaching of dreames, of faineing of Prophesyes, of dream∣ing of new Revelations, and Enthusiasticall inspirations, and here is the Procla∣mation of the Gospell by Gods lawfull Ambassadours, at whose mouth we are directed to know Christs will; whose lipps in the Temple we are bound to preferre before the private Adoration of a God of our own setting up, though we should see him moove by his itching in our garrets & chambers. We Ambassa∣dours have Authority to preach remission of sins to all faithfull penitents, assu∣rance of Resurrection to Eternall life, to faithfull soules by Iesus Christ, who having sealed up all vision and prophesy, revealed the whole will of his father di∣rected us unto Gods wisdome, commands us to lay aside all Popish traditions. A∣nabaptisticall inspirations, humane unnecessary inventions, and to rest upon him in his written holy word; who is the beginning and the ending Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, And for this we are Ambassadours. Hence the people are taught that it must needs be an high arrogancy to add new Doctrines, because the whole will of God the Father is in these last times fully declared and manifestly published by Iesus Christ his only sonne, and our only Saviour in his Word. And since Christ hath compleatly finished the whole Law of God and mans everlasting Redemption, and that this Doctrine, these Di∣vine Embassadors are commanded with substantiall knowledg to preach to the people, the people are hence directed with all humble holinesse immediatly to take drift and living directions from us as the textuaries, and Apostolicall Em∣bassadours, that so Gods written word may have evident and sound Explication, all Schismes and heresies utter exerpation, pure Devotion high augmentation sig∣nificant
discipline in all comelinesse and decency, practicall commendation, the people to whom the Embassadour comes, may receave sincere edification, the Embassadour, religious estimation; Gods Ambassage deserved exaltation, and God himself, an uniforme Glorification; and for this we are Ambassadours. Here is Officium & Beneficium, Ambassadour 'tis nomen oneris aswell as honoris, a name of Office aswell as benefice, of sedulity aswell as utility, of service aswell as ceremony. We exercise an Eldership and discharge the work, as truely, as le∣gatione fungimur we are charged with the Embassage: by the authority of Christ, we are invested and inducted into one; and by the same vertue, in nomine Christi in the name of Christ, we effect the other: Dignitas honoris, the worthinesse of this honour, falls out according to the power of this Gift; and the Gift had not been sufficient, except God had indued it with power. Whence our Deputation first issued, and what it may understand; Saint Paul (as cōmenting else where upon this text) unfolds by the word of Eternall truth: He that descended is the same also who ascended up farre above all heavens, that he might fullfill all things: 1. Ephes. 4. 10. and v. 11. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and teachers for the per∣fecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministery, for the edifying of the body of Christ. But this deputation is no lesse then a work of the sacred Trinity, for the blessed Trinity, which by one consultation in word created man, do now in the word, by one work, recreate him: in this last quotation you read Donum Filij, the gift of the Sonne, and 1. Cor. 3. 6. you may read Donum Patris, the gift of the Fa∣ther. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase; and 1. Cor. 12. 28. And God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers; after that Miracles then Gifts of Healings, Helps, Government, diversities of tongues. And Act. 20. 28. see Donum Spiritus sancti, the Gift of the holy Ghost: Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the flock over the which the holy Ghost hath made you overseers to feed the Church of God. Learned Calvin particularly interpreting Saint Pauls order of Apostles, Pro∣phets, Evangelists, shepheards, and teachers; doth summarily concorporate them into the office and honour of an Apostolicall Pastour, such as this Embassadour himself was. By shepheards and teachers some understand those, whose charge extended to the care of a particular Nation, and such fell somewhat short of that accompt, which they receaved, who spared no paines to preach every where. By Evangelists, some intimate those who walked not abroad and yet preached, as Priscilla Act. 18. 26. or those who wrot the Gospell. By Prophets, some meane certaine which were not Apostles, and yet were Prophets, as Agabus Act. 11. 28.
By Apostles, there are who understand such as had all things, for an A∣postle is a vessell of the body more principall and lively, receaving all things from Christ himself; so saith Saint Chrysostome in Ephes. 5. And the before cited judicious Calvin, puts betwixt the orders some diffe∣rence, but that, in very modest discretion. By teachers, he will signifie such, as applied their whole diligence to the sound interpretations of Divine writ, and whose care it was to preserve the pu∣rity of Doctrine amongst the faithfull, and tis his observation, that such teachers intermedled not with any Discipline or Ministrations of Sacraments to the people. By Evangelists, he meanes an order in Dignity somewhat inferiour to the A∣postles, yet not without some relations to them in office, such as Saint Luke and Timothy, and perhapps those 70. Disciples appointed by Christ. By Prophets, he intends not all interpreters of the Divine will, but such as by singular Revelation excelled others; of which kind▪ we have now none Extant, for so he argues, quales nunc vel nulli extant, vel minus sunt conspicui. But the power Apostolicall, he confines not to any other bounds then the whole Vniverse, alluding to their Commission granted from the Lord Governer and Commander of the whole world, Saint Mark 15 16. Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospell to every Creature. And the Pastorall and Apostolicall charge, not admitting the least difference betwixt them in substance or service; He concludes, comprehends all these, for thus he resolves. Pastorale autem mumus haec omnia in se continet, and now by consequence it is manifest: but what relation is or could be, in honour and office betwixt our teachers and the old Prophets; the same, more fully authorized and exemplified, have our Pastours with the Apostles, and so, in the duties of preach∣ing, praying, praising, baptizing, breaking of bread, administring of the Cup, and in all other holy actions grounded on Gods word; as apperteining to the Ministery, our succession is Apostolicall; for Saint Paul ingrosseth not the office to himself, but verifieth an equality of execution to all such succeeding Ministers and Ambassadours. Let a man so esteeme of us, as of the Ministers of Christ and stewards of the Mysteries of God 1. Cor. 4. 1. that hence, we be esteemed as Am∣bassadours for Christ, sent by Christ, and that the people to whom we are sent, may as from our hand, receave the rich treasure of Salvation▪ gathered for them, and distributed unto them from the holy Scriptures and Mysteries of God; And in this sense is my thesis in the text, we are Embassadours. Here is honour indelible, dignity indamnable, reward interminable, dignatio magna, here, if I could build Tabernacles, the glory of the Lord would suddain∣ly fill them. We are Embassadours, here is or should be our Unity, and we are all Embassadours, here is or should be our holy Community; Legatione fungimur, we
are all Embassadours, but all are not we; he mistaks the place, qui tibi hūc assumit honorem, who takes this honourable Office upon him, not being called of God as was Aaron: there are which runne, whom God hath not commanded to go, but interpreting Saint Pauls marke, sett before them, to be a pulpit, presse for∣ward in their sencelesse performances, without authenticall Ordinations. O monstrum horrendum, Informe ingens cui lumen ademptum, O head and body without eyes, unparalleld wonder, here let Admiration seale up every lipp, that any people should conceave that way, best profitable to mend their aberra∣tions and steppings awry, by hearing and seeing a Cobler, who perhaps would delight more to be Solus cum sola wax a Preacher, nay tis causa capitis and head Busines, which moves my more then ordinary invectives: against such propha∣nation, and profaners, when a dresser of Hatts will seeme a redresser of hearts; what can such polluted hands work save gum into mens Heads and gall into there minds, they may presume to make Sermons as good as ever was felt, though never so true as to be understood, such take not a book in hand without some coulour, and though there utterance exceed there entrance, their going out; there learning nay though there shutle tongues we aver like, Iigg into the tumult of discourse, and stray into the timelesse wast of words, against their own science, or capacity; yet though many their are, blessed be God (which cry such out) too too many there are, which cry up such, for the only zealous tea∣chers, and commend in them Gods power, with a digitus Dei, because such a Mechanicall Enthusiast hath it ad unguem as he hath at his fingers end. What otherwise can be expected for event then making of Schismes and rents in Gods Church, when a the theevish tailour, who but now hath robbed his neighbour of his goods in his Stall, shall leap up into Moses Chaire, and straite way robb God of his honour in the pulpit, which of you, ever heard of any King that tooke a Cobler, hatter tailour, or such like; and sent him an Embassadour: and will the King of Kings (judge you) allow of such; these like Apes, shew their uglinesse by climbing up, these like horsleeches suck up that blood unnatu∣rally, which nature and Art as Parents. Have bestowed upon lawfull Children, these like snap-dragons, live upon the Almsbaskett of the Countrey, their title to the Office and honour of the true Ambassadour, sutes well with the harlotts claime, who when she had overlaid here own Child, with a bold and uncon∣tracted for-head, pretended an interest in anothers; perswade your selves, that even by such instrument, the Divell may delude to destruction; whom ye re∣porte to have a Cloven foot, but think not of his Cloven tongue, yea my friend, to heare such tautologicall fellowes, is unprofitable for you, saith Saint Paul els∣where, and since you heare his limitation, heare a little more from this text, even your Imitation, for we are Embassadours for Christ.
I need not here further dispute our primitive Installment into this Sacred function, being Confident that no truely affected Sonne to the Church of England, can be seduced by such sencelesse insolency, to deny or doubt, so possitive a truth as is here uttered, we are Embassadours for Christ. But not being such, or in case there be such, this text will better informe both; in which, there are credenda & agenda matters of faith, that we are Embassadours, and such Embassadours, and this respects our selves, and you to beleive; and matters of fact; and this concerns us, first to approve our selves Embassadours, and such Embassadours, and then, it calls upon you to incline to our Embassage. The words respectively considered, may be compared, to an Image of Iuno in Lucian de Dea Syria; which looks this way, and that way, and every way; for they have an eye to us, and an eye to you, to us, as Activi Doctores, to you, as passivi discipuli, to us, as Embassadours faithfully to reporte our Em∣bassage, to you, as persons, to whom we are sent, fruitfully to receave our errand, they view us Embassadours, as we are dignified with honour, and they look upon us, as we performe our Office. But committing the honour, and worth of an Embassadour, to the wise estimation of those persons, whom justly it may respect; I should passe to his work, save, that the Course might seeme preposterous, except I touch a little, upon some qualifications, proper to an Embassadour, and such an Embassa∣dour, in this transition. The Persians named there King and Priests Magos, neither do the Dignity of this Embassadour, nor the Excellency of his Office, lie obs∣cure under this Appellation; since the Hebrew gives it, a Meditando & do∣cendo, from his Meditation and Instruction, for which two, he should be ably quallified. The five Intellectuall vertues, Intellectus, Sapientia, Scientia, Ars, and Prudentia, Intelligence, Sapience, Science, Art, and Prudence, which A∣rist, Ethic. 6. terms, Arma Spiritualia, Spirituall Armour, or weapons; must never be wanting to this Embassadour, nor must he need that lac Philo∣sophia, milke of Philosophy, Grammar, Logick, and Rethorique, by which soft nutriment, the Ancient aswell as youth, sucking, may be nourished, and by these his tender Documents growing up, may in time, more freely and with lesse Crudities digest his stronger Oratory. But for his more solid and prompt expressions, of those Metaphysicall and Theologicall Essayes, it will not dishonour him, yea much inable him▪ to incline a regular observation, of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Tem∣perance
4. Cardinall vertues, so called, as in respect of the matters, Dig∣nity, about which they treate, so, of that certaine and definite Princi∣pality, which they not improperly assume to themselves▪ as Boelius de Consol. 1. hath it. The Greek, , originally issues from , or  hence , which is asmuch is  to serve and labour in tho dust, so radically, (and in genere) understood, we are servants, toylers, and tillers of the Ground. And so Patheticall a power hath each word in his sence, as if the earthly hearted hearer, should necessarily and effectually be moistened, by the plento∣ous dropps of the head sweating preacher. Here the sunne bakt, vulgar, whose Envy hath made them look a squint upon the work of the Minister, and whose busy Idlenesse finde fault which his la∣bours, conceaving the Curse, in sudore vnlous &c. in the sweat of thy browes shalt thou eate bread, not to reach his head; or that like an usurer he lyes sleeping in security, and therefore, that his maintenance takes him napping, here such may receave an infallible Conviction. Pierius Hieroglyphically designes and sindes out a true Scholler by the Hare, which sleeps waking, with her eyes open, and wakes sleeping with her oyes shutt, that is one, who seemes to contemplate Acting, and to Act in contemplation; Pitty it were to start this Hare, from the forme; But alas, how subject howerly is this poore Hare to a suddaine surprize, yea without faire law shott at, and with such Greedines as scarce mist an Hare, In what danger sits this Hare to be torne in Peeces, flesh yea Skinne and all, nor will this alwayes suffice seldom suffocate. Praeda Canum lepus est vasto, non implet Hiatus, the hare is a dish for hounds, but grosser Paunches she cannot satisfy. Neither, have other Emblemists dealt penuriously, in their Annotations upon the serious Student, which discern him, by one eye shutt, and another open, Phosphorus in his right hand, and the word of observation, vigilo, I watch; Hesperus, in his left hand, and the word, Dormio, I sleepe; hence I collect they Argue, his just division of the day and night, for theoricks and practicks, for Meditation, and Application. See, how he walks obstipo Capite, with his head awrie, his eyes perceing the earth; Heare but his silent murmuring, how his Spirits are gnawn asunder and divided into peeces, by the worm of revolving invention. Perceive the worke of his Judgment, by his two lipps out stretcht, which are as Balances, to weigh his sententious and ponderous expressions; yea think, how neere he consumes himself, when spider like, he is ever weaving cu∣rious
webbs, for your soft and durable wearing, out of his own Bowells. Consider that the firmament, the world and all creatures in heaven and earth are arguments proposed for his understanding and disputation, together with that principium primum, causa prima, ens entium, that essentiâ, and trinus personis, God, that one eternall Essence of three persons, the Father, the Sonne, the holy Ghost, and his will to be revealed unto Christians; for the dis∣posing and effecting whereof, as there is little need of mundane Impediment, or the peoples discouragement, so great cause for the exercise of his prudence, which opportunely (I trust) with your patience I may consider, and that, very briefly. Cicero, saith, it is scientia & clctio rerum, quas cupimus auf fugimus, the Apprehension and Election of those things, which we are bound to seek or avoid; or it is Approbatio causarum, & effectuum experientia, the Ex∣perience and accompt of causes with their Effects, doubtlesse, it is the hand that layes out for all, the foot that walkes for all▪ the eare that heares for all and the very eye that constitutes all: It is (Ars vitae, saith Tully) as Physick is the Methodicall preservative of our health, it is the Alarm of the Army, the Monitour of the School The watch in the Pockett, it is the predominant morall in mans Affections & Actions, that whereas other vertues do, Inclinare, move men to Civility, and their passions to Regularity, this doth Imponere, imose a necessity of wise Government in the soule: for no prudent man, as good no man. Nor is the vertue to be nicely disliked because Cardinall, or Confind to one office and Action of the Ambassadour, but generally to all. To his first Admission into this holy Dignity, to his setting forth; yea it is his Companion in his journey betwixt earth and heaven, it comes along with him to the people, to whom he is sent, and to summe up all▪ It is his eye, his Eare, his mouth, his bracelett, It is every where, not circum∣scribed, but as infinite, as the individualls, For since morall vertue, is an habit created in mans will by the holy Ghost, moving him to honest A∣ctions agreeable to the line of Gods Law, and that prudence is one cheif, Pillar of mans reasonable understanding, this Prudence wanting, or not practised, it must follow, A mans passions do subvert his reason, wisdome is infatuated, His Affe∣ctions contemning a judicious Government, and prudent moderation, expose him violently to unbridled courses, irregular, exorbitant, and dissolute de∣meanours, or as the Schooles have it, per actus remissos habitus virtutis cor∣rumpitur.
I cannot stand upon the varions distinctions of this prudence, as that perso∣nall, oeconomicall politicall, nor that of Cicero's pura & impura, propria & impropria, The first shewing a respective wisdome, when a man feeles his own pulse, and consults himselfe; The second, more common, when hee sends to the Physition, and is advised by another, that, which this hand leades mee to, at this time, is to those effects, singular, and observable, in a religious prudence, and are as attendants upon this AMBASSADOVR, and they are these. The first is, Perfectè considerare, To consider throughly, God, themselves, their Ambassage, and the world; For, as he well replied, to an ignorant admi∣rer, of the ill successe of those things which with such deliberations were at, tempted and acted, so, here it may make our answers, Consultationum Domini Erant, they were Masters of their deliberating consultations, but not of the comming successe. The second, is perfecte determinare, to determine throughly, Deo fidelitate seipso, sinceritate, populo, sobrietate, with GOD by his fidel∣litie, with himselfe by his sincerity, with the world by discretion and so∣briety. First, That God bee not dishonoured, for his want of judgment, nor him∣selfe neglected, for want of due examination, nor the world abused and blin∣ded, in a matter of such importance, as the Ambassage of there owne salva∣tion. The third is perfecte applicare, throughly to apply himselfe to God, and His Word, his Doctrine to Gods people, his life for their example, and his patience for their patterne, so that the people may joyfully receave the Am∣bassadour, and hearken his Ambassage; That they may prudently embrace it, in its purity, obey it, as there line of godly life, in its sanctity: And, that they may bee wrought, to an invincible courage, against all false Am∣bassadors, and Ambassages; And all gaine-sayers of this Gospell of Jesus CHRIST, under what species of fained holinesse, and seeming re∣formation whatsoever, yea Contra Angelum descendentem, against an Angell comming downe to such a purpose; and so much for the first vertue, his pru∣dence. He that is justly prudent, is prudently just, for that is, not distinctions a badge by which, the true Ambassador is knowne. But upon, that Iustice, Quae sibi, & unicuique suum tribuit, morally I insist not, nor upon that Originall Iustice, reason over sensuality; which Socrates pretily taught going thirsty to the wel, there drawing, the first bucket to power downe, and the next to drinke of, by which he shewed, the appetites submissi∣on
to reason, neither upon that naturall, universall, and Phylosophicall Iu∣stice, which being insensible, and imaginary. We contemplate by inward, no∣tions, as the Ideas of Plato, nor that other artificiall, particular, and polliticall Iustice, which as the leaden Lesbian Rule, is made flexible, to times, persons, and accidents, vet this way, were I to walk upon any distinction of Iustice in an Embassador, I should render the devision in Iustitiam cmutativam, et distri∣butivam; The first, practised betwixt themselves and others privately, and by proportion Arithmeticall the second measured, and done publikely, by Geome∣tricall proportion, whose direct ayme is praemium et supplicium, reward and punishment. But not to prejudice my text, You, nor my selfe, by injustice in digression, I shall observe for my purpose, three speciall notes, which as debts doe ingage the Embassador to a Religious justice. Deo, sibi, suis. To God to himselfe, to the world; Our blessed Saviour, Bipartires them, Thou shalt love the Lord with all thy heart, thy God, and with all thy soule, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as thy selfe. The Ambassage in my Text, comes not short of the Angells doxology, and tydings to the Shepheards, Saint Luke 2. Here is glory to God, peace on earth, good will towards men; And the Iustice of this Ambassador, must bee Evangelically, Angelically, as was that Angelically, Evangelicall; Hee must know God, His maker, that sent him; his Lord that intrusted him, and his Law-giver, that invested him, that as in other matters, from their knowledge issueth their honour done unto him; so in this, in them, who are sent, and them to whom they are sent, by such knowledge in the one, and revelation to the other, there must be mutuall honour justly given unto God, and instructi∣ons of piety, dey one to another. But this Iustice in the Ambassadour, must reach higher, by raising his devoutest thoughts, to the contemplation of Gods Divinity, then which higher he cannot goe, for God, is terminus ad quem, the most exact indeavour of our conceits, infinitely transcending, all our ast and wisest aymes, of mortall per∣fection, every Embassadour apart, may augment the Jdea, or notion of his Glory, according to the predicament of his own abillity; But God is above all, in Heaven and Earth, and the perfect knowledge of him, is Essential∣ly Himselfe, who being Actu infinitus, nonreperitur in llo praedicamento, as Arist. To conclude, this Embassador must know God, so far as to do him justice by true and seasonable service, answerable to his nature, which is spiritu et veri∣tate: in spirit and truth; And the people, to whom this Embassadour comes, must deale justly with God, likewise, by receaving his Embassage, in purity of
heart and spirit, Deus est spiritus, God is a spirit, & si Deus est animus, sit tibi purâmente Colendus, if God be a spirit, ye must worship him in spi∣rit, yea the Father seeks for such worshippers, these are only right Worship∣full, a pure spirit is a sacrifice to God, an harmelesle life, a spotlesse soule: optimus animus pulcherrimus Dei cultus, a pure mind, is the best service to God, the most religious worshipping of God is to follow him, Amore, more, ore, re, and the only true serving and honoring of God in Priest, and people, is not evill, in summe, let this Embassadours Justice, and the peoples practise towards God, meet both in this, that it be, perfecta, pura, & perpetua, perfect, that both only love him, pure, that both wisely feare him, perpetuall, that both only and firmely beleive in him, and rest in him. And let the Ambassadour, herein be just, to himself; that he pun∣ctually understand, the will of his King, and the weale of his people. In the first, wisely and orderly to informe himself: In the second, soberly and fully, to instruct the people, his honesty must play the skillfull Organist, to touch well and truely according to Art, nor may he, at all times interweave a discourse of Justice Pharasaicall and legall, to the people to whom he comes, the Christian only must be his rule; and then he is an Embassadour for Christ; when he is thus honestly just to Chri∣stians; I say honestly, for herein, what health is in the body, the same is ho∣nestly in the soule, Salus animae is honestas corporis; And to summe up all, the Prophets Basar and the Angells , Good and new, joyfull and seasonable, Tidings, of Christ promised, of Christ exhibited, must from his mouth dropp like Soveraign oyle of Gladnes to annoint the swelling heart of the miserable wounded man, whom the Priest and Levite, the Law could not stand to pity, or look upon to remedy; this oyle, thus dropping, up∣on the soule of a Sinner, melted and dissolved, (by sence and sorrowes for sinne) to bitter teares, will in these liquids, appeare uppermost; and as the oint ment upon Aarons head, will not only supple himself, but runne down upon the skirts of his Clothing, the meanest of his Auditours. Oh, the Excellency, of such an Ambassadour, the measure, pro∣portion and Comlinesse of his body, is wisdome, and spirituall beauty, the riches of his spirit, are the Gifts of the spirit, and his sciences, and his Justice to God and man, is as that noble Aptnes, which disposeth him to all vertues, and holines, and so much for this Ju∣stice.
from that I have spoken by necessary consequence you may deduce the prime strength of an Ambassadour to depend upon well grounded intelligence and practicall wisedome, which Moses such a man of God intimates by his Urim and Thummim, so much discipline an ordinary eare might take in, from that golden Bell and Pomegranate which surrounded the hem of the Priests robe; this is that onely delightfull sound and pleasant tast, which through the appli∣cation of the holy Ghost, the voice of the Father & the Son, is effectuall to pre∣serve the sin-spotted soul & dumb sinner unto purity, & Hallelujahs everlasting. I omit the significant illustrations unto this duty, which the inseparable and particular ornaments of the Tabernacle might lead me, and content my selfe with those rules which Saint Paul applied to Timothy and Titus, Hold fast a forme of sound words, giving attendance to reading and doctrine, exhort and convince, be apt and able to teach, which doctrine clearly opposeth, all un∣fit quarrelling with words, frothy, and scummy-jangling language, and all peevish, theevish, treacherous and traiterous documents. Thus like the noted Musician, I have sate so long upon this Text, that I feare I have not kept time. I confesse my selfe unprepared for farther prose∣cution of any part coincident to, and with this Text: I beseech you, suffer my jejune and dry oratory to expresse an application of what hath beene hi∣therto propounded, which through Gods assistance, and your patience, I shall thus epitomize. 1. It instructs the Ambassadour with all meet preparation considerately to undertake his Embassage, for they are the savour of life, to life, or death, to death, to the people to whom they come; and to that office must bee required more then ordinary circumspection, the issues whereof are of such extraordi∣nary concernment. Hence Moses complaines of his want of utterance, and e∣loquence; and S. Paul, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. The trea∣sures comprised in the rich Casket of sacred Scripture, with which they are by God intrusted to communicate unto the people, are for profundity so great, and for extent so large, that I may resume that of Saint Paul, Who is sufficient, &c. it justly pursues the runners of these times, which without mission or commission lay hands on consecrated things, whom I lovingly advise to stay at Iericho till their beards be growne; for if Deacons must first be tryed, and then Minister if they be found faithfull, much more should workmen of more eminent faculty not assume unto themselves a calling, un∣lesse some Timothy or Titus duly authorised by a sacred symboll of manuall im∣position, give them externall appointment to that function: Gods holy Spirit must give them primary and private motion, their owne consciences evident and certaine justification, the Church legall ordination; and though at this time there is great question about the forme of ordination, yet in all ages, and
in all well ordered places, there have beene certaine constitutions, and can∣nons for admitting of men upon triall into sacred orders; and I finde not that ever the setled order of any Church for such purposes, hath beene so calum∣niated and branded as at this time this of ours. Hence I shall not feare to conclude, that who ever shall prophesie or preach in this Church without examination, approbation and faculty, by present authority, commeth of him∣selfe and as a false Prophet, I take it our duty to beware of him. 2. The name of an Ambassadour implies faithfulnesse in the declaration of his Embassage, he comes not forth without instructions what he shall say and doe, nor may he adde or diminish from Gods word, he must not create unto himselfe a fools paradise, and walke up and downe there, set up a throne and judge there, he must fish in Gods Sea and World, not lanch into another of his owne making, nor saile with pleasure in old wives fables, or issues of his owne braines; if he have an itch within him to long for that which neither the place nor season affords, some unheard of unparalleld perfection in Uto∣pia; it must be carefully adverted unto, and cured before it spread, or the people smell it: Gods true Ambassadour must content himselfe with the won∣ders of God discovered in the depth of his word, and the height of his works: for the blessed Spirit reveales nothing but that which is the will of the Fa∣ther and Sonne, John 16. 14. and Gods Angells we may imagine in old time spake neither more nor lesse, then what they had declared unto them in hea∣ven, and an Ambassadour on earth must not dare to transgresse that celestiall proportion. 3. The fanaticall Zelots of our times judge all learning, but Scripture, the language of the Beast, and that there is no use of Latin, except ordinary, or as much as will keepe the necke from an halter; and there can bee no pure preaching of the word with them, except Universities downe, and they come up, not directed by the letter, but Spirit; they object the Apostles were illiterate men, and yet by the Spirit they understood all mysteries and know∣ledge, and I would have them without education to their tongues, in Apo∣stolicall manner speake to the Jewes, and Indians, and other like with us, and it should be to me a probable inducement sooner to confide in their abili∣ties, to direct us in that truth in our owne tongue, which they fondly pretend Academicks misse of, and I dare safely question, whether such by their pre∣sumptuous spirit can effect more without artificiall instructions, then such as with the knowledge of Arts have the assistance of the true Spirit of God. Thence I conclude, though Gods sacred Word should especially have prece∣dency in all learning, and all Gods Ambassadours, yet how shall this word be safely interpreted, & the sense truly rendred without knowledge in the Ori∣ginalls, Translations, & ancient Commentaries, therefore to use humane lear∣ning
as Hagar to attend Sarah, and Arts and expositors assistance, the mo∣numents of learned men, as Joshua the Gibeonites, (who upon the grounds and landmarkes of antiquity, old bootes old shooes, moulded bread, were admitted to carry water for the Israel of God) is lawfull, and for ought I read not in any age before gainsayed in such vulgar impudencies, and fre∣quent insolencies as in this. 4. But how ashamed is a learned and wise King of a foolish and ignorant Ambassadour, and how God suffers in his glory when Ministers want know∣ledge to instruct the people? Because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, thou shalt bee no Priest to mee, saith the Lord by the Prophet Hosea: these are the dumbe Dogs spoken of by another of his Pro∣phets, unto whom if the booke be tendred, may be answered, non legit ut cle∣ricus, he dreams and sees visions, bookes sealed, and his profitablest docu∣ment, is the peoples nocument, his best doctrine is the peoples scandall, wherein he must acknowledge that he is no Prophet, nor Prophets sonne, he never saw the Schooles of the Prophets, he is some husbandman, herdman, or at best, a cobler, hatter, horserubber, leatherseller, or tailor, and so skipping up to reforme the magnificat in the City or Country, before he had his nunc dimittis in the University, his doctrine is ignorance, his use error, the Pulpit (the true seat of spirituall judgement, and divine oratory,) is stuffed with old saddles, empty pictures, brainsicke and railing superfluities: and hence it is that the hearers Camelion like, live upon aire and winde. But considering the weight of this spirituall Ambassage in all actions and circumstances thereto pertinent. The Tables of the Law, in the discussing whereof large Volumes will not containe the Cases of Conscience thence still emergent, considering the Ambassadours skill required in Ethickes, Oe∣conomiques, Politiques, Histories, Chronology, Geography, Philosophy, Tongues, Rhetorique, Logique, holy Scripture, mysteries of Prophesie, Fa∣thers, Schoolemen, Polemicall Divinity, and Controversie. The Arguments of Papists, Atheists, Turkes, and Sectaries, to bee resolv'd and refell'd. Misprisions in History, Prophesie, Tongues, Cases of Conscience, which arise (to the great disturbance and unhinging of Christian truth) to be con∣futed. Many divine sentences and other passages without conference inexpli∣cable. Considering these (and infinite more of this nature) individuals to his fun∣ction, what use should the true Church make of arrogant ideots, and perem∣ptory illiterates? whose zeale without knowledge, like mettle in blinde horses, destroy the riders, stumbling upon they care not, know not whom?
Why doe we put children to remove great timber? blinde men to conduct us in unknowne paths? Doth a mans curiosity restraine his wearing Apparrell from a Botcher, and his distrust preserve his dying body from a Mountebank, and shall not true zeale to his soules eternall life, warrant his speciall care; to what doctrine, and whose spirituall oversight he submits himselfe? If wee make no conscience of this, we make conscience of nothing, and conscience nothing. And by this meanes the Ambassadours ignorance, and the peoples pro∣phanenesse, sedition and heresie takes place of religion and piety, and as well sound doctrine, as ancient discipline, is transformed into a fable, and scoffe, and the people having cast off all true obedience to Gods law, benum∣med conscience, and rejected right judgement and true holinesse, make no∣thing true doctrine but what pleaseth them. But if antiquity for doctrine and discipline shall beare no authority with them, if they will not follow Moses advice, inquire of the dayes before them, even from one end of heaven to the other, if they account not the Doctors and Histories of the Church unpartiall which lived before, such ignorance in the one, and licentiousnesse in the other, were so open and impudent, such blasphemies & questions were moved, as are now too frequent to the disho∣nour of God, Jesus Christ, and his Word, and the offence of good men: and if they will circumcise the Church to themselves onely, and not to the rules of the ancient Scriptures, Apostles, and Teachers, damning all but themselves, I hope you cannot be offended if I deliberate whether I would be of such a Church, whereof for ought I know never any were before themselves: wee may gird on our swords of knowledge to help us in these perillous journies, but the best accessory for protection and direction is Gods providence and wisdome to his servants, which is timely and needful. Having in the last use, left lawlesse Ignorance in the Pulpit of godly know∣ledge, what ungodly and improbable deductions wil thence be compelled, is easie, though dismall io conceive. For doth not the Papist preach hence in∣fallibility, and with Campian cry, Templum, Templum, the Church, the Church? and the Schismaticks in their invective Pamphlets use the words of Isa. 62. 1. For Sions sake I will not hold my tongue, and for Jerusalems sake I will not rest, and are not both our enemies, the Papists for tyranny, and the other labouring for Anarchy? Are not mercenary Levites abounding with us, the Devils dawbers, prea∣ching placentia, and sowing pillowes under mens elbowes, speaking good of evill, and evill of good, men-pleasures, blinding Israels sinne, and taking a re∣ward for iniquity? Doe not Prophets prophesie falsly, and men love to have it so? and are not the times such, I feare not to speake, giving God the glo∣ry,
that he that departs from such iniquity, maketh himselfe a prey? Do not prophanenesse, hardheartednesse, murmuring, contumelies, revilings, envy∣ings, luke warmenesse, dwell amongst us? Are not these diseases catching, Epidemicall? Is it not to be feared they possesse the whole body of the land? Are not fishers of men, turn'd fishers of money, fishers of women? Did not the Devill tempt Eve first, and then overcome Adam? Is it not hence that silly women are led captive, laden with sinfull lusts? are not they first wrought upon by strange doctrines as meanes to trap their husbands? what reason can you give for this, save that their weaknesse makes way to receive false o∣pinions, and gives them more confident to broach them; or because they seeke not God in the truth, or because their wits are short, and their tongues long. Are there not a generation of men risen up, which our Protestant forefa∣thers never knew, whose hearts as if they were hewne out of hard rocks, or as if they had suckt the milke of Wolves, (as it is reported the first founder of Rome did) relent not to see their native Country made nothing else but a shambles of butchers and blood? Alexander when he saw the dead corps of Darius, and Marcus Marcellus, Syracusa burne, and Titus Jerusalem laid even with the ground, (though enemies) could not abstaine from teares: these quite contrary mourne not with Jerusalem, nor helpe it with prayers in this sad time of unnaturall calamity. Are there not men pretending right to the Ambassadours calling, who have none in justice to it, men Canon mouth'd, and yet living by no Ecclesi∣asticall rule, no Logicians, yet full of fallacies, right Carters upon Seton, whip and goe, bellowing like Buls of Basan, balls of wild fire, downe with her, downe with her to the ground; Gunpowder arguments against Church and State, who in their owne sense, notwithstanding will be martyrs, Saints, Catharists: but if those be martyrs who are murtherers? if these be Saints who are Scythians? and if these be Catharists who are Canibals? Lastly, this doctrine reflects upon the people, and teaches them spirituall obedience, Obey them that have rule over you: and Saint Paul to the Thes∣salonians, I beseech you know them that labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and have them in estimation for their workes sake. To this purpose is it that God so dearly accompts them in Scripture, that the King is directed to aske counsell of God at the mouth of the Priest: and King Salomon termes them the masters of Assemblies, to this purpose, there preaching is termed prophesi∣ing, the hearers are said to sit at their feet, and not upon their skirts; to teach them lessons of love, and religious reverence. But alas, this kingdome cannot smother it, The fathers have eaten sowre grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. In old time it was Ghostly Father,
but now Baals Priest, Jesuits, Canterbury whelps, none of Gods Priests, mans Priests, not inspired, nor called, nor led by the Spirit: nay the most Christian and judiciously godly Ambassadours in this City have in their charges, and in their occasionall grave walkings beene derided and exploded. But if natio∣nall lawes, and historicall testimonies produce such examples of cruelties and wrongs, for the abuse & blood of Ambassadours, then I say the Lord cometh even within a little while, behold the God of Angels and men cometh with thousands and ten thousands, to take vengeance upon the men of this Na∣tion for their barbarous entertainment of many of his Ambassadours, coming meekly unto them with Christmas in their mouthes, Evangelium gaudii, a Go∣spell of joy, Christ Jesus an eternall Saviour, borne in the time of peace, and for their redemption. I will end my Sermon with the prayer of our forefathers, in a part of the first English Lytany, set out in the dayes of King Henry the eight, From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and heresie, from hard∣nesse of heart, from contempt of thy word and Commandements. Unto which by the assistance of Gods Spirit I will adde: From all Jesuits, Brownists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Arminians, rebels, traitors, sectaries, and turbulent spirits, good Lord deliver us. And that Gods glory may for ever shine upon us, we pray, That it may please him to be still with this Church and Nation, that hee would say to the destroying Angell, it is enough here, and else where. That the Gospell of his Sonne Jesus Christ, the most holy and just Lord, be soundly preached, and obediently and purely practised. That the true Protestant Religion, I meane the whole body of Doctrine revealed in Gods written word, absolutely necessary to salvation, established in Queene Elizabeth, and King James his dayes, may yet and ever continue amongst us. That such discipline may be used, as Gods Saints may serve him in his places of worship in all comelinesse and decency. That God would still continue the Kings heart in sincerity, to his glory, and the true Protestant Religion. That God would cover his head in the day of battell, and protect him from all his enemies, and knit fast in one truth and peace, him and his people. That we may all keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. That we may enjoy peace supernall with God, internall of conscience▪ and fraternall one with another. We beseech thee to heare us good Lord. Thus living Angellically in peace on earth, we shall by Jesus Christ the
Prince of peace, pertake of peace with Angels in heaven, here by participa∣tion, there by consummation; where is no place for sedition, for their blesse is orderly, and their happinesse everlasting, where we shall sing this unani∣mous trisagion, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord, most high God the Father, and to Jesus Christ the everlasting soule-saving Sonne, and the truly God, and blessed and holy Spirit, eternally proceeding from both. To whom, trinity in unity, and unity in trinity, be ascribed, as is most due, from the bottome of our hearts, all honour, glory, power, praise, wisdome, righteousnesse, mercy and judgement, the rest of this Lords day, hencefor∣ward, and for ever; and let all that heare me this day, say, Amen, Amen, Amen, Amen. FINIS.
