V136 12630924 64768
Practica WALLIÆ; OR THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE Great Sessions OF WALES: Containing the Method and Practice of an ATTORNEY there, from an ORIGINAL to the EXECUTION. Whereunto is added, The Old Statute of Wales at large; And an Abridgement of all the Statutes uniting Wales to England: with Tables of the Fees, and the Matters therein contained. By Rice Vaughan, late of Grays-Inne Esquire. LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford, John Streater, and Eliz. Flesher, Assignes of Richard Atkins and Edward Atkins Esquires. 1672 Cum Gratia & Privilegio Regiæ Majestatis.
Academiæ Ganwbrigiensis Liber
To the Honourable Sr. JOB CHARLETON, Chief Justice of Chester. ROBERT MILWARD Esq One of the Commissioners of the Privy Seal. Sir THOMAS JONES, Serjeant at Law. KENRICK EATON Esq Honoured Sirs, THIS Tract how little soever, yet contains within its Circuit the Interest and Con∣cerns of many worthy and Honourable Per∣sons, to whom the late Author was in hopes it would be no less acceptable
then beneficial; especially if admit∣ted into your protections, who for the greatest Reason understand the management of all Affairs therein discoursed. You cannot but know the many alterations that happeneth in those Counties upon the uniting thereof unto the Crown of England; for the better understanding of the then settlements there, upon which the proceedings of these Courts are grounded, there is now added the effects of all the Statutes yet remain∣ing in force. So that in this short view, you see the basis and super∣structure of the Law, as it stands setled by Statutes, and the usual and ordinary proceedings thereupon, with the just Fees, all reduced to our modern Scale, which in the dead Author's behalf I offer to your Ho∣nours, desiring to approve my self in all things, Your Honours devoted Servant, T. M.
THE TABLE. A. ACtion, how to commence it in the great Sessions of Wales. page 2. Actions, real proceedings therein spee∣dy. p. 6, 7. Attorney must take care to understand his Clyents business rightly. p. 7, 8. 36, 37. 70, 71. Alias dictus, where necessary, &. è contra. p. 9. Account, proceedings therein. p. 26. Actions upon Penal Statutes, how to be brought. ibid. Audita Querela, where it lyes, and, for what. p. 28, 29. Accedas ad Curiam, where it lyes, and the nature of it. p. 29, 30.
B. Bill and Queritur how they differ. p. 2, 3. The return thereof speedy, and the reason and effect of it. p. 3, 4. Bayl, who appears upon Bayl must be discharged upon Bayl. p. 16. 35. C. Charges in a Suit in Wales, where the Debt exceeds not 40 d. p. 6. Concessit solvere, the nature thereof, and Plea therein. p. 13, 14. Cape Petit, when to be awarded, and when the grand Cape. p. 16, 17. 51. Costs, where it shall be paid p. 17. 22. 26. Curia claudenda, the nature thereof, proceedings therein. p. 27. Certiorari, the proceedings therein. p. 32, 33. Challenge, where it lyes, and why. p. 38, 39. 40, 45. D. Defendant not prejudiced but by his own Laches, and why. p 5. Declaration when it must be b ought in, and filed. p. 11.
Damages, a Writ of Enquiry of Dama∣ges, where it lyes. p. 15, 16. Distringas, Alias, Pluries, and Plus Pluries Distringas, where to be sued out. ibid. Dower, the proceedings therein. p. 16. Where a Writ to assign it shall be granted. p. 17. Detinue, the nature of the Action, and the proceedings therein. p. 25. E. Execution how attainable. p. 5, 6. 60. ad 71. Essoyn without Warranty, the ground of an Iterum Summoneas. p. 9. Error, Writs of Error where they lye, and for what. p. 29. Proceedings therein. p. 30, 31. Executions, several sorts thereof. p. 60. ad 70. F. Formedon, the Tenant may vouch therein. p. 19, 20. False Judgement, Writ of false Judge∣ment where it lyes, p 29.
Proceedings therein. p 31, 32. Fees of the Prothonotary of North-Wales, in Causes real and mixed. p. 83, 84. Fees in Personal Actions. p. 85, 86, 87. Other Fees rated and setled. p. 93. ad 100 H. Homine Replegiando, where it lyes. p. 25. I. Judgements by default, how obtained. p 4, 5. 9, 10, 11. Iterum Summoneas, where grantable. p. 9. Judicium si, what it is. ibid. Issues, where to be returned, p. 14, 15. Imparlance, where grantable, which in Latin is called, Li. Lo. p. 20. Special and general, their difference. p. 21. Jury, their duty. p. 49. ad 60. M. De Muliere abducta cum bonis viris, the nature of it, and proceedings there∣in. p. 27.
N. Non-suit, where it shall be entred. p. 17, 22. Nihil inde, when and where to be en∣tred. p. 21. Ne recipiatur, where it may be entred. p. 33. O. Original in what cases necessary. p. 10, 11. Oyer where it may be demanded. p. 12. P. Plaintiff, what he must do to obtain ex∣cution. p 5, 6, 9, 10. Pleas dilatory seldome admitted in the Courts of Wales. p. 6. Pleadings usual in an Action of Debt. p. 11, 12. Pleas in other cases. p. 12. Proceedings at the second Sessions, when Issue is not joyned at the first. p. 21. Partition, the proceedings therein. p. 25, 26. Proceedings general in all causes. p. 38.
Q. Queritur, the words thereof in divers cases. p. 14. Quod ei deforceat, the Writ and pro∣ceedings therein. p. 16, 17. R. Rule general and peremptory, p. 11. Right, Writ of right is conclusive, and the Tenant may vouch therein. p. 19, 20. Replevin, the nature of the Action, and the proceedings therein. p. 24, 25. Returno habendo, where and when to be granted. p. 24 25. Rationabili parte bonorum, the na∣ture of it, and proceedings therein. p. 27, 28. Recordare, where and for what it lies. p. 30. Rules setled for businesses at the great Sessions. p 75, 76, 77, 78. Rules in the Chancery there. p. 79, 80, 81, 82. Recovery, common Fees therein. p. 88, 89, 90.
S. Sessions, great Sessions in Wales, the time of the summoning thereof. p. 1, 2. The proceedings therein, p. 2. They have a Chancery in themselves. p. 7. Summon and pledges to be returned. p. 9. Summons only in some cases, p. 11. Sequatur sub suo periculo, a Writ where it is grantable. p. 19. Summons, ad sequendum simul cum, where necessary. p. 19, 20. Summons and severance where necessary. p. 20. Similis Narratio, what it is. p. 23. Statuta Walliæ temp. E. l. p. 101, ad 149. Statutes for uniting Wales to England. p. 150, ad finem. T. Titlixg of Actions truly very material to the Cause. p. 8, 9. V. Variance, where pleadable and why. p. 8. View of Lands where demandable. p. 23.
W. Wager of Law where admitted. p. 11, 12. Withernam, the Writ where and why grantable. p. 25. Waste, the proceedings therein. p. 26. Wales, Statutes of Wales in the time of Ed. I. p. 101, ad 149. Wales united to England by several Statutes, and the Abridgement there∣of. p. 150, ad finem.
The Manner of the Proceedings in the Courts of the Great Sessions in the Counties of Montgomery, Denbigh, and Flint, within North-Wales, as it now is. ABOUT three Weeks be∣fore every Great Sessions (by Warrant from the Chief Justice of the Cir∣cuit) a general Writ of Summons is sent forth by the Protho∣notary to the Sheriff, by which the Sheriff is Commanded to Proclaim throughout his County, that the gene∣ral Great Sessions for the County is to be holden at such a day and place: And that he Summon and give Warning to all Justices of the Peace, &c. Officers, and other Persons whom it doth con∣cern, that they appear at the day and place limited by the said Writ. Which
Proclamation being made on a Market∣day, all Persons whatsoever (by the course there holden) whether Plaintiffs or Defendants in Suits before depend∣ing, or others who intend to Com∣mence any Suits, and also all such who suspect any Suits may be brought a∣gainst them, are at their perils, ac∣cording to the general Summons be∣fore mentioned, to have their Attor∣nies in Court to prosecute and defend the said Suits. The Sessions being begun, The Plain∣tiffs who are to Commence Actions, do retain their Attornies, and bring their Actions, either by original Writ (as is usual for all kind of Debts not finable upon the Original) which Writs are made returnable the first day of the Sessions, and dated fifteen days before the Sessions, or else by Bill or Queri∣tur, which may be either for Debt, Tre∣spass, or upon the Case. And whether it be by Original, or else by Bill, or Queritur the Defendant upon the Ori∣ginal, and first Bill, or Queritur, and all Process (before appearance) thereupon awarded, is ever called in open Court, to come forth and answer to the Plain∣tiff
in such or such an Action (as the Case is) and if by Original, the De∣fendant being thereupon called, and not appearing, then a second Writ of Summons is awarded, returnable the next day after, which being made by the Prothonotary, and sealed with the Judicial Seal of the Court, and re∣turned by the Sheriff, the Defendant is thereupon a second time called openly in Court. And if then the Defendant appear not, the Plaintiff hath Judge∣ment by Default. So it is also in case the Action be brought by Queritur, or Bill, saving only that Judgement is not in that case had before a third Writ of Summons issue, and thereupon the Defendant be∣ing the third time called, do make De∣fault: whereas if by Original, there needs but one Writ of Summons, besides the Original it self. The first Bill or Queritur, commonly bears date the first day of the great Ses∣sions, or the day when the Attorny sueth it forth, and is returnable the next day after the date of it; where∣upon if the Defendant, being openly called in Court, appear not, then a se∣cond
Writ to Summon the Defendan-again is awarded; whereupon if the Defendant being the second time call∣ed, appear not, then a third Bill or Queritur, to Summon the Defendant, is awarded; whereupon if the Defen∣dant being called a third time, appear not, then the Plaintiff hath Judgement by Default. And these Writs are suc∣cessively awarded, and made returna∣ble de die in diem, and the Judgement had in three dayes at the most, in cases of debt, if the Defendant appear not, but if the Defendant appear, then the Plaintiffs Attorney declares, and upon the Defendants pleading, and not con∣fessing the Action, then issue is joyned the same Sessions, and tryed the next Sessions after. And it is here to be observed, that the awarding of these Process, and ob∣taining of these Judgements by Default, depend upon the Sheriffs return of any e said Writs, whether the Actions be brought by Original, or by Bill, or Queritur: For if the Sheriff return a Summons (as usually he doth in all cases of Debt, because of the general Sum∣mons of the Sessions upon the Writ first
before mentioned, by which the Sessi∣ons was proclaimed) then those Judge∣ments are obtained as is before expres∣sed. But if the Sheriff return, that the Defendant hath nothing in his Bailiff∣wick, whereby he may be Summoned (or Attached) as usually he doth in ca∣ses of Trespass, and upon the Case, then a Capias to Arrest the Defendant is awarded; and a Writ of Distringas also ad infinitum in cases of Trespass, and issues thereupon returned by the Sheriff, untill the Defendant do ap∣pear. Neither is the Defendant in case of these Judgements thus obtained by De∣fault, any way prejudiced, but by his own Laches or wilfulness: For in all cases of Debt, if he or his Attorney tender an Appearance any day within the Sessions (or after, with consent of the Plaintiffs Attorney, before the Debt sworn) the appearance is accept∣ed. And if he neglect so to do, so that the Judgement stand, yet no Execution can go forth untill the Plaintiff do first swear his Debt, and Damages for the forbearance of it, either before the Judges in open Court, or else by speci∣al
Commission, in which Case also exe∣cution of the Writ by the Sheriff (though gone forth) is stayed in the Attornies hand by Order, till com∣monly six Weeks or two Moneths after the Sessions, to the end that the Defen∣dant may satisfie the Debt before the de∣livery of the Writ to the Sheriff, if he please. In prosecution of all which kind of Actions in Debt and Trespass (which are almost the whole business of the Ses∣sions) the parties are not delayed above one or two Sessions, unless by some dilatory Pleas and Demurrers (which seldom happen) and for taking away whereof, some provision may be made: and the Charges, unless in Ca∣ses where and issue is pleaded, and tryal thereupon had, not commonly above thirty shillings, except where the Debt being above forty pound, is finable to the King, in case the Action be brought by Original. Neither are the People in prosecuting and defending these Acti∣ons, inforced to travel out of their own Counties. Also in Cases of real Actions (which are very few) the proceeding is spee∣dy,
unless it happen by multiplicity of Pleadings, occasioned by the intricacy of Titles, and variety of Conveyances to be pleaded, which for the most part is avoided, the Conveyances being given in Evidence. Those Courts of the great Sessions have a Chancery within themselves, and have had power to relieve in Cases of Equity ever since H. 8, time. A Tract or Directory touching the Pra∣ctick of an Attornies profession in the Court of the great Sessions in Wales. IN the first place it concerns an At∣torney partly as well as the Lawyer to understand (at least) the nature, if not the whole cause and ground of his Clients Action or Suit, before he undertakes to follow it, without which he will not be able to do his Client any great benefit, more then suing out of Process, and going from Office to Of∣fice, which every ordinary fellow that can but write and read is able to do as well as he.
Then to ease his Councel,Common Actions at the Sessions. and not to trouble him to do every ordinary plain thing, he is to draw his Titling for to have out his original Writ, or Que∣ritur, as the case requires, and the most common and ordinary Actions in the Sessions are. Actions of Debt, of Trespass, of Trespass on the Case, Trespass and Ejectment, Writs of Dower, & Quod ei deforceats. These Titlings are usual things. To instance in one of Debt; which is the commonest, The Defendant must be named in the first place according to the truth of his name, dwelling place, and addition, and in the second place, or alias dictus, if by specialty, accor∣ding to the words of the Obligation, verbatim & literatim; for if the words of the Writ and the words of the Obligati∣on do not agree, the Defendant may plead variance between the words of the Writ, and the words of the Obligati∣on, and so abate the Writ, which must be after appearance, and before Decla∣ration
be put in; but if there be no Ob∣ligation for the debt, then there needs no Alias dictus in the Writ, and in that and other Actions there be presidents for the Titlings, which therefore need not be insisted on here. In every Writ where the Sheriff is commanded only to summon the Defen∣dant to appear, the retorn therein must be pledges and summons to answer the Writ, and if the Defendant neither ap∣pears nor essoigns on the original Writ in debt, and if he essoigns and warrants not his Essoign within the next day after he casts the Essoign, an Iterum Summo∣neas is to issue out, upon which Writ, in default of appearance or Essoign, there is Judgement granted by default, which is commonly called Judicium si, &c. (but not entred so upon the Roll) which is a conditional Judgement, for (before the Judgement be entred) the Plaintiff is to swear his debt, and thereupon to recover onely what he swears to be due, with ordinary interest and costs: And if the Iterum Summoneas be essoigned (which may be when the first is not) it is but a dayes delay, and then if no appearance be, Judgement
is to be had, as formerly is said. But if you sue upon a Bond for per∣formance of Covenants, Articles, A∣wards, or any other collateral matter, being not absolutely for payment of money, the Plaintiff is also therein to recover by default for want of appear∣ance, and yet not swear his debt or da∣mage; but (upon motion and shewing the special matter) he shall have Judge∣ment entred absolutely (after calling the Iterum Summoneas) for the whole penalty of the Bond, without any Oath as aforesaid. If the debt be due within fifteen dayes of the Sessions, or the case other∣wise lyes (as several wayes it may) so that the Action cannot be begun by an Original, then there must be a Que∣ritur or a Bill had from the Prothono∣taries Office, upon which you must have a second and a third Bill, and them cal∣led, the first one day, the second the next day, and the third the third day, before you can recover by default, and then Judgement is to be had (in the same manner as if it had been begun by Original) in default of appearance. And on these last mentioned Writs the
Sheriff is to retorn only Summons, as well upon the Queritur as upon the se∣cond and third Bill, for the Plaintiffs Pledges are alwayes inserted of Course within the Queritur or first Bill, and there is no prejudice or any great mat∣ter or difference whether the Plaintiff sue by Original or Queritur, but that he cannot proceed to Outlary against the Defendant upon the Queritur. After you have gotten an appearance upon any Writ or Bill, then the Plain∣tiff must declare, and call or move for a Rule for the Defendant to answer, the first Rule is general, and the second in all those personal Actions is perempto∣ry, and if the Defendant pleads not be∣fore the peremptory Rule be out, then the Plaintiff is to recover upon a Nihil dicit. The common and most usual pleading to an Action of Debt upon a Bond for payment of money in this part of Wales, is non est factum, and to an Action of Debt without specialty, is nihil debet per patriam, &c. whereunto the Plaintiff replyes to joyn up the Issue, but for a Debt without specialty the Defen∣dant may wage his Law, and say Nil
debet per Legent, in which case the Court will assign the Defendant a day to come to wage his Law, which com∣monly is the first sitting of the next Ses∣sions following, and cannot be delayed further, where the Defendant must swear he owes the Plaintiff nothing, and produce twelve men to swear that they believe it, which is called Duodenâ manu, but the Court accepts of three or four with the Defendant, as I have seen it, but if the Defendant comes not to wage his Law, the Plaintiff is to recover. There be indeed several other Pleas to be pleaded to Actions of Debt due by Bond, as per Minas, per Dures, Impri∣sonment, Release, Nonage, &c. which may be seen in the Books of Entrees. If the Bond be with Condition the Defendant may demand Oyer of it, which must be done between the first and second Rule, and then Conditions per∣formed may be pleaded, which are usu∣ally and fittest to be done by Councel, and Oyer may be demanded of all other Bonds and Writings pleaded, if the Defendant plead in manner as aforeaid. In all or most Actions of Debt with∣out
out Bond, or Specialty upon simpl Contracts, there is (at the great Ses∣sions in Wales) a far shorter and less intricate way to declare, and so ground an Action, then in the Courts above at Westminster, by the anci∣ent Custome of North-Wales, had and deduced from those three Northern Counties that were Shire-grounds time beyond all memory, and are (indeed) rightly and properly the very North-Wales, which way is by a meer and plain Concessit solvere, and no matter ex∣pressed besides the time and place of the Contract, and the day of payment, whereunto the Defendant most com∣monly pleads the aforementioned gene∣ral Issue of Nil debet per patriam, and at the trial the whole matter and conside∣ration will be given in Evidence, so that thereby the Plaintiff saves what of∣ten falls out, by declaring specially in an Action upon the Case for every Debt upon small Contracts, wherein the Plaintiff will be more closely held to prove all Circumstances mentioned in the Declaration, for all Actions up∣on the Case are strict, and therefore more subject to miscarry, and by seve∣ral
wayes overthrown then those gene∣ral wayes of Concessit solvere, which are constantly used and approved by the priviledge of the Custome aforesaid, which are often very beneficial to the Plaintiff in many things, for the De∣fendant hardly (till the Trial) (knows if many Bargains passed between him and the Plaintiff) upon which of them the Plaintiff will produce his proof, and if the Plaintiff can make proof but of part of the Debt declared, he shall recover so much, for the Defendants Plea (upon which the Issue is joyned) sayes he doth not owe that Debt or any part thereof, and so it is beneficial in many things else, but not in Actions upon the Case for Debt, where the proof must be punctual with the Decla∣ration. In all Actions of Trespass, Trespass upon the Case, Trespass and Eject∣ment, the words of the Writ or Queri∣tur to the Sheriff are, Quod ponet per va∣dios & salvos plegios, and on every Writ where these words are, the Sheriff is to retorn Issues, which must be more or less, as the nature, greatness, or con∣dition of the Cause requires, which if
he doth not, the Court upon motion will command to heighten or encrease the Issues, thereby to compell the De∣fendant to appear, and to expedite the Plaintiffs Cause to Trial, because it is well known, that in all these Actions the Plaintiff cannot recover by default for want of appearance, but after ap∣pearance if the Defendant pleads not, the plaintiff may have a Writ to enquire of Damages, as hereafter appeareth: If the Defendant appears not, the Plain∣tiff must sue forth a Distringas, an alias, a pluries, and a plus pluries Distringas, and so in infinitum till appearance be had, and upon every Distringas the Sheriff is to encrease the Issues, or rather at least to double them; but if the retorning of Issues will not compell the Defendant to appear, then the Sheriff may be com∣pelled to retorn a Nihil habet in Balliva mea per quod distringi possit, &c. and up∣on that Retorn a Capias may be had to apprehend and attach the body of the Defendant to answer, &c. And if thereupon the Sheriff retorns a Cepi Cor∣pus, &c. the Defendant being brought to the Bar, shall upon motion be or∣dered to remain in the Sheriffs Custody,
till he find Bayl or Pledges to answer such Recovery as shall be had against him, for it is an observed Rule, he who comes in or appears upon Bayl, must go out or be discharged upon Bayl. If the Defendant after appearance plead not, then the Plaintiff is to move in all the last mentioned Actions for a Writ to enquire of Damages, and then the awarding of it must be entred, which in some respects is in nature of a Judgement; and upon the return of it, and of the Juries Inquisition, Judgement for the Dammages and Costs is to be entred, but not used without a special motion to have it granted; for the Defendant may object many things against the Inquisition, and thereby prevent the filing of it, and so per∣haps put the Plaintiff to take out a new Writ. In Writs of Dower & quod ei defor∣ceat, the second Writs are Summons, and the third is a grand Cape, upon which if the Defendant appears not, the Demandant is to recover by default, and to have a Writ of Seizin of the Lands; but the Tenant may appear
upon the grand Cape, and save or ex∣cuse his default, which is very seldom, and not so easily done, if the Deman∣dants Councel will urge all that is just and requisite by Law for his Client to demand and require, before the Tenant be admitted to appear. If after Appearance, and Declara∣tion put in, and three Rules past, the Tenant pleads not, a petty Cape is to be awarded against him and thereupon Judgement shall be entred of course and execution awarded. When the Plaintiff or Demandant after Declaration put in do not pro∣ceed, the Defendant or Tenant may call him to proceed; and if he makes default, a non-suit will be entred; and the Defendant, or Tenant, shall then have Costs in all Actions, wherein the Plaintiff, or Demandant, ought to have had them, if he had recovered. In a Writ of Dower, where the Hus∣band died not seized, there is no Costs for Demandant, or Tenant; but where the Husband died seized, the Deman∣dant recovers as well Dower, as Costs and Damages, which the Jury always finds, viz. the value of the Profits of the
third part of the late Husbands Lands since his death, as the Jury shall have Evidence to find the worth or value; but where the Recovery happens to be by Default and so without Jury, then there is a Writ to be directed to the Sheriff, as well to assign Dower to the Demandant, as to enquire by a Jury whether the Husband died seized or not, and if he did, to enquire of the value of the Lands, and upon retorn of that Writ, (if the dying seized be found) the Demandant shall have a Writ of ex∣ecution for the third part of the Profits according to the Verdict, and for her Costs of course. The common and or∣dinary Writ of Dower sayes in the close thereof, Ʋnde nihil habet, but in a Writ of right of Dower, as where one received part of her Dower, and sues for the rest in the same Township, these words of Ʋnde nihil habet must be left out, which difference is to be usually read and seen in several Books, which an Attorney should necessarily learn, that he may know which Writ to take out when his Clyent tells his Case to him, lest his Councel may undervalue him for his ignorance in common and ordinary things.
Upon every Writ of Quod ei defor∣ceat, the Demandant after appearance may declare either in the nature of a Writ of Entry sur disseizin, or in the na∣ture of a Writ of Right, or in the na∣ture of a Formedon, which are of divers sorts. If the Demandant recover in a Writ of Entry, he recovers also Costs and Damages, and so shall the Tenant, if the matter pass with him, but in the two other last mentioned Writs there are no Costs to be had on either side, and on the Writ of Entry there lyes no view, but in the rest it doth, as here∣after shall be more fully declared. A Writ of Right is a concluding Action, because it is of the highest na∣ture, and in it and in a Formedon the Tenant may vouch, and then a Writ of Summons goes to the Sheriff to summon the Vouchee, whereon if he retorns Nihil habet, &c. there goes out an alias and a pluries, and then a Sequatur sub sue periculo: And in some Cases in these, Quod ei deforceats, and in other Actions, where the Actions cannot be well laid or commenced, but in the name of seve∣ral persons, whereof some of them will have no mind to bring or prosecute the
same, it will be requisite to take out Writs of Summons ad sequendum simul cum, and Summons and Severance, which Councel must direct, and in all Cases of that high nature there is indeed nothing to be done without his directi∣ons, which the Attorney will be the bet∣ter able to observe and prosecute, if he understands them as in some measure he should. And in some cases the De∣mandant may vouch and become De∣fendant, when he shall defend his Estate against such Recovery as shall be plead∣ed against him, so that there are divers other thing; wherein there is a great deal of learning in those Formedons and Vouchers, worth any mans knowledge towards the Law, and though fit and requisite for an Attorney to know, as much as is in relation to his practice, yet I durst not presume to proceed to enlarge thereon, lest I should be justly rebuked. In some Cases there will be no Plea put in, or Issue joyned the first Sessi∣ons, but the Defendant upon some oc∣casions must move for an Imparlance, which is called Licentia interloquendi, (for brevity Li. Lo.) being a grant∣ing
of time to imparle between that and the next Sessions, or to plead by the first day of the next Sessions, or some day in the Vacation, as the Court shall think fit to appoint, or both parties agree to be entred tunc pro nunc, for there is a general and special Impar∣lance, and sometimes the Plaintiff will have cause to imparle as well as the De∣fendant, when after the Defendant hath answered or pleaded, he is not ready to reply, for in all or most Acti∣ons begun at a Sessions, there must be Recovery by Default, or after appear∣ance and Declaration either an Issue, Imparlance, or a Nihil dicit, if the Plain∣tiff do, as he may, call for proceed∣ings without both parties, will be at a stay by consent, wherein commonly a Nihil inde is for that time entred on the Writ or Declaration, in which Cause the Plaintiff (if he please) may pro∣ceed the next Sessions after, as former∣ly he might. And in such Actions, wherein Issue the first Sessions is not joyned, if the Plaintiff will proceed the next Sessions, he must then look the Docket, to know how the matter stood the Sessions be∣fore,
and continue the same unto the Book of Imparlance, according to the words of the Docket, which may also be done the second Sessions, but paying the Prothonotory for the continu∣ance. If Causes have slept after appearance, and before Declaration be put in, and the Plaintiff will not appear to proceed, the Defendant if he desires to go on, must move the Court to appoint the Plaintiff a time to declare or reply, &c. as the Case requires, and in de∣fault thereof, that a non-Suit may be entred, which the Court of course will grant, and the same Rule being entred and not performed, then the non-Suit will be entred; and if it be after the Plaintiff hath declared, the Defendant will have his Costs, and an Execution for it, if it be not in such Actions wherein Costs do not lye, for seldome or never any Costs is had by the Defen∣dant, if the Plaintiff become non-Suit before he declares, for I knew never any had or granted I should towards the end of the fore∣going leaf, where I mentioned view, lay not in a Writ of Entry Sur Dis∣seizin
declared, that it did lie in the o∣ther Writs, as of Dower, Writ of Right and Formedon, wherein after Declara∣tion is put in, and a Rule given to the Tenant to Answer, the Tenant may demand view of the Lands, which must be done in Court, or Office, before the Rule be quite out; which view so demanded is granted, which excuseth the Tenant of making any Answer till the Demandant sues out the Writ of View, whereunto as well the Tenant must appear, as the Demandant declare de novo, by a Similis Narratio; and the Tenant must be careful to observe his time to demand the view; for it is not grantable after a general imparlance, and if the Tenant slips the time, he shall not come to it again: and he must be more careful to appear, or essoin, for an essoin will lie at the calling of the Writ of View; else the Demandant will then recover seizin of the Lands, and have a Writ of seizin; and if the Defendant essoins, he will gain a day longer to appear, and then must ap∣pear; whereupon the Demandant de∣clares by Similis Narratio (mutat. mutan∣dis) as is aforesaid.
There are at the great Sessions some∣times other Actions, as of Replevin, Detinue, Accompt, Rationabili parte bo∣norum, Partition, Waste, Actions upon Penal Statutes, Curia Claudenda, de mu∣liere abducta cum bonis viri, Audita Que∣rela, and others, which have but ordi∣nary proceedings, as hath been treated in some other Actions before spoken of, whereupon I will only speak a word or two of the nature of each of them. Replevins (most commonly) are brought in inferiour Courts, and after∣wards removed to the Sessions, wherein the Plaintiff declares, and the Defen∣dant avows, as his Case requires; and afterwards the Plaintiff is to put in his bar, which is called a Replication in ano∣ther Action. And in this Action both Parties are Plaintiffs, and may recover: for the Defendant, if he makes good his Avow∣ry, is to recover his Rent, or what else he distrained for, with his Costs and Damages at the Trial: but if the Plaintiff be non-suited, the Defendant is to have a Returno habendo to restore the Cattle distrained by him to his cu∣stody, as they were before replevied,
whereby to satisfie his demands. But then the Plaintiff, if he will, may have a second Deliverance, and go on again to Trial: but if the Defendant reco∣vers in this, he is to have a Returno ha∣bendo unrepleviable: but if the Plaintiff recovers, he is to have only Damages for the wrongful distraining of his Beasts; and in case the Goods cannot be replevied, a Withernam may be had to take the Parties own Goods (that did distrain) in value, &c. there is also a homine repligiando for releasing a man detained by another person, except for some offences which are mentioned in the Writs; and there is sometimes a Capias in Withernam that issues out: it is too tedious to express all things con∣cerning them, and therefore I leave the Reader, if he be ignorant, to take pains to learn them out of better Au∣thors, as I did. In detinue the Plaintiff is to recover the things detained, and in default thereof, the value of the same in money, which the Jury usually finds. The same Process is in Partition, and in Waste, and Accompt, which is Sum∣mons and Distress; but in Partition and
Waste, the Demandant will recover by default upon the third Writ, if the Tenant appears not, as in some other former Actions treated of appears. And in these two Actions of Partition and Waste, there lies no Costs, but treble Damages, and the place Wasted is re∣covered in a Writ of Waste. And in Partition there be two Judgements; one after the Verdict, which is no more then (siat inter eos partitio) and the other upon Return of the Writ awarded to the Sheriff to make the Partition, which must be upon motion, and is quod par∣titio prædicta firma & stabilis teneatur im∣perpetuum. And in a Writ of Waste, the Demandant may, depending the Action, move for a Writ of Estrepe∣ment; and is ordinarily granted, being a Writ to the Sheriff to restrain and prevent the making or committing any further waste upon the Land. Whilt the Action is depending, Actions upon penal Statutes are usually brought by way of Information, wherein a Distrin∣gas is the next Process, and the Issue, Verdict, and Judgement therein, if found by the Prosecutor, are as the several Statutes do direct, or else a not guilty.
The Action of Curia Claudenda, and do muliere abducta cum bonis viri, are in some respects, especially that of de muliere ab∣ducta, &c. in the nature of an Action of Trespass; the Curia Claudenda being an Action brought by one against ano∣ther, for not securing or enclosing the Fence or Hedge lying between both their Grounds, and time out of mind (as urged by the Plaintiff) usually made up and fenced by the Defendant, and all other Owners of his Lands; the other de muliere abducta, &c. is for ta∣king away the Plaintiffs Wife, with some part of the Plaintiffs Goods, with∣out alledging of which Goods: and that also in particular the Action will not be well laid. In all my time of Practice, I saw but one Action of each of these, that is one of Curia Claudenda in Flint-shire, about 30. years ago, and one de muliere abducta, &c. in Denbigh-shire, 24. years ago, wherein 200. l. Damages were recovered. The Rationabili parte bonorum is, when a Widow upon the custome of North-Wales sues the Executor of her Husband for the moyety of her Husbands per∣sonal Estate; or when a Brother or
Sister upon the same custome sues for a share, as may more at large appear in Law Books, in which Action all is re∣covered in Damages, being what the Plaintiffs Witnesses can make appear, the Moiety to the Wife, or the share of the Brother or Sister, to be really worth, through all the personal E∣state. Audita Querela lyes, when one is ap∣prehended and imprisoned for Debt and Damages recovered against him, and against another person, who was prin∣cipally Bayl or Surety with him for the same Debt, and when that other per∣son had formerly been apprehended for the self same Debt and Damages, and hath satisfied the same, for it will not lye, without real payment or satisfa∣ction was made by the other person that was formerly taken in Execution, though he never lay so long in Goal, and came out some way or other with∣out satisfying the party Plaintiff, or it will lye for one as became Bayl, or en∣tred into Recognizance, though the Debt or Recognizance be not really paid and satisfied, but the Audita Que∣rela n that Case must be brought before
the parties attain to the full years, if the Audita Querela be made good, but a discharge out of the Goal, and from the Recovery, Recognizance, or Exe∣cution, there are original Writs at the Sessions, not spoken of before, (vide∣lic. t) a Writ of of Error, a Writ of false Judgement, a Certiorari or Recordari. The Writs of Error is to move the Record of any Recovery had in any in∣feriour Court, which is a real Court, and so a Court of Record, into the great Sessions, so that the Errors there∣in (if any be) may be there heard and examined. A Writ of false Judgement, or some∣times called Acceds ad Curiam, is to re∣move the Record of any Recovery in a mean or base Court, which is a Court that hath not power to hold Pleas, but under forty shillings to the Sessions. A Certiorari for removing any Action depending, before it be tryed by Jury in any real Court or Court of Record, which hath power to hold Plea above forty shillings, which are Courts held by Charter in Corporations or Lord∣ships, and in some Lordships Marchers by prescription unto the Cost of the
great Sessions, there to be proceeded upon, and go to Issue and Trial, if the Plaintiff when it is removed will prose∣cute and follow it. A Recordae is to remove any Action begun, and not tried in the said base Court under 40 s. to be proceeded on as is aforesaid, touching the Certior. at the Sessions. Now for proceedings in the said Writs of Errours, false Judgement, Certiorari, and Recordari, thus much which followeth. The Writ of Error after it is granted, must be delivered to the Steward, or Judge of the Court where the reco∣very was had; and he must certifie the Record to the next Sessions, or an At∣tachment lies against him: And when it is there entred, he that put in the Record must assign Errours by his Councel, and sue forth a Scire facias ad audiendum; Errours directed to the Sheriff; at the return whereof, if a Scire fcci be returned, the Defendant in the Writ of Error must appear, and plead to the Assignment of Errours; which is In nullo est errætum in Common Pleas; and if he doth not appear, and
plead, the Court may proceed by default to hear, or rather to exa∣mine the Errors: and in both cases there must be a day appointed for reading the Record; and then after part thereof is read, the Errors are opened by Councel; and if the Cause be argued on both sides, thereupon the Court will either re∣verse or affirm the Judgement: and if Judgement be reversed, the Plain∣tiff in the Writ of Error shall have his Costs: but there are no Costs upon reversal of a false Judgement, as shall be said hereafter. And if Judgement be affirmed, the Party shall have Execution as well upon his former Judgement, as for what Costs and Damages shall be awarded by the Court to him for that delay. A Writ of false Judgement is di∣rected as well for Judgement given in other mean Courts, as in his own County Court; for such as are Judges in those Courts have not the return of Writs: but in this Writ there is a far shorter proceeding when the Record is put in, then in the Writ of Error; for here needs
nothing after it is put in, but Coun∣cel to move to have it read, which being done, Judgement is either re∣versed, or affirmed. If reversed the Defendant in the Court below (who is the Plaintiff) in the Writ of false Judgement, is to have a Writ to be only restored to what he hath lost, that is, to what he hath paid upon the former Judgement (if any) to have no Costs but the bare sum he was dri∣ven to pay upon the former recovery in the Court below. If affirmed, as seldom or never it is, then the Plain∣tiff in the inferiour Court is to have Execution out of the Sessions for what he formerly recovered, with∣out Costs. A Certiorari is to remove an Action above 40 s. as is aforesaid, out of a real Court, or Court of Record, be∣fore any Judgement or Trial be had therein in that Court. And in that, and in the Recordari, such as sue them forth, are to deliver them into the Sessions by their Attornies, having first called them from such as are to return them, to wit, the Steward, or Judge of the Court of Record for
the Certiorari, as in the Writ of Er∣ror before, and to call to the Sheriff for the return of the Recordari, to whom the same, as before is said  false Judgement, is directed, and are to be proceeded upon as in all other Actions of the nature they be from the beginning, only that Writ serves for an Original, or a Q to ground the Action. And in case where any man  sued out any of the aforesaid  mentioned Writs, of purpose to de∣lay proceeding in the Court below, (as often it falls out) and the Party suing forth the same is slow or negli∣gent to return and put in the same, the other Party, Plaintiff in the Court below, is to move the Court to appoint a time to put in the same; or in default thereof, that a ne reci∣piatur may be entred, which is entred. And if it be not put in by the time appointed, the Plaintiff below may take out a Copy of that Rule; or if he please, take out a Writ of Proce∣dendo, and thereby proceeded in that Court below, notwithstanding the former Writ procured, or taken out
for delay (ut supra): and if the Writ of Certior. be put in into the Sessions, and the Plaintiff in the Action will not appear and prosecute, then a non suit will be entred, wherein no Cost lies, if it be before Declaration. And if the Defendant appears not, the Plaintiff may proceed, and shall recover by default, if it be an Action of Debt; if otherwise, he may pro∣ceed as the nature of the Action re∣quires. But if Bail be entred in the Court below to answer the Action, as commonly there is, and that cer∣tified with the Plaintiff, as often it is, and indeed should be then, when the Writ and Plaint is returned and filed, and the Plaintiffs appear∣ance entred by his Attorney; the Plaintiffs Attorney is to move the Court, that the Defendant be or∣dered to put in there the same Bail as was in the Court below; all which is usually granted and had. And there be good Reasons it should be so, that besides the Common-Law-Rules, before mentioned, which is, That he who comes in upon Bail, or once is driven to find Bail, should
again finde Bail; it is fit that the Party Plaintiff should stand in the superiour Court, notwithstanding the Defendants removing of the A∣ction from below, in as good a con∣dition, and in no worse then he was in the other Court; for if the Plain∣tiff should have no Bail found him at the Sessions, the other Bail that was put in at the Court below be∣ing free by the removing here, the Plaintiff would be in a far worse case then he was, and perhaps (if the Defendant prove insolvent) be remediless of the fruits and benefits of his Action at the Sessions. And if Bails were not ordered to be gi∣ven upon all Actions removed to the Sessions, where Bail had been for∣merly given in the inferiour Court, then it were no great matter or pre∣judice to any loose, mean, and un∣thrifty Person to be arrested in any Corporation for any sum of Money, though never so great and just, for he could readily find some or other sufficient Bail, if both were assured and knew that, that Bail could pre∣sently, or shortly after free and dis∣charge
charge himself, by being at th charge of a Certiorari, and retorn it into the superior Court, which in∣deed any Bail would do to free him∣self from his first Engagement, and so put the Principal, (were it not for the Course before-mentioned) in the same estate as he stood before the Ar∣rest, which would be heard to the Plaintiff, but as it is used, as before is said, if the Principal for all their moving of the Action, be not able to find at the Sessions the same Bail a∣gain as was at the Court below, or another as good, the Plaintiff shall as aforesaid have a Procedendo to the inferior Court. If an Attorney finds himself any way ignorant (as the best many times may be) what Process to issue out in any of all the Actions before∣mentioned, or how to prosecute the same from time to time, let him of∣ten attend Councel to be guided and often instructed by him, and he can∣not do amiss, for therein few or none do miscarry in their business, but such as trust overmuch to them∣selves, and so neglect the advice of
others, which is too common and known a fault. Therefore I should advise all Attorneys, never so able and knowing, to attend their Coun∣cel as often as possibly they can, not only to give him Instructions in their Clyents Cause, but also to receive Directions how to proceed in the Cause, and also to bring his Councel Copies from time to time (after the Action is called) of the Writs, and of the Declaration, and all plead∣ings thereunto, yea and of all Rules passed in the Cause, were very re∣quisite; for otherwise if any thing prove amiss, they cannot be fault∣less, and in observing and doing what there above is advised, they will not only much further their Clyents Cause, and gain to them∣selves more knowledge, but also a∣void the blame and censure which Councel too often and sometimes justly, laid upon the Attorneys for their neglect therein, and so shall they not only preserve but also en∣crease their good repute and credit with Councel and Clyents, which I hope all discreet Attorneys do or at
least should esteem and look upon, far above their gain and profit. Here∣unto touching the proceedings in A∣ctions, till Issue be joyned in them. Now followeth how to proceed, and what is to be done in them after Issue is joyned. Now for further proceedings in all Causes to trial, after Issue is joyned the Party Plaintiff is to sue forth his Jury Writs, as his Venire facias, and Habeas corpora, and (if need be) a Distringas Juratores, and for better expediting of his Trial, and preventing rubbs and obstacles that may come in his way, he must consider and enquire whether there be any kindred, affinity, or alliance between him or his Wife; and the Sheriff or his Wife and if there be, he must put in his Challenge to the Sheriff, and thereby pray Process to the Coronors to retorn his Jury, and move before any Writs goes out, that the Defendant may answer it, and thereupon the Court will ap∣point a time ordinarily but to the next sitting, and then if he does not answer it by saying, Vicecomite non
obstante, as he may, and usually is done, or pleaded to it if he please, which is seldome done, or say no∣thing to it, then the Plaintiffs prays by having Process to the Coronors is granted; but if the Defendant yields it as is aforesaid, by allowing the Sheriff notwithstanding that Chal∣lenge, the Process goes to the She∣riff. And so again, if he knows or suspects kindred or alliance to any of the Coronors, he may put his Chal∣lenge to the one, and pray Process to the other Coronor, and the other which is of kin, not to intermeddle, or put in a Challenge to both Coro∣nors, if there be cause, and pray Process to Elizors, which is alwayes the safest course, and in a Cause of any consequence no man should omit any of these to all those Officers, notwithstanding the little charge he be thereby at, and the little delay he is thereby put unto, which seldome is not used to be above one day, for thereby he may perhaps prevent a greater charge, and a longer delay, the Challenge hath but an ordinary form, therefore I omit it; and though
the Pedegree be a little mistaken, I never found it much material, for it would come to the same, viz. that the Plaintiff may have his Process either to the Sheriff, Coronors, or Elizors, and avoid all inconveni∣ences that falls out by omitting it: But in these Challenges there must be observed what the form of Law re∣quires; as if it be for Kindred, to the Sheriffs Wives, then to mention that she is living, if the case be so; if she be dead, to mention her death, and that the Sheriff hath Children alive by her, (if he hath) and many such things; that if the Wife be dead, and no Children living by her, there needs no Challenge. And if Process is to go to Elizors, the Court must be moved to nominate them, and then swear them: but if otherwise, then you are to take out your Pro∣cess of first Jury-writ to the Sheriff, or Coronors, or one of them, as the Defendant admits it; and he shall have no benefit of any Challenging to quash the array, though there were Kindred: but if you omit this course as is said, and take Process
to the Sheriff when he is of kin, then the Defendant may, (when you have retained and instructed your Coun∣cel, and been at charge with your Witnesses, and so be ready for Trial) put you off that Sessions, by chal∣lenging and quashing the Array upon that Kindred or Alliance, suggested by that Challenge made to quash the Array; which Challenge to quash the Array must be moved and put into Court by the Councel of the Defen∣dant, after the calling and appearing of the Jury, and before they be sworn. And that challenging may be two-fold: the one as principal; as for Kindred and Alliance between the Plaintiff or his Wife, and the Party who returned the Jury; the other for favour; as where the She∣riff, or his Officers, returned the Jury by nomination of the Party, or where the Lessor in an ejectione firme is of kin: for as I should have said before, if there be no Kindred at all between the Lessee, who is the Plain∣tiff in the Action, and the Sheriff; and if you find there is Kindred be∣tween his Lessor and the Sheriff, it
behoves you before you take out your Jury-Writ, to put in (as before is shewed) a Challenge to the Sheriff for Kindred to the Lessor; or where there is Kindred between the Plain∣tiff or his Lessor, and such as return∣ed the Jury by bastardy; that (as I heard) is no principal Challenge, but a Challenge to the favour. And so if that Challenge to the Array be made good upon good Oath punctu∣ally, the Array (as aforesaid) will be quashed, and the Plaintiff be put to begin de nove with Jury-Writs, which cannot be brought about that same Sessions; for the Defendant may cast an essoin to the Venire facias the first Jury-Writ: but to all such Challenges to the Array the Plaintiff is called to speak to it, and he must either confess it, or deny it: And so both Parties joyn issue upon it, if confessed, then the Array is quashed; if denied, then Triers are sworn to try, whether the Kindred be as is said; which Triers will be two or three of the Jury that had appeared. And if they find the Kindred, the Array is quashed; if not, the Array
will be affirmed, and the Plaintiff shall go on with his Trial, and the Jury that were called, and appeared, will be sworn to try the cause: but if the Array be quashed as for Kin∣dred to the Sheriff, the Plaintiff must take a Venire facias to the Coro∣nors, though the next Sheriff be no way kin or allied to him. And if the Jury writ whereon the Array was quashed was returned by the Coro∣nors, the Plaintiff must begin, and take his Venire facias to Elizors, though there were new Coronors sworn that were neither kin nor al∣lied to the Plaintiff; because the Plaintiff taking out his Jury-Process de novo cannot go backward, but must still go forward. If the 24. Men re∣turned on the Venire facias, are re∣turned by a Sheriff that hath no re∣lation to the Plaintiff, and a suc∣ceeding Sheriff that will be of kin to the Plaintiff returns the decem tales on the habeas Corpora, in that case the Defendant, if cause be to Challenge the Array, is to say nothing to such as appears on the principal Pannel, till those appear who were returned
on the docem tales by the last Sheriff, and not before a Challenge may be put to the rest of the Array from that place forward, (ut supra) when Tri∣ors are named by the Court (as is aforesaid) to try whether the Array returned stand indifferent, by reason of the Kindred proved between the Plaintiff and such as returned it, the Plaintiff or Defendant may twice challenge or accept against those Triors, without shewing any cause for it; but the third Challenge is pe∣remptory, which must be allowed at the Partiesown peril when the Plain∣tiff hath made & put in his Challenge, (as is aforesaid) or is assured that he needs not, he is to take out his Venire facias, and return it, or file it in Court; which the Defendant may, if he please, Essoin, and thereby gain a day longer to prepare himself; but the Essoin must be cast at the Chal∣lenge of the Writ, or else too late when the Essoin is not allowed or not Essoined at all, then a Habeas Cor∣pora, with a Decem tales, is to be taken out, and so (if cause requires) a Di∣stringas Juratorum, with an Octo tales.
Upon Challenge, the Habeas Cor∣pora, or Distringas Jurat. the whole Jury therein returned will be cal∣led; and after they are all called, if twelve appear, they will be sworn: but before they be sworn, any of the Parties may challenge any one of them, or all, (if there be cause) by the Poll, if any Party dislikes any of the Jury by reason of Kindred, or favour to the other Parties Attorney, must say, when that Jurors come to the Book to be Sworn, I challenge him for the Plaintiff, or for the De∣fendant, which will in the margine of the Pannels be entred. And then he that is challenged is not sworn, till twelve be found out, if so many indifferent men appear upon the Pan∣nel, or till all the names in the Pan∣nel be called. And if full twelve be not found to appear upon the Pan∣nel, and after the Pannel is perused and gone through, then the Party which challenged any is called to shew his cause of Challenge against such and such; and then must his Councel or Attorney manifest the Cause, which is most commonly for
Kindred, or Alliance to the other Party; or that the Jury challenged is Tenant, Servant, or within the Plaintiffs destress, if the Challenge be put in by the Defendant; and so e contrario if the Challenge be put in by the Plaintiff: if you name at first but one of those Causes of Challenge, and the Juror upon Oath deny it, you are not allowed to go back and name the rest of the Causes of Challenge. And therefore for fear of the worst, all those Causes are usually named at first; for the Juror challenged is to be examined upon the Voyer dier to all those exceptions, and if he doth confess or acknowledge any of them, he is put by and excused; if not, he is sworn to try the Cause: and very often when the Party challenging, will not allow the bare denial o the challenged, but will produce proof to make good the Causes, or one of them, for which challenged; whereupon two of them that will be already Sworn to Try the Cause, will be again Sworn to try whether the Party challenged is an indiffe∣rent man, as he stands unsworn, to
be of that Jury or no? if they find, or say he is, or stands indifferent, he is presently Sworn to Try the Cause; and if they say he is not, he is put by, as is said before. And if a Challenge be made by Plaintiff or Defendant to any of the Jury for corruption, or any other miscarriage in him, as may be, then you must prove it by Wit∣nesses; for the Juror will not be compelled to his Oath in this as in other cases, to accuse himself in such case; and as good not challenge any, or rather better upon that score, if it cannot be palpably proved; for if not proved, he will be Sworn to Try the Cause: and perhaps when he is amongst his Fellows debating the Cause, think of the ignominy which was spoken and offered him, and could not be proved, and then do the Party as challenged him a discourtesie, if not a mischief. If there do not appear full twelve upon calling of the Pannel, after they are twice called, then the Plain∣tiff is told by the Clerk as called the Jury, that there is not a full En∣quest, and asked what he prays,
and then Councel prays a tales, but it is in the Plaintiffs choice to pray a tales de Circumstantibus, or a tales at Common Law, which is had upon further Process. But if he prays a ta∣les de Circumstantibus, as most usually it is, then the Sheriff, Coronors, or Elizors, or some of them that made retorn of that Pannel, is presently to retorn as many of the standers by as will make up a full Jury; but if you pray a tales at Common Law, you may take out your further Pro∣cess at that or the next Sessions; if you sue out a Venire facias one Sessi∣ons and do no more, then you are to take out the Habeas corpora the next Sessions, and continue the Cause, if the Cause be stayed upon Habeas corpora, to continue the Cause the next Sessions after, and sue forth a Distringas Juratores; if after Issue joyned the Plaintiff will not proceed in the Cause, then the Defendant upon any default made by the Plain∣tiff, may go on (if he please) by moving the Court that he may pro∣ceed with a Proviso, which of course the Court grants, and the same Rule
being entred, the Defendant shall proceed and take the matter in the same place where the Plaintiff left, (to wit) if the Plaintiff left it after Issue joyned, before any Writs ta∣ken out, the Defendant is to take out a Venire fac. with Proviso, which is no more then to prohibit the She∣riff to retorn one Writ of the same nature, in case two came to him, one from the Plaintiff, and one from the Defendant, so that the She∣riff is to retorn only the first that comes to him, and if the Venire facias be taken out by the Plaintiff, the Defendant upon the Plaintiffs de∣fault may take out the Habeas corpora with a Proviso, and so forward in all Processes with a Proviso, and the Court shall proceed thereon to Trial or non-Suit, let the Plaintiff appear or not appear; but if the Plaintiff please he may appear, and give Evi∣dence as well upon that Writ of the Defendant, as if it had been sued out by the Plaintiff, and challenge the Jury or the Array.Co. lib. Intr. 340. As for kindred between the Defendant and the She∣riff,
but if the Plaintiff appears not as soon as the Jury are sworn, the Plaintiff will be called, and upon his non-appearance non-suited. When a Jury is called, and after full appearance of twelve, and are ready to be sworn, the Defendant before any be sworn will be called to appear, and will be told in all perso∣nal Actions, that if he doth not ap∣pear, the Jury will be taken in his default, whereupon the Defendant either appears by his Attorney or not appears, if he does not appear, the Plaintiffs Councel prays that the Defendants default may be entred, and the Jury taken by default, which is accordingly done, and though the Defendant makes default, and appears not by his Attorney, (yet if he please) his Councel will be admitted to speak for him, and manage his Evidence if there be any, as far forth as Councel can in the Defendants defence, but an Attor∣ney will not be admitted to speak or act any thing for him, but in a real Action when the Tenant is called (ut supra) he is told that if he appears
not, a Pettite Cap. will be awarded against him, and upon his non-ap∣pearance or default, the Deman∣dants Councel will move that the de∣fault may be entred, and the Pettite Cap. awarded, which the Court grants, and the Trial stayed, and the Pettite Cap. issued out, and when it is retorned and called, which will be ordinarily the next day after the default, the Demandant shall have Judgement, and recover seizin of the Lands, unless there be a receit in the Case; but before I speak there∣of, I will end with the manner of Trials; for at some Trials, after the Jury are sworn, and after some Evidence given, or before any Evi∣dence given, the Cause is by both parties consents referred or stayed, wherein in such a Case to prevent a Verdict or a non. Suit of either sides, a Juror is withdrawn, which will be the first, second, third, or last, or any other that were sworn, of them that appeared on the Pannel, as the Court shall direct, and then is struck∣en out of the Pannel, and the Jury discharged, and paid equal by both
parties Plaintiff and Defendant; the withdrawing of a Juror must alwayes be with the consent of both parties, and cannot be by an Act of the Court, without consent of the Plaintiff and Defendant, and where a Juror is withdrawn, if the Cause be not comprized and ended by the next Sessions following, the Plaintiff may go on if he please, and if he will not, the Defendant may go on with a Proviso, as is before said, and if it stood upon the Habeas corpora, there will issue out a Distringas Jurat. wherein all that were named upon the former Pannel, will be named in the Distringas, saving him who was withdrawn, and stricken out of the former Pannel, and commanded to retorn eight more unto him, and so proceed to Trial again in all points, as formerly hath been said of first Trial. Now a Receipt spoken of a little before, is where one is admitted to appear upon the Pettite Cap. where a Quod ei deforceat or a Writ of Dow∣er, is brought against Husband and Wife for Lands, wherein the Wife
hath some title or interest, if the Husband makes default after the ap∣pearance of full Jury, and suffer a Pettite Cape to go out against him, the Wife if she please upon calling of the Pettite Cape, shall be admitted to appear if she please upon the very calling of the Writ, either in proper person or by Attorney, having had out a Commission, whereby her Warrant was taken to make that At∣torney, as it is in all Cases of Com∣mon Recovery, wherein any Te∣nant or Vouchee appears not in per∣son, but by an Attorney; and if she also have her Plea ready or forth∣coming, to be put into the Court, and so save her and her Husbands de∣fault: and she may also so do in case her Husband alone were sued for some Lands, wherein after the death of her Husband she hath an Estate for life, and save her Husbands default, by stopping and preventing the issu∣ing out of a Writ of Seizin against him, so that her Plea be issuable, and put in manner aforesaid, and then the Demandant will be forced to proceed to Issue and Trial against
her de novo. And if a real Action be brought against a Tenant for life, and he maketh default (ut supra) he in the remainder shall in the like sort be admitted and received, having his Plea ready as aforesaid, shewing his Estate in remainder, but the Tenant in Receipt is after bound in Recog∣nizance with pledges, to answer the mean Profits before it be received, in case the matter pass against him, if it be required of him, but very many have been and still are admit∣ted, without requiring any such tyes. These proceedings which in∣deed are very good, and which the Law as I conceive hath provided to save the right of a Stranger to the Action, if he comes in, are very of∣ten used for meer delayes to the De∣mandant, in my judgement some of these Receipts upon what experience I found, might be abrogated in some Cases, as when a Tenant for life is sued, after he appears and comes to plead, he may pray in him that hath the Estate in remainder, and there∣upon a Writ of Summons ad auxilian∣dum will be issued out against him in
the remainder, whereupon he may come in and appear, and plead his Title, and at the Trial give it in E∣vidence, which is as much as he can do when he appears upon the Pettite Cap. and if the Law be so to save that trouble to the Demandant, of going round about upon the Receipt, when the Jury are gone together, and have deliberated and considered of their Evidence, and to come to yield and deliver up their Verdict, after they are asked whether they are agreed on their Verdict or no, or who shall speak for them, the Plain∣tiff is called to know whether he stand to his Writ or Plaint, and if his Attorney appears, the Verdict is taken and entred, if he does not ap∣pear, the Defendants Councel prays that a non-Suit be entred or record∣ed, which accordingly is done, and upon every such non-Suit the De∣fendant shall have Execution for his Costs, if the Law give Costs to the Plaintiff, had he recovered in that Action, and there falls sometimes in some Cases a special Verdict as well as a general Verdict; a general
Verdict is, when a Jury finds in ge∣neral the matter in Issue, either for the Plaintiffs side, or Defendants side, no points or matter in Law opposing it: but a special Verdict is, when upon the Evidence the whole matter of Fact on both sides is apparent to the Jury; save that a point or que∣stion in Law falls out to appear upon the whole Evidence, which the Jury cannot resolve: wherefore the Court assents, and Councel on both sides agree, that a special Verdict be drawn in that case. And thereupon the Councel on both sides agree, and consider forthwith at the Bar upon the main material points, or heads to be agreed and delivered up by the Jury, which is afterwards drawn at large in form: and that Verdict will be, that the Jury find all matters of Fact material to make the Case on both sides, and make a doubt in some points in Law which fall to be in the whole case and matter, and conclude, that if the Law in such points be thus and thus, they find for the Plaintiff, and cess him Damage and Costs, or otherwise, as the Action requires:
but if the Law in that point be thus and thus, or otherwise, they find for the Defendant; and after this Verdict is drawn and perfected, and both Parties Councel assent to the truth thereof, it is entred, and Copies thereof made for the Judges, and a time appointed to argue it; for the Court is to Judge and determine all points and questions doubtful in Law to the Jury, though the Jury be to determine, and accordingly to de∣liver up their Verdict on all matters of Fact as be given them in Evidence, and leave the doubt in Law to the Judges determination and judge∣ment: and at the time appointed, Councel on both sides argue the Case that falls out to be the point of Law in the Verdict, by citing as many Cases as they can produce to make the stronger for the Law in the Case to be on their Clients behalf, and by enlarging with their own Reasons and Expositions upon the same Cases; and then, or perhaps another time, the Judge make each of them an Argument, upon what Cases as were cited, and on all as had
been said on both sides; and then, or what other time they are disposed, deliver their opinion in the point in Law, either for the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, and accordingly Judgement shall be entred. And for every Sessions from the time of giving up the Verdict by the Jury, till Judg∣ment be given, there is an Entry of Curia advisare vult, which is in the nature of a continuance. It falls out sometimes, but indeed very seldom, that a Jury after they are Sworn, and hear their Evidence, are discharged without delivering any Verdict at all, and none of them wihdrawn, as is before spoken of, when Causes are referred after Evi∣dence heard; but an absolute dis∣charge entred by the Court, wherein yet there is always mentioned ex as∣sensu partium, and this falls out to be when Councel of the one side de∣murs on the Evidence given on the other side, and the Councel from whom the Evidence is given joyns in demurrer; whereupon the Evidence that was given to be drawn up with the demurrer to it, and then the
Jury, as aforesaid, discharged, and the points that falls out were in Law upon the Evidence left to the Judge∣ment and, Determination of the Court, which sometimes after Argu∣ment is given and entred for Plain∣tiff or Defendant, as is before spoken, where a special Verdict is given; and therefore I will not enlarge further thereon, having stood somewhat longer on manner of arguing, and determination of a special Verdict then altogether concerned, my pur∣pose being to direct an Attorney how far he was to act in that and in this; It is the Councels part to man∣age all things. Again, when a Jury after they heard their Evidence, and deliberate thereon, comes to deliver their Ver∣dict, if the Plaintiff when he is then called becomes non-suit, it is requi∣site that the Defendants Attorney have care (which I omitted to speak of when I formerly spake of a non-suit, where it had been more proper) that is to say, a special Entry made of that non-suit, that it was after Evidence; whereby the Record may
be, as several Presidents are for it, drawn up accordingly; for there is a very great difference and strong one, when occasion is to be urged between a common ordinary Non-suit before Evidence, and a Non-suit after full Evidence on both sides given, for it is near as good as a Verdict for the Defendant. And in so doing the Attorney may perhaps benefit his Client far more then what he had formerly done for him in this Cause, if the Plaintiff should after∣wards stir therein, and bring his Cause about again to another Trial. After Recovery or non-Suit, there may be several Writs of Exe∣cution had by the party that reco∣vers, though but one at a time, for to attain the fruits of his Recovery, which Writs in Debt and all other personal actions, are either a Capias ad satisfaciend. a Ficri facias, or an Elegit, the one being to take the bo∣dy, the other to seize on the party, goods and chattels, the third to find the moiety of his Lands that he had at the time of the Judgement given,
and all his Cattel, except the Cattel of his Plow. If an Elegit be taken out, the party can resort to no other Writ: till the time expires that he must sue forth a Sci. fac. for to re∣new his Judgement, if a Capias be taken out, he cannot resort to a Sci. fac. but after a Fi. fac. there may be a Cap. had upon retorn of Nihil ha∣bet in Balliva mea, &c. After an enquiry is made upon an Elegit, and Lands found, the party that sued it out, if he conceives that what is done upon it it may satisfie his Recovery, is to retorn it, and have it filed in the Prothonotary Office, or else keep it with him, and accept a time to take out another Elegit or another Writ, if it be to be obtain∣ed; for if he files his Elegit, he is thereby concluded and barred from having any further Execution, though by that which he filed, he could never attain to the third part of his Recovery. If a Sheriff upon a Capias retorns, Non est inventus, the party may have an alias if he please, or an Exigent, which is to the Sheriff, to proclaim
the Defendant at the fourth or next County Court, and at the fourth County he is to be outlawed by the Coronors Judgement, and when the Exigent is retorned, then will issue out a Capias ut legatu; which is ei∣ther general or special, the general is to take the body only, and the spe∣cial is as well to take the body, as to find or to seize on the party his Lands and Goods to the Kings use, till the party clears himself of the Outlary. But I never understood in all the time of my experience, and upon all my enquiry, how, or in what manner legally a man upon an Outlary had out of the Sessions and Lands found thereon, may come to reap the benefit thereof, by satisfy∣ing his Recovery; though it is ordi∣narily done in England, for no In∣quisition upon an Outlary was ever retorned to our Welch Exchequer, which is an Office belonging to the Sessions for making of Original Writs there, and how it may be transmitted; or Cognizance taken of them at the Exchequer above forth, I leave them to signifie, that
have reason to be more knowing then my self therein; for there was no such proceedings in all my time, and never before for ought I heard. There are also in Actions of Dower, and on other real Actions, a Habere facias seisinam, as an Execution, to be taken out, to obtain possession of the Lands recovered, and in it some∣times a Writ to enquire of Damage, as in Dower, which is recovered by default, or where it appeared not what the Damages were, and a Capi∣as or Fieri fac. for the Costs, wherein Costs lyes, which Writ when exe∣cuted, is to be retorned and filed, and in Ejectione firmæ, an Habere faci∣as possessionem is the Execution, for to put into possession with a Cap. or Fi∣eri fac. as is aforesaid included, or by it self, for the Costs and Dama∣ges, which likewise are to be retorn∣ed and filed after they are executed. If Execution be not taken out till a year be expired, since the last Exe∣cution upon any Judgement was sued forth, then the Plaintiff should have no Execution, though Prothonoto∣ries use to do it, by continuing the
Cause before he takes out a Scire fac. to the Sheriff, to sum non the party Defendant to shew cause wherefore the Plaintiff should not have Execu∣tion, and if the Sheriff retorns thereupon a Scire feci, as there is a Rule given by the Court to shew cause, &c. but in some Courts there be two, or in some three Rules to appear, and the like to plead, which in Summe seems to be too favoura∣ble to the Defendant, and in great delay to the Plaintiff, which may tend to his prejudice, but in default of appearing and pleading something to it, Judgement is entred, which is Quod fiat Executio, and then Execu∣tion awarded, the Defendant may plead thereunto what the Law ad∣mits; and as his Case stands, Nul tiel record, and several other things. But some hold that that Plea holds not in the same Court where the Judgement was obtained, others I found of opinion it would, but when it is admitted, as soon as the Record of the Judgement is produced and read, there is an end of it, and Exe∣cution is presently awarded; if the
Sheriff retorn upon the Fieri facias, Nihil habet per quod, &c. the party Plaintiff must take out another Scire fac. and if the Sheriff retorns the same Retorn on that, then those two Nichils amount to a Scire feci, and the party shall have Execution, as if a Scire feci had been at first retorned, in case the Defendant appears not, or afterwards plead not. There be several Causes wherein a Scire fac. is requisite after Judgement, before Execution be made or taken out, as if the Plaintiff or Defendant died af∣ter Judgement, there must be a Scire fac. for the Plaintiffs Executor or Administrator of the Defendant, if the Defendant die, or against the Son and Heir of the Defendant, or against the ter-Tenant of the Lands, which the Defendant held at the time of the Judgement. And also when a single Woman marries, after she re∣covers she must have a Scire fac. in her and her Husbands name, or where there are two Plaintiffs, and one di∣ed after Judgement, and before sa∣tisfaction, there the Survivor must have a Scire fac. and it is very fit a
Scire fac. be where two are such joyntly, and one of them died after Judgement, and before satisfaction that a Scire fac. be had against th Survivor Defendant, that the future Execution be only against the survi¦ving person; for otherwise it mu be issued out against him that is dead as well as against him that is living for otherwise no Record will war∣rant the issuing of any Execution fo or against them, who before that Sci∣re facias were therein never mention∣ed, in all which Scire facias the must be a mention or suggestion  the Cause thereof. In a Scire facias against one Execu∣tor or Administrator, for a Debt re∣covered against the Testator or Inte∣state, he may plead as he might to as Action commenced for the same thing against him, Ne unques Exec. &c. o Administratio nunquam Commissa fuit but his safest course will be, Plene ad∣ministravit, but if there were an Judgement against the Testator  Intestator, that must be pleaded i special, or otherwise he shall have  benefit thereof, when he comes
discharge the Assets that shall be charged upon him, upon his general Plene Administravit. The Scire facias against the Heir is, where any Heir hath any Lands fallen upon him from Father or Kinsman, without any conveyance formerly made to him thereof, or against the ter-Tenant, is where any one doth occupie, and hath purchased Lands, that were the Lands of him against whom any Recovery was had, at the time of the Judgement given, for all such Lands are lyable to the Judge∣ment, and in these Cases the Defen∣dants in the Scire fac. are to appear and defend themselves if they can, the ter-Tenant by pleading some Conveyance made of the Lands be∣fore Judgement, or something else, as his Case requires, and the Heir defendeth himself most commonly by pleading, Riens per discent, which is sometimes generally, and some other times specially pleaded; now to plead it specially, is to say he hath nothing by discent præter &c. (to wit) save ten acres of Lands, or such a quantity in such and such
Townships, for if the Heir be sure the Plaintiff cannot fasten that he hath any Lands by discent, he may safely plead the general Riens per dis∣cent. but if he hath not from his Fa∣ther or Ancestors some thousand acres, and but one acre or two by discent, and all the rest being a thou∣sand or two thousand are not, so he must except the two acres in his Plea, without which the Plaintiff upon the general Issue pleaded, if he prove; the Defendant hath one or two acres by discent, shall have a Writ not on∣ly to extend that, but all the rest of the Land that he holds, as were the late Lands of him against whom the Judgement was, though he held them by conveyance, and came not by dis∣cent, whereof he must be seized in Fee-simple at the time of the Writ brought against him, or else he is not lyable, and upon Judgement had against Heir and ter-Tenants, the Plaintiff is to have Execution, to extend the whole Lands thereto lya∣ble, till the whole money recovered be thence levied. If Judgement in any Action, or on a
Scire fac. against an Executor or Ad∣ministrator, the first Execution is a ieri facias de bonis testatoris for the rincipal Debt, and bonis propriis for he Damage thereon, if the Sheriff o return, that the Executor or Ad∣ministrator, hath no Goods unad∣inistred, then the Plaintiff is with∣out remedy against the Party, but is y an Action upon the Case to take is remedy against the Sheriff; for e return is not held sufficient, or ny good return in Law: but if the heriff returns a Devastavit, &c. then Fieri facias de bonis propriis goes out o leavy the whole, as well the Debt s the Damage out of the Execu∣tor or Administrators own Goods which return also proves sometimes very dangerous to the Sheriff; for n returning of a Devastavit against ome Executor or other, wherein evera it lies not, that Executor may ring his Action against the Sheriff, nd recover very great Damage a∣gainst him; therefore the Sheriff is n a strict case, and he should do no∣thing rashly, but all things warily nd advisedly, and so he cannot do
amiss. And upon that Fieri facias bonis propriis, if the Sheriff return nib∣habet, &c. then the Party Plainti shall have a Capias ad satisfaciend, a∣gainst the body of the Executor o Administrator. There are many other things which are requisite for an Attorneys know∣ledge, as the knowledge in the so∣licitation of quashing or traversing of Indictments or Presentments, a in levying of Fines, and suffering common Recoveries for better as∣suring of Lands, and some other things which would prove too ted¦ious to insist upon: for I confess have been in some things before ove tedious already, therefore I sha leave them to learn, and to seek o by their own industry the knowledge of them, if they conceive the plea∣sure in them, or the gain gott thereby will countervail their pain And indeed I rather omit to speak any thing touching the quashing and tra∣versing of Indictments, for it mat∣ters not much what such Person  gives occasion to be presented o indicted, may suffer for defect o
knowledge that way in his Attorney for Councel (if well paid) as such Person to avoid their conviction, and consequently their penalties and punishments will, or at least should do, will sufficiently direct them. And for the knowledge in suffering of common Recoveries, and levying of Fines, it belongs altogether to Councel to be managed and directed, without an Attorney be in something able to ease the Councel; as by Draw∣ing Titlings and Concords, which an Attorney who that way obtained good experience may do, other∣wise I hold him not fit to meddle therein; or to be instructed, least trusting to his Instructions, without further knowledge, he may spoil his Clyents Conveyances, and thereby do him therein more harm perhaps, then by his negligence or ignorance in dealing, for his Clyent in several petty Causes. It is very behoovefull for an Attorney to know at least the forms, if not the nature of all Writs, and the Retorns of them, especially of such Originals, second Writs, Jury Writs, and Writs of Executi∣on,
as be most used and expedient for his practice. And to know well the Fees of the Prothonotory, and the rest of the Officers of the Court; for without some knowledge in these Writs and Retorns, his Clyents Cause may be delayed, and perhaps sometimes overmuch prejudiced, be∣cause all Clerks of an Office or Un∣der-Sheriff are not so perfect and knowing, but some may commit a fault now and then, and those that are knowing may be subject (by rea∣son of negligence or over-hastiness) to write false. And if any Attor∣ney, if he suspect any such thing, cannot apprehend it, his Clyents as aforesaid may suffer by it, if the At∣torney of the other side be more knowing and apprehensive. And if any Attorney knows not perfectly all Fees, he cannot choose but in making of Bills of Costs for his Cly∣ent after Sessions, or when he takes out Execution for them, prejudice and wrong himself or his Clyent. Neither is it handsome for an Attor∣ney when he is paying some Fees to an Officer, to be enquiring of him,
or of another, what the Fees are; lest he gives occasion to some stand∣ers by to suspect his ignorance in other things as well as in those Fees. All which ordinary Writs and their Retorns, I would have done here: but far better then I could do, are to be had and read in several printed Books; wherein if Attorneys please they may be fully instructed, and their Fees they may soon attain to know in a short time, if they be but diligent in observing, and willingly learning, and also carefull to re∣member what they observe and learn, that I need not here give any Cata∣logue of them; for an Attorney, though he were bred up an Appren∣tice his time under an able Attorney, which I conceive is a very good way to bring him up, and make him able, and if he had never so good instructi∣on from him in writing, and by long experience, will never for all this I think prove throughly perfect and able in his profession, no more then I also think any of another profession will do, without he be as earnest and desirous to learn and know the same,
as much or more for the delight and pleasure he shall take and receive in the knowledge thereof, as in the profits and gain he expects to attain by it: but the over-hastiness and for∣wardness to come too soon by that gain, hath made many one a bung∣ler, not only in that, but in several other professions, which Error were well to be by others hereafter shun∣ned and avoided.
Ad magnam Sessionem Domini Re∣gis, Com. Caernarvon tent. apud Conwey in Com. predict. coram Petro Mutton Ar. Justiciar, Do∣mini Regis magn. Sessionis suæ Com. pred. & Edvardo Littleton Ar. uno alter. Justiciar. &c. die Lunæ (viz.) decimo quinto die Septemb. Anno Regni Dom. Ca∣roli Dei gratia Angliæ, Scotiæ, Franciæ, & Hiberniæ Regis, fidei Defensor. &c. quarto. Certain Rules agreed upon at the said Sessions, for the setling of business in the Court of the said Sessions, within the three Shires of North-Wales. 1. Imprimis, Every Essoin to be east upon the calling of the Writ, or else not to be allowed. 2. Item, An Essoin is to be al∣lowed upon the Iterum Summoneas, second or third Bill, Distringas, &c.
if there be no Essoin cast before upon the Original, and that before Issue, but after Issue one Essoin upon the Venire fac. only. 3. Item, No Essoin to be allowed upon a Scire fac. brought upon a for∣mer Judgement. 4. Item, After Appearance and Declaration, three Rules in every real Action, and two in every per∣sonal, mixt, or popular, and the last peremptory, after a Plea one Rule for Replication, Rejoynder, Surre∣joynder, Rebutter, Surrebutter. 5. Item, The Petit visum or audi∣tum in real Actions to be demanded between the second and third Rule, and the Petit auditum in personal Actions between the first and second Rule. 6. Item, An Essoin to cast one day only, (viz.) the next day af∣ter Essoin cast, as if a Writ be essoin∣ed upon a Munday to put off Tues∣day, so that no Writ can be called untill Wednesday morning, and the party to wave or warrant the Essoin, the day essoined, sitting the Court. 7. Item, If there be no appear∣ance
upon the day of the Retorn, nor upon the calling of any Writ sitting the Court, or upon that day, the appearance not to be allowed, but upon the next Writ or Process. 8. Item, Upon a similis Narratio, upon a Writ of View, Sum. ad War∣ran. ad auxiliand. and upon a Chal∣lenge one Rule only, and that pe∣remptory. 9. Item, After Imparlance one Rule. 10. Item, Upon every Sc. fac. upon an old Judgement in personal Actions two Rules to appear, and after appearance two Rules to plead, and that peremptory, but upon real Actions three Rules to appear, and three to plead, but upon a Judge∣ment of ten years past no Sc. fac. is to be granted without motion in Court, unless it be continued by Process. 11. Item, No Judgement to be given upon a Bond for performance of Covenants, Award, or Agree∣ments upon default, without motion in Court. 12. Item, An Executor or Admi∣nistrator to make Oath that he re∣ceived
no part of the Debt, nor any other for him, since the death of the Testator, nor the Testator himself to his knowledge. 13. Item, No Judgement entred by default, or taken of the same Ses∣sions, unless the Defendant plead in Bar the same Sessions. 14. Item, Upon the general Issue tendred, the Similiter to be entred for the Defendant without Rule, but upon any special pleading, or a Similiter for the Plaintiff, one Rule to be given. 15. Item, Upon a Demurrer ten∣dred, one Rule to joyn, and upon refusal Judgement to be given. 16. Item, If a Plaint be removed by Recordare, Pone, Certiorari, or otherwise, from an inferior Court to the great Sessions, the Defendant appearing by Attorney, and giving Rule, and the Plaintiff thereupon non-suited, the Defendant ought not to have Costs, the Amercia∣ments of 3d. or that Amerciament to be increased.
The certain and known Rules to be ob∣served in the proceedings of the Chan∣cery Court of the great Sessions of the Counties of Anglesey, Caernarvon, and Merioneth. 1. IMprimis, If any Party served with a Subpoena to answer doth not appear, and enter his appear∣ance with the Register, before the sitting of the fourth Court next after the said service, the Plaintiffs At∣tornies may sitting, or after the fourth Court upon filing the Bill, and the Oath of the Service of Course, without motion, cause the Register to enter and pass an At∣tachment: And the legality of it, and the validity of the Oath, to be disputed upon the Defendants ap∣pearance; and no Subpoena shall issue into a foreign County without order of Court; and by the entry of appearance it is to be expressed, whe∣ther the Defendant appear in person, or by Attorney, and for how many Defendants the appearance is given. 2. If no Answer, Plea, or Demur∣rer be put in before the sitting of the
fourth Court next after the entry of appearance, the Register ex officio to enter and grant an Attachment, and upon the due return of any Attach∣ment to enter and issue forth an alias Attachment; and upon the return thereof (if cause require) to enter and issue forth Proclamation of Re∣bellion, but no sequestration without motion in Court, and every of these Processes to bear teste from day to day, and all contempts are to be cleared or paid, for before answer be received, and all Bills and An∣swers to be subscribed by Councel. 3. If no Bill be filed against the Party, served within three Courts after the entry of his appearance, he shall upon the producing of the Sub∣poena, or Ticket, wherewith he was served, and filing of it with his Af∣fidavit of his service be of course dismissed with vj. s. viij d. costs, and if after answer no exceptions or reply be filed and entred, or o∣ther proceedings given within four Courts, the Defendant is of course to be dismissed with 13. s. 4. d. costs, having first by himself or his At∣torney
moved the Plaintiffs Attor∣ney to give proceedings. 4. After replication entred and re∣ceived, and issue joyned, and at any time before publication either Party is at liberty to examine witnesses be∣fore the Register giving notice of the witnesses names in writing to the Attorney of the adverse party, and for want of notice the examinations to be suppressed, and the first inter∣rogatories to be ministred to all the witnesses without any alteration, without special order of Court. 5. That in all causes wherein wit∣nesses have been examined in the Re∣gisters office, or by Commission re∣turned and certified publication shall without motion pass, if cause be not shewed by the Plaintiff or Defen∣dant before the rising of the second Court on Wednesday in the Sessions week, in the County wherein such causes arise, and both parties if pre∣sent, or such of them as appear there in person, or by Attornies, that pre∣sent Sessions, at their peril, without service of any Process in that behalf; otherwise if absent, and not appear∣ing
as aforesaid, to be served with a Process to hear Judgement therein at such time and place as the Justices of the same great Sessions shall ap∣point. 6. If a Bill of Costs awarded upon any hearing, or otherwise, be in dif∣ference between the Attornies, the Register is indifferently to tax and allow the same, and the order to pass according to his approbation therein without motion. 7. That no motion in any cause after appearance entred be made by Councel or Attorney, without notice first given of the purpose and inten∣tion thereof to the Councel or At∣torney for the Party against whom such motion is to be made; and that if any such motion shall be made be∣fore notice, the same shall be of no effect, and at every motion the last Rule in that cause to be produced. 8. Where any Person shall be brought in by Process, or shall ap∣pear gratis to be examined upon a Contempt, he shall give notice of such his appearance to the Attorney of the other side; and if within three
Courts after such appearance, or notice given, Interrogatories shall not be exhibited to examine him; or if being examined, no reference shall be procured of his Examination, then the Party so examined shall be discharged of the Contempts without further motion, and attend the Re∣gister for taxing of Costs, which the Register is to tax without further order. Montgomery and Denbigh. A Note of the Fees belonging to the Pr thonotary of North-Wales in Causes real and mixed. FOr every mean Process before Appearance, ij s. For every Warrant of Attorney and Essoin severally, iv d. For every Declaration, Plea, Re∣ply, Rejoynder, Surr. Demur. and joyning in Demur. ij s. For every Issue joyned of either Party, ij s. For every Pet. visum, ij s. For every Imparlance, ij s.
For every Writ of Grand Cape, ij s. Petty Cape, ij s. View, ij s. Sum. ad aux. ij s. Sum. ad Warr. ij s. and other Ju∣dicial Writs, ij s. For every Continuance ij s. viij d. For every Challenge to the She∣riff ij s. the like to either Coroner ij s. to all three in all vj s. For Challenge unto the Array, ij s. For Affirmation, or Quasat. there∣upon, ij s. For every Ven. fac. ij s. q. For every Hab. Corp. Distring. &c. ij s. viij d. For every Tales de Circumst. ij s. For calling the Jury j s. For every Adjournment of Jury, Remanet, or Juror withdrawn by As∣sent of Parties, ij s. For Verdict and Judgement, iv s. For every privy Verdict, v s. For Reading the Record, ij s. For Reading the Evidence, ij s. For every Non-suit, iv s. For every Capt. by default, ij s.
For every Writ of Seisin, ij s. For Slander the Fees for the most part concur with the precedent Fees, as experience will inform. Fees in Personal Actions above 40 s. Debt or Damages. FOr the first Bill, or Pone, x d. For every second, third Sum. or Distr. vj d. For every Warr. of Att. and Essoin severally, iv d. For every Adjourn, ij d. For every Decl. viij d. For every Pet. Audit. viij d. For every Li. lo. xij d. For every Bar, and other Pleas, xij d. For every long Plea, entring In∣dent. and Awards in heo Verba, for every sheet viij d. For every ordinary Issue of either Party, xij d. For every Non est factum, xij d. Similiter inde. iij s. For every Demurrer, xij d. For Issue thereunto, xij d.
For every Continuance, j s. iv d. For every Ve. fa. j s. ij d. For every Challenge, Plea, Qua∣sat. or Affirmat. as before, per piece ij s. For every Hab. Corp. j s. viij d. Voc. Jur. j s. Tales, ij s. For every Adjournment of Jury, Remanet. or Juror withdrawn, ij s. For Reading Record, j s. For Verdict and Judgement ij s. For Non-suit, ij s. For Capt. by default, j s. For Ca. Sa. or Fi. fa. vj d. Personal Actions under 40 s. FOr every Summons, Pone, and Writs thereupon issuing, iv d. Warrant Attorney, iv d. Declaration, iv d. Euery Issue, iv d. Continuance, viij d. Judgement, viij d. After Issue joyned the Fees are ta∣ken as in the former Action above 40 s.
For Awarding upon Record, and making of every Writ of Retorn. Habend. ij s. Second. Deliver. ij s. Ca. in Wither. ij s. Priviledge, ij s. Procedendo, ij s. Certiorari, ij s. Elegit. ij s. Scire fac. ij s. Inquir. de dam. ij s. Ha. Cor. cum Causa, ij s. Duces tecum, ij s. Distr. Ballium, ij s. Distr. nuper. vic. ij s. Sum. & severans, ij s. Restitution, ij s. Diminution, ij s. Extent. ij s. Mittimus, ij s. Cap. ad Respondendum, j s. Exigent. j s. Cap. ult. j. s, For Recording the Appearance of every Person Arrested, ij s. iv d. For every special Bail, ij s. iv d. For Entring upon Record an In∣fants Admission to his Gardian, or Procheyne Amy by the Court, ij s. iv d.
For a Deed Inrolled, for every side of a Roll, v s. For entring every Attornies name in the Roll when he is Sworn, iij s. iv d. The Fees of Common Recovery with a single Voucher. NArr. vers. tenant. ij s. Res. inde, ij s. Narr. vers. Vouch. ij s. Li lo. j s. Jud. vers. tenant. ij s. vj d. Jud. vers. Vonch. ij s. vj d. Hab. fac. seisinam, ij s. vj d. Entry Return, ij s. Exemplific. vj s. viij d. j l. v s. ij d. li
With double Voucher. Narr. vers. tent. ij s. Res. inde. ij s. Narr. vers. vouch. ij s. Res. inde. ij s. Narr. vers. 2. vouch. ij s. Res. inde. ij s. Li. lo. 1 s. Sum. ad Warr. ij s. Jud. vers. tent. ij s. 6 d. Jud. vers. vouch. ij s. 6 d. Jud. vers. 2. vouch. ij s. 6 d. Habere fa. seisinam. ij s. 6 d. Entry retorn. ij s. 6 d. Exemplification. 6 s. 8 d. 1 l. 14 s. 2 d. For receiving and recording eve∣ry Fine. vj s. The Goal Fees. For every Prisoner that appears upon Bail for recording of appear∣ance. ij s. For every Commitment per Court. ij s.
For every non Cul. pleaded. ij s. For every Acquittance by Procl. or otherwise. i s. v d. For every Bail over. ij s. For every Writ. De Pace. ij s. De bono gestu. ij s. Hab. corp. prisonarii. ij s. Deliberes co. prisonarii. ij s. Restitution. ij s. Scire fac. ij s. Excommunicat. cap. ij s. Excommun. deliband. and other speciall Writs. ij s. For recording every Mittimus and Signific. iiij s. For certifying every Record for every sheet. viij d. Every Attachment. xij d. For enrowling every Pardon, according to the length xx d. a sheet. xx d. For certifying of every Recogni∣zance. ij s. For every Travers to an Indict∣ment. ij s.
For every Recognizance to pro∣secute in Travers. ij s. For every Ve. fa. thereupon. xiiij d. q. For every Hab. cor. or distr. xx d q. For every Non cul. thereupon by Jury. ij s. For every person indicted upon Trespass, that submits himself o the Fine upon the Ve. fa. i s. vi d. Upon the Cap. ij s. vi d. Upon the Al. Cap. iij s. v d. Upon the Plur. Cap. iij s. v d. Upon the Exigent. vi s. v d. Other Fees there are, which ex∣perience will best inform. Fees upon a Writ of Error. For certifying the Record. 1 l. Prothonotory for entring upon Record. vi s. viii d. Copia Record. xiij s. iiij d. Consil. x s. Pro quolibet Error. ij s. a piece. Feod. Attorney ij s. 2. 14. 0.
Sessio secunda. Councel. x s. Writ of Restitution. iij s. vij d. Continuance. 1 s. Feod. Attorn. ij s. 16 s. 7 d. Kings Silver, & post fines. xl s. pay vi s. viij d. iij l. x s. iiij l. xv s. v marks. xiij s. iv d. v l. xx s. For filing a Writ of Habere facias possessionem, vi s. viij d.
Quinto die Aprilis Anno Regni Domini Jacobi Dei gratia An∣gliæ, Scotiæ, Franciæ & Hiber∣niæ Regis, Fidei Defensor. &c. Angliæ, Franciæ & Hiberniæ sexto, & Scotiæ quadragessimo primo. A Rate of all and every the Fees and Duties to be received by the Pro∣thonotary, and Clerk of the Crown of the Counties of Denbigh and Mountgomery, and his Clerks, as belonging to his said place and Office, assessed, rated, and appoint∣ed, according to the Statute in that behalf made and provided. 1. FOr every Queritur. 4 d. 2. For every Writ upon a Queritur under 40 s. 4. d. 3. For every Writ upon a Queri∣r, and second Writ for 40 s. and ove. 6 d. 4. For every Writ upon a Queri∣r, in Actions upon the Case. 12. d. 5. For every second or third
Writ in plea of Land Ejectione firme. Trespass on the Case, and such like. 12 d. 6. For every Writ of View Sum. ad Warran. Sum. ad anxiliand. are such like. 12 d. 7. For every Venire facias under 40 s. 12 d. 8. For every Venire facias for 40 s and above. 14 d. 9. For every Venire facias in ple of Land Ejectione firme, Trespass o the Case, Appeals, and the like. 2 s. 4 10. For every Hab. corpora, Di∣stringas, Alias distringas, under 40 s with a Tales. 1 s. 4 d. 11. For every like, in plea o Land Ejectione firme, Trespass on the Case, Appeals, and such like. 2. s. 8 d 12. For every Petty Cape and Grand Cape. 2 s. 13. For every Tales de Circumsta∣tibus. 2 s. 14. For entring every Chal∣lenge. 2 s. 15. For joyning every Issue t the Challenge. 2 s. 16. For entring every not Suit. 2 s.
17. For entring every Verdict in Debt. 1 s. 18. For entring every Judgement in Debt. 1 s. 19. For every the like Entrees under 40 s. 6 d. 20. For every the like Entrees in plea of Land Ejectione firme, Ap∣pleals, Trespass on the Case, and such like. 2. s. 21. For Adjournment of a Jury after appearance. 2. s. 22. For every Execution under 40 s. 4 d. 23. For every Execution of 40 s. and above. 6 d. 24. For every Writ of Seisin. 2 s. 25. For entring of Seisin. 6 s. 8. d. 26. For every Elegit. 2 s. 27. For every Sc. fac. Excommuni∣ato Capiend. Exigent, Capias, Ʋtlegat. Writs for certifying of Matrimony or Bastardy, Supersedeas, Writs of Restitution, Procedendoes, and such like, for every of these. 2 s. 28. For entring every Declarati∣on under 40 s. 4 d. 29. For the like of 40 s. and above, Trespass, Detinue, and the like. 8 d.
30. For entring every Declarati∣on in plea of Land Ejections firme. Trespass on the Case, and Appeals, and such like, not exceeding two sheets. 2 s. 31. For entring every Plea under 40 s. 4 d. 32. For entring every Plea for 40 s. and above, not exceeding two sheets of Paper. 1 s. 33. For entring every such like Plea, in plea of Land Ejectione firme, and Trespass on the Case, and such like. 2 s. 34. For entring, filing, and en∣rolling in parchment of all Writs, Declarations, Answers, and every other Plea, if the Copy thereof be above two sheets of paper, as Copies are usually written in his Majesties Court of Common Pleas or Kings Bench, then for such sheet of paper 12 d. and after that rate. 1 s. 35. For entring the Tenants de∣mand of View. ij s. 36. For every Habear corpora, Dl∣stringas, and alias Distringas, for 40 s. and above, with a Tales i s. viij d. 37. For joyning every Issue in Debt under 40 s. iv d.
38. For joyning every Issue in plea of Debt of 40 s. and above Trespass, Detinue, and such like. i s. 39. For joyning every Issue in plea of Land Ejectione firme, Trespass on the Case, Appeals, and such like. ij s. 40. For every Scriptum de Dom. ij s. iv d. 41. For entring every Warrant of Attorney. iv d. 42. For entring every Essoin. iv d. 43. For entring every Adjourn∣ment unto an Essoin. ij d. 44. For every Rule. iv d. 45. For search for every Sessi∣ons. iv d. 46. For every continuance before Issue joyned. iv d. 47. For every continuance in Debt after Issue joyned, for entring the same upon the plea Roll. 1 s. 48. For every such Entry in Plea of Land Ejectione firme, Trespass on the base Appeals, and such like, for every such Entry as aforesaid, ij s. 49. For entring every Imparlance in Debt. i s. 50. For entring every Impar∣lance
in plea of Land, Ejectione firme, Trespass on the Case, Ap∣peal, and such like. ij s. 51. For drawing and entring eve∣ry special Order. i s. 52. For entring every Fine with Proclamations, and for entring Kings Silver. vi s. 53. For the Chirograph of every Fine. ij s. 54. For entring and enrolling in parchment of every Recovery by consent of parties, for every Decla∣ration, Plea and Judgement, 2 s. and such other Fees, as in real Acti∣ons is set down and rated before. ij s. 55. For Exemplyfying of Fines with Proclamations. vi s. 56. For Exemplifying of every Recovery, or other Record what∣soever, according to the length thereof, (viz.) after the rate of 1 s. a sheet as aforesaid. i s. 57. For certifying of every Re∣cord, upon a Writ of Error, or otherwise for entring of every such Record, certified into the Protho∣notaries Office, for every such 1 s. 2 sheet.
58. For the reversal of every In∣dictment and Judgement. ij s. 59. For every Copy of Writ, Declaration, or other Record, for every such sheet. viij d. 60. For the Prothonotaries hand to every such Copy, or any other in paper, if the said hand be desi∣red. ij s. 61. For every Recognizance, Plege of Fine, Plege of Traverse, Plege tam de respond. quam de satis faci∣endo, for every such. ij s. 62. For recording every appear∣ance of such as are bound to an∣swer. ij s. 63. For every prisoner discharged upon Proclamation. i s. 64. For every such acquitted by Jury. ij s. 65. And for his Plea of not Guilty. ij s. 66. For every Warrant of the Peace, Warrant of the good Beha∣viour, or Subpæna ad testificand. for every such. ij s. 67. For the Prothonotaries Clerk, for the writing of every Ven∣fac. 4 d.
68. For their other Jury. Writ, and Writ of Execution. vi d. Ra. Eure. H. Towneshend. R. Lewkner. We whose Names are subscribed, have seen these Fees before recited, for many years received and taken by James Garnons Esq late Deputy Prothonotary of the Counties afore∣said, as Fees belonging unto the said Office. Richard Mitton. Robert Lloyd. Evan Lloyd. Aug. 13. 1660. This last Copy of Fees I have writ∣ten with my own hand out of the O∣riginal, under the aforementioned Judges hands, viz. Sir Ralph Eur, Sir Richard Lewkner, and Sir Henry Towneshend, attested by the persors above-mentioned, under their hands also, viz. Richard Mitton then Secon∣dary, Robert Lloyd and Evan Lloyd. then Attorneys there. Rice Vaughan
Statuta Walliæ EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliæ, Dominus Hiberniæ, & Dux A∣quitaniæ omnibus fidelibus suis de ter∣ra sua de Snodon, & de aliis terris suis in Wall. Sal. in Domino. Divina providentia, quæ in sua dispositione non fallitur, inter alia suæ dispensa∣tion is munera, quibus nos & regnum nostrum Angliæ decorari dignata est, terram Walliæ cum incolis suis prius nobis jure feodali subjectam, tam sui gratia in proprietatis nostræ domini∣um, obstaculis quibuscun{que} cessanti∣bus, totaliter & cum integritate convertit, & coronæ regni prædicti, tanquam partem corporis ejusdem an∣nexuit & univit. Nos ita{que} intuitu divino volentes prædictam terram nostram Snodon, & alias terras no∣stras in partibus illis, sicut & cæteras ditioni nostræ subjectas, ad honorem & laudem Dei & Ecclesiæ sanctæ, ac zelum justitiæ sub debito regimine gubernari, & incolas seu habitatores terrarum illarum, qui altæ & bassæ se
submiserunt voluntati nostræ, & quos sic ad nostram recepimus volun∣tatem, certis legibus & consuetudi∣nibus sub tranquillitate & pace nostra tractari: leges & consuetudines par∣tium illarum hactenus usitatas, co∣ram nobis & Proceribus regni nostri fecimus recitari. Quibus diligenter auditis, & plenius intellectis, quas∣dam illarum de consilio Procerum prædictorum delevimus, quasdam permisimus, & quasdam correximus, & etiam quasdam alias adjiciendas & faciendas decrevimus: & eas de cæ∣tero in terris nostris, in partibus il∣lis perpetua firmitate teneri & obser∣vai volumus in forma subscripta. ¶ Providimus, & decernendo statu∣imus, quod Justitiarius Snoudon habe∣at custodiam & gubernationem pacis nostræ regiæ in Snoudon, & terris no∣stris Wall. adjacentibus: & justitiam exhibeat quibuscun{que} juxta brevia re∣gia originalia, leges etiam & con∣suetudines infrascriptas. Volumus & statuimus, quod Vice-Comites, Coronatores, & & Ballivi com∣motorum sint in Snoudon & terris no∣stris partium earundem: Vicecomes
de Angliseia, sub quo terra nostra to∣ta Anglisei, cum cantredis, medis, & bundis suis: Vicecomes de Kaernar∣vam, sub quo cantreda de Arvan, cantreda de Artlentoyth, commotum de Crukvn, cantreda de Thlen, & commotum de Invenyth: Vicecomes de Meronyth, sub quo cantreda de Meronyth, commotum de Ardudo, commotum de Pentlyn, & commotum de Irmony, cum metis & bundis suis: Vicecomes de Flint, sub quo cantre∣da de Englesende, terra de Meillor, Seisnek, & terra de Hope, & tota ter∣ra conjuncta castro nostro & ville de Ruthlan us{que} ad villam Cestriæ, de cæ∣tero intendant Justitiarij nostri Ce∣striæ, & de exitibus eorundem co∣mitatuum respondeant ad Scaccarium nostrum Cestriæ. ¶ Coronatores sint in eisdem com∣motis per breve regium elegendi, cu∣jus tenor invenietur inter brevia ori∣ginalia Cancellariæ. Sint etiam Ballivi commotorum, qui fideliter officia sua faciant & exe∣quentur, & eis diligenter inten∣dant secundum quod per Justic. & Vicecom. eis injungatur. Vi∣cecomes
de Kermerthen cum cantre∣dis, commotis & metis ac bundis suis antiquis, Vicecomes de Kardygan Lampader, cum cantredis, commo∣tis, & metis ac bundis suis. Coronatores sint in eisdem com∣motis, & ballivi commotorum ut prius De Officin Vicecomitis in Wallia, & modo Com. tenendorum. Vicecomes officium suum exercere debet sub hac forma: scilicet cum quis sibi conquestus fuerit de qua∣cun{que} transgres. sibi facta contra pa∣cem Domini Regis, sive de captione, & Injusta detentione averiorum, sive de namio vetito, aut de debito, aut de alio contractu non observato, & de consimilibus, per breve vel sine brevi: Primo capiat pleg. de prof. clam. suo vel per fidem, si fuerit pau∣per: & postea faciat executionem, prout plenius declaratur hoc modo. Defendentes in quolibet casu summo∣neantur, quod sint ad proximum com. respons. conquerentibus: Ad quem com. facta summonitione & te∣stisicata.
si non venerint, per consi∣derationem com. iterum sum. quod sint ad alium prox. com. respons. ut prius. Ad quem com. si non vene∣rint, ex tanc conquerentes per con∣siderationem com. tam in placitis per brevia quam querimoniis sine brevi recuperent petitiones suas cum dam∣nis suis sive emendis, tam in rebus mobilibus quam immobilibus prout actiones requirunt. Et per hujus∣modi defaltis pœna secundum legem & consuetudinem Wallensicam Domi∣no Regi incurratur. Et cum partes comparuerint ad placitand. utra{que} pars suam narrando veritatem admit∣tatur sine occasione, & secundum petitiones respondeat, & allegeat: hinc inde per considerationem com. ad judicium pro Queren. vel Defend. procedatur: & secundum quantita∣tem & qualitatem delicti puniatur. Et sciendum est, quod hoc modo de∣bet com. teneri, sc. de mense in mensem, in loco ubi Dominus Rex ordinaverit, & hoc per diem Lunæ in unum com. per diem Martis in alium com. per diem Mercurii in tertium com. & per diem Jovis in quartumcom.
& non per alios dies. Et Vicecomes ad com. suum tenendum sic procedat. ¶ In primis audiat& recipiat coram eo & coronat̄, & sectatoribus com. præsentationes feloniarum & casu∣um, qui contigerint inter duos com. de morte hominis hoc modo. Quod quatuor villatæ propinquiores loco, ubi casus homicidii vel infortunii contigerit, veniant ad prox. com. una cum inventore & Wallesheria, id est parentela hominis interfecti, & ibi præsentent factum feloniæ & ca∣sum infortunii, & modum utrius{que} ita pronunciando, quod tali die & tali loco contigit, notus aut igno∣tus, inventus fuit occisus per feloni∣am vel submersus, vel alio modo mortuus per insortunium, & talis eum invenit, qui presens est, &c. Et ista præsentatio tam in rotulo Co∣ronatorum quam in rotulo Vicecom. statim irrotuletur. Et si ibi fuerit homo vel fœmina, quæ appellum se∣qui voluerit, slatim recipiantur ple∣gii de pros. & deducatur appellum in illo com. Ita quod si appellati com∣paruerint, statim capiantur, & in prisona Domini Regis usque adven∣tum
justic. detineantur, & salvo cu∣stodiantur. Et si non comparuerint, tunc ad prosecutionem appellantis exigantur de com. in com. Et si ad quartum com. non venerint, vel ma∣nucapti non fuerint, utlagentur, & fœminæ weymentur: Et ad primum com. ad quem exigentur, si non comparuerint, statim eorum terræ & catalla capiantur & seisientur in manum Domini Regis, & tradantur custodiend. villatis, ut infra. Eo∣dem modo procedat in appello de plaga, mahemio, raptu, incendio, & roberia contra appellatos, si non comparuerint. Et si comparuerint, & pleg. invenerint sufficientes, sex ad minus vel plures, standi recto in adventu Justic. statim replegien∣tur. Et sciendum est, quod contra ap∣pellatos de vi. præcepto, missione, vel receptamento, non est proce∣dend. ad utlagar. quousque de facto aliquis convincatur. Vicecomes faciat turnum suum in singulis commotis suis, bis in anno, in aliquo certo loco ad hoc assignato: se. semel post festum sancti Michaelis,
& semel post Pascham. Ad quem tur∣num omnes libere tenentes, & alii terram tenentes, in commoto illo re∣sidentes tempore summonitionis tur∣num tenendi, exceptis religiosis, clericis & fœminis, ibidem venire debet. Et Vicecomes per Sacramen∣tum. xii. libere tenentium de discre∣tioribus, & legatoribus, vel pluri∣um pro discretione sua diligenter in∣quirat de capitulis coronam Domini Regis tangentibus subscriptis. De seductoribus Domini Regis, & Regni Dominæ Reginæ, vel libe∣rorum suorum, & eorum consenta∣neis: De finibus: de homicidiis: de roberatoribus: de murdritoribus: de incendiariis, incendia felonice facientibus, & corum receptatori∣bus, & eis consentientibus: de ma∣cegrariis carnes furatas scientibus, vendentibus, & ementibus: de whittawariis scilicet quod coria bo∣vina, & equina furata scienter albi∣ficant, ut sic non agnoscantur: de redubbatoribus pannorum furato∣rum, eos in novam formam redigen∣tibus, & veterem mutantibus, ut de mantello tunicam vel super tunicam
facientibus, & similia: de utlagatis, & illis qui regnum abjuraverunt re∣versis: de his qui contra adventum. Item Just. se subtraxerint, & post iter Justic. redierint: de raptoribus vir∣ginum, sanctimonialium, & matro∣narum honeste viventium: de the∣sauro invento: de cursu aquæ diver∣so: de via obstructa, vel restricta, vel arctata: de muris, domibus, portis fossatis, & marleriis levatis & fact is intra iter publicum, ad nocumentum ipsius itineris, & periculum transe∣untium: & de prædicta levantibus & facientibus: de salsariis monetæ, & sigilli Domini Regis: de malefa∣ctoribus in parcis, & vivariis: de frangentibus prisonam Domini Re∣gis: de capientibus columbas vo∣lantes de columbat: de facientibus poundbreche, hoc est de fractoribus parcorum in quibus animalia imper∣cantur: de forstali, hoc est de re∣cussu averiorum: de hampsonkne, hoc est de invasione domorum: de thefbote, hoc est de emenda furti capta sine consideratione curiæ Do∣mini Regis, de imprisonantibus libe∣ros quoscunque, de usurariis de amo∣veribus,
vel corrumpentibus divisas, de assisa panis & servisiæ non obser∣vata, & de eam infringentibus. de bussellis galonibus & aliis mensuris injustis & per ea vendentibus. De ul∣nis & ponderibus injustis, & per ea vendentibus, de hospitantibus igno∣tos ultra duas noctes: de sanguine effuso, de hutesio levato, de tonden∣tibus multones noctanter in ovilibus, & eos excoriantibus, vel etiam alia animalia, de capientibus & colligen∣tibus noctanter blada in autumno, & ea asportantibus, & de omnibus hu∣jusmodi malefactoribus. ¶ Inquiratur etiam de juribus Do∣mini Regis subtractis, ut de custodiis, Wardis maritagiis, releviis, feodis, advocationibus Ecclesiarum, si quæ fuerint, sectis commitatum & com∣motorum, quis ea subtraxit, & à quo tempore, & de his qui sibi appropria∣verint jura regalia absque warranto, ut furcas emendas, assisæ panis & ser∣visiæ fractæ, placitum de vetito na∣mio, & alia hujusmodi jura, quæ ad prærogativam pertinent & coronam. Domini Regis. ¶ Vicecomes aut in visu & turno
suo faciendo statim in principio con∣venire faciat coram eo omnes totius commoti, & eos jurace faciat, quod verum presentabunt. xij juratoribus vel pluribus per vicecom. electis, & nullum verum celabunt, vel aliquod falsum dicent de his, de quibus ab eis inquiretur ex parte Domini Regis. Et facto sacramento, exponant eis capitula suprascripta, & injungant eis, quæ de singulis diligenter veri∣tatem inquirant, Et si quos invene∣rint, qui ob eorum malefactum vitam amittere debeant vel membra, eorum nomina in secretis vic. intiment, ne forte hujusmodi indictati, li presen∣tes essent in turno, affugerent, li in publico indictarentur. De cæteris autem articulis bene poterunt palam & publice respondere & veredictum suum reddere, & tunc dictatur eis quod singuli seorsum vadant, & tra∣ctent diligenter & inquirant de his, quæ eis sunt injuncta: Et cum bene certiorati suerint, redeant, veredi∣ctum suum reddant & presentent. ¶ Vicecomes vero in veredictis & recognitionibus admittend. non que∣rat actiones verfus presentantes, nec
capiat ab eis fines, per sic quæ non occasionentur. Recepto autem vere∣dicto seu præsentatione præsentan∣tium, Vicecomes statim, vel quam cito poterit, indictos de maleficiis, quo∣rum pœna est mors, vel amissio mem∣brorum, capiat, & in prisona deti∣neat, vel per plegios dimittat suffi∣cientes. Et de cæteris capitulis se∣cundum quod inquisierit statim fiat correctio & debita executio in omni∣bus & singulis supradictis. Ballivi autem commotorum de cæ∣tero teneant commotos suos, & ju∣stitiam faciant & exerceant inter liti∣gantes. ¶ De officio coronatorum, vide∣licet de placitis coronæ in partibus Walliæ provisum est, quod in quolibet com. Wall. si un us coronator ad minus per breve Domini Regis in forma inter cætera brevia regia subsequent. contenta, qui in pleno com. eliga∣tur, & coram Vic. ibidem fac. sacram. quod erit fidelis Domino Regi, quod fideliter faciet & exequet. omnia quæ ad officium coronatoris perti∣nent. Eritque officium ejus, quod sta∣cim postquam ab aliquo fuerit requi∣situs
veniendi ad mortuum interfe∣ctum per feloniam, vel subversum, aut quocunque alio modo mortuum per infortunium, & etiam ad viend. hominem enormiter vulneratum, de cujus vita desperatur, quod statim mandabit Vic. vel ballivo commoti, quod ven. fac. coram eo certis die & loco oc. xij. annorum & ultra de villa illa, in qua casus contigerit, & de quatuor villatis propinquioribus: & quod per eorum sacram. fideliter caute & secrete ac diligenter inqui∣ret de felonia, de felonibus, & eo∣rum catallis, similiter de facto & de modo facti videlicet quis fuerit cul∣pabilis de facto, quis de vi, & cujus∣modi vi quis de præcepto seu missi∣one, quis etiam de receptamento post factum, & de catallis eorundem hu∣jusmodi qui per inquisitionem inde culpabiles inventi fuerint. Inquirat etiam quis interfectum primo inve∣nerit, & nomen ejus irrotuletur, & attachietur per pleg. quorum nomi∣na irrotulentur veniendi ad prox. commotum, & etiam coram Justic in adventu suo. Et quæ facta inquisi∣tione illa eam statim distincte & a∣perte
irrotulari fac. una cum nomi∣nibus eorundem, quæ inventi fuerint culpabiles & corum catallis, & quæ nomina scripta vic. si præsens fuerit, vel ballivo commoti liberabit secrete præcipiendo ex parte Domini Regis, quod corpora eorum statim capian∣tur, & in prisona Domini Regis sal∣vo custodiantur, donec inde stete∣rint recto in cur. Domini Regis. Et quod catalla eorundem fideliter ap∣preciari fac. & tam catalla particu∣lariter quam precium eorundem, in rotulo suo ponet, & eadem catalla per visum vic. vel ballivi, & aliorum fidelium Domini Regis, qui inter∣fuerint singulis villatis, in quibus catalla prædicta inventa fuerint, in∣terim liberari fac. ut in adventu Ju∣stic. fideliter inde Domino Regi re∣spondeant. ¶ Coronator vero cum fecerit in∣quisitionem super mortuum, inter∣roget Walesheriam, scilicet parente∣lam interfecti: Et si quis ex parte patris, & alius ex parte matris appa∣ruerint, dicendo, quod fuit de pa∣rentela sua, & hoc per fideles Regis presentes testificatum fuerit, nomina
eorum in rotulo suo statim irrotu∣lari fac. Si autem nullus de paren∣tela comparuerint, irrotuletur simi∣liter in rotulo quod nullus compa∣ret, ut Justic. in adventu suo evi∣dentius facere possit, quod in hac parte fuerit faciendum. Coronator etiam diligenter inquirat casum in∣fortunii & modum & secundum quod invenerit per inquisitionem distincte irrot. fac. Inquirat etiam de inven∣tore & nomen ejus irrotulari fac. ut supra. ¶ Præterea cum latro vel homici∣da, seu alius malefactor fugerit ad Ecclesiam, coronator quæ cito con∣stiterit sibi, mandet ballivo Domini Regis illius commoti, quod certo die venire faciat coram eo probos & le∣gales homines de visu. & in præ∣sentia eorum facta recognitione felo∣niæ, fieri fac. abjurationem hoc mo∣do, quod felo duc. usque ad portam Ecclesiæ & assignetur ei portus per coronatorem, & ex tunc abjuret Regnum, & secundum quod assigna∣bitur ei portus propinquus vel remo∣tus præligatur ei terminus exeundi Regnum prædict. Ita quod in eundo
versus portum illum deferens quan∣dam crucem in manu sua, non decli∣net à via regali ullo modo scilicet à dextris nec à sinistris, sed semper eam teneat, quousque regnum exi∣erit. ¶ Forma brevinm orig. plac. in Wall. ¶ Bre. de No. diss. de libero ten. de quo quis liber homo injuste & sine judicio fuerit disseisitus. Rex Vic. Anglisci salutem. Questus est nobis A. quod B. & C. injuste, &c. diss∣eum de libero ten. suo de N. post pa∣cem nostram in Wall. proclam. An. Regni nostri. xi. Et ideo tibi præ∣cipimus, quod si prædictus A. fece. rit te, &c. tune fac. ten. illud de catallis, quæ in ipso capta fuerunt, & ipsum ten. cum eatallis esse in pace usque ad certum diem, q. Justic. nostri tibi scire fac. Et interim fac. xii. liberos & leg. homines de vis. sum illo videre ten. illud, & nomina eorum inbreviari. Et sum. eos per bonos sum. quod tunc sint coram præfatis Justic. nostris parati inde fac. recognic. Et pone per vad. &
salvos pleg. prædictos B. & C. vel ballivos suos, si ipsi inventi non fue∣rint, quod tunc sint ibi aud. illam recogn. Et habeas ibi sum. nomina pleg. & hoc bre. Dat. apud Kerner∣van, vel alibi, tali die & tali anno. ¶ De no. disseisina de communia pastu∣ra fiat breve sic. ¶ Questus est nobis A. quod B. & C. injuste, &c. disseis. eum de com∣munia pasturæ suæ in N. quod perti∣net ad liberum ten. suum in eadem villa, vel in alia, si casus hoc velit, post pacem, &c. Et ideo tibi præ∣cipimus, quod si prædictus A. fecerit te, &c. tunc fac. xii. liberos, &c. videre pasturam illam & ten. & no∣mina eorum inbreviari. Et sum. eos per bonos sum. quod tunc sint coram Justic. &c. parati inde facer. recogn. Et pone, &c. prædictos B & C. vel ballivos suos, si ipsi in∣venti non fuerint, quod tunc sint ibi aud. illam recogn. Et habeas ibi, &c. Dat, &c. vel sic. Questus est nobis A. quod B. &c. levavit vel prostravit quandam septem, vel
quoddam fossatum, vel obstruxit, vel arctavit quandam viam, vel divertit cursum cujusdam aquæ, vel levavit, vel prostravit, vel exaltavit quoddam stagnum in N. ad nocumentum libe∣ri tenementi sui in eadem villa, vel in alia si casus sit, post pacem nostram in Wall, &c. Et ideo tibi præcipi∣mus, quod si prædictus A. fecerit, &c. tunc fac. xii. &c. videre sepem illam, vel fossatum illud, vel viam illam, vel cursum illius aquæ, vel stagnum illud & ten. & nomina eo∣rum inbreviari. Et sum. eos, &c. quod sint coram Justic. nostr. &c. Et pone, &c. prædictum B. vel bal∣livum, &c. quod sit, &c. Et habe∣as, &c. Dat, &c. Et mutentur formæ brevium secundum diversita∣tem casuum. ¶ Breve de morte antecessoris. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Si A. fece∣rit te secur. &c. tune sum. per bono sum. xii. liberos. & leg. homines de vis. de N. quod sint coram Justic. nost. &c. parati sacr. recognoscere, si B. pater prædicti A. fuit seisitus in
Dominico suo ut de feodo, de mane∣rio tali cum pertin. vel de tanto terræ cum pertin. in N. die quo obiit, & si obiit post pacem nostram in Wallia proclamatam, Anno Regni nostri undecimo. Et si idem A. propin∣quior hæres ejus sit. Et interim ma∣nerium illud, vel terram illam vide∣ant, & nomina eorum inbreviari fac. Et sum. per bonos sum. B. quod ma∣nerium illud, vel terram illam tenet, quod tune sit ibi aud. illam recogn. & habeas ibi sum. & hoc bre. Et fiant brevia patentia sub his verbis, quousque Dominus Rex aliud inde ordinaverit. ¶ Rex Justic. suo salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justic. nostros una cum his, quos vobis assoc, ad assisas no. dis. & mortis antec. in par∣tibus Walliæ capiend. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod ad certos dies & loca, quos ad hoc provideritis, assi∣sas illas capiatis. Factur. inde, quod ad Justic. pertinet secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni nostri. Sal∣vis nobis amerciamentis, & aliis ad nos inde spectantibus. Mandavimus enim Vicecomitibus nostris, quod
ad certos dies & loca, quos eis scire fac. assisas illas coram vobis ven. fac. In cujus rei test. has litteras nostras fier. sec. patent. Dat, &c. Et fiat bre. clausum dirigend. vic. sub hac forma. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Præcipi∣mus tibi, quod omnes assisas no. diss. & mortis anteces. coram Justic. nostro arraniatas per brevia nostra venire fac. coram eodem Justic. ad certos dies & loca, quos tibi scire fac. cum brevibus origin. & omnibus aliis adminiculis dictas assisas con∣tingentibus, & hoc bre. Dat, &c. Et mutet. forma brevis secundum diversitatem casuum vid. si pater vel mater, frater vel soror, avunculus vel amita fuit seisitus in Dominico suo, ut de feod. de repetita per viam mortis anteces. die quo obiit. Et quum plures coher. participes unius hered. petunt ipsam her. videlicet quando unus eorum petit de mor patris vel matris, fratris vel sororis, avunculi vel amitæ, & alius vel alii ex ipsis coher. petunt de mort. avi sui vel aviæ suæ vel consanguineæ suæ, fiat eis bre. mortis anteces, in casu∣suo,
quia illa pars dicti brevis, quæ tangit naturam mortis anteces. juxta articulum inde usitatum attra∣hit ad se naturam aliorum articulo∣rum tangentium coheredes in gradi∣bus remotioribus. ¶ Breve commune quod in aliquo casu tangit jus, & in aliquo possessionem. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem Præc. A. quod juste, &c. reddat B. maner. de N. cum pertin. quod prædictus A. ei deforciat, ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit, & prædictus B. fec. te secur. &c. tunc sum. &c. prædictum A. quod sit coram Justic. ostens. quare non fece∣rit. Et habeas ibi sum. & hoc bre. Dat. &c. Vel sic. Præc. A. quod juste, &c. reddat B. tantum terræ cum pertin. in N. ut supra. Et si∣militer conced. istud bre. coram Justic. de banco, si petens voluerit. ¶ Breve de dote in Wallia. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Præc. A. quod juste, &c. reddat B. quam fuit uxor C. rationabilem dotem suam,
quæ eam contingit de libero ten. quod fuit prædicti C. quondam viri sui in N. unde nihil habet, ut dicit; & unde queritur, quod prædictus A. ei deforceat. Et nisi fecerit, & præ∣dicta B. fec. te secur. de clam. suo pros. tunc sum. &c. prædictum A. quod sit coram Justic. nostro, &c. ostens. quare non fecit. Et habeas ibi, &c. Dat. &c. Et mutetur for∣ma brevis secundum diversitates ca∣suum, videlicet si mulier dotata fue∣rit ad hostium Ecclesiæ de assensu & voluntate patris, vel alterius ante∣cessoris, cujus hæres esse poterit, vel esse debet. ¶ Breve de Debito. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Præc. A quod juste, &c. reddat B. cent. solidos, quos ei debet, & injuste detinet, ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit, & prædictus B. fecerit te secur. de clam. &c. tune sum. &c. prædictum A. quod sit co∣ram Justic. nostro, ostens. quare non fecerit. Et habeas ibi sum. & hoc breve Dat. &c. Et si catalla vel sac∣ci lanæ exigantur, fiat eis breve sub∣scriptum.
¶ Rex Vic. sal. Præc. A. quod juste, &c. reddat B. unum sacc. lanæ precii decem mercarum, quem ei in∣juste detinet: Vel eatalla ad valen∣ciam. x. mercarum, quæ ei injuste detinet, ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit. &c. ut supra. Et fiant formulæ consimilis brevis secundum ostensiones peten∣tium, & diversitates casuum. Et non fiant hujusmodi brevia coram Justic. plac. de minori summa, quam xl. s. sed placita de debito, quæ summam xl. s. non attingunt, in com. placi∣tentur, & in commoto similiter. Et si forte petens placitare voluerit de hujusmodi in com. tunc fiat ei tale breve, quod vocatur Justicies. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Præcipimus tibi, quam Justicies A. quod injuste. &c. reddat B. cent. solidos, quos ei debet, ut dicit, sicut rationabiliter monstrare poterit, quod ei reddere debeat. Ne amplius inde clam. aud. per defectum Justitiæ. Dat. &c. vel lic. Quod reddat B. unum faccum lanæ precii. x. mercarum, vel catalla ad valentiam. x. mercarum, quæ ei injuste detinet, ut dicit. Sicut ratio∣nabiliter. &c. Ne amplius. &c. Dat.
&c. Et fiat inde Pone, si petatur, sub hac forma. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Pone ad petitionem petentis coram Justic. &c. tali die loquelam quæ est in com. tuo per brev. nostr. inter A. & B. de debito centum solidorum, quod idem A. à præfato B. exigit. Et sum. per bonos sum. prædictum B. quod tunc sit ibi præfato A. inde responsurus. Et habeas ibi. &c. Dat. &c. ¶ Breve de Conventione. ¶ Præcipe A. quod injuste. &c. teneat B. conventionem inter eos factam de uno messuagio cum x. acris terræ & v. acris bosci cum pertin. in N. Et nisi secerit. &c. tunc sum. &c. prædictum A. quod sit. &c. ostens. &c. Dat. &c. Et fiant conventiones secundum voluntates contrahentium & diversitates casuum, sive coram Justic. vel in com. juxta petentium voluntatem. Et si voluerint placita∣re, fiat eis breve quod vocatur Justi∣tias, & postmodum inde fieri poterit pone, si petatur.
¶ Forma brevis de Atturn. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Sciatis quod A. atturnavit coram nobis loco suo B. & C. ad lucrand. vel perdend. in loquela quia est in com. tuo per breve nostr. inter ipsum A. peten∣tem, & D. tenentem, de uno messu∣agio cum pertin. in N. Et ideo tibi præcipimus, quod prædictus B & C. vel alterum ipsorum, si ambo inter∣esse non possint, loco ipsius A. ad hoc recipias. Dat. &c. Eodem modo fiant brevia de atturn in aliis casibus secundum diversitatem casuum & formam brevium. ¶ Forma brevis de Coron. eligendo. ¶ Rex Vic. salutem. Præcipimus tibi, quod in pleno com. tuo, de assensu ejusdem com. eligi fac. unum Coronatorem, qui præstito Sacra∣mento, prout moris est, extunc ea fac. & conservet, quæ ad officium Coronatoris pertinent in com. præ∣dicto. Et talem eum eligi fac. quia melius sciat & possit officio illi inten∣dere.
Et nomen ejus nobis scire faci∣as. Dat. &c. Et si ipse infirmetur, vel moriatur, vel ob aliquam aliam causam officio illi intendere nequie∣rit: tunc fiat illud breve, mutatis mutandis. ¶ Placitorum quadam habent terminari per assisam, & quædam per juratas. ¶ Per assisam habent terminari cum quibus seisitus de liber. ten. postea per vim dissesitus petit seisinam sibi restitui: & in hoc casu provisum est bre. de nova disseisina in forma inter alia brevia originalia Cancella∣riæ subscripta. Similiter de commu∣nia pasturesve pertinente ad liberum tenementum suum petat seisinam sibi restitui: & in hoc casu providetur idem breve de nova disseisina per mu∣tationes quorundam verborum in forma inter alia brevia originalia Cancellariæ subscripta. In quibus brevibus sic est procedendum. Primo receptis à quærente duobus plegiis de præc. Vic. fac. eliger. xij. liber. & leg. &c. de vis. ubi ten. vel pastur. existit, & fac. eo, videre ten. &
similiter pasturam, & attachiet dis∣seisitores, prout continent in brevi. Postea cum partes & assisa venerint coram Justic. quæratur à quærente de quo libero tenemento, vel de qua communia pasturæ quæritur disseisiri, & secundum ejus quærimoniam & responsionem partis adversæ, proce∣datur ad captionem assisæ, nisi dissei∣situs aliquid sciat dicere, quare assisa debeat remanere. Et si assisa fac. pro quærente, recuperet quæ∣rens seisinam suam simul cum damnis taxatis per assisam versus disseisito∣rem. Et disseisitor remaneat in mis. Domini Reg. vel committatur gaole redimendus, si disseisina facta fuerit enormiter & vi & armis. ¶ Sunt quædam alia brevia, quia per ass. habent terminari, videlicet de stagno levato, prostrato, exaltato, de fossato levato, vel prostrato, sæpe levata vel prostrata, de via obstructa vel arctata, de cursu aquæ diverso. Et secundum diversitatem casunm diversificent brevia originalia: quæ quidem brevia, cum brevibus de no. diss. superius continentur, & eodem modo sicut supradictum est in brevi
de libero ten. & de communia pastu∣ræ, est procedend. in eisdem. ¶ In supradictis brevibus ass. no. diss. nullum jacet essonium seu dila∣tio, sed prima die procedat ad justi∣tiam fac. Aliud est brev. assisarum, quando aliquispetit seisinam ten. unde antecessor suus obiit seisitus, videli∣cet, pater, mater, frater, soror, avunculus, aut amita, in quo casu provisum est breve mortis antecess. in forma inter cætera brevia originalia superius contenta. ¶ Contingit etiam aliquando, quod petitur seisina antec. in casu quando antecessor non obiit seisitus, sed fuit seisitus die quo habitum religionis suscepit, vel iter peregrinationis arripuit, in quo itiner. obiit. Pona∣tur dies, quo habit. religionis susce∣pit, vel iter peregrinat. &c. in quo itinere, &c. Et li itur. &c. In isto brevi mortis antec. sic est procedend. Primo inventis pleg. de pros. & ass. electa, & visu facto à juratoribus, summoneatur tenens per duos bonos & leg. sum. quod sit coram Justic. ad certum diem, &c. & contineat sum∣monitio. xv. dies, ad quem diem si
venerit. procedat Justic. in suo offi∣cio exequendo. Et si ad alium diem non venerit, puniatur, pro defalta sua secundum quod continet. in lege Wallensica, videlicet per tres vaccas, vel per precium earundem: & re∣summoneatur per alios duos sum sum∣monitione similiter continente spaci∣um. xv. dierum, sicut prædictum est, ad quem diem sive venerit, sive non, procedatur ad judicium, vel proce∣dat Justic. ad officium suum faciend. nisi fecerit se essoniari de ultra mare: & tunc dabitur ei spacium. xl. die∣rum, ut possit habere cb & flode. Sed caveat sibi, qui se sic essoniat, quod si existens infra quatuor maria de ultra mare falso se essoniaverit, & super hoc convincat. per bonam pro∣bationem, vel per bonam inquisitio∣nem, puniatur, tanquam pro defal∣ta, primo per mis. secundum quod continetur in lege Wallensica, & præ∣cludatur ei via aliquid dicendi contra assisam nisi vocare possit ad war∣rantum. ¶ Et sciendum, quod nec in brevi mortis antec. nec in aliquo brevi de placito terræ jacet aliquod esson.
nisi tamen esson. de ultra mare, & hoc antequam tenens vel deforcians appareat in cur. & esson. de servitio Domini Regis, quod jacet in omni lco placiti, quum Rex illud war. voluerit. Sed caveat sibi quod non falso fac. se esson. de servitio Domini Regis. Quia si deficiat de warranto Regis, puniet. pro defaltis per mis. Domino Regi dandam secundum legem Wallensicam, & versus partem adversam de expensis sibi refundendis de illa jorneta secundum discretionem Justic. ¶ In istis brevibus mortis antec. sic est procedendum. Lecto primo brevi, in quo continent. petito pe∣tentis, quæratur à defore. si quid sciat dicere, quare assisa debeat re∣manere, quod si nesciat, capiat Justic. ass. per juratores, quia melius sciant veritatem, secundum formam brevis. Et si assisa transeat pro pe∣tente, adjudicet. petenti seisina cum damnis taxatis per juratores, & re∣maneat deforcians in mis. Domini Regis. Multa quidem potest defor∣ciator dicere contra assisam. Potest enim vocare ad warrantum, & tunc
expectandus est adventus warranti, quem Justic. faciat venire primo per unam summonitionem, & si necesse sit per resum. sicut dictum est de prin∣cipale deforciante, & pro defalta puniatur sicut dictum est. Post resum. si nondum venerit, nec se essonave∣rit, procedat assisa versus eam per defaltam. Et si assisa transeat pro petente, adjudicetur petenti seisina rei petitæ, & defendens habeat de terra warranti ad valentiam. Et si warrantus venerit, & petat sibi osten∣di, per quod debeat warrantizare. oportet, quod vocator ostendar cartam, quæ faciat mentionem de warrantia vel de dono facto à war∣ranto, vel antecessore suo, cujus hæres ipse est: in quo fiat mentio, quod de deforciatore & hærede tenere debeat: Vel quod ostendat, quod warrantus sit seisitus de homagio suo pro ten petito, quod habet inquiri, si dedicat. per eos, in quorum præ∣sentia dicet se fecisse hom simul cum aliis liberis & leg. hominibus juratis; Vel quod teneat ten. illud in excam∣bio pro alio ten. si per ista poterit defore, dacer. warr. suum ad warr∣remanebit
in mis. Domini Regis, quia dedixit warr. & nihilominus considerabit, quod warr. & respon. deat ad assisam, si voluerit. Multa alia potest deforciator dicere contra ass. videlicet quod antecessor, de cujus morte, &c. fecit feloniam, pro qua suit suspensus, & utlagatus, vel tanquam publicus latro fugiens & juri non parens decaptatus, vel si consitens feloniam coram Coronat: Walliam abjuravit. ¶ Potest etiam deforcians obicere petenti bastardiam, & tunc mandet Episc. loci, quod rei veritatem super hoc inquirat, & certificet inde capi∣talem Justic. Wall. Et secundum quod Episcopus certificavit, proce∣dat ad judicium sine captione assisæ. Et si Episcopus mandet, quod bastar∣dus est præcludat omni via petendi. Et si mandet, quod legitimus est, Justic. fac. venire deforc. per sum. & si necesse sit per resum. reservata Regi mis pro defalta. Et sæpe dictum est, post resum. sive ven. sive non recuperabit petens demandam suam per testim. Episcopi: cujus testim. non creditur in contrarium, & re∣manebit
in mis. Regis. Multa alia potest deforcians dicere, quod diffi∣cile esset enumerare: sicut antecessor, de cujus seisina ass. arraniata est, suit villanus, & terram tenuit in villen. vel quod tenuit ad voluntatem, vel ad terminum vitæ, vel annorum. In quibus casibus ass. mortis antec. non jacet. Non debent autem supradictæ ass. no. diss. & mortis antec. capi, nisi in propriis com. ne propria laboribus & expensis fatigetur: sed per Justic. capiantur assisæ bis, ter, vel quater in anno. Dictum in parte de brevibus ass. & de processu eorundem, modo dicen∣dum est de placitis, quæ terminari habent per inquisitionem seu per ju∣ratam: quorum quædam sunt de re∣bus immobilibus, sicut de ten. sive de mobilibus, sicut de debitis & catall. quædam de utrisque, sicut de trans∣gressione. Sed primo de ten: & im∣mobilibus aliquid est dicendum, de quibus provisum est breve, cujus for∣ma inter cætera brevia partium illa∣rum continetur. Processus istius brevis est talis. Primo inventis pleg. de pros. Vic. fac. sum. per bonos
sum. ten. quod sit ad certum diem, ad quem si non venerit, fiat alia summonitio ad alium diem: Et si ad secundum diem non venerit, summo∣neatur, quod sit ad certum diem: ad quem si non venerit, nec se essoni∣ari secerit, adjudicabitur petenti seisina per defaltam, & deforcians remanebit in misericordia Regis, reservata Regi misericord. pro qua∣libet defalta, sicut prædict. est. ¶ Cum vero deforcians compar. quia per verba brevis non potest sciri petitio petentis, eo quod multæ, & quasi infinitæ sunt rationes petendi, necesse habet ille, qui petit, quod narret versus deforciantem, & ex∣primat rationem petitionis suæ, & hoc per verba veritatem continentia, sine calumnia verborum non servata illa consuetudine: Qui cadit à sylla∣ba, cadit à tota caussa. ¶ De rationibus petendi quales sint & esse debeant, expedit quod aliquid sub brevitate dicat. Multoti∣es habet petens jus, per hoc quod an∣recessor suus tenuit terram & fuit sei∣situs, ut de jure & de feodo, & tunc necesse habet petens narrar. descen∣sum
parentele descendendo ad ipsum. Contingit etiam, quod aliquis di∣mittit terram suam ad terminum vitæ vel annorum, post quem terminum, ad ipsum vel ad heredes suos terra debet reverti, vel etiam debet ad ipsum reverti post mortem mulieris tenentis in dotem vel tanquam escæta post mortem tenentis sui felonis. In quatuor casibus prædictis, vel post mortem alicujus debet terra remane∣re alii per formam donationis. In istis casibus & similibus exprimat petens petitionem suam secundum casum suum. Et in casibus illis & consimilibus, quibus utendum brevi prædicto, illo, & non alio utatur: & audita ratione petentis, habeat tenens visum terræ, si petat: & det, dies: infra quem fiat, visus. Et ad diem datum post visum respondeat deforcians, qui vocare poterit ad warrantum per auxilium cur. sicut dictum est in brevi mortis antec. Et justic. fac. venire warrantum, sicut venire fecit principalem deforc. per unam summonitionem, & si ne∣cesse sit per secundam & tertiam, ad quam si non venerit, puniatur: tamen
pro qualibet defalta (ut prædictum est) adjudicabit petenti seisina rei petitæ per defaltam warranti, & de∣forcians habeat de terra warranti ad valentiam, & warrantus sit in mis. Si warrantus venerit, & gratis war∣rantizaverit recipiet ad responsionem & placiti defensionem sine visu terræ habendo. Si autem warrantizare de∣dixerit, deducatur placitum de war∣rantia inter eos, secundum quod dictum est supra in brevi mortis antec. Si autem deforcians excipiat contra petentem, quod antecess. suns, de cujus seisina petit, vel aliquis in de∣scendendo fuit bastardus: ita quod ab ipso, vel per medium ipsius nihil potest ei descendere, audiatur, vel ostendat cartam antecessoris sui de feoffamento, vel alicujus in descen∣dendo de quieta clamantia: & per unius partis affirmationem & alterius negationem descendant partes ad leg. inquisitionem, & per veredictum inquisic. terminet placitum: quia placita de terris in partibus istis non habent terminari per duellum, neque per magnam assisam. Eodem modo si excipiat, quod antecessor vel ali∣quis
in descendendo commisit feloni∣am, per quam sibi non competit actio: In quo casu si ille, cui hoc opponitur, neget: potius habet ne∣gotium terminari per recordum Justic. vel per inquis. patriæ: De suspensione & de-captione, & etiam per recordum Coronatorum de utla∣garia & abjuratione. Similiter in petitione ten. quod debet reverti post terminum præteritum, vel per mo∣dum donationis per affirmationem unius partis, & per negationem al∣terius descendatur ad inquisic. patriæ: & per veredictum ejus adjudicetur. ¶ De articulo alio sc. de mobili∣bus debitis sive catallis est dicendum. Super quo provisum est breve de de∣bito in forma præscripta. In hoc bre. sic est procedendum. Primo in∣ventis pleg: de pros. summoneat. debi∣tor sive reus, quod sit coram Just. ad certum diem, ad quem si non ve∣nerit, nec se essoniaverit, adjudicet debitum petenti per defaltam simul cum damnis per discretionem Justic. vel per inquisitionem patriæ pro vo∣luntate Justic & debitor remaneat in mis. Domini Regis, reservata semper
Regi mis. pro qualibet defalta. Si vero debitor venerit, necesse habet actor exprimere petitionem & ratio∣nem suæ petitionis, videlicet quod tenet ei in centum marcis, quas sibi accommodavit, cujus solutionis dies præteriit, vel pro terra, vel pro equo, vel pro aliis rebus seu catallis quibuscunque sibi venditis: vel pro arreragiis redditus non soluti prove∣mentis de ten. vel de aliis contracti∣bus super quibus necesse habet produ∣cere sectam vel cartam obligationis, vel talliam oftendere. Audita & in∣tellecta petitione, & etiam ratione petentis, respondeat debitor: quia si recognoscat adjudicetur & levatur de terris & catallis, &c. Si neget debitum, & proferat contra eum ob∣ligatio sua oportet scriptum verifica∣ri per testes nominatos in oblig. si sint superstites simul cum patria. Et si non sint testes nominati vel si fuerint mortui, verificetur solummodo per patriam: & secundum veredictum patriæ procedatur ad judicium. Si quærens non babet obligationem, sed tantummodo producat sectam vel talliam, poterit pars adversa often∣dere
se ei in nullo teneri, & hoc de∣fendere per legem, scilicet per pro∣prium Sacramentum cum xij. secum jurantibus, vel per patriam, prout eligere voluerit. ¶ Contingit aliquis, quod debi∣tor confitetur, quod aliquis debuit ei debitum, & allegat solutionem: tunc oportet oftendere quietantiam de solutione. Vel potuit petens de∣fendere per legem, se nihil recipisse, vel etiam per patriam, &c. Istud bre. de debito non concedat de mino∣re summa quam xl. s. quia de minori debito placitant in com. sine brevi, & per bre. ¶ De tertio articulo, in quo pro∣visum est breve de Conventione, per quod aliquando petuntur mobilia, aliqua immobilia per vim conventio∣nis initæ inter partes, quæ legi dero∣gat. Proceslus istius brevis est talis. Inventis pleg. de pros. summonebie reus semel, & si necesse sit secundo. Et si ad secundam sum. non venerit, nec se essoniaverit: audiatur & ratio petentis, & capiat res petita, si sit ten. in manum Domini Regis. Et si serit catallum: illud vel ejus valor
capiat in manum Domini Regis, & etur alius dies. Et si infra xv. dies replegiaverit rem in manum Regis captam & ad diem sibi datum venerit: admittatur ad responsionem & defen∣sionem. Sin autem adjudicetur pe∣tenti sua petitio per defaltam, simul cum damnis taxatis, sicut supra dici∣tur in brevi de debito: & remaneant in mis. Domini Regis: salva semper Regi mis. pro qualibet defalta, ut prædicitur. Audita quærimonia pe∣tentis, & ratione suæ petitionis, respondeat defendens: & per affir∣mationem unius partis & negationem alterius procedi poterit ad inquisiti∣onem. & per inquisitionem patriæ poterit negotium terminari. Et sci∣endum est, quod per breve de Con∣ventione aliqua petitur liberum ten. ut in casu quando aliquis dimittit terram alteri, reddendo inde quan∣dam certam firmam, apposita condi∣tione in scripto conventionis, quod nisi ei fuerit satisfactum de firma: liceat ei terram, quam dimisit, in∣gredi & ten. si ille, cui terra illa fue∣rit dimissa, non satisfecerit de forma: & ille, qui dimisit, non habeat po∣testatem,
secundum tenorem scripti sui ingrediendi terram, quam dimi∣sit, propter potentiam sui adversarii. In hoc casu per breve de conventione recuperare debet ten. simul cum damnis. Aliquando cum conveniat in∣ter aliquos, quod unus feoffabit ali∣um de aliquo ten. & ad certum diem ei seisinam faciet, si post modum transtulerit illud ten. in tertiam per∣sonam ipsum feoffando, cum non po∣terit illud feoffamentum per priorem contractum ad effectum non perdu∣ctum infirmari: Non poterit in isto casu ei, cui sit injuria per breve de conventione subveniri, nisi in hoc tantum, ut satisfaciat ei de damnis in pecunia. Et si in casu competit actio petendi ten. per breve de conventio∣ne, & in casu pecuniam seu damna sive ten. ¶ Et quia infiniti sunt contractus conventionum, difficile esset facere mentionem de quolibet in speciali, sed secundum naturam cujuslibet con∣ventionis per affirmationem unius partis, & negationem alterius par∣tis, aut perveniet ad inquisitionem fac. superfacto negotii, aut perve∣niet
ad eognitionem scriptorum la∣torum, & secundum illam cognitio∣nem erit judicand. aut negabunt scripta, & tunc perveniet ad inqui∣ren de confectione scriptorum per testes in scriptis nominatos, si fue∣rint, simul cum propria. Quod si testes non fuerint nominati, vel eti∣am mortui, tunc solummodo per patriam. ¶ De quarto articulo, videlicet de transgressionibus personalibus, de quibus provisum est, quod omnes transgressiones, de quibus damna non excedunt xl. s. placitent coram Vic. in com. sine brevi per vad. & pleg. Transg. quæ excedunt sum∣ma xl. s. placitentur coram Justic. Wall. sub hac forma. Quod ante∣quam Justic. eum audiat, juret quæ∣rens, quod actio sua exced. valor. xl. s. & hoc facto, & pleg invento de pros. præcipiat Justic. vel ballivo, quod in brevi termino fac. venire coram eo eum, de quo fit quærimo∣nia: Et audita quærimonia actoris, respondeat reus. Et cum vix in pla∣cito transg. evadere poterit reus, quin defendat se per patriam, de
consensu partium inquirat verita∣tem Justic. per bonam patriam. Et inquisita veritate si invenerit reum culpabile: castiget eum per mis. vel per prisonam, vel per redentionem, & per damna læso restituenda secun∣dum qualitatem & quantitatem de∣licti. Ita quod castigatio illa sit aliis in exemplum, & timorem præbeat delinquendi. Et quia dictum est su∣pra de consensu partium, contingere poterit, quod reus refutabit inquisi∣tionem patriæ. In quo casu si actor transg. sibi factam offerat verificare per patriam, & reus patrlam refuta∣verit: habeatur pro convicto, & puniatur sicut si convictus esset per patriam. ¶ Et quia mulieres hactenus non extiterant dotatæ in Wallia, Rex concedit quod dotent. Duplex est dos mulieris: una assignatio tertiæ partis totius terræ, qui fuit viri sui in vita sua, super quo fiat bre. de ra∣tionabili dote, alibi in suo loco cum cæteris brevibus Wall. expressum. Processus istius brevis est talis. In∣ventis pleg. de pros. sum. deforcians, quod sit ad certum diem, ad quem
diem si non venerit, adjudicetur mu∣lieri dos sua sc. tertia par &c. simul cum damnis. Si vo. defendens ve∣nerit, admittitur ad responsionem sine visu terræ habendo: & format. petitione mulieris, dicat. tenenti, quod respondeat, si sciat aliquid dicere quare ipsa dotem habere non debeat: qui si nihil sciat dicere, re∣cuperet mulier, ut supra. Si forte objiciat, quare non debet dotem habere, co quod nunquam fuit talis quem ipsa vocat virum legit. ma∣trim. copulata: tunc mandabit Epis∣copo, quod super hoc inquirat veri∣tatem, & inquisita veritate, certifi∣cet Justic. Wall. Et secundum certil. Episcopi procedat ad judicium in hac forma. Si Episcopus certificet, quod non fuit legitima, præclusa erit ei via habendi dotem. Si certificet, quod fuit uxor legit. sum. tenens, quod sit ad certum diem audiendi ju∣dicium suum: ad quem diem si non venerit, iterum sum. tenens, quod sit ad alium diem. Ad quem diem sive venerit sive non, nullo esson. al∣locato recuperet mulier dotem suam, & damna, & sit ten. in mis. salva
semper Regi mis. pro defaltis, Si vero objiciat, quod non debet doter habere, eo quod vir suus die quo eam desponsavit, nec unquam postea te∣nuit ten. unde petit dotem in feodo: ita ut eam inde dotare poterit: hujus rei veritas solummodo per patriam est inquirenda, & per veredictum pa∣triæ ad judicium erit procedend. Si objiciatur ei, quod non debet dotem habere, eo quod vir suus commisit feloniam: tunc si constiterit de felo∣nia: dotem non recuperabit. Simi∣liter si objiciatur ei, quod vir suus amisit terram, de qua petit dotem, per judicium, ut illam, in quo jus non habent, hoc convicto per recor∣dum Justic. si dedicatur, coram qui∣bus terra illa fuit amissa, vel per pa∣triam, si in com. vel minore cur. fuit amissa, præclusa erit sibi via de dote habenda. ¶ Alia dos est, quando filius dotat uxorem suam de voluntate patris sui. Forma cujus brevis inter cæte∣ra invenietur, cujus processus talis est. Summoneatur deforcians sicut in alio brevi de dote, & eodem modo punia∣tur contumacia sicut in alio brevi de
dote. Si vero ad diem sibidatum venerit, tunc formata petitione mu∣lieris respondeat. Et si dedicatur dotatio facta in dicta forma & con∣sensus dotationis, & convinci pote∣rit per patriam, quod vir dotavit eam ad hostium Ecclesiæ de ten. pa∣tris sui, & quod pater personaliter, vel per specialem nuncium ad hoc missum consensit illi dotationi: re∣cuperabit mulier dotem & damna. ¶ Sciendum est etiam, quod in utroque brevi potest tenens vocare ad warrantum per auxilium Cur. & procedetur in placito warrantiæ, sicut prædictum est. Sed est diffe∣rentia in casu isto de dote & in casu superius per Præcipe, ubi terminatur modus procedendi in warrantia: Quia ibi in illo casu petens semper recuperat rem petitam, & tenens de terra warranti ad valentiam dotis petitæ. In casu de dote alio modo est, quod tenens tenebit in pace, & mulier habebit de terra warranti ad valentiam dotis petitæ, dum tamen tenens habeat de terra viri sui ad va∣lentiam, unde hoc fieri possit alias vero non, De modo dotis aliter
assignando, nihil ad præsens: quia aliter usitatum est in Wallia quam in Anglia quo ad successionem hæredi∣tatis eo quod hæreditas partibilis est inter hæredes masculos, & à tem∣pore cujus non extiterit memoriæ partibilis extitit. Dominus Rex non vult, quod consuetudo illa abrogetur: sed quod hæreditates remaneant par∣tibiles inter consimiles hæredes, sicut esse consueverunt: & fiat partitio illius sicut fieri consuevit. Hoc ex∣cepto quod bastardi non habeant de cætero hæreditates, & etiam quod non habeant p. partes cum legiti∣mis nec sine legitimis. Et si forte hæreditas aliqua ex tunc pro defectu hæredis masculi descendat ad legiti∣mas mulieres hæredes ultimi anteces∣sor. sui inde seisiti, volumus de gra∣tia nostra speciali, quod eodem modo mulieres legitimæ habeant p. partes suas inde sibi in Cur. nostra assign. licet hoc sit contra consuet. Wallensi∣cam ante usitatam. Et quia Wall. no∣bis supplic. ut eis concedamus, quod de rebus suis immobilibus veluti de terris & ten. iuquiratur veritas per bonos & leg. homines de visneto de
consensu partium electos, & de mobilibus sicut de contractibus, de∣bitis, fidejussionibus, conventioni∣bus, transgressionibus, catallis, & omnibus allis hujusmodi mobilibus uti possint lege Wallensica, qua uti consueverunt, quæ talis erat. Quod si aliquis conquereret de alio de con∣tractibus vel factis in tali loco, quod posset intentio, quærentia probari per. videntes & audientes. Cumque petens per hujusmodi testes, quorum testim. reprobari non posset, proba∣verit intentionem suam, recuperaret rem petitam, & condemnaretur pars adversa: & in aliis, quæ non possit probari per videntes & audientes, esset pars defendens ad purgationem suam, aliquando cum pluribus, ali∣quando cum paucioribus secundum qualitatem & quantitatem rei vel facti: & in furto si furtum inven. in manu, se purg. non posset, sed pro convicto haberetur. ¶ Nos pro communi pace & quiete dicti populi nostri terræ nostræ Wall. præmissa eis concedimus. Ita tamen quod in furtis, latrociniis, incendiis, murdris, & roberiis manifestis &
notoriis locum non habeant, nec ad ea aliquatenus se extendant: in qui∣bus volumus, quod utantur legibus Angliæ, prout superius est expressum. Et ideo vobis mand. quod præmissa de cætero in omnibus firmiter observe∣tis. Ita tantum quod quotiescunque, & quandocunque, & ubicunque no∣bis plac. possimus prædicta statuta, & eorum partes singulas declarare, interpretari, addere, sive diminuere pro nostræ libito voluntatis, prout securitati nostræ, & terræ nostræ prædictæ viderimus expedire. In cujus rei testimonium præsentibus sigillum nostrum est appensum. Dat apud Rothelan. die dominica in medio quadragessimæ. Anno Regni no∣stri xij.
An Abridgement of the Statutes uniting Wales to England, and establishing the Courts of the Great Sessions there. I. STat. 26. H. 8.4. Forthwith up∣on the charge given to an En∣quest in Wales or the Marches there∣of, upon any traverse against the King, or trial of any recognizance broken, or any forfeiture due to the King, or upon trial of any murde∣rer, felon, or accessary, an officer or other person shall be deputed and sworn in open Court for the true keeping of the Jurors, who (with∣out special order of the Court) shall not suffer them to have any bread, drink, meat, fire, or light, nor to speak to any person whatso∣ever; nor speak to them himself, before they are agreed upon their verdict, unless it be only to ask them, whether or no they are agre∣ed; and all this such Keeper shall ob∣serve, in pain to be imprisoned and fined, at the diseretion of the Court.
II. Here if the Jurors give any untrue Verdict against the King, contrary to good and pregnant Evi∣dence, or otherwise misdemean them∣selves, the Lord President and Coun∣cil (upon complaint thereof) have power to convent them before the said Council, and to punish them at their discretion. III. Stat. 26. H. 8.6. All Persons dwelling in Wales, or the marches thereof, upon warning of any Court to be kept within their respective li∣mits, shall appear there in proper person to do their service, in pain of such fines, forfeitures, and amercia∣ments, as shall be assessed upon them by the respective Courts where they owe such service, to be levied by distress, to the use of the King with∣in his Lordships there, and of other Lords marchers within theirs. IV. If any Steward or other Offi∣cer there do feign any untrue sur∣mise against any person that shall so appear, as aforesaid, and thereupon commit him to prison, contrary to Law, or the Custome of that Lord∣ship, the Commissioners or Council
(upon complaint) have power to send for such Steward or Officer, and if upon good proof it be found that the party was so imprisoned without lawful cause, they shall assess such Steward or Officer to pay him 6 s. 8 d. for every day of his imprison∣ment, or more (at their discretions) as the damage shall deserve: the Com∣missioners shall also fine him to the Kings use, whether he appear or not, and may compel him by imprison∣ment to pay such fines and penal∣ties both to the King and the party grieved. V. Courts in Wales and the Mar∣ches thereof, shall be kept in the most sure and peaceable places of each Lordship Marcher, where the Ju∣stice, Steward, or other Officer thereof shall appoint. VI. Justices of Peace and Goal-delivery in the Counties next ad∣joyning to Wales, where the King's Writ runneth, may hear and deter∣mine the offences of Counterfeiters, Washers, Clippers, or Diminishers of Coin, and all Felonies, and their Accessaries, committed in Wales or
the Marches thereof: And acquital or fine making for any of the said offences in any Lordship Marcher, shall be no bar for any Person or Persons indicted for the same within two years next after such offence committed. VII. The said Justices of Peace and Goal-delivery have power to award all manner of Process, as well of Outlawry as otherwise, against every such offender, and shall send to the Lord or Officer of the Lord∣ship where the Offender is resident, a Certificate under the Seals of two of them at least, of any such Out∣lawry or Attainder, commanding him under the pain of 100 l. to be forfeited to the King, to apprehend or cause to be apprehended the body of such Offender, and safely to keep him, until such convenient time be∣fore the next Goal delivery of the County where he was so outlaw∣ed, as shall be thought fit for his conveyance thither, and then he shall be conveyed from Marcher to Marcher by the Lords or Officers thereof, to the said next Sessions of
Goal-delivery of the County where he was so outlawed, as aforesaid: And here the Lords Marchers and Officers aforesaid, by whom he is so to be conveyed, shall not be negli∣gent herein, in pain to forfeit (each of them so making default) 100 l to belevied to the King's use: Also the said Lords, or other Officers, shall at the said Sessions make due return of such Certificate, upon the like pain. Howbeit here all Traverses, Challenges, Exceptions, Advantages, and all other Pleas upon any such Outlawry are saved to the Offender. VIII. Here an Offender attainted of Felony as principal or accessary upon surety found for the good be∣haviour may (for one time only, by the assent of the President and two Commissioners) be discharged, and admitted to a fine, to be levied for the Kings use, so as no appeal be then de∣pending against him for such offence. IX. Provided that this Act shall not extend to abridge the liberty of any Lord Marcher, unless such Offender be outlawed, or attaint∣ed by force of this Act within two
yeares after the offence committed. X. All Felonies and their Accessa∣ries committed in the County of Me∣rioneth shall be inquired, heard and determined in the Counties of Car∣narvan, or Anglesey, before the Ju∣stice of North-Wales, or his Deputy, by Enquest of Carnarvan and Angle∣sey, or otherwise at the discretion of such Justice or his Deputy. XI. All Officers and their Depu∣ties upon command of the Commis∣sioners, or Council, shall bring, send, or deliver every Offender in Felony to the Officer of the Lord∣ship Marcher, or other place where the offence was committed, upon the bounds of such Lordship, or to the said Commissioner or Council, as such Officers shall be commanded, in pain of 40 l. which command shall be so sent by a Serjeant at Arms, or a Pursuivant, then Attendant upon the said Council. XII. Stat. 27. H. 8.26. Wales shall be incorporated, united, and annexed to and with England; and all Persons born there shall enjoy all Liberties as other Subjects in England do: also
Lands shall descend there according to the English Laws, and not after the form of any Welch Laws or Cu∣stoms. XIII. The Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and none other, shall be had and used, and executed in Wales, in like manner as in this Realm, and as shall be further declared by this Act. XIV. Divers Lordships Marchers are united to English Counties, o∣thers to Welch Counties, and the residue are divided into new parti∣cular Counties by themselves, viz. Monmouth, Brekenoke, Radnor, Mount∣gomery, and Denbigh. XV. The County of Monmouth shall consist of these Lordships, Town∣ships, Parishes, Commotes, and Can∣tredes, viz. Monmouth, Chepstow, Ma∣herne, Llamnihangel, Magor, Goldecliffe, Newport, Wenlong, Llanwerne, Caer∣lion, Ʋske, Trelecke, Tinterne, Skin∣freth, Grousmount, Wite Castle, Regian, Calicote, Biston, Abergavenny, Penrose, Greenfield, Maghen, and Hochuystade; all which said places shall be here∣after guildable, and reputed as parts
and members of the County of Mon∣mouth, whereof Monmouth shall be re∣puted the Shire-Town: And the Sheriff of the County shall keep his Country Court at Monmouth and Newport alternis vicibus. XVI. All Actions for Lands and other things may be laid and sued in the County of Monmouth, and tried there by Assize, or Nisi prius, and Venire facias; and all other Process may be awarded thither by the Ju∣stices: Also the Inhabitants there shall be obedient to the Kings Offi∣cers and Laws, and the Sheriffs and Escheators of that County shall per∣form their duties, and render ac∣count in the Exchequer, as is used in or for any other County of England. XVII. The Lordships, Towns, &c. to be reputed members of Brekenoke∣shire shall be Brekenoke, Crekehowell, Tretoure, Penkelly, English Talgarth, Welch Talgarth, Dians, the Hai, Glinebogh, Broyulles, Canterbely, Lando, Blainlinby, Estrodew, Buelthe, and Lin∣gros: Also the Shire-Town shall be Brekenoke, and the Shire Court shall be kept there.
XVIII. The Lordships, Towns, &c. of Radnorshire shall be New-Rad∣nor, Elishrman, Glawdistre, Mihelles Church, Meleneth, Blewagh, Knighton, Norton, Preston, Commorhader, Rayder, Gwe∣thronyon, and Stonage: Here also New-Radnor shall be the Shire-Town, and the County or Shire-Court shall be holden at New-Radnor, and Rother Gwy in the same County alternis vi∣cibus. XIX. Those of Mountgomeryshire shall be Mountgomery, Cedwenkery, Cawryland, Arustely, Kiviliocke, Doy∣thur, Powesland, Clunesland, Balisle, Temycester, and Alcestre: Whereof Mountgomery shall be the Shire Town, and the County-Court shall be hol∣den there, and at Maghenteth in the same County alternis vicibus. XX. Those of Denbighshire shall be Denbyland, Ruthin Saint Kiynllethowen, Bromfield, Yale Chirk, Chickland, Mo∣lesdale, and Hopesdale: The Shire-Town also shall be Denbigh, and the County Court shall be holden at Denbigh and Wrixham in the said County, alternis vicibus.
XXI. The King shall yearly ap∣point Sheriffs, Escheators, and other Officers accomptants for the Coun∣ties for Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgo∣mery, and Denbigh, and shall have a Chancery and Exchequer at Breke∣noke, where the said Officers of the Counties of Brekenoke and Radnor shall yearly accompt before such Au∣ditors, Chamberlain and Baron, as the King shall appoint for that pur∣pose. There shall be also another Chancery and Exchequer at Denbigh, where the said Officers of the Coun∣ties of Montgomery and Denbigh shall also accompt before such Auditors, Chamberlain, and Baron, as afore∣said. XXII. Justice shall be administred and executed in the Counties of Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, and Denbigh, according to the Laws and Statutes of England, and such other Customes and Laws now used in Wales, as the King and his Council shall allow, by such Justice, or Justicers, as shall be thereunto ap∣pointed by the King, and after such manner as Justice is administred in
the Counties of North-Wales. XXIII. In the Marches of Wales there shall be made guildable, and annexed to the County of Salop, the Lordships, Towns, Parishes, Com∣motes, Hundreds, and Cantredes of Oswestrie, Whetington, Masbroke, Kno∣king, Ellesiner, Down, and Cherbury Hundred: Here also Oswestrie, Whe∣tington, Masbroke, and Knoking shall be known by the name of the Hun∣dred of Oswestrie, and the Inhabi∣tants thereof shall be attendant at Sessions, Assizes, and Goal-deli∣very, as the Inhabitants of other Hundreds within the said County of Salop use to do. Also Ellesmer cum membris shall be united to the Hun∣dred of Pimhill in Com. Salop. and the Inhabitants thereof shall be atten∣dant, as aforesaid. Likewise the Lordship of Down cum membris shall be united to the Hundred of Cherbury in Com. Salop. and the Inhabitants thereof shall give their attendance, as aforesaid. Howbeit, neither the said Hundreds of Cherbury or Oswe∣strie, nor the Lordship of Ellesmer shall be hereby otherwise priviledged then
as Hundreds annexed to the County of Salop, as other Hundreds be within the same County. XXIV. In like manner the Lord∣ships, Towns, Hundreds, &c. an∣nexed to the County of Hereford, are Ewyas Lacy, Ewyas Harold, Clifford, Winforton, Yerdosley, Huntington, Whit∣ney, Wigmore, Logharneis, and Steplu∣ton, whereof Wigmore and Logharneis, with their members, shall be called the Hundred of Wigmore; and Ewyas Lacy, cum membris, the Hundred of Ewyas Lacy: but Ewyas Harold shall be united to the Hundred of Webree in Com. Hereford and Clifford, Winfor∣ton, Yerdlesley, Whitney, and Hunting∣ton, shall be called the Hundred of Huntington: Here also the Inhabi∣tants shall be attendant at Sessions, Assizes, and Goal-delivery holden for the County of Hereford; but these Lordships, &c. shall claim no pri∣viledge but as Hundreds, or Mem∣bers of Hundreds of the same Coun∣ty. XXV. Likewise the Lordships, Towns and Parishes of Wollaston, Tidnam, and Becheby, and all Ho∣nours,
Lordships, Castles, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments ly∣ing between Chepstow bridge and Glo∣cestershire, shall be annexed to the County of Glocester, as part thereof, and shall be parcel of the Hundred of Wesebury in that County: Also the Inhabitants thereof shall be at∣tendant, as aforesaid, and shall claim no priviledge but as Hundreders of the Hundred of Wesebury aforesaid. XXVI. Cowerwisney, Bishops Town, Landaffe, Signithe supra, Signithe sub∣tus, Miskin, Ogmore, Glencothney, Tal∣lagarn, Ruchien, Tallavan, Lamhelthion, Lantwid, Tyerial, Avan, Nth, Land∣way, and the Clays shall be guildable, and united to the County of Glamor∣gan; and Justice shall be administred in Glamorganshire (so united) accord∣ing to the Laws of England, (as in the three Counties of North-Wales) and not according to the Welch Laws. XXVII. Lanemthevery, Abermeles, Redwely, Elkenning, Cornwolthon, New∣castle, Emlin, and Abergoyly shall be guildable, and annexed to the Coun∣ty of Caermarthen, where also Justice
shall be administred as aforesaid. XXVIII. Haverford west, Kilgaran, Lansteffan, Langherne, alias Tellan∣ghern, Walwinscastle, Dewis land, Lanny baddein, Lanfrey, Herbirth, Slebeche, Rosmarket, Castellan, and Lland of Loute shall be guildable, and annexed to the County of Pembroke, wherein Justice shall be administred as afore∣said. XXIX. Tregarn, Generglin, Landwy and Ʋrency shall be guildable, and united to the County of Caraigan, and there also Justice shall be admi∣nistred as aforesaid. XXX. Mountway shall be guildable, and annexed to the County of Me∣rioneth in North-Wales, as a commote or part thereof. XXXI. All Justices, Commissio∣ners, Sheriffs, Coroners, Escheators, Stewards and their Lievtenants, and all other Officers and Ministers of Law shall proclaim and keep Sessions, Courts, Hundreds, Leets, County-Courts, and all other Courts in the English tongue, and all Oaths of Officers, Juries, and Enquests, and all Affidavits, Verdicts, and Wagers
of Law shall be given and done in the same tongue. XXXII. None that use the Welch language, shall have or enjoy any Office or Fees in any of the Kings Dominions, but shall forfeit them unless he use the English. XXXIII. The Sheriffs of Mon∣mouth, Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery and Denbigh, shall put every unruly person under common Mainprize, as the Sheriffs of the three Counties of North-Wales use to do. XXXIV. The Sheriff of Monmouth shall certifie such Recognizances, common Mainprize, and Surety of Apparence at every Quarter-Sessions of that County, and the persons so bayled shall appear at the two Sessi∣ons holden at Easter and Michaelmas, until they be released. XXXV. The Sheriffs of Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, and Denbigh shall certifie such Recognizances, &c. before such Justice as the King shall appoint, at every Sessions to be holden in the said Counties. XXXVI. All persons under Bail for appearance in the Counties of
Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, Den∣bigh, Glamorgan, Caermarthen, Pem∣broke, and Cardigan, (either by the Sheriffs or Justices of those Coun∣ties) shall appear before the said Justices at every Sessions, as is used in the three Counties of North-Wales. XXXVII. The lay and temporal Lords Marchers shall have the moiety of every such Recognizance forfeit∣ed within their respective Precincts, to be paid them by the Sheriff, (if he can levy them) who is also to an∣swer the other moiety to the King in the Exchequer upon his account. XXXVIII. The Lord Chancellor shall (forthwith after this Parlia∣ment) direct a Commission under the great Seal for the division of the Counties of Caermarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, Monmouth, Brekenoke, Rad∣nor, Mountgomery, Glamorgan and Den∣bigh into convenient Hundreds to be returned into the Chancery, and there to remain of Record, which shall be of like force as an Act of Parliament. XXXIX. Commissions also shall
issue forth to enquire after the Welch Laws and Customs, and such of them as shall be thought fit (by the King and Council) to be continued, shall stand and be in full force, not∣withstanding this Act. XL. Two Knights for the Coun∣ty, and one Burgess for the Bur∣rough of Monmouth shall be chosen to serve in Parliament. XLI. Also, one Knight shall be chosen for each County of Breke∣noke, Radnor, Mountgomery, and Den∣bigh, and for every other County in Wales, and for every Burrough, be∣ing a Shire-Town, (except the Shire-Town of Merioneth) one Burgess. XLII. The said Knights and Bur∣gesses shall be elected, and enjoy like Priviledges and Fees, as Knights and Burgesses of England: And the Knights Fees shall be levied of the Commons of each County, and those of the Burgesses, as well of the Shire-Towns, whereof they be Bur∣gesses, as of all other ancient Bur∣roughs within the said respective Counties.
XLIII. All Lords Marchers shall enjoy all such Liberties, Mises, and Profits as they had, or used to have at the first entry into their Lands in times past, notwithstanding this Act. XLIV. The Laws and Customs of the three Counties of North-Wales, and of the County Palatine of Lan∣caster are saved. XLV. This Act shall not extend to derogate any other Act heretofore made for the trial of Treason, Mur∣ther, or Felony, or accessaries thereunto; committed in any Lord∣ship Marcher in Wales, or in any Court of England next adjacent thereunto. XLVI. Lands by the Custom par∣table amongst males shall so conti∣nue, notwithstanding this Act. XLVII. The King hath power (within three years) to suspend or repeal this Act: As also (within five years) to erect as many Courts (of Record or others) and to ap∣point as many Justices and other Of∣ficers in Wales, as he should think fit.
XLVIII. Stat. 33. H. 13. Hope, Asaph, Hawarden, Moldesdale, Mere∣ford and Oseley, shall be reputed to be within the County of Flint, as part thereof, and not in any other Coun∣ty. Howbeit, they shall pay their Taxes with the Inhabitants of such Shire or Shires, as hath been former∣ly accustomed. XLIX. Also Hope, Modesdale, Mereford, Oseley, and Hawarden, shall be called the Hundred of Mo∣desdale, in the County of Flint; and Asaph shall be reputed parcel of the Hundred of Ruthland in the same County. L. Stat. 34, 35. H. 8.26. Wales shall be divided into twelve Coun∣ties, whereof eight were ancient Counties, viz. Glamorgan, Caermar∣then, Pembroke, Cardigan, Flint, Car∣narvan, Anglesey, and Merioneth; al∣so four other were made by the Sta∣tute of 27 H. 8.26. viz. Radnor, Brekenoke, Mountgomery, and Denbigh, besides the County of Monmouth, and divers Lordships united to the Coun∣ties of Salop, Hereford and Glo∣cester.
LI. The limitations of Hundreds lately made within the said Counties by Commission out of the Chancery, and again returned thither, shall stand in force, except such of the same, as have been since altered by any Act, and shall be altered by this. LII. There shall remain a Presi∣dent and Council in Wales and the Marches thereof, with Officers and Incidents thereunto as hath been used, which President and Council shall hear and determine such Causes, as shall be assigned to them by the King, as heretofore hath also been used. LIII. Sessions shall be kept twice a year in the Counties of Glamorgan, Brekenoke, Radnor, Caermarthen, Pem∣broke, Cardigan, Mountgomery, Denbigh, Carnarvan, Flint, Merioneth, and An∣glesey, which Sessions shall be called the Kings great Sessions. LIV. The Justices of Chester shall hold Sessions twice a year in the Counties of Denbigh, Flint, and Mountgomery, for his old Fee of 100 l. per annum.
LV. The Justices of North Wales shall do the like in the Counties of Carnarvan, Merioneth, and Anglesey, and shall have a Fee of 50 l. per annum. LVI. A person learned in the Law (to be appointed by the King) shall be Justice in the Counties of Radnor, Brekenoke, and Glamorgan, and shall likewise hold Sessions twice a year, and have for his Fee 50 l. per annum. LVII. Another such person (to be appointed as aforesaid) shall be Justice in the Counties of Caermar∣then, Pembroke and Cardigan, and shall hold Sessions, and have Fee as aforesaid. LVIII. The said Justices shall have Commissions under the Great Seal for their Offices, to be executed by themselves or their Deputies. LIX. These Justices may hold Pleas for the Crown in as large manner as the Lord Chief Justice, or the other Justices of that Bench may do, and also Pleas of Assizes, and all other Pleas and Actions, real, personal, and mixt, in as large manner as the
Chief Justice of the Common Place, or the other Justices of that Court may do. LX. They shall also enquire, hear, and determine, all criminal offences whatsoever, committed within their several limits, and ad∣minister common justice to all the Kings Subjects there, according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of England, and this present Ordi∣nance. LXI. The said Sessions shall each of them hold six dayes, as hath been used in North-Wales, and notice thereof shall be given (by Procla∣mation) fifteen dayes (at least) before they keep the same. LXII. Dayes shall be given in all Pleas, Plaints, Process, and Adjourn∣ments from day to day, and Sessions to Sessions, at the discretion of the said Justices, for the good and spee∣dy administration of Justice. LXIII. The Seal for the three Counties of North-Wales, viz. Me∣rioneth, Carnarvan, and Anglesey, shall remain in the custody of the Chamberlain of North Wales. The
Seal for Carmarthen, Pembroke, and Cardigan, with the Chamberlain of South Wales. That for Brekenoke, Radnor, and Glamorgan, with the Steward and Chamberlain of Breke∣noke. That for Denbigh and Mount∣gomery, with the Steward and Cham∣berlain of Denbigh. And that for Flint, with the Chamberlain of Chester. LXIV. The said Stewards and Chamberlains shall with the Seals seal all original Writs and Process, returnable before the Justices at the Sessions as aforesaid, and shall an∣swer the Profits thereof to the King: But none of them, or any Chancel∣lor shall by occasion of keeping such Seals, compel any person, inhabit∣ing in any of the said twelve Shires, to appear before themselves or their Deputies, or hear or determine any Pleas or Causes whatsoever, other∣wise then as by this Ordinance is li∣mited: And such Writs and Process shall be returned before the said Ju∣stices, as hath been used before the Justice of North-Wales. LXV. All that shall be Stewards,
Chamberlains, or Chancellors with∣in any of the said twelve Shires, ha∣ving Offices of Receipt, Collection, or account of any of the Kings Rents, Revenues, or Profits there, may di∣rect Process under the said Seal (be∣ing in their charge) within the li∣mits of their Authorities, against Bailiffs, Reeves, Fermers, and other Ministers accomptant, to appear be∣fore themselves for any such Rents, Revenues, Farms, or Profit, as hath been heretofore used: But for no∣thing else, nor to any other per∣son. LXVI. The Stewards also may hold Leets, Law-dayes, or Court-Barons of the Lordships whereof they are Stewards, and also Pleas by Plaint under 40 s. in every such Court-Baron, and have and enjoy all Authorities and Profits thereunto belonging, notwithstanding any Law or Custom in Wales to the con∣trary: Howbeit neither they nor Sheriffs shall have power to enquire of Felonies in any such Leet, Law-day, or Turn: Neither shall they keep any Leet or Law-day, but in
such places where they were used to be kept, before the Statute of 26 H. 8.6. So as the place be convenient for the keeping of such Courts. LXVII. Maiors, Bailiffs, and Head-Officers of Corporate Towns in Wales may hold Pleas, and deter∣mine Actions; so as they observe the Laws of England, and not Welch Laws or Customs; They may also try Issues by six men, (as in divers places hath been used) notwithstand∣ing this Act. LXVIII. The King may within seven years dissolve Boroughs in Wales, and erect others there by his Letters Patents. LXIX. Officers certain Fees (ap∣pearing in the Kings Letters Patents) shall continue, but not their casual Fees, claimed by colour of their Of∣fices, any Custom in Wales, or this Act to the contrary notwithstand∣ing. LXX. Each Justice shall also have a judicial Seal to seal all Bills and ju∣dicial Processes sued before them in the Sessions, whereof the first shall remain with the Justice of Chester,
for Flint, Denby, and Mountgomery: The second with the Justice of North-Wales,: The third with the Justice of Glamorgan, Brekenoke, and Radnor: And the fourth with the Ju∣stice of Pembroke, Caermarthen, and Cardigan: Also every such Justice shall accompt and answer to the King the Profits of the Seal in his custody, as shall be hereafter declared: And the Teste of every Bill and Process, that passeth under such Seal, shall be under the name of the Justice, that issueth it out, as is used in the Com∣mon Place in England. LXXI. All Actions real and mixt, Attaints, Conspiracies, Assizes, Quare impedits, Appeals of Murder and Felony, and all Actions ground∣ed upon any Statute, shall be sued by Original Writs sealed with the Ori∣ginal Seal, and returnable before the Justices at their Sessions; but all personal Actions, as Debt, Detinue, Trespass, Account, and the like, amounting to the summe of 40 s. or above, shall be sued by such Writs Original, or by Bills, at the electi∣on of the Plaintiff, as is used in North Wales.
LXXII. All personal Actions un∣der the sum of 2 l. may be sued by original Bill, (as is also used in North-Wales) sealed by the Judicial Seal, remaining in the custody of the Justice. LXXIII. The Fee for sealing every original Writ upon the Causes afore∣said, and for every Bill in Actions personal (when the Debt and Dama∣ges amount to 2 l. or above) is 6 d. and for every Judicial Process, sued upon any such original Writ or Bill 7 d. whereof the King shall have 6 d. and the Justice 1 d. And for every Bill in personal Actions, when the Debt and Damages amount not to 2 l. and for every Judicial Process to be sued upon the same 3 d. where∣of the King is to have 2 d. and the Justice 1 d. LXXIV. All Writs of Scire facias, and Writs of Good Abearing, or for the Peace, or Writs of Supersedeas upon the same, and all other Process sued before the Justices upon any Record or Suggestion shall be sealed with the Judicial Seal, for which the Plaintiff shall pay 7 d. whereof
the King is to have 6 d. and the Ju∣stice 1 d. LXXV. Every Exemplification upon any Record shall be sealed by the Judicial Seal, for which the Plaintiff shall pay 1 s. 8 d. whereof the King is to have 1 s. 4 d. and the Justice 4 d. LXXVI. Recoveries and Fines, Concords and Warrants of attorny for the same, may be taken before the said Justices of Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments within their Authority, by force of his general Commission, without any dedimus, as is used before the Chief Justice of the Common Place. LXXVII. All Fines levied before any of the Justices, with Proclama∣tion made the same Sessions: it shall be engrossed, and in two other great Sessions then next following shall be of the same force as Fines levied with Proclamations before the Justices of the Common Place. LXXVIII. Every Person suing Writs of Entry in the Post, or Writs of Covenant; or any other Writs, for any recovery to be had (by as∣sent
or otherwise) or for any Fine to be levied, shall pay Fines to the King's use for the same (as well Fines pro licentia concordandi, as all other Fines) as is used in Chancery, or elsewhere in the King's Courts of England; which Fines shall be paid to such Persons as shall seal the ori∣ginal Writs for that purpose, who shall account for the same as they do for the profits of the said original Seal. LXXIX. Also the King's silver (upon every such Fine) shall be paid as is used in the Common Place of England, viz. 2 s. and shall be re∣ceived by the Justice before whom such Fine is levied, whereof the King shall have 1 s. 4 d. the Prothonotary for entring it 2 d. and the Justice the rest, who shall account for the King's profit, as he doth for the pro∣fits of the Judicial Seal. LXXX. The four said Justices shall have each of them a Prothonotary to attend upon them, for the entring of all Pleas, Process, and matters of Record in Sessions, to be holden before the said Justices.
LXXXI. There shall be a Marshal and a Crier in every of the said Circuits, to be named by the said Justices, as Justices of Assize in England use to do; which Officers shall attend upon the said Justices in their Circuits in proper Person, and not by Deputy LXXXII. The Marshal shall have upon every Judgement, and every Fine 4 d. and the Crier 1 d. and the like Fees shall be paid upon the ac∣quital of Felons, and of such as be delivered by Proclamation, or out of Common Mainprise. LXXXIII. Here also are set down the Fees that the Prothonotaries shall take for Writs, Entries, Judge∣ments, &c. for which see the Statute at large. LXXXIV. The King shall have all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, and Recognizances forfeited, which the Prothonotaries shall yearly estreat into the Exchequer appointed for that limit, that Process may be a∣warded to the Sheriff to levy them for the King's use; which Sheriffs shall yearly account before the
King's Auditors to be thereunto as∣signed. LXXXV. Besides the President, Council, and Justices aforesaid, there shall be Justices of Peace and Quorum, and also one Custos Rotu∣lorum in every of the said twelve Counties, who shall be appointed by the Chancellor of England, by Com∣mission under the great Seal, with the advice of the President, Council, and Justices aforesaid, or three of them, whereof the President to be one. LXXXVI. There shall not be more then eight Justices of Peace in any of the said twelve Shires, besides the President, Council, and Justices aforesaid, and the King's Attorney and Solicitor, all which Persons shall be also put in every such Commissi∣on. LXXXVII. These Justices of Peace shall be of good name and same, and may exercise their Office albeit they have not 20 l. per annum, or be not learned in the Law: but before they shall execute their Commission, they shall take such Oath as Justices of
Peace in England use to take before the Chancellor of England, or else before the President, or one of the same Justices of Wales by dedimus, or before some other to be appointed by the Lord Chancellor for the pur∣pose. LXXXVIII. The said Justices of Peace, or two of them at least, (1. Qu.) shall keep their Sessions four times in the year, and at other times also upon urgent cases, as Justices of Peace in England use to do; for which they shall also have such al∣lowances for themselves and their Clerks as the Justices in England have. LXXXIX. Here the Fee for a Warrant of the Peace, or good A∣bearing is 6 d. for entring of Pledges to pay the King a Fine upon an In∣dictment 9 d. and if it be with Pro∣testation 12 d. for a Supersedeas 8 d. and for a Recognizance 12 d. XC. These Justices of Peace shall certifie Recognizances taken before any of them for the Peace and good Abearing into next Sessions; but Recognizances taken before them for suspition of Felony, shall be cer∣tified
before the Justices at the next great Sessions without concealing them, upon such penalties as be therefore ordained. XCI. All Fines and Amerciaments lost before the Justices of Peace shall be asserted by two of them at least, (1. Qu.) and shall be duly set with∣out partiality. XCII. All such Fines and Amer∣ciaments, as also all Issues lost, for∣feited Recognizances, and other Forfeitures before the said Justices of Peace, shall be yearly estreated by the Clerks of the Peace into the Exchequer appointed for that limit, to the end that Processes may be thereupon awarded for the levying of them for the King's use to the Sheriff of every County; who shall account before such Auditors as shall be thereto assigned, which Au∣ditors shall make due allowance un∣to the Sheriffs upon their accounts for the Fees of the Justices and Clerks of the Peace, as is used in England. XCIII. The President, Council, and Justices of Wales, or three of
them at least, (whereof the President to be one) shall yearly nominate three able Persons in every of the said twelve Shires, to be Sheriffs thereof, and shall certifie their names to the Lords of the Privy Council Crast. Animarum, to the end the King may appoint one of them in every of the said Shires to be Sheriff for that year, like as is used in England: And thereupon the said Sheriffs shall have their Patents under the great Seal of England, and shall make Oath, and acknowledge Recognizances before the President and Justices, or one of them, by a De∣dimus, for the due execution of their Offices, and for their just account before the Kings Auditors assigned for Wales. XCIV. The said Sheriffs have power to use their Offices as Sheriffs of England do; shall be observant to all lawful commands and precepts of the President, Council, Justices of Wales, Justices of Peace, Eschea∣tors, and Coroners, and every of them in all things appertaining to their Offices; shall yearly account
to the Auditor, or Auditors, assign∣ed by the King for Wales, and shall each of them have yearly for his Fee 5 l. XCV. All Officers and other Per∣sons in Wales, shall be obedient, at∣tendant, and assisting to the Presi∣dent, Council, and Justices of Wales, and shall obey the Kings commands, and Process from any of them di∣rected, and all lawful and reason∣able precepts of them, and every of them; and also shall be obedient to all Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and Escheators, within their several li∣mits, in all things appertaining to their duties and offices. XCVI. Also Escheators shall be named in every of the said Counties by the Treasurer of England, with the advice of the President, Council, or three of them, whereof the Pre∣sident to be one; which Escheators shall make oaths, and acknowledge Recognizances before the President; or one of the Justices, by a Dedimus, for the due execution of their offi∣ces, and for their true account be∣fore the King's Auditor, or Audi∣tors,
to be assigned for that purpose, which Oath and Recognizance shall be agreeable to those used for Es∣cheators in England. XCVII. Such Escheators shall yearly have their Patents under the great Seal, shall exercise their Offi∣ces as Escheators in England, and shall be bound to all Laws and Sta∣tutes of England: But they need not have above 5 l. per annum freehold, and shall account yearly before such Auditor, or Auditors, as the King shall assign for Wales. XCVIII. There shall be also two Coroners elected for each of the said twelve Shires, by the Writ De Co∣ronatore Eligendo, awarded out of the Chancery of England; which Coro∣ners shall exercise their Offices, and have like Fees as in England: Only the Writ de Cor. elig. for the County of Flint, shall be directed out of the Exchequer of Chester. XCIX. The Justices of Peace, or two of them (1. Qu.) shall appoint in every Hundred (within their li∣mits) two substantial Gentlemen, or Yeomen, to be chief Constables of
the Hundred where they dwell, who shall preserve the Peace, and use their Offices, and be bound in all things as High-Constables in En∣gland. C. The Sheriff shall have a Goal in a place of the Castle of the Shire-Town, or such other convenient place, as by the President, Coun∣cil, and Justices, or three of them, (whereof the President to be one) shall be appointed, any Patent or Grant notwithstanding. The Sheriff also shall make Bailiffs of the Hun∣dred, who shall attend upon the Ju∣stices at their Courts and Sessions. CI. Sheriffs shall keep their Coun∣ties monthly, and their Hundred-Courts for pleas under 2 l. and shall take for entring of Plaints, Process, Pleas, and Judgements there, as is used in England, and not above. Al∣so all Trials in such Courts, or be∣fore Stewards in Court Barons, shall be by Wager of Law, or Verdict of six Men, at the election of the Party, Plaintiff or Defendant, that pleads the Plea. CII. Sheriffs shall hold their Turns
yearly after Easter and Michaclmas, as is used in England. CIII. The King shall have all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, and Forfei∣tures lost in the said Courts and Turns, to his own use, and the She∣riff shall account for the same accor∣dingly, having been first afferred by the Justices of Assize of that Circuit, before they be levied; And the She∣riff shall not levy them before they be so afferred, in pain to forfeit to the King 40 s. Also the Sheriff upon every Judgement in his County or Hundred Court, may award a Capias ad satisfaciendum, or a Fieri facias, at the election of the Plaintiff. CIV. Certain Fees, which the Sheriff is to have for the return and execution of divers Writs, For which see the Statute at large. CV. Every Sheriff within this li∣mit may put suspitious persons under common Main-prise, according to the Statute of 47 H. 8.26. (which see before) binding them with two suffi∣cient Sureties by Recognizance, to appear before the Justices at the next great Sessions, and shall then also
certifie the names of the parties so bound, without concealment. CVI. The Sheriffs Fee for taking such common Main-prise is 2 d. but he shall take no Fee for the return of any Writ of Execution, unless he return the same executed. CVII. The Fees of Sheriffs, Es∣cheators, and Coroners, and their Ministers, Prothonotaries, and their Clerks, and other Ministers of Ju∣stice in Wales, shall be rated, aug∣mented, and diminished by the Pre∣sident, Council, and Justices, or three of them, whereof the President to be one, from time to time at their discretions. CVIII. None for Murder or Fe∣lony shall be put to his Fine, but suf∣fer, according to the Laws of Eng∣land, except it please the King to par∣don him; And if the Justices see cause of pity, or other considerati∣on, they may reprieve the prisoner, till they have advertised the King of the matter. CIX. The Statute of the 26 H. 8.6. (which see before) is confirm∣ed, notwithstanding this Act; and
from henceforth shall be put in exe∣cution. CX. Abertannad heretofore repu∣ted parcel of the County of Merio∣neth, shall now be annexed to Salop, and be reputed parcel of the Hundred of Oswestry. CXI. If any sorreign Plea or Voucher be pleaded or made before any of the Justices of Wales, tryable in any other County in Wales; in this case, the said Justice shall send the Kings Writ, with a transcript of the Record, unto the Justice of the County where the matter is tryable, commanding him to proceed to the tryal thereof, according to Law, which tryal being had, he shall re∣mand it with the whole Record unto the Justice that sent it, who there∣upon shall proceed to Judgement, as the Cause shall require: but if such Plea or Voucher be tryable in Eng∣land, the Justice of Wales, before whom they are pleaded or made, may proceed to tryal thereof in such County of Wales, where they are so pleaded or made, such forreign Plea or Voucher notwithstanding.
CXII. All Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in Wales, and in the Lordships and places annexed (by the Statute of 27 H. 8.26.) to the Counties of Salop, Hereford, Glo∣cester, or any other Shires, shall be English tenure, and not partable amongst Heirs males, according to the Custom of Gavelkind. CXIII. No Mortgages of Lands, &c. made in any of the said Counties or places, shall be hereafter allowed or admitted, otherwise then after the course of the Common-Law and Statutes of England. CXIV. It shall be lawfull for all persons to alien their Lands, &c. in Wales, the County of Monmouth, and other places annexed as aforesaid, from them and their Heirs, to any person or persons in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for life, or years, according to the Laws of England, notwith∣standing any Welch Law or Custom to the contrary. CXV. If any person having Lands in Wales be bound in England by a Sta∣tute staple of Recognizance, and pay not the Debt accordingly, in such
Cases, upon Certificate into the Chancery of England, Processes shall be made to the Sheriffs of Wales out of the said Chancery, for the due levying of the said Debt, as is used in England: Howbeit for such Recognizances as are taken in the Kings Bench, or Common Place of England, Processes shall be pursued immediately from the Justices of the said Courts, as in England also is used. CXVI. All such Writs, Bills, Plaints, Pleas, Process, Challenges, and Trials shall be used throughout all the Shires aforesaid, as are used in North-Wales, or as shall be devi∣sed by the President, Council and Justices, or three of them, whereof the President to be one. CXVII. Where there shall be some Suits in Pleas personal, which cannot be well tryed before the Ju∣stices in the great Sessions, for shortness of time, such Issues may be tryed at the petty Sessions before the Deputy Justices, as is used in the three Counties of North-Wales, save only for such Suits, as by the discre∣tion
of the said Justices shall be ne∣cessary to be tryed before themselves: Howbeit, there shall be no Suit ta∣ken before any of the said Justices by Bill, under the sum of 20 s. CXVIII. No other Liberties, Franchises, or Customs shall be used or claimed in any Lordship, which was anciently part of Wales, (who∣soever be owner or owners thereof) but only such as be given to the Lords thereof by force of the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. and not altered by this Act, notwithstanding the Stat. of 32 H. 8.20. which see in Fran∣chises. CXIX. If any Murther or Felony be committed in Wales, the party or parties grieved shall make no agree∣ment with the offender, or with any other in his behalf, unless he first ac∣quaint the President, Council, or Justices therewith, in pain of Im∣prisonment and grievous Fine at the discretion of the President, Council, and Justices, or two of them, where∣of the President to be one, the like punishment also they shall incur, that labour or procure such agree∣ment,
although it never take effect. CXX. If any person, or they whose Estate he hath, have peaceable possession of Lands in Wales by the space of five years, without inter∣ruption or lawfull claim, such per∣son shall continue the same, untill they be recovered from him by Law or Decree of the President or Coun∣cil there. CXXI. If in personal Actions pursued before the Justices, nine of the Jury be sworn, and the residue make default, or be tryed out, in that Case the Sheriff may return other names de circumstantibus, untill the Jury be full, as is used in North-Wales, and else-where in such Cases. CXXII. No sale of Goods or Cat∣tel stolen in Wales, and sold in any Fair or Market there, shall alter the propriety thereof, such sale not∣withstanding. CXXIII. No person shall buy any quick Cattel in Wales out of the Fair or Market, unless he can produce credible witness of the person, place, and time, he so bought the same, in
pain of such punishment and Fine, as shall be set by the President and Council, or any of the Justices in his Circuit, and to answer it at his fur∣ther peril. CXXIV. If any Goods or Cattels be stollen in Wales, the Tract shall be followed from Town to Town; and Lordship to Lordship, according to the Laws and Customs heretofore used in Wales, upon such penalty as hath been heretofore accustomed. CXXV. Any man (being a Free∣holder) may pass upon a Jury in all Causes both criminal and civil, At∣taint only excepted, saving to every man his lawfull Challenge, accor∣ding to the Laws of England: How∣beit none shall pass in Attaint, unless he have Freehold of 40 s. per annum. CXXVI. Tenants and Resiants in Wales shall pay their Tallage at the change of their Lords in such places, and after such form, as hath been accustomed in Wales. CXXVII. The Kings Subjects in Wales shall find at the Parliaments in England, Knights for the Counties, and Citizens and Burgesses for the
Cities and Towns, to be chosen by the Kings Writ, according to the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. and shall also be chargeable to all Subsidies, and other Charges granted by the Com∣mons of the said Parliaments, and pay all other Rents, Farms, Customs, and Duties to the King, as hath been accustomed, Fines for redemption of Sessions only excepted, which the King is pleased to remit. CXXVIII. Haverford-west shall find one Burgess for that Town, whose Charges shall be born by the Major, Burgesses, and Inhabitants of the said Town, and by none other. CXXIX. The King shall have all Felons Goods, Goods of persons outlawed, Waifs, Estrays, and all other Forfeitures and Escheats, and shall be answered thereof by the She∣riffs, saving the right of all others, having lawfull title thereto. CXXX. Errors and Judgements before any of the Justices in their great Sessions, in Pleas real and mixt, shall be redressed by Writ of Error out of the Chancery of Eng∣land,
returnable before the Justices of the Common Place, as other Writs of Error be in England: but Errors in Pleas personal shall be re∣formed by Bill, before the President and Council, and if the Judgement be affirmed good, in any of the said Writs or Bills, then there to make Execution, and all other Process thereupon, as is used in the Kings Bench of England, and that the Plain∣tiff in every such Writ or Bill, pay for the same like Fees as is used in England. CXXXI. No Execution of any Judgement given in any base Court, shall be stayed by reason of any Writ of false Judgement, but Execution may be had at all times before the re∣versal of such Judgement; and if such Judgement shall after be rever∣sed, the Plaintiff shall be restored to what he hath lost by such Judge∣ment. CXXXII. All Process for urgent and weighty Causes, shall be direct∣ed into Wales by the Chancellor of England, or any of the Kings Coun∣cil, as heretofore hath been used,
notwithstanding this Act. CXXXIII. The Town of Bewdley in the Parish of Ribsford, in Com. Wigorn. is made parcel of the County of Wigorn, and united to the Hun∣dred of Dodingtree in that County, saving to the Burgess and Inhabitants of Bewdley their ancient Liberties and Franchises. CXXXIV. Llanstissan, Ʋsterloys and Langham, with their members, are united to the County of Caer∣marthen, and made parcel of the Hundred of Derries in that County. CXXXV. The Shire-Court of the County of Radnor shall be holden one time at New Radnor, and another time at Preston, alternis vicibus, and never at Rather Goway, notwith∣standing the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. CXXXVI. The Kings Farmer of the Subsidy and Aulnage of Wollen Cloths in the County of Monmouth, and the other twelve Counties of Wales, shall take for sealing such Cloths as followeth, viz. for every whole piece of Frise 1 d. a half piece, ob. a piece of Cotton or Lining, (24 yards and under) ob. a piece of the
same (above 24 yards) 1 d. a broad Cloth, 1 d. a piece of Kersey (18 yards or above) 1 d. and for a piece of Kersey, (under 18 yards) ob. Howbeit this shall not extend to Cloth made in private Houses, and not put to sale, but to their Ser∣vants. CXXXVII. The Aulnager in Wales shall be bound and subject to the Laws and Customs of England, in like case provided. CXXXVIII. The Town of Haver∣ford west is made a County of it self, whose Justice shall be the Justice of the County of Pembroke, and the Ju∣dicial Seal of Pembrokeshire shall be also used there, with divers other Priviledges; for which see the Statute at large: Howbeit, this Article was but to continue in force during the King's pleasure. CXXXIX. This Act shall not be prejudicial to any mans Inheritance, nor to any of the King's Officers for their Offices or Fees. CXL. No Land in Wales shall be Gavelkind, but discendable accord∣ing to the course of the Common Law.
CXLI. All Liberties of the Dutchy of Lancaster shall continue as they were before the making of this Act. CXLII. Stat. 18 El. 8 The Queen and her Heirs and Successors may (at her and their pleasure) name and appoint two or more Persons learn∣ed in the Law to the Justices in each of the Circuits in Wales, which had but one Justice before, or may grant Commissions of Association to such Person or Persons to be associate to the Justice, or Justices of the said Circuits, who shall have like autho∣rity and power as the one Justice had by the Statute of 34, 35. H. 8.26. CXLIII. Stat. 27. El. 9. All Fines and Recoveries taken or suffered in the Courts of Assizes or Sessions of the twelve Shires of Wales, the Town and County of Haverford-west, and the Counties Palatines of Chester, Lancaster, and Duresme, and in every of them, and all Writs, Returns, Warrants, and other proceedings concerning the same, now remain∣ing, or which hereafter shall remain in the said Courts or Sessions, or in any of them, or in the custody of
any of the Officers there, may (up∣on the request, and at the election of any person) be inrolled in Rolls of Parchments by such persons, and for such considerations, as are here∣after expressed, and such Inrolments shall be as good in force in Law (for so much as shall be so inrolled) as the same so remaining are or ought to be. CXLIV. No Fines, Proclamati∣ons, or Recoveries there, shall be reversable by Writ of Error, for false Latin, rasure, inter-lining, mis∣entring of any Warrant of Attor∣ney, or of any Proclamation, mis∣returning, or not returning of the Sheriff, or other want of form in words, and not in matter of sub∣stance. CXLV. The person there that shall hereafter take the acknowledge∣ment of any Fine, or any Warrant of Attorney, of any Tenant of Vou∣chee, for suffering any Recovery, or shall certifie them or any of them, shall with the Certificate of the Con∣cord or Warrant of Attorney, cer∣tifie also the day and year, wheren
the same was acknowledged, but shall not be inforced to certifie them, except within the year next after they were taken; And no Clerk or Officer there shall receive any Writ of Covenant, Writ of Entry, or other Writ, whereupon any Fine or Recovery is to pass, unless the day of acknowledgement thereof shall ap∣pear by such Certificate, in pain of 40 s. CXLVI. No Attornment upon any Fine there, shall be entred upon Record, except the party mentioned to attorn, have first appeared in Court in person or by Attorney, warranted by the hand of one of the Justices of the same Court, upon any Writ of Quid juris clamat, quem red∣ditum reddit, or per quæ servitia, as the cause requireth; and every Attorn∣ment otherwise entred shall be void, without Writ of Errour or other means to avoid it. CLXVII. There shall be in the said places an office of Inrolments crected to continue for ever, for the inrolling of Fines and Recove∣ries, as aforesaid; and the Justices
there shall (within their several li∣mits) enjoy the said Office, and the disposition thereof, and carefully see to the execution of the same by the due examination of such enrol∣ments, and for their pains and care therein shall have certain Fees al∣lowed them; for which see the Statute at large. CXLVIII. Unto every Roll by any Justice so examined, he is to sub∣scribe his hand, in pain of 40 s. and any of the said Justices may take or∣der in all things needfull for the said Inrolment, and upon examination may in the said Courts assess such Fines and Amerciaments, or any Clerk, Sheriff, Attorney, or other Person, for misprision, contempt, or negligence, in any thing concerning such Fines and Recoveries, as to them or any one of them shall seem meet which Fines and Amercia∣ments shall be estreated as others use to be out of the said Court. CXLIX. The exemplification of any such Record of any Fine or Re∣covery thereof, or any part thereof (in the said twelve Shires of Wales,
and the Town of Haverford-west) under the Judicial Seal, or (in the said Counties Palatine) under the Seal of the respective County Pala∣tine shall be of as good force as the original Record it self. CL. The Justices Clerks may write out and enrol the said Records, but shall not carry them out of their Offices. CLI. No Fine or Recovery here∣tofore levied or suffered shall after exemplification be amended.
THE TABLE TO THE RULES of LAW. A. AFter Appearance and Declaration, three Rules in Real Actions, two Rules in Actions Personal, mixt and popular, and the last Peremptory. Rule 4. After Pleas one Rule for Replication, &c. Rule 4. Amerciament where it shall be upon Non∣suit, and no Cost to the Defendant. Rule 16. Appearance when to be allowed. Rule 7. Administrator, vide Executor. Rule 12.
D. Demurrer upon it one Rule to joyn, upon refusal Judgement. Rule 15. E. Essoin upon calling the Writ. Rule 1. Essoin to be upon Iterum sum. 2 d. and 3 d. Bill, Distringas, &c. if none be upon original before Issue. Rule 2. Essoin, one after a Ven. fac. Rule 3. Essoin to be cast for one day only. Rule 6. Executor to make Oath that he, &c. re∣ceived not the Debt, nor any part thereof, nor his Testator, to his know∣ledge, in his life-time, &c. Rule 12. I. Imparlance after it, one Rule. Rule 9. Issue general, upon it the Solicitor to be for the Defendant, without Rule; but upon special pleading or a Solicitor for the Plaintiff, one Rule. Rule 14. Judgrment none to be given upon Bond for performance of Covenants, upon A∣ward, or upon Agreements, without motion. Rule 11.
Judgement by Default to be taken of the same Sessions, unless the Defendant plead in Bar at the same Sessions with∣out Rule. Rule 13. N. Non-suit where Amerciaments upon it and no Costs. Rule 16. Narratio similis upon Writ of View, Sum. ad Warran. ad Auxiliandum, and upon Challenge, one Rule. Rule 8. P. Petit. visum & auditum to be demanded between 2 d. and 3 d. Rule. Rule 5. Petit. auditum in Personal Actions, be∣tween the first and second Rule. Rule 5. Plaint removed by Certior. &c. from inferiour Courts to the great Sessions, the Defendant appearing, and the Plaintiff Non-suited, the Defendant not to have Costs. Rule 16. S. Scire fac. upon an old Judgement in Per∣sonal Actions, two Rules to appear,
and after Appoarance two Rules to plead upon Real Actions, three Rules to appear, and three to plead. Rule 10. Scire facias none to be allowed upon a Judgement of ten years standing with∣out motion, unless it continned by Pro∣cess. Rule 10.
THE TABLE TO THE Rules in Chancery. A. APpearance after Subpoena to An∣swer is served, must be before the sitting of the fourth Court, or Attach∣ment to issue. Rule 1. Appearance must be entred whether the Defendant appear in Person or by At∣torney. Rule 1. Answer, Plea, or Demurrer, must be put in before the sitting of the fourth Court, or an Attachment to issue. Rule 2. Alias Attachment to issue upon Return of the first, and upon return of that a Pro∣clamation. Rule 2. B. Bills to be filed against Parties served
within three Courts after Appearance, or else a Dismission of Course, with Costs of 6 s. 8 d. Rule 3. C. Contempts to be cleared before Answer be received after Attachment regularly issued forth. Rule 2. Costs, Bills of Costs to be indifferently taxed by the Register if Attornies dif∣fer. Rule 6. Costs for not putting in Exceptions or Re∣ply, is 13 s. 4 d. Rule 3. Costs. v. Bill Regula. Rule 3. Costs to be taxed upon References on Con∣tempts, &c. by the Register. Rule 8. E. Exceptions, or Reply to be filed within four Courts, or else the Defendant to be dismissed of Course, with 13 s. 4 d. Costs. Rule 3. I. Interrogatories the same to be administred to Witnesses to be examined before the Register, as upon common Return,
without alteration, unless upon order of Court. Rule 4. Interrogatories upon Contempts to be put in within three dayes. Rule 8. M. Motions in Court notice to be given of them. Rule 7. N. Notice to be given of motion in Court to the Attornies of the other side, other∣wise to be of no effect, and the last Rule to be produced upon every motion. Rule 7. Notice to be given to the other side upon Appearance on Contempts, and Inter∣rogatories to be put in within three Courts, or else the party to be discharg∣ed. Rule 8. P. Publication after Witnesses examined to pass of course, unless motion in Court be made to the contrary second Court on Wednesday in the Sessions week. Rule 5. Proclamation to issue upon Return of an
alias Attachment. Rule 2. Process to hear Judgement not to issue if Parties be present at the Sessions, or their Attornies, otherwise if absent. Rule 5. R. Reference upon Examinations on Con∣tempts within three Courts, or else the Party to be discharged. Rule 8. Reply, v. Exception Regula. Rule 3. S. Subpoena none to issue into a Foreign County without order of Court. Rule 1. Sequestration not to issue without motion in Court. Rule 2. W. Witnesses may be examined before the Re∣gister at any time before Publication, upon notice by either Party, but upon no notice given to be suppressed. Rule 4. FINIS.
Law-Books Printed, and Sold by Henry Twyford in Vine-Court Middle-Temple, with the usual Prizes. In Folio. PƲlton's Statutes at large, price 2 l. 10 s. Manby's Continuation of Pulton, 12 s. Shepand's Epitomy. 1 l. 10 s. Wngat's Maxims of Law, 14 s. Herne's Pleader, 18 s. Manby on Cowell's Interpreter, 8 s. Lord Cook's Reports in French, newly print∣ed, 3 l. L. Cook's 12th and 13th Report, English, 7 s 6 d. Ryley's Records of the ower, 18 s. Leonard's Reports, 2d Vol. 6 s. Leonard's Report, 3d Vol. 7 s. Latche's Reports, 7 s. Judge Owen's Reports, 5 s. Judge Hutton's Reports, 6 s. Lord Leyes Reports, 4 s. 6 d. Bridgeman's Reports, 5 s. Judge Crook's Reports first Part, K. Ch. 12 s. —Second Part, King James, 14 s. —Third Part, Queen Elizabeth, 18 s. Lord Cook's Reports, English, 2 l. 5 s. Lord Cook's Declarations, in English, 8 s. Judge Bulstrod's Reports in 3. Vol. 1 l. 3 s. Styles's Reports. 10 s. Hobart's Reports, 10 s.
Judge Winches Reports, 4 s. 6 d. Lane's Reports, 4 s. 6 d. Ashe's Tables to Lord Cook's Reports, 6 s. Dalton's justice of Peace, 8 s. Dalton's ffice of Sheriffs, 11 s. Townsend's Tables, 12 s. Serjeant Bendlows Reports, 6 s. Lord Dyer's Reports with Tables, 18 s. Lord Cook's Boo of Entries, 3 l. Rastall's ook of Entry, 3 l. Lord Cook's Littleton, 18 s. Magna Charta, 14 s. Ple s of Crown, 6 s. Jurisdiction of Courts, 8 s. Practical Councellor, 12 s. In Quarto. Brownlow's Reports, Part 1. 3 s 6 d. Brownlow's Reports, Part 1. 4 s. Gregory's Mooe Book in English, 10 s. Hughes Commentary on Original Writs, 4 s. Hughes Grand Abridgement in three Vo∣lumes, 2 l. 10 s. Placita Latinæ Rede vive, 6 s. Compleat Clerk, 12 s. Brownlow's Judicial Writs in English, 4 s. Brownlow's Declarations, 4 s. Shepard's Marrow of Law, Part 2. 3 s. 6 d. Godboult's Reports, 6 s. Touchstonc of Assurance, 6 s. In Octavo. Wingat's Abridgement, 6 s. Kitchin's Jurisdiction of Courts, 5 s. 6 d.
Hawkes Grounds of Law, 3 s. 6 d Hernes Law of Conveyances, 2 s. Modern Assurances, 2 s. 6 d. Book of Judgements, 2 s. 6 d. Sir Jo. Davis of Impositions, 1 s. 6 d. Ireland's Abridgement of Lord Cook's Re∣ports, 2 s. 6 d. Trotman's Abridgement of Cook's Reports, 4 s 6 d. Shepard's Sure Guide for His Majesties Ju∣stices, 3 s. 6 d. Parson's Law, 2 s. 6 d. Irevia selecta, by Antrobus & Imp. 1 s. 6 d. Compleat Attorney, 3 s. Plowden's Abridgement, 2 s. Office of Executors, 2 s. Abridgement of Cook's Littleton, by Daven∣port, 2 s. 6 d. Perkins in English, 2 s. Layman's Lawyer, 2 s. Wingat's Body of Law, 1 s. 6 d. Wilkingson's Office of Sheriffs, 2 s. 6 d. Abridgement of Doctor and Student, 1 s. Hornes Mirrour of Justice, in French, 2 s. Law of Corporations, by Shepard, 1 s. Stones Reading on Bankrupts, 1 s. The Judges Resolution on the Statute of Bankrupts, 1 s. 6 d. Brook's Reading on the Statute of Lmi∣tation, 1 s. Practise of the Exchequer, 1 s. The Exchequer opered, 1 s. Compleat Solicitor, 3 s. 6. Clark's Cabinet, 1 s. Judge Dodaridg's Law of Nobility and Pea∣rage, 1 s. 6. d.
Fitz. Nat. brevium Eng. 5. s Calthrop's Reports, 1. s. 6. d. Shephard's Justice, 3 s. Dr. and student, 2. s. Manby's Abridgement of Coke's 12th part of Reports, 1 s. 6. d. Compleat Copyholder, 1 s. 6. d. Clarke's Companion, 1 s. Clark's Tutor, 1 s. 6 d. Termes of Law, 4. s. Law of charitable Uses, 2 s. Clark of Assize, 1 s. Lambert's duties of Constables, 1 s. Elsuceer's Observations, 1 s. Lord Leye's of Wards and Liveries, 1 s. In Twelves. Survey of Justice, 1 s. 6. d. Justice restored. 1 s. Vade mou or Justice, 1 s. Principles of Law by Phillips, 1 s. Littleton's Tenures French and Eng. 2 s. 6 d. Exact Constable, 1 s. Parsons Guide or Law of Tithes. 1 s. Compleat Justice, 2 s. Clarke's Tutor to Arithmetick and wri∣ting, 1 s. Practica Walliae, 1 s. 6. d.
