7797 99844536 9359
❧ A PROCLAMATION concernyng the Kynges style, made the. XXIII. day of Ianuary, the XXXIII. yere of his maiesties moste gracious reygne. WHERE VVE BE IVSTELY and rightfully kinge of out Realme of Irelande, and ought to haue the title stile and name therof by righte of inheritaunce, and the non vse therof in our style hath caused moche disobe∣dience, rebellion, dyscention, and sedition in our sayd realme, to the great impouery shyng and peryl of distru∣ction of the same, if we had not for the redresse therof, put to our kyngly hand, as we haue done, in such wyse, as by reason therof our sayde realme (thankes be to god) is no we broughte and reduced to better order peace and ciuilitie, than it hath ben many yeres past. AND for as moche as our louynge subiectes of our sayd realme, both the prelates nobles and commons, do thynke and determyne, that the good estate, peace, and tranquyllitie, wherein our sayde realme nowe standeth. shall the better and longer contynewe, yf we wolde as we ought of ryghte, accepte and take vppon vs the title and name of kynge of the same: whiche to do all our sayde subiectes, of our sayde realme, by their mutual assentes, by auctoritie of parlya∣ment holden within the same, haue agreed and assented vnto, and moste instantly desyred vs, that the sayde title and name of kynge of Irelande, togyther with our sayde hole realme, shuld be vnyted and annexed to our imperiall crowne of our realme of Englande. To whiche their desyres and humble requestes, for the better consecuation of the good peace of our sayde re∣alme, we haue assented, and haue caused for that purpose our stile to be altered and reformed, aswell in the latine as in the en∣glyshe tungue, as hereafter foloweth. HENRICVS octauus dei gratia Angliç Franciae & Hibernie rex, fidei defensor, & in terra ecclesiae Anglicanae & Hibernicae supremum caput. HENRY the, VIII, by the grace of god kynge of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, defendour of the saythe, and of the churche of England and also of Ireland in erthe the supreme heed. And to the intent that our sayd subiectes shuld not be ignoraunt of the alteration of our sayd, in forme as is aforesayde, we haue caused this present proclamation to be made, and by the same wyll and commaunde all and synguler our officers in∣stices and ministers, and all other our subiectes and resiauntes within this our realme of Englande, and elles where, within any our domynyons, that they shall accepte, take, and vse oure style, in forme aboue wrytten, in lyke forme, as they vsed and accepted oure olde style before this alteration. Neuer the lesse, to the intente that noo dyscorde varyaunce occasyon. trouble, ympechemente, or molestation shoulde be had or made to any our Iustyces, offycers, minysters, and other oure subiectes or resyauntes, before they maye haue conuenyent knowledge of the chaunge and alteration of our late stile: we are therfore pleased & contented, that none of our sayde Iustices officers ministers subiectes or other resiantes within our realme of England, the dominion of wales, Calais; and of theyles of Iersay & Carnysay, for omyttyng of our sayd title and name of kyng of Ireland in wryttes patentes proces or other writinges, to be passed vnder any our seales, or for non acceptation or mis acceptation therof, or for any offence touching the same, done or cōmitted, or to be done or cōmitted, before the last day of Apryl nexte comynge, shall be vexed troubled impeched, or by any wyse molested or troubled, but that all wryttes patentes proces or other wrytynges that be passed or shall passe vnder any our seales, before the sayde laste daye of Apryll, wherin shall happen our sayde title and name of kyng of Irelande to be omytted, shall be taken construed accepted and admytted to be of the same force, strength, qualitie, and condition in all thynges, as they were before the sayde title and name of kynge of Irelande was annexed to our stile. And that the non acceptation or mysacceptation of our sayde title and name of kynge of Ireland, or any actes or thynges done, or that shall chaunce to be done before the sayd laste day of Apryll, by any our subiectes or resiaun∣tes, towthynge or concernyng our sayd title or name of kynge of Irelande, shall be construed and expounded any offence or occasion of trouble to any of our sayde subiectes or resiauntes: any thynge conteyned in this proclamation, or any thyng that shall be expressed in the same, or any other thynge or thynges to the contrary therof in any wise not withstandynge. ❧ GOD SAVE THE KYNGE. ❧ Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
