8052.3 23669354 12321
By the Queene. ¶ A Proclamation for restraint of transportation of grayne beyonde the seas. THE Queenes Maiestie vnderstandyng of the sodayne increase of the pryces of grayne, for the more part vniuersally in the Realme, as it is to be coniec∣tured partlye by the vnseasonablenesse of the late haruest tyme, and partlye by reason of excessiue transportation of grayne out of the Realme, into the parties beyonde the seas, whereby yf stay be not speedily made for anye fur∣ther transportation, there may follow a great dearth, whiche shall hardly be borne of a great number of her good louing subiectes: doth therfore straight∣ly charge and commaunde all maner her subiectes, and other inhabitauntes within this Realme, to forbeare from the day of the publication hereof, from the shyppyng or ladyng into any vessell, any manner of grayne, to the intent the same shoulde be di∣rectly or indirectly caryed and transported into any partes beyonde the seas, vppon payne of imprison∣ment, and other further punishments, due by the lawes of the Realme. And yf any officers, in anye porte Townes, as Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, or such lyke, shall eyther themselues offend herein, or shall not doe theyr endeuour to stay any such transportation, or yf they cannot conueniently stay the same, shall not make due and speedye infourmation thereof to her Maiestie, her priuie counsell, or to the principal officers of her Exchequer, then they, besides the former punishmentes, to forfeyte theyr offices. And consy∣derying it cannot be well auoyded, but that some quantitie of grayne is to be caryed from one porte to ano∣ther porte, to serue the necessitie of some other part of the Realme: in such case, the officers of the portes shal diligently see, that good sureties with bondes be taken of persons being of valure aunswerable for the same, to bring due certificates from the portes where the same shall aryue and be vnladen: And that for more as∣suraunce thereof, the officers of the portes, shall thereof make theyr certificates into the Exchequer within two monethes after the ariuall thereof, vpon payne of forfeiture of their offices. And for that it is thought, that it shal appeare by the ende of October next, what effect shal folow hereof, to the diminution of the excessiue prices, her Maiestie meaneth that this maner of restraint shall not conti∣nue by force of this Proclamation, but to the ende of the sayd moneth of October nowe folowing. Geuen at Woodstocke, the xvi. day of September 1572, the fourteenth yere of her Maiesties raigne. God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London in Powles Churche yarde, by Richarde Iugge, Printer to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
