f1580 12409795 61504
THE Form of the Proceeding TO THE CORONATION Of Their Majesties KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY, The Eleventh Day of this Instant April, 1689. [To be punctually Observed by all Persons therein concerned.] April 8. 1689. I do Appoint Edward Jones to Print this Account of the Proceeding. NORFOLKE, and MARSHALL. DRums four a-Breast. Drum-Major. Trumpets four a-Breast. Serjeant-Trumpeter.
The Six Clerks in Chancery, in Gowns of Black Flower'd Sattin, with Black Silk Loops and Tuffs. Chaplains having Dignities, in Scarlet, and Tippets with Square Caps in their Hands. Sheriffs and Aldermen of London. Masters in Chancery. Sollicitor, and Attorney General. Esquires of the Body, in Rich Habits. Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of Both Benches, in Judges Robes of Scarlet. These are to Meet in the Court of Requests, where they are to be put in Order by some of the Officers of Arms, and Conducted into the Hall. Lord Chief Baron, Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, in Scarlet Robes, with their Collars of SS. Guilt. Master of the Rolls, in a Rich Gown. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, in a Scarlet Robe, with his Collar of SS. Children of the Choir of Westminster, in Surplices. Serjeant of the Vestry, Serjeant Porter, in Scarlet Gowns. Children of the Chapel, in Scarlet Mantles. Choir of Westminster, in Surplices. Gentlemen of the King's Chapel, in Scarlet Mantles. Sub-Dean of the King's Chapel, in a Scarlet Gown, turn'd up with Black Velvet. Prebendaries of Westminster, in Surplices and Rich Copes. The Master of the Jewell House, in a Scarlet Robe. Privy Counsellors of England, not Peers, in their usual Habits. Two Pursuivants of Arms. The Peeresses to meet in the Painted Chamber. The Peers in the Lords House; From thence, being put in Order, by the Officers of Arms, and by them to be Con∣ducted into the Hall. Baronesses two a-Breast in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Barons in their Robes in like manner. Bishops. Two Pursuivants at Arms, as before. Viscountesses two a-Breast, in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Viscounts in their Robes, in like manner. Two Heralds, in their Rich Coats and Collars of SS.
No Train  but the KING  QUEENS, and Prin GEORGE of DEN¦MARK's. Countesses two a-Breast in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Earls in their Robes, in like manner. Two Heralds, as before. Marchionesses in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Marquisses in their Robes, in like manner. All the Knights of the Garter are to Wear their Collars and Georges. Two Heralds, as before. Duchesses two a-Breast, in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Dukes in their Robes, in like manner, who do not bear some of the Regalia. The two Provincial Kings of Arms, in their Rich Coats and Collars Guilt, and Medals, and Coronets in their Hands. Lord Privy Seal. Lord President of the Council. Lord Arch-Bishop of York. Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Prince GEORGE of Denmark, with his Train born up by his Master of the Robes. Two Persons to Represent the Dukes of Aquitaine and Normandy, in Crimson Velvet Mantles, lined with Meniver, powdered with Ermine, each of them his Cap in his Hand of Cloth of Gold, Fur'd and powdered with Ermine. St. Edward's Staff, carried by the Earl of Manchester. The Gold Spurs, by the Lord Grey of The Queens Scepter with the Cross, by the Earl of Clare. The Kings Scepter with the Cross, by the Earl of Northampton. The Third Sword, by the Earl of Pembroke. Curtana, by the Earl of Shrewsbury. The Pointed Sword, by the Earl of Derby. Lord Mayor of London, bearing the City Mace, in a Gown of Crimson Velvet, Wearing his Collar and Jewell. Garter, Principal King of Arms, Wearing his Collar and Jewell, his Coronet in his Hand. Sir Thomas Duppa, with the Black Rod in his Hand. Serjeants at Arms. The Lord Great Chamberlain in his Robes, with his Coronet and his White Staff. Serjeants at Arms. The Earl Marshal of England, in his Robes, with his Coronet and Earl Mar∣shal's Staff, Duke of Nor∣folk. The Sword of State, carried by the Earl of Oxford. The High Constable in his Robes, with his Staff and Coronet, Duke of Or∣mond. The Queens Scepter with the Dove, carried by the Earl of Bedford. The Kings Scepter with the Dove, by the Earl of Rutland. The Queens Orbe, by the Duke of Bolton. The Kings Orbe, by the Duke of Grafton. The Queens Crown, by the Duke of Somerset. The Kings Crown, by the Lord High Steward. The Paten, by the Lord Bishop of St. Asaph. The Bible, by the Lord Bishop of London. The Chalice, by the Lord Bishop of Rochester.
The Canopy born by 16 Barons of the Cinque-Ports, over the KING And QUEEN. Gentlemen Pentioners. Supporter to the QUEEN, the Lord Bishop of Bristol. The QUEEN in in Crimson Velvet Robes, on Her Head a Circlet of Gold, Her Majesties Train born by the Duchess of Somerset, assisted by the Lady Elizabeth Pawlett, Lady Diana Vere, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish, and the Lady Harriot Hyde. The KING in Crimson Velvet Robes, a Cap on His Head of the same, both Fur'd and Powdered with Ermine, His great Collar and George, His Majesties Train born by the Master of the Robes, assisted by the Lord Eland, Lord Wil∣loughby, Lord Lansdowne, and the Lord Dunblaine. Supporter to the KING, the Lord Bishop of Winchester. Gentlemen Pentioners. A Lady of the Bed-Chamber. A Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber. Two of the QUEENS Women. Two Grooms of the Bed-Chamber. Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard. Captain of His Majesties Guard. Captain of the Gentlemen Pentioners, Lord Lovelace. Ensign and Lieutenant of the Yeomen of the Guard. Yeomen of the Guard four a-Breast. In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones. 1689.
