H2629A H3812 12187121 55817
Memorabilia Mundi: OR, Choice Memoirs, OF THE HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD. By G. H London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by F. Smiih at the Elephant and Castle without Temple-Bar. 1670.
To the Right Honourable John Earl of Dover, Viscount Rochford, Lord Hunsdon, &c. MY LORD, I Approach your Lordship with the same hardiness as they who satisfie themselves, that the sincerity of the Giver may attone for the little value of the gift; having learnt this presumption from Histo∣ry, where I find that great Princes have look'd kindly upon mean obla∣tions, and thereby rendred the ge∣nerosity of their acceptance more il∣lustrious, by the duty and obedience of the Presenters. Nor with this trick of moral sto∣ry would I be thought to wind your Lordship into the reception of a trifle, but that I carry a braver de∣sign in it; that is, on this occasion
to make a publick acknowledgment of the many and great favours (and of one especially above the rest, the o∣verflow of your nobleness) which you have been pleas'd to confer upon your unworthy servant. For (my Lord) the sense of them hitherto, bounded within the narrow knowledge of my meanness, hath seem'd to me a kind of guilty concealment, and almost tantamount to a denyal of them, till I was able to render this happy and open declaration to the world, of an humble and obsequious gratitude for those favours done me; and so done, that your generous affability in dis∣spensing them may for ever condemn the rough custom of the age, whose haughty state in doing kindnesses, does most commonly turn their bread into stone.
And though I know, that thanks alone is no payment sterling; yet since to the greatest Beings for the greatest and most lasting benefits we can scarce make any better return. I hope it will not seem strange, if I present your Lordship the memory of your own goodness to pay your self. For where the obligation exceeds possibility of requital, the sawsiness of attempting to satisfie, is infinitely worse than the humble acknowledg∣ment of still owing. My Lord, I offer to your view a piece, that dare not stand the test of your Judgment, but would humbly shelter near your goodness, & which (when your Lordship takes breath from your other more weighty both publick and private affairs) may
serve to entertain you in the less serious part of the day; The matter is least mine, the form & composure I may own a whole share in; so the Bulloin of the Indies (if the allusion be not presumptuous) becomes the Kings coin, after it has receiv'd his stamp & image. And as after view∣ing the scatter'd pleasures of a large and fair Garden, some satisfaction is receiv'd from the contracted scent and beauty of a posie; so if I have here at all justified the compa∣rison, whatever error may have past in the choice or ordering of the flow∣ers, I hope your Lordship will pardon to My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most grate∣ful Servant, G. H.
TO THE Most Accomplish'd LADY, Mrs. DOROTHY RIVERS. Madam SInce for Persons of Your Quality and Merit, it is usual to suffer Afflictions of this Nature; there is now a necessity that you un∣dergo Your Fate, which is so much the sadder, in that all those Excellencies which in you shine in their Meridian, and might command Reverence from the most Savage World, serve only to incourage my Rudeness, and with me to become accessory to your own Per∣secution.
But it may be (Madam) after an humble Acknowledgment of the guilt, that Goodness of Yours (which ex∣cepts no Sinners) may be gain'd to think the Crime Venial, and that par∣ticular Condescension which hath here∣tofore showr'd Obligations upon Your most humble Servant, may stretch out Your saving Hand to receive a Present, that would live onely in and by Your favour. 'Tis true (Madam) that the Worth∣lesseness of the Present might very well have dispirited the boldest attempt in this kind▪ had I not considered that I should thereby better Consult for Your Glory, when the World shall take notice that my greatest Ambition hath been not to raise Trophies to my self by Writing well, but only to pay my just and respectful Devoirs, and that by publishing Your Names and Vertues, I might shew a Pattern of all that is Excellent and Good; which (Madam) if I should strive to embellish
with what Art of Words can add to render any thing Illustrious, yet would all fall far below the Dignity of the Subject, and I should be constrain'd at length to leave it as altogether unaffa∣ble. If then (Madam) what is wanting to the true payment of Justice and Obliga∣tion to Your Vertues, Your Goodness will allow my Zeal of owning to supply, please to accept this trifle as the best Testimony I can at present make of it, which when receiv'd into Your choice Closet, and sometime turn'd over by Your fair Hands (when you please to give Your own quainter thoughts leave to rest) will give me just cause to call my self the happyest man living, and for ever fix me Madam Your most humble and most obedient Servant. G. H.
TO THE READER. I Present you (Reader) with a novelty, which if your pallate be not wholly vi∣tiated, may generally relish well with you. For the variety of the matter you may call it a kind of Olio, the seasoning of which hath cost me both time and expence; and though it be not of the choicest rarities, it is done at least according to the best of my skill. If by this slender attempt I may pro∣voke any better able more handsomely and regularly to couch a subject attended with so much both profit and pleasure, I think I have done the kind and industrious part of
the world no ill office, who will (though but for this reason) let pass without rigid and supercilious Censure the mean Essay of him, whose ardor to serve them, hath ren∣dred him less seeing in the examination of his own ability. Yet would I not be con∣ceiv'd to know my self and value my pains so little, but that I may merit some thanks, at least from the well tempered measurers of mens intentions: however some there will be (and those not a few) whom I could wish (because I love my self well) might be won to my side) but I fear my single ta∣lent of perswasion will never be able to gain them; for being ill-natured, and therefore doing nothing themselves but mischief, they carry an intense hatred to those that would humbly do good, nay though it be done never so perfectly. What quarter then my poor offering (being sensible to how many exceptions it may be lyable) is like to find among them I well know, but have heart enough not much to fear; e∣specially hoping among the Candid Ingeni∣ous such reception as will amply remunerate
me for all the ill usage I may meet with elsewhere. Here is a tast then (to you kind Reader I speak it) of what in so useful a Subject might be performed by a more judicious pen, Analects of the History and Descripti∣on of the World, not so choicely nor methodi∣cally handled as might be expected, but yet may serve to refresh your memory after the tedious and ill way of other mighty Vo∣lumes. It were a worthy employ for any that hath parts and leisure to go through with it (in a more acute and accurate man∣ner, not emitting ought memorable) to ex∣tract from those numerous Records of Hi∣story all such short Memoirs as may tend either to instruction or delight. And as he will thereby infinitely oblige both these, whose way of Education may have less qua∣lified them to distinguish the Stars in sail∣ing on the vast Ocean of Story; and those also, whose confinement in time or coin may disenable them for such expensive ways of knowledge: So shall he in particu∣lar find me the most acknowledging of all
his Servants, must esteem mine most happy faults, that have been to him incentives of aspiring to the true glory of Writing better.
ERRATA. PAge 1. line 4. dele utra{que} p. 4. l. 20. r. Ctesiphon p. 12. l. 2. r. happy; p. 25. l. 4. dele from East Frizeland, to Westphalia, then r. Westphalia is most famous, &c. p. 31. l. 16. for of the r. and p. 32. l. 11. r. Earl Floris, p. 41. l. 19. r. Persians, p. 52. l. 5. r. Lines, p. 57. l. 11. r. any, p. 59. l. 12. r. third, p. 60. l. 19. r. Shoals, p. 67. r. not maly, but maly, p. 75. l. 13. r that, p. 78. l. 6. r. injoyned, ib. l. 21. r. and at, p. 81. l. 4. r. rich, p. 82. l. 7. dele of, p. 83. l. 21. r. far from, p. 84. l. 3. r. Isicles, ib. l. 17. r. Lewelyn, p. 91. l. 23 r. not wherein, but where in, in p. 93. l. 2. r. enricheth this, ib. l. 14. r. Ruyters, p. 100. l. 13. r. notwithstanding they, p. 108. l. 12. in piramidy-wise, r. pyramid-wise, ib. l. 1. dele of, and the comma after wonders, p. 109. l. 12. r. Shotland, ib. l. 19. r. ever pleasing, p. 112. l. 23. r. Gods, p. 114. l. 7. r. necks were, p. 116. l. 9. r. Agincourt, p. 118. l. 13. r. Cyrenaean, p. 120. l. 16. r. Ecstatick, p. 126. l. 2. r. of Arabia, p. 129. l. 22. r. wanderers, p. 134. l. 6. r. Herodian, ib. l. 12. r. more barba∣rous then the Axiacan, p. 147. l. 7. r. murtherer, p. 149. l. 5. r. Savour, p. 162. l. 11. r she please. Other Literal escapes there are, which the kind Reader may correct as he passes.
Memorable things Noted in the DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD. IN our Description of the World there are four parts, into which the World is divided; Europe, Asia, Africa, America utraque. We will begin first with Asia, for in Asia did God himself speak his miracu∣lous work of the Creation: There was the Church first collected, there was the Saviour of the world born, Cruci∣fied and Raised again: Indeed the great∣est
part of Divine History was there written and Acted; There was the first Monarch, and Monarchies of the World in Assyria, Persia, Babylonia, Media. The first people of the world received their being in Mesopotamia, and the several tongues of the World their Original in Babylonia: These are parts of Asia, and were in the first ages blest with God's own holy Presence, Exodus the third; and the footing of Angels, Exod. 14. However, now it is left (for her In∣fidelity) to the punishment of a Prophe∣tical Curse that long before passed up∣on her, and is delivered up into the hands of Turks, and Nations that Blaspheme the Creatour, and there∣fore doth not flourish in that height as heretofore. Now add together, that this Re∣gion was at first the Paradise of the World, and indeed still enjoyeth a fer∣tile Soyl and temperate Air, and that it exceeds in compass the two other parts of the old World, to which she was
the Mistress for Arts and Sciences; Yet is it not at this day so well peopled in proportion, as this little Europe, which came many hundred years after; for this we need search no further cause than God's just Anger: Yet hath he not ex∣ercised upon her, only by Miraculous and Immediate Punishment from Hea∣ven, but hath suffered (as it were) her own Creatures, over which Man at the first had the Rule) to turn head upon their Lords, and possesse their Habitation, for it is so over-run with wild-Beasts, and cruel Serpents, that in many places they live not without much danger. In this; though the Nation suffer for their Monstrous Irreligion; Yet the Earth which did not offend, reserves her place, and abounds with many excellent commodities, not else-where to be had; Myrrhe, Frankincense, Cinamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Musk, Jewels of great esteem, and Minerals of all sorts; It breeds Elephants, Camels,
and many other Beasts; Serpents, Fowl wild and tame, and some have added such Monstrous shapes of men, as passe all belief. In Asia were the seven Churches which St. John mentioned in the Apo∣calips; now scarce is it inhabited but to∣ward the Sea-side, and that by a base and abject people, such as are both lazy in their life, and odious Idolaters in their Religions, for the most part Mahu∣metans. Here Ephesus it self the Star of Asia, that as well for her Reli∣gion as her miraculous Temple,This is within the compass of that one part which bears the name of Asia pro∣pria. set the world at gaze upon her: It was raised in the middle of the City, Modelled out by Ctesifon, but was 220. years in build∣ing, and was ordered in such a ground, that no Earth-quake should move it; It was 425. foot long, and 220. broad, and 127. Pillars, given by so many se∣veral Kings, whereof twenty seven
were most curiously graven, all the rest of Marble polished. In this City St. John the Evangelist is said to have gone down into his Grave alive, there be who yet question his death. Armenia minor, which is one of the Provinces of Asia minor, is by most thought to be the Land of Ararat where the Ark rested, And there is great store of Oyl, and excellent Wine. Arabia Foelix in Asia major is account∣ed the fruitfullest Country in the World. In this Arabia is the City Medina, where Mahomet is Intombed in an Iron Chest, supported only by a Roof of Adamant, without other Art to keep it from falling to the ground. Cyprus a place heretofore Consecrated to Venus, to whom both Men and Wo∣men performed their Sacrifice naked, till by the prayer of Barnabas the Apostle, the Temple was ruined. Trojus Reports, that the Fathers of this Isle had wont to prostitute their Daughters to Mariners for money,
whereby to raise them a portion against they could get them Husbands; but Christianity corrected those Barbarous Customs. AFRICA. IN most parts she hath scarce plenty sufficient to maintain Inhabitants, and where there is, we shall meet with multitudes of Ravening Beasts, or other horrible Monsters, enough to devour both it and us: In a word, There is no Region of the World so great an Enemy to Mans Commerce; there is such scarcity of water, that no Creature almost could live, had not Nature provided thereafter, that the greater part of them endures not drink in the very midst of Summer: And if (as sometimes they be enforced by such as take them) they suddenly perish. Thus we see how God gives a property
to each place, that may make up her defects, least it should be left as well by Beasts as Men. Their Land is full of sandy Desarts, which lye open to the winds and storms, and oftentimes are thrown up into Bil∣lows like Waves of the Sea, and indeed are no less dangerous. Strabo writes, that Cambyses his Army was thus hazarded; a foolish Nation in Africa, as they march∣ed towards the South, to revenge them∣selves upon the Winds for drying up their Rivers, were overwhelmed with Sand, and so dyed in their Graves. It is also full of a venemous kind of Ser∣pent, that in some places they dare not dress their Lands unless they first fence their legs with Boots against the sting: Other wild Creatures there are, which range about, and possesse to themselves a great portion of this Countrey, and make it a Wilderness of Lyons, Leo∣pards, Elephants; and in some places Crocodiles, Hyena's, Basilisks, and in∣deed Monsters without either number
or name: Africa as it is reported, is full of danger to the Inhabitants, more dye by Beasts than by diseases. But among all these Inconveniences, Commodities are found of good worth, and the very evils yield at last their be∣nefit, both to their own Country and o∣ther parts of the world: The Elephant a docible Creature and exceeding useful for Battel; The Camel which affords much riches to the Arabian; The Bar∣bary Horse, which we our selves com∣mend; The Ram that besides his flesh gives twenty pound of wool from his ve∣ry tail; The Bull, painful and able to do the best service in their Tillage: And so most of their worst, alive or dead yield us their Medicinal parts, which the world could not well want. In one of the Divisions of Africa, which is Fesse that hath a City in it with seven hundred Churches, and one of them a Mile and a half in compass. In Morocho is a Castle of great fame, for the Globes of pure Gold that stands up∣on
the top of it, and weighing 130000. Barbary Duckats. The Land of Negro is full of Gold and Silver, and other commodities, but the Inhabitants most barbarous; they draw their Original from Chus, and have entertained all Religions that came in their way; first their own, then the Jews, the Mahumetans, and some of them the Christian; For the most part they live not as if Reason guided their Actions. Bornaum, a Country where the people have no proper Names, no Wives pe∣culiar, and therefore no Children which they call their own. Aethiopia superiour, it is governed by one of the mightiest Emperors in the World, called by us Presbyter John, he hath under him seventy Kings, which have their several Laws and Customs, Among these the Province of Dobas hath one, that no man marry till he hath killed twelve Christians; Their Religi∣on is mixt, Christians they have, but
yet differ from us, for they Circumcise both sects; their Oath is by the life of their King, whom they never see but at Christmas, Easter and Holy-Rood; Their Commodities are Oranges, Lemmons, Cittrons, Barley, Sugar, Hony. Aethiopia inferior, the Government of this Region is under five Kings, where∣of Monomolopa is one, In which is report∣ed to be three thousand Mines of Gold; Here there lives a kind of Amazons as valiant as men, their King is served in great pomp, and hath a guard of 200. Mastives. Cafraria is another Kingdom whose people live in the Woods with∣out Laws like brutes. And here stands the Cape of good Hope, about which the Sea is alwaies rough and dangerous; It hath been especially so to the Spaniard, it is their own note, insomuch, that one was very angry with God, that he suffered the English Hereticks to pass it so easily over, and not give his good Catholicks the like speed. In the Kingdom of Manicongo whose Inhabi∣tants
are in some parts Anthropophagi, and have shambles of Mens flesh, as we have for Meat, they kill their own Children in the birth, to avoid the trouble of breeding them, and preserve their Nation with stolen Brats from their Neighbouring Countries. Aegypt is another part of the African continent, the places of Note are Caire, and Alexandria, the first was heretofore Memphis, some say Babylon, whither the Virgin fled to escape Herod's Tyran∣ny intended to our Saviour, and blush not to shew the very Cave where she had hid her Babe. In a Desart about forty miles distant stand the Pyramides, esteemed rightly one of the seven Wonders of the World. Alexandria was a magnifi∣cent City, and was famous for the rarest Library in the world; to the Inhabitants of this Country we owe the Invention of Astrology, Physick, Writing on Paper, their Kings names were Pharaoh toward the begining; Now what the Turk pleaseth.
EƲROPE. EUrope bears the Name of the most happiest Country in the World, both for plenty of Corn, Plants, Fruits, for Rivers and Fountains of ad∣mirable vertues; For beauty as well of Cities, Castles, and Houses, as Men and Women of excellent Feature▪ For the Study of Arts, for the science in Reli∣gion, and what ever else God hath pleased to bless his Church with from the beginning. She wants nothing but what she may well spare, Wild-Beasts which cause Desarts in the parts where they breed; hot spices which fit not our temper, and rather corrupt our manners, than mend our dyet, precious jewels and the like, which have brought in a degree of vain and useless pride, not known before by our predecessors: Yet of Gold, Sil∣ver,
and other commodious metals, she hath her portion, and in brief is of a very prosperous temper, yet of so strange va∣riety, that it is admirable to think that there is no place in this quarter, but is fit for any man to live in; Insomuch as every Country is Inhabited, as is con∣firmed by our latter Travellers, though heretofore it hath been questi∣oned by reason of the extream cold to∣ward the Pole. In Hungaria is the Country of Soli∣ense where the Earth sends forth such a stench, that it poysoneth the very Birds which flye over it. An Island in Danubius exceeding fer∣tile, and so indeed is the whole Coun∣try; The people are generally strong, but barbarous, their Daughters portions are only a new attyre, and their Sons e∣qually Inherit without priviledge of Birth-right; The Emperour of Germany and the Turk share it betwixt them. Muscovia, The whole Region is sub∣ject to the Emperour of Russia: A vast
Territory and as wild a Government, for the people are very base, conten∣tious, ignorant, and sottishly supersti∣tious; they bury their dead upright, with a staffe in hand, a penny in his purse, and a Letter to St. Nicholas to procure him entrance into Heaven. AMERICA. AMERICA admits of all variety almost, either of plenty or want; Admirable for the fertility of soyl, then again as barren, here tem∣perate, there scorching hot, elsewhere as extream cold; Some Regions watered with dainty Rivers, others again infested with perpetual Drowth▪ Some Plains, some Hills, some Woods, some Mines, and what not in some tract or other, yet nothing almost common to the whole, but Barbarism of Manners, I∣dolatry in Religion, and Sottish Igno∣rance,
such as hardly distinguisheth them from Bruits, else they would not have taken reasonable Men to be immortal Gods, as at first they did, yet what ei∣ther God was, or Immortality, they knew no more than instinct of Nature gave them; they had heard of some place or other (God knows where) be∣hind some Hill, where the blessed resi∣ded after death: And from thence they supposed the Spaniard came at their first Arrival, but it was not long before the Tyrants cudgelled their simplicity, and by their cruelty appeared to them rather Devils from Hell, than Saints from Hea∣ven. Yet still the Inland-Countryes retain for the most part their Inbred blindness, and worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, and they have their other Spirits, which they call their Zemes, and Adore them in Images made of Cotton-Wool, which oft-times by the delusion of Satan seem to move, and utter an hide∣ous noise, that works in these poor
Idolaters a great awe, least they should harm them. The rest of their Customs are answer∣able to their Religion, beastly; they go naked, and are very lustful people without distinction of Sex; In many places they are Anthropophagy, and prey upon each other like Wolves, they la∣bour not much to sustain themselves, but are rather content to take what the Earth can yield without Tillage. Nova Hispania, or Mexicana propria is the largest Province; It was first pos∣sessed by the Spaniard 1518. But it cost them much blood to intitle their Kings Hispaniarum reges. It is an excellent Country, full of all variety almost in e∣very kinde usual with us, and exceeds in rarities full of wonder. There is one Tree which they dress like our Vine, and order it so, that it yields them al∣most all useful necessaries. The leaves serve them instead of Paper, and of the Vine-bark, they make Flax Mantles, Matts, Shoes, Girdle and Cordage.
Peninsula Peruviana, is the South tract of America, from North to South there runs a continued course of high Mountains, whose tops the very Fowls of the Air cannot reach by flight; And from thence descend many admirable Rivers, among which Maragn and Ar∣genteus are most famous, the one for his extent, and the other for his plenty of Silver, The Country is exceeding rich, but the people differ not much from the worst of Beasts; They devour Mans flesh, filthy worms, and what else comes in their way. Near to the North-west of Peru, was an admirable atchievment performed by our valiant Country-man John Ox∣enham, who by the direction of Moors skilled in the Country, went to the Land of Pearls, and took from the Spa∣niards an incredible weight of Gold and Silver. Cartagena a fruitful Countrey which did yield (when time was) to our still Renowned Sr. Francis Drake, store of
prize, and 240. pieces of Ordinance. Peru a very rich Countrey, abound∣eth with Gold and Silver, little esteem∣ed among the Inhabitants: For by re∣port the Spaniard ordinarily shoed their Horses with Gold. The Inhabitants are strange Idolaters, and worship a black Sheep, Serpents, and other ugly Crea∣tures. Brasile. The Inhabitants are rude, live for the most part in the bodies of Trees, the people are covered with natural hair, cruel lascivious, false and what not; In this Region is an hearb called Viva, which if you touch it, it will shut up, as a Daisie in the Night, and will not open till the party that injured it be out of sight. Chile, on the North of Peru; it is there extream cold, insomuch that many are frozen to death, and harden∣ed like Marble; The Rivers are fed with Snow that falls from the tops of the high Mountains.
GREECE. GReece, She had once the prehe∣minence of Rome in glory, as the precedence in time; For to say truth, she was the wisest of any people that were not inlightened with the know∣ledge of that great Mistery; She set a pattern for Government to all her suc∣ceeding ages, and (in brief) she was the Mistress almost of all Sciences: Some there are which (in a strict ac∣count) will except none but the Mathe∣maticks, but now the poor wretches suf∣fer by the Turks, under whom to this day they are, and are scarce permit∣ted by that great tyrant, means of learn∣ing to know the name for which they suffer. And besides the base mis-usage of the mis-believing Turk, the very Natives themselves are fallen from the noble disposition of their Predecessors into an incredible sottishness, and those which
before reckoned the rest of the Earth barbarous in comparison to their Politick Common-wealth, are now themselves sunk below the envy of the meanest Nation, and become the most misera∣ble object of pity living upon the earth; indeed, they may hardly be said to live: They are lazy beyond belief; and igno∣rant almost beyond recovery; for they have now no means to bring their Chil∣dren either to learning or manners: Not an Academy in all Greece, their car∣riage generally uncivil, their feasts rio∣tous, and their mirth debaucht; Their Wives are well favoured, and so indeed they must be, for they use them no longer as their Wives than they continue to their liking, when they once fade, they are put to the house of drudgery: Their language is the same as hereto∣fore, but rudely corrupted, they have no habit almost proper, but those which serve the Turk wear their fashion, the rest which are under the Venetian, ob∣serve them in their Apparel, for they
are Slaves to both in their whole course. Yet they retain still a shew of the Christian Religion, which was here first settled by Timothy to whom St. Paul wrote two Epistles, and was af∣ter in the primitive times, professed by diverse learned and Reverend Divines of their own Nation, which are with us received as Authentick Fathers of the Church; St. Chrysostome, Basil, &c. Thrace. Part of this Province was here∣tofore perswaded, that their Ancesters did not at all dye, neither should they, but passe only out of this world into ano∣ther, to their supposed God Zalmoxis, once a Scholer of Pythagoras, who when he had perswaded them into this Re∣ligion, seemed wonderfully to vanish out of their sight, and appeared not any more, but left them fully possest that he was the Deity, which must after a time entertain them: And this they expected with that great joy that as oft as one dyed, instead of mourning, they set forth Games and Feasts to congratu∣late
his freedome from the troubles of this earthly condition, and the Wife only, whom he loved best (for they had many) was thought worthy to be killed by her best friends at her Hus∣bands Grave, that she might bear him company in the other World, the rest bewailed their neglect, and the residue of their life was to them as a disgrace. When a Child was born, neighbours were called to bemoan his entrance into a multitude of calamities, and in course they reckoned up, what he was to passe before he could go to their God Zal∣moxis, for they acknowledged no other, but blasphemed and shot Arrows against the Heavens as oft as they heard it Thunder. They will not admit, that their Government should become hereditary, neither must their King be a Father of any Children; If the King offend, he shall not escape their Laws even to death, ye no man may set a hand to his Execution, but by a common desertion he is allow∣ed
no necessaries to live, and therefore must needs dye. GERMANY. THey are a most ingenious people, famous beyond any others in Eu∣rope, unless Belgia, for the invention of many notable and useful Engines: The Gun and gun-powder was first brought to light by one Bertholdus Swart a Fran∣ciscan, which hath almost put by the use of any other Warlick Instrument, in those parts of the World where the pra∣ctice is perfectly understood. The Government of this Germany is Emperial. The right descends not by succession, the power of choice was con∣ferred by Pope Gregory the tenth, upon seven German Princes, three spiritual, and four temporal: These are the Arch-Bishop of Mentz, Chancellour of the Empire through Germany; Arch-Bishop of Cullen, Chancellour of the Empire through Italy; Arch-Bishop of Triers,
Chancellour of the Empire through France. The temporal are, the King of Bohemia, who hath the casting voice, on∣ly in case of equality among the other six, His Office is to be chief Cup-Bearer at the great Solemnity: Next him the Count Palatine of the Rhene, Arch Sewer to the Emperour; Duke of Saxony, Lord Marshal and Mar∣quesse of Brandenburg chief Chamber∣lain. Each of these perform his own Office in person, upon the day of In∣auguration. The Duke of Saxony bears the Sword, the Count Palatine places his meat on the Table, the King of Bohe∣mia bears his Cup, and delivers it him to drink: Marquesse of Brandenburg serveth him water to wash, and the three Bishops bless his meat; He receiveth three Crowns before he is fully settled into the Majesty of the Empire. The first is of Silver, for Germany: the second of Iron, for Lumbardy; and the third of Gold, for the Empire: The last is set on at Rome, for to this day it pre∣tends
to the Name of the Roman Em∣pire, and gives the title of Casar, Ro∣mani Imperii Imperatr. East-Frizeland; One of the chief Towns of this Region, is West-Phalia; It is most famous for Swine, and ex∣cellent Bacon, which is esteemed with us, one of the greatest dainties to com∣mend a Feast. In Cullen, It is a received tradition among the Inhabitants, that the bodies of the Wise-men which came from the East to worship Christ, are here Inter∣red. In Cleveland is a City called Aken, where the Emperour receives his Sil∣ver Crown from Germany, and doth great worship to a Clout, which they take to be our Saviours Mantle in which he was wrapped. BOHEMIA. THe scituation of this Kingdom is almost in the midst of Germany,
there is a Forrest called by the Name of Hercinian Forrest, held in the Romans time, to be nine daies journey in breadth, and in length at least forty. The River Albi which hath his ri∣sing in the Hercinian Wood, (if we will believe Report) there is often found in the Sands, lumps of pure Gold, which need no other refining, and very pre∣cious shells of great value, the water supplies that only defect which is to be found in their Land, the earth gives good corn, and their pastures breed as good cattel, there is Woods good store which harbour multitudes of Wild-Beasts, among the rest there is a wild Beast which they call Lomi▪ Armed by Nature with a strange defence against the Hounds which follow her, for they say she hath a kind of bladder hanging under her jaws, which in the Hunting she fills with a scalding hot water, and casts it upon the Dogs with that nimble∣ness that they are not able to avoid or pursue her, but oft times have their ve∣ry
hair fall off as from a drest Pig. There is a story passeth of one Zisca a Bohemian Captain (in the difference of the Hussites against the Pope) that when he had won so many Battels, as his very name began to be a terrour to the Foe, he was not content to be fear∣ed alive, but bethought himself how he might speak louder when he was dead; And therefore will'd his Souldiers, that they would flea him, and make a Drum of his skin, which he was perswaded, should ever beat victory before them, as oft as he was heard (though in a dead sound) by the enemy, whom he had so often crushed, while he was yet living. A wicked couzenage of Picardus, who possest great multitudes of these silly people, with an opinion, that he could recall them to that perfect state in which Adam was Created; placed them in an Island for that purpose, which he called Paradise, caused them to walk naked, and named his Sect A∣damites:
Horrible sins were committed under that pretence, promiscuous Whoredom, and Incest at their very Di∣vine Service. FRANCE. IN so great a multitude, we must look to find as much variety of Customs and Dispositions. It was the report of Caesar long since, and seconded by late Authours, that the French for the most part are of a fiery spirit for the first on∣set in any Action, but will soon Flag; They desire change of Fortunes, and passe not greatly whether to better or worse: Their Women very Jocund, of a voluble tongue, and as free of their speech, Complemental to strangers, and win more by their wit than their beauty, one and tother are great enticers of mens affections: Their Nobility have been reported to be liberal, but I sup∣pose that fashion is now worn out, for so it hath been noted in diverse, which
respect their purse more than their ho∣nour, and let pass the Service and De∣serts of worthy persons unrewarded, as if their gracious acceptance were a sufficient return of thanks for any Office a man can do them: They are practised to this garbe by their Peasantry▪ whom they reckon but as slaves, and command as their proper Servants, which the poor snakes take as a favour and are glad to be employed by their betters, that by their protection they may stand free from the injury of their equals. For the meanest of them are cruel, and af∣fect to oppresse their adversary, either by open violence or suit in Law, though to their own Ruine. They are very rea∣dy to take Arms, and serve in defence of King and Country, they need no more Press than the stroke of Drum, but are as rash in their atchievements; they will not wait upon Councel, but run as far on, as upon their strength they may, and when they find that fails, they will as soon give ground.
Aquitania. In this Province was fought the great Battel betwixt our Black Prince and John of France; where, with eight thousand he vanquished forty thousand, took the King Prisoner and his son Philip, 70 Earls, 50 Barons, and 1000 Gentlemen. Normandy; where our William the Conqueror was Duke. It was lost from his Successors in the time of King John: Her chief Cities are Roan, and Cane, memorable for the Siege of our English Henry the Fifth, and Verveille, Besieged by Philip the second of France, in the time of our Richard the First. Which when the King heard as he sate in his Pallace at Westminster (it is said) he sware he would never turn his back to France, till he had his revenge; and to make good his Oath, brake through the Walls, and justly performed his threat upon the Besieger.
The Low-Countries. The People are very thrifty, painful, and ingenuous in the invention of many pretty things, which draw many other Nations to them for traffique, and they lye as fit for it. They have the name for the first Authors of the Compass, Clock, and Printing: They are excel∣lent Artificers, for working of Pictures in Glass, for laying Colours in Oyl, for Tapestry and other Hangings; in brief, for any oeconomical commodity, either for use or Ornament: And in their own private families excel any other people. In the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, Luick the chief City of the University; Me∣morable for this one story, above any other in Christendome, That at one time there studied nine Kings sons, twen∣ty four Dukes sons, twenty nine Earls Sons, &c. Geldria. The Province stands on the East of Brabant, and North of Lumburg;
It is a very fertile soil, especially if it be well tilled, Her Pastures are excellent, insomuch that they feed up their Cattel to an incredible bigness and weight, a re∣port passeth of one Bull which weighed 3200 pound. It was killed at Antwerp 1570. Hague a Village, yet the fairest in Chri∣stendome, and seat of the States Coun∣cel. The report lyeth upon this Pro∣vince, of Margaret Sister to the Earl of Floris, that she brought at one birth 36 children, all living till they were Christ∣ned. Spain. A memorable story of King Rodericus▪ who lost both himself and Kingdome for a Rape committed upon the Daughter of Julian a noble Gentleman, and at that time Ambassador with the Moors in Africa. When the Father had under∣stood of his Daughters unworthy injury, he brought back his Revenge with him
30000 Horse, and 180000 Foot, of Moores and Sarazens, which discomfited the King, overthrew all the resistance which he could make, and bespread the Country with their Forces, where they and their Posterity stood firm, till with∣in the Memory of some living 1630. This change of State was before pro∣phesied, and concealed in a large Chest within that part of the Pallace, which both the last King and his Predecessors were fore-warned not to discover: But the hope of an inestimable Treasure made him transgress: and when he had entred, there appeared nothing but the portractures of Armed Moores, with a presage annexed, that when that part of the Pallace should be forced open, such Enemies should ruin Spain. The River Guadiana, which in one place glides under Ground for 15 Miles together, and gives the Spaniard an oc∣casion (as he will catch at any) to brag that they have 10000 Cattel daily feed∣ing upon one Bridge; yet give them
their own sense, the truth may be que∣stioned: For they have not such plenty of Meat, as they have of Sauce. It yields indeeds abundance of Oran∣ges, Limons, Capers, Dates, Sugar, Oil, Honey, Liquorish, Raisons, Saffron, Rice, excellent Sacks, and other Wines, and in some places Sheep, Goats, and swift Horses. They are extreamly proud, and the silliest of them pretend to a great porti∣on of Wisdom, which they would seem to express in a kind of reserved State, and silent Gravity; when perhaps their wit will scarce serve them to speak sense: But if once their Mouths be got too o∣pen, they esteem their breath too preci∣ous to be spent upon any other subject, than their own glorious actions. They are most unjust neglectors of other Na∣tions, and impudent vain flatterers of themselves, superstitious beyond any o∣ther people. In the City Saint Jago, in the Island of Gallicia, was St. James the Apostle
buryed, his Reliques kept, Worshipped, and visited by Pilgrims. ITALY. MEmorable, for Rhea a Virgin which was cloystered up into the Temple of Vesta, by her Uncle A∣mulius Silvius, that she might not bring forth an Heir to endanger his Title. Notwithstanding means was found, so that she conceived at once two Children by Mars, and was delivered among her Sisters Vestals. For this her self (as the censure was upon such Delinquents) was buryed alive, her Boys exposed to be destroyed. Italy is a happy Soil, pleasant and Fer∣tile, at all times moderate Weather, and healthful Air, full of Variety; as Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins, Taffaties, Grograms, Rash, Fustians, Gold-wyer, Armour, Allom, Glasses, &c. The Rich are very Rich, for Wealth will come with much labour in great abundance:
but the Poor are extream poor, for they are most of them very idle. Rome retains a 11 Miles round, and 200000 Inhabitants; a great part Fry∣ers, and such odd idle fellows, which pretend to Religion for want of other means to live, Cloyster themselves up to a single life, only to avoid the charge of Incumbrances of Marriage, not to se∣parate themselves from the World or desires of the Flesh; for among them they maintain commonly 40000 Curte∣zans in good Custom, and so Rich, that they are able to pay 30000 Duckets yearly to the Pope. The buildings in which they most glory in, are the Church of St. Peter, the Castle of St. Angelo, the Vaticane Library, and the Popes Pallace. The truth is, their Pride is enough to attire the Whore of Baby∣lon, as there can hardly be any other meant than Rome, She sits upon the Beast with seven Heads, for she was built up∣on seven Hills, was ruled first by seven Kings, and hath been since subject to
seven several forms of Government. HUNGARY. HEre are many▪ Waters of excel∣lent Vertue, whereof some turn Wood into Iron, others Iron into Brass; some very Medicinal for sundry Disea∣ses, others again so pestiferous, that they kill the Creature which doth but taste them. The like is reported of an Hiatus in the Ground, unaccessable by any but the fowls of the Air, and those fall sud∣daily dead with the stench which ascends from it. It is hard to believe what most Geo∣graphers report of her Fertility: That she yields Corn thrice in one year, al∣most without any Tillage or care of the Husband-man. Fruit of all kinds in great abundance, and Grapes which make an excellent, wholsome, and rich Wine; It breeds Cattel in such plenty, that this one Country, besides store of her own Inhabitants, sends Sheep and
Oxen into Forrain Nations which lye about her, and might say they suffice to feed all Europe with Flesh. Venison is not here any dainties, Does, Hares, Harts, Goats, Boars, &c. are every Mans Meat, and the Game common, as well to the Boors as Gentry. And so for Phesant, Partridge, Black-birds, Pige∣ons, most Fowl, wild and tame. The Earth is inricht with variety of Mines, which yields her plenty of Iron, Steel, Copper, Silver and Gold, Lead she hath not, and scarce at all any Tin. DENMARK. THe people are valiant and War∣like, strong of body, and big boned, and of a terrible countenane; ambitious of a glorious death, rather than a sluggish idle life. Such incredible plenty of Herring (near the Isle of Scunia) that (say they) are scarce able by main strength of Oars to Row out of the Harbour. Here are
furniture for War both by Sea and Land, Armour, Masts, Cables, Steel, Saddles, &c. POLAND. IT is well-nigh past belief which is re∣ported of their Multitudes of Bees, such as yield more Honey and Wax, then the people can find room for; they need here neither Art, nor care of the good Huswife to order their Hives, but naturally are their own Guardians, and provide so diligently for their own safety within the bulks of Trees; that they easily pass over the hardest winter without hurt. The Polanders have a good mind to Religion, but cannot fasten upon any one to their liking; and therefore they will try all Christians, they have been ever since the year 965. but from that time they have scarce slipt any Error, Schism, or Heresie, which hath crept in∣to the Church. Here are Jesuits, and
other of the Romish Sects. Here are Lutherans, and Calvinists, and Arians▪ Anabaptists, and Antirinitarians, none allowed, but all tollerated: And in∣deed Poland had the Seniority of Am∣sterdam, for that old saying; that if a Man had lost his Religion, here he might find it. They have one ancient Custom in their Churches, when the Gospel is Reading, the Nobility and Gentry un∣sheath their Swords; and stand as it were prepared to defend it with their lives a∣gainst any which dare violate it. In Samognia near to Livonia, a people there which is called the Peasants, who are most of them gross Idolaters: and are oftimes met in their Woods with horrid Visions, and are strangely coze∣ned by the Devil, with a belief that they can Prophesie. The silly blasphemers nourish in their House a poor Snake (like themselves) gathered out of some Ditch, and call it their God Ziemenike. Their greatest Commodity is of Honey, which they gather ready made to their
hands in their hollow Trees. PERSIA. FOr want of lawful Heirs to Camby∣ses their second King, their Prin∣ces consulted to salute him; whose Horse first neighed at a set meeting up∣on the Court Green before the Sun-risin. Darius Histaspes was one, and by the subtilty of his Horse-keeper car∣ryed the Crown; for the night before in the same ground, he had coupled a Mare with the Horse his Master should ride, which when the lustful▪ Steed mis∣sed, the next Morning being full of spi∣rit, no sooner had he set footing upon the place, but with much eagerness he snuffed and neighed after his Mare, and gave the quue to the other Princes to Proclaim Darius King of the Pesiians. This was he whom the Scriptures call Ahasuerus, he was Hesters Husband. The ancient Persians Customs were most of them Superstitious, but they
held nothing almost in so great reve∣rence as Water: It might not lawfully be soiled, so much as with a foul hand; but to piss, or cast rubbish, or a dead Carkase into their Rivers, was a kind of Sacriledge. They had many Wives, and more Concubines; for they were exceeding desirous of increase, and great Rewards were appointed by their King himself, for him that could most aug∣ment the number of his Subjects in one year. They seldom entred into any Consultation of State, till they had well armed themselves with drink; for then they thought they should be most free to speak what they most thought. To spit or laugh before their Prince, was a Crime well-nigh unpardonable: Some say that they bury not their dead, but cast them forth to be devoured by wilde Beasts, and thought him most happy which was soonest torn to mammocks: the rest their friends bewailed, as such who had lived impurely, and were therefore by this sign declared wor∣thy
of Hell only, without any Redemp∣tion. In Assyria, now Arzeram stands the most famous City Ninive, near the River Tigris, containing full three score Miles in compass; they had a Custom to sell their Virgins, which were fair and most desired, and tender the price into the common Treasury. The homelier sort were placed in Marriage with that Mo∣ney, to those which would accept of them for gain at least, if not for Beau∣ty. Bermudas ISLAND. THis Island having been formerly shunned by Travellers as most dangerous, and seldom seen by any, ex∣cept against their Wills, reputed to be rather a hold and habitation of Devils, then any fit place for men to abide in; was discovered by Sir John Gates, and Sir George Sommers in the year 1609. they found there in great abundance.
Fish, Fowl, Hogs, and other things for sustenance of Man: but no people, nor any kind of Cattel; Sir John, and Sir George having with them 150 Men, abode there nine Months: Most of these Men afterwards returning for England, and making it known to the Virginia. Company, obtained a Char∣ter from His Majesty, and so hold it. In Mr. Richard Moor the Governours time, he having spent three years of his Government, for the most part Forti∣fying the Country, &c. A wonderful annoyance fell out by silly Rats: These Rats coming at the first out of a Ship, few in number, increased in the space of two years or less so exceedingly, that they filled not only those places where they were first Landed. But swimming from place to place, spread themselves into all parts of the Country: Inso∣much, that there was no Island, though severed by the Sea from all other Lands, and many Miles distant from the Isles where the Rats had their Original,
but was pestred with them. They had their nests almost in every Tree, and in all places their Burrows in the ground (like Connies) to harbour in; They spared not the Fruits of Plants or Trees, neither the Plants themselves, but eat them up. When we had set our Corn, they would commonly come by troops the night following, or so soon as it be∣gan to grow, and dig it up again. If by diligent watching any of it were preser∣ved till it came to earing, it should then very hardly scape them; yea, it was a very difficult matter after they had it in their Houses, to save it from them; for they became noy some even to the per∣sons of Men. They used all diligence for the destroyng of them, nourishing many Cats wild and tame for that pur∣pose; they used Ratsbane, and many times set fire on the Woods, so as the fire might run half a Mile or more be∣fore it were extinct. Every Man in the Country was enjoyned to set twelve traps, and some of their own accord set
near a hundred, which they visited twice or thrice in a night; they trained up their Dogs to hunt them, wherein they grew so expert, that a good Dog in two of three hours space, would kill forty or fifty Rats: and other means they used to destroy them, but could not prevail, finding them still to increase against them, and continued with them till almost to the end of Captain Tuckers time (who was then Governour) but towards the end of his time it pleased God (by what means it is not well known) to take them away;Captain Tucker succeeded Mr. Moor Gover∣nour, arriving in May 1616. insomuch that Wild Cats and many Dogs that lived on them were famished: Some have attri∣buted this destruction of them to the encrease of Wild Cats, some to one thing, some to another; though none could positively conclude this, or that. It remaineth then, as we know God doth sometimes effect his will without subor∣dinate and secondary causes, and some∣times
against them: So we need not doubt but that in the speedy increase and spreading of these Vermine, as also in the preservation of so many of them by such weak means as they then en∣joyed, and especially in the suddain re∣moval of this great annoyance there was joyned with, and besides the ordinary and manifest means, a more immediate and secret work of God. In the Sommer Islands. THere is the Tortoys, which they call a Turckle, which having some affinity and resemblance with Fishes, Beasts, and Fowls; They are in the shape of their body like a Crab-fish, and have four fins, they are as great as three or four men can carry, the upper part of them is covered with a great shell, which they call a Galley patch, weighing about half a hundred weight, the Flesh that cleaveth to the inside of this being Roasted against the Fier, is
excellent Meat, almost like the Marrow of Beef, but the shell it self harder then horn; she hath also a shell on her belly not so hard, but being boyled it beco∣meth soft, like the sinews or gristle of Beef, and good Meat. These live in the Sea, spending the Spring time, and part of Sommer about these Islands, but the residue of the year, is not known where. They are like to Fowl in respect of smallness, and fashion of their heads and necks, which are wrinckled like a Tur∣kies, but white, and not so sharp Billed. They also breed their young of Eggs which thy lay. They resemble Beasts, in that their flesh is like Veal, but more hard and solid, and they feed always up∣on grass growing at the bottom of the water; neither can they abide any lon∣ger under water then they hold their breath, which the old ones will do long, but the young ones being chased to and fro, cannot continue two Minutes with∣out coming up to breathe. Shortly after their first coming in, the Male and Fe∣male
couple, which is there called Coot∣ing; this they continue some three days together, during which time, they will scarce separate though a Boat come to them, nor hardly when they are smit∣ten. Not long after, the she Turckle comes up by night upon some sandy Bay, and further up then the water u∣seth to flow, she digs a hole with her Fin in the sand some two foot deep, and there coming up several nights lays her Eggs; some half a bushel (which are a∣bout the bigness of a Hens Egg, and round as a Ball, and ch time covers them with sand very curiously, so that a Man shall hardly find the place. These Eggs (as it seems) are afterwards hatch∣ed by the heat of the Sun, and then by the providence of God (the means as yet unknown) are brought out of the Earth; for they could never perceive that she returns any more to them, and yet in likelihood they remain not long in the Earth after they are hatched, be∣cause (as is before said) they cannot live
without breathing. Sometimes is seen the young ones no bigger then a Mans hand, which some Fish will devour. They grow slowly, and seem to have a very long life; they'l sleep on the top of the Water, and were wont to sleep often on the Land, till the Country was peopled; they will also live out of the Water some three weeks, and that without Meat, but mourn and pine a∣way, they are very witty. Being on the Land turned upon their backs, they can no more without some help or advan∣tage recover themselves, by which means when they come on shore to lay their Eggs, they are easily taken, as al∣so they are when they are Cooting. But otherwise they take them for the most part by night, making a great light in a Boat, to which they will some∣times swim, and seldom shun; so that a Man standing ready with a staffe in his hand, at one end of which he hath a Soc∣ket, wherein is an Iron less then a Mans finger, four-square and sharp, with a
line fastned to it, he striketh this Iron in∣to the upper shell of the Turckle, it strikes so fast, that after she hath a lit∣tle tyred her self by swimming to and fro she is taken by it. They will live, the head being cut off four and twenty hours, so that if you cut the flesh with a knife, or touch it, it will tremble and shrink away. There is no meat will keep longer either fresh or salt. Out of the Description of Great Britain, these Stories following are Remarkable and Pleasant. BRitain seated in the Ocean, hath her praises in honourable Eulo∣gies: That Britain is the Seas High Admiral, and the Fortunate Island, whose Air is more temperate then France; whose Soil bringeth forth all Grain in abundance, whose Seas pro∣duce Orient Pearl, whose Fields are the
seat of a Summer Queen; her wildest parts free from wild Beasts, and her chief City worthily named Augusta: So as we may truly say with the Psal∣mist, Our Lives are fallen in pleasant places; Yea, we have a fair Inheri∣tance. To the Praise of this Island, are these following Verses. England, fierce Land, Worlds Angle, fer∣tile Art, Rich Isle, thou needst no other Countries Mart; Each other Country yet thy succour needs. England, Joyes Land, be free and Joyous long Free Race, free Grace, free kind, free Mind and Tongue, Tet hands pass tongues for free and Glori∣ous Deeds.
KENT. DOver with the Castle is account∣ed by Mathew Paris the Monk, the Lock and Key to the whole Realm of England, fatal for the death of King Stephen, and surrender of King John therein hapning. An accident hapned in the year 1586. the fourth day of August, in this County at Mottingham, a Town 8 miles distant from London, suddenly the ground began to sink, and three great Elms thereon growing, were carryed so deep into the bowels of the Earth, that no part of them could any more be seen; the hole left in compass fourscore yards about, and a line of 50 fathams plum∣med into it doth find no bottom. The City of Canterbury hath been ho∣noured with the Presence and Corona∣tions of King John, and Queen Isabel his Wife; with the Marriages of King Henry the third, and of King Edward
the first; and with the Interments of Edward the Black Prince, King Henry the fourth, and of Queen Joan his Wife: King Stephen and Maud his Queen was buryed at Feversham. SUSSEX. A Battel was fought at Battle, when the hazard of England was tryed in one days fight, and Harold the King gave place to his Conqueror by losing his life among sixty seven thousand, nine hundred seventy four English men be∣sides; whose bloud so spilt, gave name to the place in French, Sangue Lac. And the Soil after Rain becoming of a red∣dish colour, caused William of Newbery to write, that if there fell any small sweet showers in the place where so great a slaughter of the English was made, presently sweateth forth very fresh bloud out of the Earth, as if the evidence thereof did plainly declare the voice of bloud there shed, and cryed
still from the Earth unto the Lord. William the Bastard, Duke of Nor∣mandy, making his claim to the Crown of England, by Affinity, Adoption, and Promise, arrived at a Port in Sussex cal∣led Pensey, with 896 ships furnished for War the 28th. of September, in the year 1066. And the 14th. of October follow∣ing being Saturday, near Hastings in the same County joyned Battel with Ha∣rold King of England, who in the Field Valiantly fighting, was there slain by the shot of an Arrow into his brains, and with him dyed his two Brethren, and 67974 men besides. The place where they fought, ever since doth in Memo∣ry thereof bear the name of Battel, where the Heptarchy of the Saxons was brought to their last Period. Having all their Laws altered, their Nobles dis∣placed, and all men disherited, all seized into the Normans hand, who made him∣self Lord of all, and on the day of Christ, his Nativity in the same year, was Crowned at Westminster King of
England, which he governed the space of 20 years, 8 Months, and 16 days. But Places of other Note in this County is, that from Basham, Earl Ha∣rold taking the Sea for his delight, in a small Boat was driven upon the Coast of Normandy, where by Duke William he was retained, till he had sworn to make him King after Edward Confessors Death: which Oath being broken, the Bastard arrived at Pensey, and with his Sword revenged that perjury. SURREY. THis County is stored with many Princely Houses; yea, and five of His Majesties so Magnificently built, that of some she may well say, no Shire hath none such, as is None-such indeed. And were not Richmond a fatal place of Englands best Princes, it might in E∣steem be ranked with the Richest: For therein dyed the great Conqueror of France, King Edward the third, the
beautiful Anne Daughter to Charls the Fourth, Emperour, and intirely beloved Wife to King Richard the second; the most wise Prince, King Henry the se∣venth, and the Barest of her Sex, the Mirrour of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, the Worlds Love, and Subjects Joy. In Chertsey Abbey King Henry the sixth, who was deposed and made a∣way in the Tower of London, was first Interred without all Funeral Pomp; but for his holy life was imputed a Saint: and lastly translated, and In∣tombed at Windsor. Hant-shire. NEar Ringwood, from God and peoples service, to Beast and Luxury, thirty six Parish Churches were converted and pulled down by the Conqueror, and thirty miles of circuit inforrested for his Game of Hunting. Wherein his Sons, Richard and Rufus, with Henry the second son to Duke Ro∣bert
his first, felt by hasty death the hand of Justice and Revenge: For in the same Forrest, Richard by a blasting of a pestilent Air, Rufus by a shot taken for a Beast, and Henry as Absalom hanged by a bough, came to their untimely ends. At so dear a rate the pleasure of Dogs, and harbour for Beasts were bought in the bloud of these Princes. In the City of Winchester was Richard and Rufus Interred, their bones by Bi∣shop Fox were gathered and shrined in little gilt Coffers fixed upon a wall in the Quire, where still they remain care∣fully preserved. The Wars betwixt Maud the Em∣press, intituled Lady of England, unto whom all the Nobility had sworn Alle∣giance. And King Stephen Earl of Bol∣loign her Cousin German; was prosecu∣ted with such variable Fortunes in many conflicts on both parts, that Stephen himself was by her taken Prisoner, and retained in Irons with other extremities used. But the success of War altering,
Maud the Empress to save her own life, adventured through the Host of her E∣nemy, laid in a Coffin fained to be dead, and so was carryed in a Horse-Litter from Winchester to Lutegershall Vices, and Glocester, and thence to Oxford, whence the year following she escaped as dangerously by deceiving the Scout Watch in a deep Snow, Anno 1141. Wight Island. IT is reported that in the year 1176. and twenty three of King Henry the second, that in this Island it rained a shower of bloud, which continued for the space of two hours together, to the great wonder and amazement of the people that beheld it with fear. Devonshire. FRom the Port of Plymouth Sir Francis Drake, that potent Man at Sea setting forth in the year 1577. In the
space of two years and ten Months did compass the circle of the Earth by Sea. Henry Holland, Grand-Child to John Holland, half Brother to King Richard the second, siding with Lancaster against Edward the fourth, whose Sister was his Wife, was driven to such misery as it is reported, that he was seen all torn and bare-footed to beg his living in the Low-Countries: and lastly his body was cast upon the shore of Kent (as if he had perished by shipwrack:) so uncertain is Fortune in her endowments, and the state of Man, notwithstanding his great Birth. Cornwall. BEsides the abundance of Fish that do suffice the Inhabitants, the Pil∣chard is taken, who in great Skuls swarm about the Coast: whence being tran∣sported to France, Spain, and Italy, yield a yearly Revenue of gain unto Cornwall. There are Rocks that are not destitute
of Gold nor Silver; yea, and Diamonds shaped and pointed Angle-wise, and smoothed by nature her self, whereof some are as big as Walnuts, inferiour to the Orient only in blackness and hard∣ness. Memorable matters for Antiquity and strangeness of sight, are these, at Boskenna, is a Trophy erected, which are eighteen stones placed round in com∣pass, and pitched twelve foot each from others, with another far bigger in the very center. These do shew some Vi∣ctory there attained either by the Ro∣mans, or else King Athelstone. At the foot of the Rocks near unto St. Michaels Mount, in the Memory of our Fathers were digged up Spear-heads, Axes, and Swords of Brass wrapped in Linne, the Weapons that the Cimbrians and ancient Britains anciently used. There also the Wring-Cheese doth shew it self, which are huge Rocks heap∣ed one upon another, and the lowest of them the least, fashioned like a Cheese
lying pressed under the rest of those Hills, which seemeth very dangerous to be passed under. But near to Pensans, and unto Mounts-bay, a far more strange Rock standeth; namely, Main-Amber, which lyeth mounted upon others of meaner size, with so equal a counter∣poize, that a Man may move it with the push of his finger; but no strength re∣move it out of his place. Sommerset-shire. THis Country, besides other Com∣modities in some places is inrich∣ed by Lead-mines, which yields great Plenty, the most Marchantable Com∣modity that is in England, and vented into all parts of the World: Some pla∣ces are beautified with Diamonds, as St. Vincent Rock, whereof there is great plenty, and so bright of colour, as they might equalize Indian Diamonds if they had their hardness; yet being so many, and so common, they are less
sought after or commended. In this Country is the City of Bathe, which takes name of the hot Baths: A place of continual concourse for Persons of all degrees, and almost of all diseases: who by Divine Providence do very of∣ten find relief there, the Springs thereof by reason of their Mineral and sulphu∣rous passage, being of such exceeding power and medicinal heat, as that they Cure and Conquer the rebellions stub∣bornness of corrupt humors. At Dunstere, where (as is reported) a great Lady obtained of her Husband so much Pasture Ground in common by the Town side, for the good and bene∣fit of the Inhabitants, as she was able in a whole day to go about bare-foot. Wilt-shire. SAlisbury the chief City, in which every street almost hath a River running thorow in her midst. The Ca∣thedral a most rich Magnificent Church,
wherein are as many Windows as there are days in the year, as many cast Pillars of Marble, as there are hours in the year: and as many Gates for entrance, as there are months in the year. Aurelius Ambrosus buryed at Ston∣heng, Anno 500. THis ancient Monument was erect∣ed by Aurelius, Surnamed Am∣brosus King of the Britiains, whose No∣bility in the Reign of Vortiger (his Coun∣trys scourge) about the year 475. by the Treachery of the Saxons, on a day of parley were there slaughtered, and their bodys there Interred. In Memory whereof, this King Aurel caused this Trophy to be set up, Admirable to Po∣sterities. Both in form and quantity; the matter thereof are stones in great big∣ness, containing twenty eight foot and more in length, and ten in bredth: these are set in the ground by two and two,
and a third laid Gate-wise over-thwart fastn'd with tenons & mortasses wrought in the same, which seem very dangerous to all that pass there under. The form is round, and as it seemeth hath been circulated with three ranks of these stones: Many whereof are now fallen down, and the uttermost whereof con∣taineth in compass three hundred foot by measure of assize. They all are rough, and of a gray colour, standing within a Trench that hath been much deeper. In this place this foresaid King Aurelius, with two more of the Brittish Kings his Successors have been buryed with many more of their Nobility: and in this place under little banks, to this day are found by digging bones of Mighty men, and Armour of large and ancient fashion. Not far hence is seen the ruins of an old Fortress, thought by some to be built there by the Romans, when this Kingdom was possessed by their Emperours.
Bark-shire. IN Reading, in the Collegiate Church of the Abbey, King Henry the first and Queen (lay both veiled and Crown∣ed) with their Daughter Maud the Em∣press, called the Lady of England, were Interred, as the private History of the place avoucheth. But of far greater Magnificence and State is the Castle of Windsor: A most Princely Pallace and Mansion of His Majesty. In this Castle was King Ed∣ward the third born, and here held at one and the same time Prisoners, John King of France, and David King of Scot∣land. Neither was it ever graced with greater Majesty then by the Institution of the most Honourable Order of the Garter, the invention thereof some as∣cribe to be from a Garter falling from his Queen, or rather from Joan Coun∣tess of Salisbury, a Lady of an uncom∣parable beauty, as she danced before
him, whereat the by-standers smiling, he gave the impress to check all evil con∣ceits: and in Golden Letters imbellish∣ed the Garter with this French Posie; Honi Soit Qui Maby Pense. The Princely Chappel of Windsor is graced with the bodies of Henry the 6th. and Edward the 4th. Kings of England; the one of Lan∣caster, the other of York, as also King Henry the 8th. lyeth there Interred. Finch-hampsted: For wonder inferi∣our to none, where (as our Writers do witness) that in the year a thousand one hundred, a Well boiled up with streams of bloud, and fifteen days together con∣tinued that Spring, whose Waters made red all others where they came; to the great amazement of the beholders. Middlesex. LOndon: This City doth shew as the Cedars among the other trees, being the seat of the British Kings, the Chamber of the English, the Model
of the Land, and the Mart of the World. For thither are brought the silk of Asia, the spices from Africa, the balms from Grecia, and the riches of both the Indies, East and West. No City standing so long in Fame, nor any for Divine and Politick Government may with her be compared. In King Johns time a Bridge of Stone was made over Thames, upon nineteen Arches, for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like again cannot be found in the World. Essex. IN the year 1581. an Army of Mice so over ran the Marshes in Deugy Hundred, near unto South-Minster in this County, that they shore the grass to the very roots, and so tainted the same with their venemous teeth, that a great Murrain fell upon the Cattel which grazed thereon, to the great loss of their owners.
Suffolk. RAlph Coggeshall in the Monuments of Colchester, declareth that a Fish in all parts like a Man was taken near Or∣ford, and for six Months was kept in the Castle: whence after he escaped, went again to the Sea. As strange, but most true, was a crop of Pease, that without tillage or sowing grew in the Rocks, betwixt this Orford and Aldebrough, in the year 1555. when by unseasonable weather a great dearth was in the Land, there in August were gathered above one hundred Quarters, and in blossoming remained as many more, where never grass grew, or Earth ever seen, but hard sollid Rocks three yards deep under the roots. Hereford-shire. AT Langley in this Country was bu∣ryed Richard the second, that un∣fortunate
King, who in the Cell of Fry∣ers Preachers was there first buryed: but afterwards removed and enshrined at Westminster: And in another Lang∣ley, near the East from thence was born that Pontifical Breakspear, Bishop of Rome, known by the name of Hadrian the fourth (and famous for his Stirrup∣holding by Frederick the Emperour) whose breath was lastly stopped by a fly that flew into his mouth. Bedford-shire. IN the year 1399. immediately be∣fore those Civil Wars broke out between the Princes of York and Lanca∣ster. The River Ouse near unto Har∣wood stood suddenly still, and refrained to pass any further; so that forward men passed three miles together on foot in the very depth of her channel, and backwards the waters swelled unto a great height, which was observed by the judicious, to fore-tell some unkind
division that shortly should arise. Buckingham-shire. A Shridge Town hath been in great repute for the bloud (supposed out of Christs sides) brought out of Germany by Henry the Eldest son of Ri∣chard King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwal, whereunto resorted great con∣course of people for Devotion, and A∣doration thereof. But when the Sun∣shine of the Gospel had pierced through such clouds of darkness: it was percei∣ved apparently to be only Honey cla∣rified and coloured with Saffron, as was openly shewed at Pauls Cross by the Bishop of Rochester, the twenty fourth of February, 1538. Oxford shire. MEmorable places of Note, either for Actions therein happening,
or for their own famous esteem, are the Roll-rich-stones standing near unto Eni∣sham, in the South of this shire, a Mo∣nument of huge stones set round in com∣pass, in manner of Stone-henge, of which fabulous Tradition hath reported for sooth, that they were Metamorpho∣sed from men, but in truth were there erected upon some great Victory obtain∣ed in the year 876. Wood-stock is a most ancient and Mag∣nificent Pallace, built to that glory by King Henry the first, and enlarged with a Labyrinth of many windings by King Henry the second, to hide from his jea∣lous Juno, his intirely beloved Concu∣bine Rosamond Clifford, a Damosel of surpassing beauty; where notwith∣standing, followed by a Clew of silk that fell from her lap, she was surprized and poysoned by Queen Eleanor his Wife: and was buryed at God-stow Nunnery, in the midst of the Quire under a hearse of silk, set about with lights.
Glocester-shire. THe Inhabitants in some parts of this shire, injoy a private cu∣stom to this day, that the Goods and Lands of condemned persons fall unto the Crown, but only for a year and a day, and then return to the next Heirs, contrary to the custom of all England besides. Glocester City: In this Church the unfortunate Prince, King Edward the se∣cond under a Monument of Alablaster doth lye, who being murdered at Barkly Castle, by the cruelty of French Isabel his Wife was there Intombed. And not far from him another Prince as unfortu∣nate; namely, Robert Curthoise the El∣dest son of William the Conquerour, lyeth in a painted Wooden tomb in the midst of the Quire, whose eyes were pluckt out in Cardiff Castle, wherein he was kept prisoner twenty six years, with all contumelious indignities, until
through extream Anguish he ended his life. Barkley Castle, where King Edward the second was through his Fundament run into his bowels with a red burning spit. Tewkesbury the fatal period of King Henry the sixth his Government, and the wound of the Lancastrian cause; for in a Battel there fought in 1471. Prince Edward the only Son of King Henry, had his brains dashed out in a most shameful manner, the Queen his Mother taken prisoner, and most of the Favourites slain and beheaded. And at Alderley a little Town standing eight miles from the Se∣vern, upon the hills to this day are found Cockles, Periwinckles, and Oisters of sollid stone: which whether they have been shell-fish and living Creatures, or else the sports of Nature in her Works. Let the Natural Philosophers dispute and Judge.
Hereford-shire OF rare Note in this shire are said to be Bone-well, a Spring not far from Richards Castle, wherein are con∣tinually found little fishes bones, but not a fin seen: and being wholly cleansed thereof, will notwithstanding have again the like, whether naturally produced, or in veins thither brought, no man know∣eth. But more admirable was the Work of the Omnipotent in the year 1571. When the Macley-Hill in the East of the shire rouzed it self out of a dead sleep, with a roaring noise removed from the place where it stood, and for three days together travelled from her first site, to the great amazement and fear of the beholders: It began to journey upon the 7th. day of February, being Saturday, at six of the Clock at night, and by seven the next morning had gone forty paces, carrying with it
sheep in their Coats, hedge-rows, and trees, whereof some were over-turned, and some that stood upon the Plain, are firmly growing upon the Hill; those that were East were turned West, and those in the West were set in the East: in which remove it overthrew Kinna∣ston Chappel, and turned two High∣ways near a hundred yards from their usual place, paths formerly trod. The ground thus travelling, was about twen∣ty six Acres, which opening her self with Rocks and all, bare the Earth be∣fore it four hundred yards space without any stay, leaving that which was Pastu∣rage in place of the Tillage, and the Til∣lage over-spread with Pasturage. Last∣ly, over-whelmed her lower parts, mounted to an Hill of twelve Fathoms high, and there rested her self after three days travel; remaining his mark, that so laid his hand upon this Rock, whose power hath poysed the Hills in his ballance.
Worcester-shire. IN the midst of the Quire in St. Ma∣rys Church in Worcester City, resteth the body of King John (the great with∣stander of the Popes proceedings) un∣der a Monument of white Marble in Princely Vestures, with his Portraiture thereon according to life. Warwick-shire. COventry City: The Citizens ha∣ving highly offended their first Lord Leofrick, had their privileges in∣fringed, and themselves oppressed with many heavy Tributes, whose Wife La∣dy Godiva pitying their Estates, unces∣santly sued for their Peace, and that with such importunacy, as hardly could be said whether was greater, his hatred, or her love; at last over-come with her continual intercessions, he granted her suit upon an uncivil, and (as he thought)
an unacceptable condition (which was) that she should Ride naked through the face of the City, and that openly at high Noon-day: This notwithstanding she thankfully accepted, and performed the Act accordingly injoyed; for this Lady Godiva stripping her self of all rich attire, let loose the tresses of her fair hair, which on every side so covered her nakedness, that no part of her body was uncivil to sight: whereby she redeemed the former freedom, and remissions of such heavy Tributes. At Gofford Gate in Coventry, did hang the shield-bone of a Wild-bore, far big∣ger then the greatest Ox bone: with whose snout the great pit called Swans∣well was turned up, and was slain by the famous Guy. At Leamington, far from the Sea, a Spring of Salt water boileth up, and Newenham Regis most soveraign water against the Stone, green Wounds, Ul∣cers, and Impostumes, and drank with Salt looseth, but with Sugar bindeth
the body, and turneth Wood into Stone. Northampton-shire. NOtwithstanding the simple and gentle sheep, of all Creatures the most harmless: are now become so Ra∣venous, that they begin to devour men, waste fields, and depopulate houses; if not whole Town-ships, as one merrily hath written. Rutland-shire. NEar the Lord Harringtons house Burley, standeth Okham a fair Market-town, which Lordship the said Lord Baron enjoyeth, with a Royalty somewhat extraordinary, which is this: If any Noble by birth come within the precinct of the same Lordship, he shall forfeit as an homage a shooe from the Horse whereon he rideth, unless he re∣deem it at a price with Money. In wit∣ness
whereof, there are many Horse∣shooes nailed upon the Shire-hall door, some of large size and ancient fashion. Leicester-shire. KIng Richard the third, (vid.) Crouch-back Richard the Usur∣per, who from the City of Leicester set forth in one day in great Pomp, and in battel-aray, to keep the Crown sure up∣on his own helmet in a sore fought field, yielded both it and his life, unto the Head and Hands of Henry of Rich∣mond his Conquerour, and the next day was brought back like a Hog, naked and torn, and with contempt without tears obscurely buryed in the Gray-Fryers in this City; whose suppression hath suppressed the Plot place of his Grave, and only the Stone-Chest wherein he was laid (a drinking trough now for Horses in a common Inn) re∣taineth the Memory of that great Mo∣narchs Funeral: And so did a Stone in
the Church and Chappel of St. Ma∣ries, inclose the Corps of the proud and pontifical Cardinal Wolsey, who had prepared for himself a far more richer Monument. Lutterworth: Where the famous John Wickliffe, Englands Morning-Star, di∣spersed the clouds of all Papistical dark∣ness, by preaching the Gospel in that his charge, and stile of his Pen; so pier∣cing in power, that the Man of sin ever since hath been better known to the world. Lincoln-shire. THis Country affordeth great Plenty of Fowl and Fish, exceed∣ing any other in the Realm, wherein at some times and season of the year, hath been taken in Nets. In August at one draught, above three thousand Mallards, and other Fowls of the like kind, At Harlaxton was plowed up a brazen Vessel, wherein was inclosed a Golden
Helmet of an ancient fashion, set with precious stones, which was presented to Katherine of Spain, Wife and Dowager to King Henry the eight. At Bullingbrooke was King John poy∣soned by Simon a Monk of Snsted Ab∣bey, and of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the first, the Mirrour of Wed∣lock, and Love to the Commons, who at Harby near Bullingbrooke, his Birth place, ended her life. Nottingham-shire. IN this Town are many strange Vaults hewed out of the Rocks, and those under the Castle of an espci∣al note; one for the story of Christs passion engraven in the Walls, and cut by the hand of David the second, King of Scots, whilst he was therein detained prisoner. Another wherein the Lord Mortimer was surprized in the Non-age of King Edward the third ever since bearing the name of Mortimers Hole;
these have their stairs and several rooms made artificially even out of the Rocks, as also in that Hill are dwelling Houses with winding stairs, windows, chimneys, and room above room, wrought all out of the same Rock. Darby-shire. THings of strange note are the hot water Springs bursting forth of the ground at Buxton, where out of the Rock within the compass of eight yards, nine Springs arise, eight of them warm, but the ninth very cold. These run from under a fair square building of free stone, and about threescore paces off, receive another hot Spring from a well, near unto which another very cold Spring bubled up, daily experience sheweth they are good for the stomach and sinews, and very pleasant to bathe the body in. Not far thence is Elden hole, the Waters that trickle from the top of that Cave (which indeed is very
spacious, but of a low and narrow en∣trance) do congeal into stone, and hang as Ickles in the roof very white, and somewhat Christal-like. And seven miles thence upon a Mounted hill, stand∣eth a Castle, under which there is a hole or Cave in the ground of a marvellous capacity, which is commonly called the Devils Arse in the Peak. Shrop-shire hath nothing remarka∣ble. The County Palatine of Chester. CHeshire having been made a Prin∣cipality by Richard the 2d. and styled himself Prince of Chester, King Henry the 3d. gave it to his eldest Son Prince Edward, against whom Lewlin Prince of Wales gathered a mighty Band, and with them did the Country much harm, even unto the Cities gates. With the like Skar Fiers it had oft times been afrighted, which
they lastly defenced with a Wall made of the Welsh mens heads, on the South side of Dee in Hanbridge. Chester in the days of King Edgar, was in most flourishing Estate, wherein he had the Homage of eight other Kings, who rowed his Barge from St. Johns to his Pallace, himself holding the Helm as their Supreme. Lancashire. BY the civil Wars of York and Lan∣caster was bred and brought forth that bloudy division and fatal strife of the Noble Houses, which for many years together molested the peace and quiet of the Land, and defiled the earth with bloud: there were thirteen fields fought, and three Kings of England, one Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marquess, eighteen Earls, one Viscount, and three and twenty Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen, lost their lives in the same; yet at last, by the happy
Marriage of Henry the seventh, King of England, next heir to the house of Lancaster, with Elizabeth Daughter and heir to Edward the fourth of the house of York; the White and red Roses were conjoyned in the happy uniting of those two divided Families. York-shire. HAlifax once called Horton, and touching the alteration of the name, this pretty story is related of it; namely, that a Clerk (for so they call him) being far in Love with a Maid, and by no means either of long praises or large promises, able to gain like affection at her hands: when he saw his hopes frustrate, and that he was not like to have his purpose of her, turned his love into rage, and cut of the Maids head, which being afterwards hung upon an Ewe tree, common people counted it as an hallowed Relique till it was rotten: And afterward (such was the credulity
of that time) it maintained the opinion of reverence and Religion still, for the people resorted thither on Pilgrimage, and perswaded themselves, that the little veins that spread out between the bark and body of the Ewe-tree like fine threds were the very hairs of the Maids head: Hereupon it was called by this name Haligfax, or Haly-fax, that is, Ho∣ly-hair. Under Knaushrouh there is a Well called Dropping-well, in which the Waters spring not out of the veins of the earth, but distil and trickle down from the Rocks that hang over it; it is of that vertue and efficacy, that it turns Wood into Stone; for what Wood so∣ever is put into it, will be shortly cover∣ed over with a stony bark, and be turn∣ed into stone, as hath been often obser∣ved. St. Wilfrids Needle, a place very fa∣mous in times past for the narrow hole in the close vaulted room under the ground, by which womens honesties
were wont to be tryed; for such as were chaste pass through with much facility, but as many as had plaid false, were mi∣raculously held fast, and could not creep through. The West Riding of York-shire. THose Mountains near unto Rich∣mond, on the top whereof are found certain stones much like unto sea∣winkles, Cockles, and other Sea fish, which if they be not the wonders of Na∣ture, we may deem to be the undoubt∣ed tokens of the general deluge, that in Noahs time over-flowed the whole face of the Earth. Also the River Swale, among the En∣glish was reputed a very Sacred River, and Celebrated with an universal glory; for that (the English Saxons first em∣bracing Christianity) in one day above ten thousand men, besides a Multitude of Women and Children, were there∣in baptized unto Christ, by the hands of Paulinus Arch-bishop of York.
The North and East Riding. PLaces of eminent Note, are Whitby, where are found certain stones fa∣shioned like Serpents, folded, and wrap∣ed round in a Reath, even the very pas∣times of Nature, who when she is wea∣ried (as it were) with serious works, sometimes forgeth and shapeth things by way of sport and recreation; so that by the credulous they are thought to have been Serpents, which a Coat or crust of stones had now covered all o∣ver, and by the prayers of St. Hilda turned to stones. And also there are certain fields here adjoyning, where Geese flying over fall down suddenly to the ground, to the great admiration of all men. Ounsbery hill; besides a Spring of Me∣dicinable waters for the eyes, is a Prog∣nostication unto her Neighbours, whose head being covered with a cloudy cap, presageth some tempestuous storms or
showers to follow. At Huntly Nabe, are stones found at the roots of certain Rocks, of divers bigness, so artificially shaped round by nature in manner of a Globe, as if they had been made by the Turners hand. In which (if you break them) are found stony Serpents, en∣wrapped round like a reath, but most of them headless. The Bishoprick of Durham. THings of rare note observed in this shire, are three pits of a won∣derful depth, commonly called the Hell Kettles, which are adjoyning near unto Darlington, whose waters are somewhat warm. These are thought to come of an Earth-quake, which happened in the year 1179. whereof the Chronicle of Tinmouth maketh mention, whose Re∣cord is this, On Christmas-day at Ox∣enhall in the Territory of Darlington, within the Bishoprick of Durham, the ground heaved up aloft, like unto a high
Tower, and so continued all that day, as it were unmoveable until the Evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that it made all the Neighbour dwellers sore afraid; and the earth swallowed it up, and made in the same place a deep pit, which is there to be seen for a testi∣mony unto this day. Of no less admiration are certain stones lying within the River Weere, at Butterbee near Durham, from whose ebb and low-water in the Summer, issueth a certain Salt reddish water, which with the sun waxeth white, and growing into a thick substance, becometh a necessary salt to the use of the by-dwellers. Westmorland nothing worth noting. Cumberland. THe Rivers in this Country feed a kind of Muskle that bringeth forth Pearl, wherein the mouth of the Irt, as they lye gaping and sucking in dew, the Country people gather and
sell to the Lapidaries, to their own lit∣tle, and the buyers great gain. But the Mines Royal of Copper, whereof this Country yieldeth much, is for use the Richest of all: at Keswick and Newland, is the black lead gotten, whose plenty maketh it of no great esteem, otherwise a Commodity that could hardly be missed. At Burgh upon the sand, was the fa∣tal end of our famous Monarch King Edward the first, who there leaving his Wars unfinished against Scotland, left his troubles, and soon missed life, to his untimely and soon lamented death. And at Salkelds upon the River Eden, a Monument of seventy stones, each of them ten foot high above ground, and one of them at the entrance fifteen, as a Trophy of Victory, was erected. These are by the by-dwellers called Long Megg and her Daughters.
Northumberland. THe chiefest Commodity that en∣richeth Country, is that which we call Sea-Coals, whereof there is such plenty and abundance digged up, as they do not only return a great gain to the Inhabitants, but procure also much plea∣sure and profit to others. No place of this Province vents forth so many of these Sea-Coals into other Regions as New-Castle doth. The Inhabitants of Morpeth set their own Town on fire in the year 1215. in the spight they bare to King John, for that he and his Rutars over ran these Countries. Man Island. THis Commodity makes this Island more happy then we are here, for the people are there free from all necessary commencements of Suits,
from long and dilatory Pleas, and from frivolous Feeing of Lawyers. No Judge or Clerks of the Court take there any penny for drawing Instruments, or ma∣king of Processes. All Controversies are there determined by certain Judges, without writings or other Charges, and them they call Deemsters, and chuse forth among themselves. If any com∣plaint be made to the Magistrate for wrongs either done or suffered, he pre∣sently taketh up a stone, and fixeth his mark upon it, and so delivereth it unto the party Plaintiff, by vertue of which he both calls his adversary to appear∣ance, and to produce his Witnesses. If the case fall out to be more litigious, and of greater consequence than can easily be ended, it is then referred to twelve men, whom they term the Keys of the Island. And this Island is so well ma∣naged for matter of Rule and civil Dis∣cipline, that every man there possesseth his own in peace and safety. No man lives in dread or danger of losing what
he hath. Men are not there inclined to robbing, or thieving, or licentious li∣ving. This Isle prohibits the customary manner of begging from door to door, detesting the disorders, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical of Neighbour-Nations. That which deserves to be committed to Memory, is, that the Women of this Country, wheresoever they go out of their doors, gird themselves about with the winding-sheet that they purpose to be buryed in, to shew themselves mind∣ful of their Mortality; and such of them as are at any time condemned to dye, are sowed within a sack, and flung from a Rock into the Sea. This Island is in length 29 Miles, the widest part is scarce nine Miles, the whole compass about, is fourscore and two Miles.
Holy Island. THis Island from East to West is a∣bout two thousand two hundred and fifty paces, so that the circumference cannot be great. Farn Isle. THe bredth of this Isle is but five Miles, and the length no more; the whole circumference extends it self no further then to fifteen Miles. Garnsey. THis Isle lyeth in length from Plim∣mouth-bay South-west, to Lancross de Anckers North-east, thirteen Miles; in bredth from St. Martins point South-east, to the Howe North-west, nine miles; and is in circuit thirty six miles. In this Isle is neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or any other venemous Crea∣ture,
whereas Jersey hath great plenty, their fields in the Summer time are so naturally garnished with Flowers of all sorts, that a Man (being there) might conceit himself to be in a pleasant Arti∣ficial Garden: Among the Rocks is found a hard stone, which we term Eme∣rill. This stone is serviceable for many purposes, and many Trades, as Glasiers, &c. but especially for the Gold-smiths and Lapidaries, to cut their precious stones. Jersey. THis Island is in length ten miles, and in bredth six miles, the whole cir∣cuit of the Island being thirty eight miles. Pembroke-shire, in this shire nothing remarkable.
Caermarden-shire. IN the ruins of Carreg-Castle, which stood mounted on a high hill, under which many Vaults and spacious Caves far into the ground are seen, wherein is thought the people unable to fight, were therein secured in time of their Wars. Where also is a Well, that in this place twice in four and twenty hours ebbing, and twice flowing, resem∣bleth the unstable Motions of the main Sea. Glamorgan-shire. THings of strange note, that in a Rock or Cliff upon the Sea-side, and Island of Barry, lying near the South-east point of this Country, is heard out of a little chink, the noise as it were of Smiths at their work, one while the blowing of Bellows to increase the heat, then the stroaks of the hammer, and
sound of the Anvil; sometimes the noise of the Grind-stone in grinding of Iron Tools, then the hissing sparks of Steel-gads▪ as they fly from their beat∣ing, with the puffing noise of flames in a Furnace. More Westward from hence, upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in a sandy plain about an hundred paces from Severn, there springeth a Well, though not of the clearest water, whereat the flowing and fulness of the Sea can hard∣ly any water be gotten, but at the ebb and fall of the Tide, it walloweth up a main. And upon the same shore more North and by West, on the top of a hill called Minyd-Margan, is erected a Monument inscribed with a strange Character, and as strange a conceit held thereof by the by-dwellers, whose opinions are posses∣sed, that if any Man read the same, he shall shortly after dye.
Monmouth. OUr King Henry the V the great Triumpher over France, was born in Monmouth. Brecknock-shire. THe Welshmen relate of a Prince na∣med Brechavius, the Father of an holy off-spring, whose twenty four Daughters were all of them Saints. From the top of a Hill, in Welsh called Mounch-devuy, or Cadier Arthur; if any man from the North-east Rock cast their Cloaks, Hats, and Staves, notwith∣standing will never fall, but with the Air and wind return back, and blow up; neither will any descend from that Cliff being so cast, unless it be stone or some Metalline substance, affirming the cause to be the Clouds, which are seen to rack much lower than the top of that hill.
As strange a tale is told of the My Llynsavathan, two Miles East from Brec∣nock, which at the breaking of her fro∣zen Ice, maketh a fearful sound like un∣to Thunder. In which place as is repor∣ted, sometimes stood a fair City, which was swallowed up in an Earthquake, and resigned her Stone-walls unto this deep and broad water. Radnor-shire. NEar Knigton a Market Town, is Offaes Ditch which runs along by the Mountain, which was a bound set to separate the Welsh from the English. A Law was made, that it should be present death for the Welsh to pass over the same. Cardigan-shire. IN Tyui, the Beaver hath been found, a Creature living both by land and water, whose stones the Physici∣ans
hold in great price. His fore-feet are like unto a Dogs, but the hinder whole skinned as is the Goose, like Oars giving him swift motion in swiming, his tail broad and Gristly, he useth a stern, wherewith on the sudden he can divert his swift floating course. Mount-Gomery-shire, nothing there re∣markable. Merioneth-shire. HIlls there are so high, as it is af∣firmed by one, that shepherds upon their tops falling at odds in the Morning, and challenging the field for fight, before they can come together to try out the Quarrel, the day will be spent, and the heat of their fury shut up with their sleep. Denbigh-shire. THis is worth observing, both for Admiration and Antiquity, that in
the Parish of Llan-sunan within this County, there is a place compass cut out of the main Rock by mans hand, in the side of a stony hill, wherein there be four and twenty seats to sit in, some less, some bigger, where Children and young men coming to seek their Cattel, use to sit, and to have their sports. And at this day they commonly call it King Arthurs Round Table. Flint-shire. THis Country hath many shallow Rivers in it, but none of fame and note, but Dee and Cluyde. How he it there is a Spring not far from Rudland Castle, of great report and antiquity, which is termed Holy-well, and is com∣monly called St. Winefrids Well, of whom antiquity thus reporteth, that Winefrid a Christian Virgin, very fair and vertu∣ous, was doted upon by a young lustful Prince or Lord of the Country, who not being able to rule his head-strong affe∣ctions,
having many times in vain at∣tempted and tryed her chastity, both by rich Gifts, and large Promises, could not by any means obtain his desires, he therefore (in a place of advantage) sud∣denly surprized and ravished her weak (yet resisting) body. After the deed done, the cruel Tyrant, to stop her crys and acclamations, slew her, and cut off her head, out of which place did sudden∣ly arise a Spring that continueth to this day, carrying from the Fountain such a forcible stream and currant, as the like is not found in Christendom. Over the head of the Spring there is built a Chappel of Free-stone, with Pillars cu∣riously wrought and ingraved, in the Chancel whereof, and Glass window, the Picture of the Virgin is drawn, toge∣ther with the Memorial of her life and death. To this Fountain Pilgrims are accustomed to repair in their zealous, but blind devotion, and divers others resort to Bathe in, holding firmly that the water is of much vertue.
There be many Red stones in the bot∣tom of this Well, and much green Moss growing upon the sides, the superstition of the people holding that these Red spots in the stones were drops of the Ladies bloud, which all the water in the Spring can never wash away, and that the Moss about the Wall was her hair, which though some of it be given to e∣very stranger that comes, yet it never wasteth. But howsoever this be carry∣ed for truth by the Tradition of time, the Moss it self smells exceeding sweet. Carnaervon-shire. KIng Edward the second was born at Carnaervon, in a Tower of the Castle; he was the first Prince of Wales of the English Line. There are in this shire two Pools call∣ed the Mears, the one of which produ∣ceth great store of fish, but all having only one eye; and in the other there is a moveable Island, which as soon as a
man treadeth on, it forthwith floateth a great way off, whereby the Welsh are said to have often escaped, and deluded their Enemies assailing them. Anglesea-Island. THe length of this Island is twenty miles, in bredth seventeen miles, the whole circumference amounting to∣twards seventy miles. Out of Scotlands General Description. THis Nations Original by some hath been derived from Scota, the sup∣posed Daughter of the Egyptian King Pharaoh, that nourished Moses, who having marryed Gaithelus, the son of Ce∣crops (the Founder of Athens) who first seating in Spain, passed thence into Ire∣land, and lastly into Scotland, where his Wife Scota gave name to the Nation.
In this Country is the dark Wood Caledonia, famous for the Wild White Bulls that therein were bred, whose Manes were Lion-like, thick and curled, of nature fierce and cruel, and so hateful to Mankind, that they abhorred whatso∣ever was by them handled or breathed upon; but because the flesh was plea∣sant and dainty to the mouth, the whole race of them is extinguished. It is Admirable, the report that is gi∣ven of this Country, as to the plenty of Cattel, Fish and Fowl there abiding, fish so plentiful, that men in some places (for delight) on Horse-back hunt Sal∣mons with Spears, and a certain Fowl, which some call Soland-Geese, spread∣ing so thick in the Air, that they even darken the Suns-light; of whose flesh, feathers and Oil, the Inhabitants in some parts make great use and gain; yea, and even of fishes brought by them, abundant provision for Diet; as also of the sticks (brought to make their Nests) plentiful provision for fewel.
With these of Wonders, might be spoken of the Natures of those two fa∣mous Loughs, Lomand and Nessa, the latter whereof never freezeth in Win∣ter, though never so extream, and the Waters of the other most raging in the fairest and calmest weather, wherein also floteth an Island that removeth from place to place, as the wind forceth her spongeous and unfastned body. In Buquhan upon the banks of Ratra is a Well, whose trickling drops turn (in Piramidy wise) into hard stone, and ano∣ther near Edenbrough that floteth with Bitumen. In Dee and Done, besides the admired plenty of Salmons, is found a Shell-fish, called the Horse-Muscle, where Pearls are engendred most preci∣ous for Physick, and some of them so Orient, that they give no place to the choicest. The Western Islands lying scattered in the Deucalidonia Sea, were anciently ruled by a King of their own, whose maintenance was out of their common
Coffers, and the Regal Authority never continued in lineal succession; for (to prevent that) their Kings were not per∣mitted to have Wives of their own, but might by their Laws accompany with other mens, as the like Law was in the other parts of Scotland, that the Virgi∣nity of all new Wives, should be the Land-Lords prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that half a Mark should be paid for Redemption. More North, lie the Isles of Shet∣land, where as Tzetzes fableth, the Souls of good men are ferryed into those Elizian Fields that ever grow green, but their fictions intended only that the ver∣tuous Souls of the dead passed the ut∣termost bounds of earthly abode, and attained to an over-pleasing repose, and ever flourishing happiness; which whe∣ther they borrowed from the Descripti∣on of Paradise, (taken both for a fair Garden, and the Souls happy rest) is hard to define.
Out of the Description of Ireland. THe Manners and Customs of the Wild Irish are thus set forth by Strabo. The Inhabitants (saith he) of Ireland are more rude then the Britains, they feed upon the flesh of men; yea, and think it a point of worth to eat their dead Parents, wantonly they accompa∣ny with Women, making no difference of other mens wives, their own Sisters, nor of their natural Mothers; but of these things (saith he) we have no cer∣tain witness of sufficient credit. Pompo∣nius Mela recordeth, that the Irish are uncivil, ignorant of Vertues, and void of Religion. And Solinus affirmeth, that after Victory they drink the bloud of the slain, and besmear their own Faces therewith, so given to War, that the mother at the birth of a man-child, feed∣eth the first meat into her Infants mouth upon the point of her Husbands sword,
and with heathenish imprecations, wish∣eth that it may dye no otherwise then in War, or by sword. But from these ancient and barbarous manners, we will come to the conditi∣ons of their middle time, whom Giral∣dus Cambrensis describeth as followeth. The Irish (saith he) are a strong and bold people, Martial and Prodigal in War; nimble, stout and haughty of heart; care∣less of life, but greedy of glory; courte∣ous to strangers, constant in Love, light of belief, impatient of injury, given to fleshly lusts, and in enmity implacable. At the baptizing of their Infants, their manner was, not to dip their right arms into the water, that so (as they thought) they might give a more deep and un∣curable blow, never calling them by the name of their Parents whilest they li∣ved together, but at their death took it upon them: Their Women nursed not their Children they bare, and they that nursed others, did affect and love them much more than their own.
So much were they given to Fanta∣stical conceits, that they held it very o∣minous to give their Neighbours Fire upon May-day, to eat an odd Egg; endangered the death of their Horse▪ And before they cast in their seed, they sent salt into the field; to hang up the shells in the roof, was a preservative of the Chickens from the Kite; to set up green boughs at their doors in the month of May, increased their Kines Milk, and to spit upon Cattel, they held it good against Witchery, whereof Ire∣land was full. Superstitious Idolatry among the Wild Irish was common, yielding di∣vine honour unto the Moon after the change, unto whom they both bowed their knees, and made supplications, and with a Loud Voice would thus speak unto that Planet, We pray thee leave us in as good Estate as thou foundst us. Wolves they did make as their God-sis, terming them Chari Christ, and so thought themselves preserved from their
hurts, the hoofs of dead Horses they accounted and held Sacred: About childrens necks they hung the beginning of St. Johns Gospel, a crooked nail of an Horse shooe, or a piece of a wolves-skin, and both the sucking Child and Nurse were girt with Girdles finely plated with Womans hair; so far they wandred in∣to the ways of errour, in making these arms the strength of their healths. Their Wives were many, by reason of Divorcements, and their Maids marry∣ed at twelve years of Age, whose Cu∣stoms were to send to their lovers, brace∣lets plated, and curiously wrought of their own hair, so far following Venus in the knots of these allurements. The men wore Linnen shirts exceedingly large, stained with Saffron, the sleeves wide, and hanging to their knees, strait and short Trusses plated thick in the skirts, their Breeches close to the thighs, a short skeine hanging point down be∣fore, and a Mantle most times cast over their heads. The women wore their
hair plated in curious manner, hanging down their backs and shoulders from un∣der foulden wreaths of fine Linnen, roll∣ed about their heads, rather loding the wearer then delighting the beholder; for as the one was most seemly, so the other was unsightly, their necks was hung with Chains and Carkaneths, their Arms wreathed with many Bracelets, and over their side garments the Shag Rug Mantles, purfled with a deep fringe of divers colours, both Sexes ac∣counting idleness their only liberty, and ease their greatest riches. In War they were forward, and fought with Battle-axes, whose bearers were called Galloglasses, the common souldier, but lightly armed, who served with darts and sharp skeines, their Trum∣pet was a Bag-pipe, and word for en∣counter Pharroh, which at the first On∣set with great acclamation they uttered, and he that did not, was taken into the Air, and carryed into the Vale of Kerry, where transformed (as they did believe)
he remained until he was hunted with hounds from thence to his home. For the dying and dead, they hired Women to mourn, who expostulated with the sick, why he would die▪ and dead, at his Funeral such out-crys were made, such clapping of hands, such howlings, and gestures, that one would think their sorrows unrecoverable, hold∣ing the opinion of Pythagoras for their souls departed. Their Diet in necessity was slender, feeding upon Water-cresses, Roots, Mushrooms, Shamroh, Butter temper∣ed with Oatmeal, Milk, Whey; yea, and raw fish, the bloud being crushed out; their use was also to let their Kine bloud, which standing a while, and co∣ming to Jelly, with Butter they did eat as a very good dish.
Out of the Description of the Civil Wars fought in England, Wales, and Ire∣land. FRance felt the heavy hands of Ed∣ward and Henry our English Kings, when the one of them at Poictiers took Prisoners John King of France, and Philip Sirnamed the hardy, his son; the other (Henry the fifth at Azincourt in a bloudy battel took and slew four thousand Princes, Nobles, Knights and Esquires, even all the flower of France, as their own writers have declared. And at Paris the Crown of France was set up∣on Henry the 6th. his Head, homage done unto him by the French, that Kingdom made subject, and their Flower deluces quartered with our Lions of England. An enterprize remaining fresh in Me∣mory, of Philip date King of Spain, against our Dread Soveraign Queen Elizabeth,
in the year 1588. attempting by his in∣vincible Navy as he thought, and so termed, under the Conduct of the Duke of Medina Celi, which with great Pride and Cruelty was intended against us, arrived on our Coasts to Englands Invasion and Subversion, had yet never∣theless, here in the narrow Seas, the one part of his Fleet discomfited, taken, and drowned, and the other part forced to their great shame, in poor Estate, to make a fearful and miserable flight a∣bout the Coast of Ireland homeward, so that of 158 great ships furnished for War, came to their own Coast of Spain but few; and those so torn and beaten by the English Canons, that it was thought they were unserviceable for ever, and eleven of their Ensigns or Banners prepared for Triumph and Pride in Conquest, were contrariwise to their dishonour shewed at Pauls Cross, and in other places of this Realm.
Out of the Description of the Turkish EMPIRE. WE will take notice of their Re∣ligion, how it is a meer Cou∣zenage thrust upon the filly people by the impious subtilty of one Mahomet, whose story is well worth our know∣ledge, and may cause us to commiserate the desperate Estate of those ignorant, yet perverse and bloudy Antichristi∣ans. His place of Birth is questioned, whe∣ther he were a Cirenick, an Arabian, or Persian, it is not yet fully decided; cer∣tain enough it is he was of base Parents, his Father (some say) a Worshipper of Devils, and his Mother a faithless Jew, betwixt them they sent into the World a pernicious deceiver (which none but two such Religions could have made up.) In the year 597. when he had been for a while thus instructed by his
distracted Parents, poverty and hope to improve his Fortunes, perswaded him from his Native soil, to live for another while among true professed Christians, where he received so much knowledge of the Word, and light of the Gospel, as to pervert it to his destruction, and ruine of many Millions of souls. In his first adventurous travels a∣broad, he fell into the hands of thee∣vish Saracens, which sold him to a Jew∣ish Merchant, and he imployed him to drive his Camels through Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and other forrain Countries, where he still gathered farther instru∣ctions of that truth which he intended to abuse. His wickedness first brake forth into fraud, open Theft and Ra∣pine, and other sins of highest rank, in which he continued and seduced others, till the death of his Master, and after marryed his Aged, but rich Mistress. He had means now to act his malicious purposes, and wealth to countenance his exceeding Pride, which would not be
satisfied with a lower Ambition, then to be called a Prophet of God. This he began to practice, by the Counsel of one Sergius a Monk, who being cast out for Heresie from Constantinople, betook himself into Arabia, and joyned in with Mahomet to make up this mischief per∣fect: see now their Juggling. There wanted no craft betwixt them, to make use of his worst actions to gull the sim∣ple. For when by his debaucht drinking and gluttony, he was fallen into an Epi∣lepsie, and in his fits lay (Bear like) gro∣velling and foaming upon the Earth, as one without sense; he pretended an Exta-like swoon, wherein his soul was wrapped from his body, in which he con∣verst with Gabriel an Angel from Hea∣ven. To make this familiarity with God the more to be believed, he had bred up a Dove to take her meat from his ear, which he most blasphemously professed to be the Holy Ghost, who in such times and in that shape infused the prophesies which he was to preach. Lastly, what
they in their wicked fancies had concei∣ved, and meant to propagate, they di∣gested into a Volume, and called it the Alcoran. For this too they had a trick, that it might seem to have been sent from Heaven into the hands of Mahomet; and to this purpose he had himself fed up a tame Bull, which by custom became so familliar, that no sooner he heard the voice of his Master, but he would straight run, cast the head in his lap, and use his wanton dalliance as with a Fel∣low. Betwixt the horns of this Bull, had he fastned the Alcoran, and conveyed him into a by-place, near where he had assembled the Multitude at a set time, to expect a wonderful Miracle from Heaven that might confirm his Prophe∣cy. The Scene thus ordered, on the sudden he lift up his voice, and made a loud cry, which no sooner the beast heard, but he brake his way through the Press, over-turned many of the Specta∣tors, which now stood at a gaze, and
gently laid his horns and book in the bo∣som of this false couzener, which he with much ceremony, and feigned Reverence received, and in their presence opening the Volume, began to interpret the chief of their Laws, which for hereafter they were to observe. Circumcision he allowed, and with the old Law forbad Swines flesh, that he might with more ease lead on such as were Jewish; he suffered him∣self to be baptized by Sergius, that the Christian too might have in some mea∣sure his content: Moses and our Savi∣our he denyed not to be great Pro∣phets, but that neither party might e∣mulate the greater observance of other, and indeed especially that his own might seem new, and yet take place from both, he changed the circumsion of the Jews from the eighth day, and multiplyes baptism, which can be con∣ferred but once for all, upon the true believer. For the like reason of diffe∣rence with other Nations and Sects, he
left both the Jews Sabbath, and diem Christianorum Dominicum, and com∣mands his holy ceremonies to be cele∣brated on the Friday; for so it was, whent he Bull bestowed on him his Al∣caran. Before they enter the Temple, they wash all the unclean parts of their bodies, and then to prayer, which must be performed five times in a day with their face toward the South. They have a Months fast too once every year, but it is observed only for the day, for they may, when the Sun is down, redeem it with what gluttony they please; Wine is forbidden, only for a shew that he might not seem to have loved that which (he was guilty to himself) had brought him into his Epileptical fits. Briefly, what he knew would best agree with the brutish desires of the people, that he took order should be confirmed by his Laws, four or five Wives to eve∣ry Husband, and as many Concubines as they could maintain. For their bliss af∣ter life, he proposed no invisible de∣lights
which over reacht their under∣standing, but proportioned to each of their sensual thoughts. And promised to those which would keep his Law a Paradise of all kinds of pleasure, which they themselves most affected, to the covetous wealth, to the ambitious Ho∣nours, to the gluttenous Meats, to the Virgins rich attire, and embraces of An∣gels, the poor souls were never so fitted; and when he had thus for a long time discoursed over his Alcoran, he took a yoak from Sergius, and put it upon the Bulls neck; for it was fore-told by an Inscription brought by his door, that whosoever could yoke the Bull, it should be a sign to declare the man, as one sent from God, to govern his peo∣ple. This huddle of Miracles put the Ga∣zers beyond all pause, so that in an in∣stant they cryed him up King, and held his companion in Reputation of a minor Prophet, called themselves Musulmanni; true believers, which the Turk still af∣fects,
rather than his right name of Turk, which imports banishment, and unpraids him the disgrace of his Original. And now he hath past the difficulty of his attempt, an easie matter to draw on Millions of followers, such as would like that Religion best which baulkt not their pleasures; yet at last he met with an end answerable to his beginning, for he was poysoned by some of his own Fa∣mily. He had long before prophesied, that he should be wonderfully conveyed to Heaven, and to make good his Fraud, had framed an Iron Chest for his Sepul∣chre, which he purposed should have been held up by force of a Load-stone placed in the top of the Temple, and by this means have appeared to the behol∣der to hang in the Air without any sup∣port. But this trick (it seems) was pre∣vented by death, yet they expected still his ascent to Heaven, till he stank upon Earth, so that at last they were forced to convey him into his Iron Coffin,
which remains to this day in Mecha a City of Persia, and is visited by the Turks, as the Sepulcher of our Saviour at Jerusalem by Pilgrim-Christians. China. THis Kingdom is in the utmost bounds Eastward of the East India, and therefore lyes farthest remote from Christendom; the Chinoyse do much exceed us for ample Cities, and multi∣tude of Inhabitants: It is now a vast Empire, and without doubt, as they are infinitely populous, so they are propor∣tionably Rich, beyond any other Na∣tion of the World. Their principal Commodities are Silks and Sugars; yet besides these, they send forth Wool, Cotton, Olives, Metals, Rhu∣barb, Honey, Purslain dishes, Camphire, Ginger, Pepper, &c. Musk, Salt great store. The men are in their several imploy∣ments infinitely laborious, and ingenu∣ous:
it is very rare to see any of them in a strange Country, nor will they easily admit a stranger far into theirs; they are addicted much to Manual Arts, for they have excellent practick Wits, and indeed for that go beyond any other Nation: Much quarrel hath been about the invention of Guns and Printing, which several people have been ambi∣tious to take to themselves, as the Master-piece of Mans wit; but with∣out doubt they were both used here, long before any of Europe pretended to the knowledge of either. In their wri∣tings, they make not their Lines from the Right hand to the left, as the He∣brews, nor from the left to the right as we do, but from the top to the bottom of the page, and use all one Character through the whole Kingdom. Their special skill, which we much admire, but cannot imitate, is in making the Pur∣slain dishes white as very Snow, and transparent as Glass, formed up only of Cockles found in the Sea-shore, mixt
with Egg shells, but lye buryed in the Earth many years before they come to perfection, and are seldom took up by the same Artificer, which kneads them, but are left as a portion to some of his Posterity. When they travel over the Plains, they use a kind of Coach, yet not drawn with Horses or other Beast, but driven with the Wind under-sail as a Bark on the Sea, which the people are as perfect to guide which way they please, as the Mariner is to direct his course unto any Coast whither he is bound; as they sail upon Land, as if it were Sea; so they dwell as frequent upon the Sea, as if it were Land; for they have an incredible number of ships and Boats, which are in many places ranked like streets upon the Waters, and filled with Inhabitants, such as are here born, live, traffick, mar∣ry, and die. Mr. Purchas Reports that upon one River from Nanquin to Pa∣quin, they are thus ordered for three hundred leagues. No marl then, if
their number exceed any part proportio∣nable of the whole Earth, since their Land is not sufficient, but is forced to borrow room out of the Sea, for their habitation. Yet are they all governed by one Monarch, whom they call the Lord of the World, and Son to the Sun. In matters of State they are very Politick, in Peace wary, and in War Va∣liant, crafty and excellent Engineers. Their Laws are for the most part just, and severely executed, especially against idle drones which set not a hand to ad∣vance their State, or maintain them∣selves; they will not cherish the very blind by Alms, since without eyes a man may be fit for some corporal im∣ployment; but to the maimed and lame, they deny not a charitable main∣tenance; the Son is bound to exercise his Parents occupation, so that no pre∣tense almost is left for Wonderers: and briefly, as far as humane Laws can pro∣vide, all other vain occasions, for mis∣expence of time are taken off; for
within the Cities no stews are allow'd, or lewd persons to withdraw them, Adul∣tery is punished with death, but yet they have liberty to take many Wives, one they keep at home, the rest are disposed of abroad, where they best please. Their Marriages they chiefly solemnize at the New Moon, and for the most part in March, which begins their year. For their Religion, they are Gentiles, but have a confused knowledge of God, Heaven, and the Creation: When they would decipher their great God, they express him by the first Letter in their Alphabet, and in their Devotions; they worship him as their chief (but not on∣ly) preserver, for they have their pray∣ers to the Sun, Moon, Stars, and to the Devil himself, that he would not hurt them. Their Priests are distinguished into the black and White Friers as we call them, for they much resemble Fri∣ers in their course of life, some are cloath∣ed in White, their heads shorn, and their Victuals in common; others in
black, long hair, and live apart, neither are marryed, but both take their liberty to live obscurely, as the debauchest swaggerers. The chief of the Cities is Paquin, where the King hath his continual Resi∣dence, his Pallace here is compassed with a Triple wall, carrys the bulk and face of a fair Town, for indeed his re∣tinue are no fewer then might well peo∣ple a large City, among the rest he hath 16000 Eunuchs daily attending, such as their own Parents have emascul'd in their Infancy, to make them capable of this Court preferment. The seat Imperial was heretofore at Nanquin, where still remains a Golden testimony of her past glory. It is a fair City thirty miles in compass, seated nine leagues from the Sea upon a fair Navigable River, where there Rides commonly at least 10000. of the Kings ships, besides Merchants; it hath three brick walls, the streets are six miles in length, of a proportionable breadth, and trimly paved.
The Metropolis is Quinsay or Suntien, the largest City in the world; for it contains 100 miles in compass, it is seat∣ed in a low and Fenny ground, is subject to floods, and hath been forced in very many places, to erect bridges for free passage from one street to another; there are in all 12000. built of stone, and most of them so high, that a good ship may strike under them with full sail, each of them hath its ten for a night guard. The Inhabitants of this City live luxuriously, especially their Women, who are much more comely then their men; yet all of them almost eat both Horse and Dogs flesh. Toward the South part of the City, there is a great lake about 24 miles in circuit, in the midst stand two Islands, whither the chief Nobilty repair and invite their friends to Solemnize their Marriage, and have in each a stately Pallace erected, furnished sufficiently with all fitting Or∣naments for a Wedding jollity. In ma∣ny parts of the City there are publick
places of Receipt; for such as sustain any misfortune by fire, there they may lodge their Goods safe upon a suddain casualty, till they can make better pro∣vision. In each Province the Cities stand so thick, and are so populous, that they all seem to be as one, one as well for their continued building almost as their fa∣shion of building; for they all observe the same form, and dispose their streets alike, two broad, crossing each other in the middle in so strait a line, that the eye may reach clean from one end to the other. The Revenues of the whole Empire and number of Inhabitants, are not easily to be reckoned. Yet this in brief, he hath subject under him 70 Crowned Kings, gathers up yearly 120 Millions of Crowns, stirs not into the field without 300000 foot, and 200000 horse.
Out of the Description of the Kingdom of TARTARY. THese Tartaryans, for brutish Cu∣stoms, were grown odious to the more civil parts of the World, and as (Herod in his fourth Book of Histories delivers) were wont to sing their Pa∣rents to the Grave, invite their best Friends to Feast with their Fathers flesh, and use his Scull, as a cup to drink in at their lascivious banquets. Who more the Axiaca, who quenched their thirst with the bloud of him, whom they first slew, as it gushed warm from his wounds; who more foolish proud than the Agathyrst, who were used to mend their beauty by a deformed paint∣ing, and ugly staining of their bodies with motly colours. You shall have here their Character, which is given by most that describe them, to have ill fashioned bodies, an∣swerable
to their rude minds, fit houses for so unclean guests. Their Stature is different. The most part have large shoulders, a broad face, with a crooked nose, deformed counte∣nance, swarthy colour, hollow eyes, hai∣ry and untrimmed beard, and head close shaved. Their speech is boisterous, and clamorous, their noise in singing, like the yell of Wolves, and endurance of hun∣ger, thirst, heat, cold and watching e∣quals them (in strength of body) to the most able beast, for it exceeds the com∣mon power of a man. Their lust is with∣out Law, for they except no kindred, but their own Mothers, Daughters, and Sisters. No species, for they mix with beasts; nor sex, for they are unsatiate Sodomites; and yet take liberty for as many Wives which they can maintain, which (contrary to our civil courses) they buy of their Parents, instead of recei∣ving Dowries. Their meat is the raw flesh of horses, without regard how they were killed, or what diseases they dyed;
sometimes they suck bloud from the li∣ving, to appease their hunger and thirst, if (in a journey) they be distressed for want of food. Cities they have but few, nor hou∣ses other then moveable Tents made of Beasts skins, which they pitch up by great multitudes in the form of a Town, and those are called hordes: when the Grass is once eaten bare, and the ground yields not meat for their Cattel, they trudge with bag and baggage to another quarter, and so in course they wander through the vast Desarts unsetled, and indeed impatient to be setled, or rather imprisoned (as they take it) within any bounded compass, having the wide world to roam in: Their chief Arms are Bow and Arrows, which they use most on Horse-back, for their most speedy flight, and have them commonly strong∣ly poysoned, for the more sure mischief to the foe; their stratagems are down∣right fraud, and breach of truce, for they keep no faith with an Enemy, regard
not any compact made upon terms of peace, but follow their own sense, and commit what out-rages they can with least danger to themselves. Their Religion is answerable to their vile customs; Some are Pagans, others Mahometans, yet will not be called Turks, but Bersemany, and their chief Priest Seyd, whom they reverence more then their Maker, and admit none shall touch his hand but their Kings; and these too with an humble gesture, their Dukes aspire not above his knee, nor the Nobles higher then his feet, the rest are happy if they can but reach at his garment, his Horse, his any thing; so simple are they in their superstition. And thus have they continued either Atheists or false Idolaters, ever since the first entrance upon this Kingdom in the year 1187. Before they were not esteemed a Nation at all, but wild peo∣ple, without Law or reason almost, who lived in the open fields, and conversed with no other then their own heards of Cattel.
They cease not to commit continual Murthers and Rapines upon the Coun∣tries adjoyning, with an inveterate hate to such as profess the Name of Christ, insomuch, that they have engaged themselves to pay yearly three hundred Christians, as tribute to the great Turk, which number they draw out of Polonia, Russia, Tituania, Walachia, and part of Muscovia.
A GENTLEMAN In his Travels TO BOHEMIA, Hath these Rare Observations following. AFter he had left Hambrough, he was carryed (as he saith) day and night in Waggons to an ancient Town called Heldeshim, it standeth in Bruns∣wick-Land, and yet it belongeth to the Bishop of Collin, where he did observe in their Kirk or Cathedral Church, a
Crown of Silver 80 foot in compass, hanged up in the body of the Church: In the circuit of which Crown were pla∣ced 160 Wax Candles, the which at Fe∣stival days, or at the Celebration of some high Ceremonies are lighted. Moreover there he saw a Silver Bell in their steeple of thirty pound weight, and the Leads of their steeple shining and sparkling with the Sun-beams; they did affirm to him to be Gold, the truth of which he doubted. From thence in his Travels, he came to a Town called Halverstadt, which belongs to a Bishop so styled, who is Duke Christian Brother to the now Duke of Brunswick, a long Dutch mile (or almost six English) is a small Town called Groning belonging to the Duke: In which place he observed, First a most stately Pallace built with a beautiful Chappel, so adorned with the Images and Forms of Angels and Cherubims, with such exquisiteness of Arts best Industry of Carving, Graving,
Guilding, Painting, Glazing, and Pa∣ving, with such super-excellent Work∣man-ship of Organs, Pulpit, and Font, that for Curiosity and admirable Rare∣ness, all the buildings (he saith) and Fa∣bricks that ever he beheld, must give it preheminence; he confesseth that Hen∣ry the sevenths Chappel at Westminster, Kings Colledge Chappel in Cambridge, and Christ-Church in Canterbury, are be∣yond it in height and Workman-ship of Stone; for indeed this Chappel is most of Wood, Gippe, and Plaister of Paris, but it is so guilded, as if it had been made in the Golden age, when Gold was esteemed as Dross, so that a man had need to wear a vaile over his daze∣ling eyes, or else he can hardly look up∣on it. In this Church there is no Service: If the painted Pulpit could preach, the Images might (perhaps) have a Sermon now and then, for scarce at any time there comes any body into the Chap∣pel, but a fellow that shews the beauty of it for 2d. or 3d. a piece.
In the same house, in a place or Cel∣ler built of purpose, is a great Tun, or Vessel of Wood, that was seven years in making, and was used to be filled with Rhenish-Wine, it is said to be twice as big as the Vessel at Heidelberg, and the hoops of it are twelve inches thick, the staves or boards of it being as much; they go up to the top of it with a Lad∣der of 18 steps, he that keeps it, saith it will hold 160 Tunnes. This is a Tub of Tubs, Tub of Tubs hall; Who ne're had fellow yet, nor ever shall. From hence passing through many Towns, and inaccessible mountains, he and his company came to a Wood, which parts Bohemia from Saxony on the West, which Wood is called by the peo∣ple of those parts the Beamer Wolts, or Wolt, and is in breadth ten English miles, but in length farther than to be descri∣bed by him truly: Thus much is affirm∣ed, that it is a natural impregnable Wall
to the Kingdom of Bohemia, which Kingdom is all incompast round with Woods and mountains, so that there is no passage on that side of it for an Ar∣my to enter into it with Munition and Artillery, all the wayes being uneven, and the mountain tops all Bogs, Mosses, and Quagmires; besides, there are num∣bers past numbring of Firre-trees, many standing, and such store fallen of them∣selves, that any passage might easily be stopped by laying them cross the way; a most dismal Wood it is, the trees grow so thick, and so high, that the Sun is obscured, and the day seemeth night. When they had past the Hills and Woods, and that they might look down the Mountains, into the fruitful Land of Bohemia, never did sight more rejoyce them, the lower hills being all full of Vineyards, and the Valleys, Corn and Pasture, not an English mile distance, but a Village every way, and twenty, thirty, or fourty ricks or stacks of Corn (which
their Barns cannot hold) in the space of every hours journey: In a word, every thing that belonged to the use and Commodity of man was and is there, and all the delightful objects to satisfie every sense is there abundantly, so that nature seemed to make that Country her Store-house or Granary, for there is nothing wanting, except mens grati∣tude to God for such blessings. Then they came to Prague, which long lookt for City, could not be seen until they came within an hours travel of it; within half a Dutch mile is a fearful place, being frequented with inhumane and barba∣rous murderers, that assault travellers, but if they chance at any time to be apprehended, they are racked and tortu∣red to make them confess, and after∣wards their Executions are very terrible: In their journey they saw above seven∣score Gallowses and wheels, where thieves were hanged, some fresh, and some half rotten, and the carkasses of murtherers broken Limb after Limb on the wheels.
When they were come to Prague, which was but two days after a most fearful execution of two notorious Of∣fenders; the manner how, with their faults, as it was truly related to them by English Gentelmen that saw it, I shall relate it. The one of them being taken, apprehended and racked, for ripping up a live Woman with Child, and for taking the Infant out of her bo∣dy, did sow a living puppy into her bel∣ly, all which he confessed he did to make properties for Witchcraft; and be∣ing further tortured, he confessed when & where he had committed 35 murthers more. The other in respect of him was but a petty offender, for he in all his life-time had murthered but 14. for the which execrable facts, their deser∣ved executions were as followeth. First, they were brought out of the Goal na∣ked from the girdle upward, and so be∣ing bound fast on high in a Cart, that the Spectators might see them, then the hangman having a pan of Coals near
him, with red hot pincers nip'd of the nipple of one breast, then he took a knife and gives him a slash or cut down the back on one side from the shoulder to the waste, and presently gave him such another slash, three inches from the first, then on the top he cut the slashes into one, and presently taking pincers, took hold of the cross cut, and tore him down like a Girse below the middle, letting it hang down behind him like a belt, after which he took his burning pincers, and pluck'd off the tops of his fingers of one hand; then passing to ano∣ther place of the Town, his other nipple was plucked off, the other side of his back so cut and mangled, (which they call by the name of rimming) his other fingers nip'd off; then passing further, all his Toes were nip'd off with the burning pincers, after which he was inforced to come out of the Cart, and go on foot up a steep hill to the Gallows, where he was broken with a wheel alive, one bone after another, beginning at his leggs,
and ending with his neck, and last of all quartered and laid on the Wheel, on a high post, till Crows, Ravens, or con∣suming time consume him. This was the manner of both their executions, but I speak of the greatest murther particularly, because it is re∣ported that all these torments never made him once to change countenance, or to make any sign or action of grief, to call to God for mercy, or to intreat the people to pray for him, but as if he had been a sensless stock or stone, he did most scornfully, and as it were in disdain abide it; whilst the other Villain did cry, rore, and make lamentation, calling up∣on God often. The difference was not much in their lives, and manner of their deaths, but the odds may be great in their dying. In the City of Prague is said to be of Churches and Chappels 150. I was there at four several sorts of divine ex∣ercise, viz. at good Sermons with the Protestants, at Mass with the Papists,
at a Lutherans preaching, and at the Jews Synagogue, three of which I saw and heard for curiosity, and the other for E∣dification. The Jews in Prague are in such great numbers, that they are thought to be of Men, Women, and Children betwixt 50 or 60000. who do all live by Brokage and Usury upon the Chri∣stians, and are very rich in Money and Jewels, so that a man may see 10 or 12 together of them, that are accounted worth 20 30 or 40000 l. a piece, and yet the slaves go so miserably attired, that 15 of them are not worth the hang∣ing for their whole ward-ropes. The City of Hamburgh. The priviledges of their grand hang-man. YOu must understand that this fel∣low is a Subsidy Hangman, to whom our Tyburn Tatterdemallion, or our Wapping winde-pipe stretcher, is but a Raggamuffin, not worth the
hanging. The priviledges of this Grand haulter-master are many, as he hath the emptying of all the Vaults or draughts in the City, which no doubt he gains some favour by. Besides all Oxen, Kine, Horses, Dogs, or any such beasts, if they dye themselves, or if they be not like to live, the hang man must knock them on the head, and have their skins; and whatsoever Inhabitant in his jurisdiction doth any of these things aforesaid himself, is abhorred and accounted as a Villain without Redemp∣tion: So that with hangings, headings, breakings, pardoning, and killing of Dogs, flaying of Beasts, emptying of Vaults, and such privy Commodities, his whole Revenue sometimes amounts to four or five hundred pounds a year. And he is held in that regard and estima∣tion, that any man will converse and drink with; nay, sometimes the Lords of the Town will feast with him, and it is accounted no impeachment to their honours, for he is held in the rank of a
Gentleman, (or a rank Gentleman) and he scorns to be clad in the cast weeds of executed offenders; no, he goes to the Mercers, and hath his Sattin, his Vel∣vet, or what stuffe he pleases measured out by the Yard or the Ell, with his Gold and Silver Lace, his silk Stock∣ings, laced spangled Garters and Roses, Hat and Feather, with four or five brave Villains attending him in Livery Cloaks, who have stipendary means from his ignominious bounty. Their manner of executing Thieves and Murtherers upon the Wheel▪ I shall name one for a president. A Poor Carpenter dwelling in the Town, who having stoln a Goose, and plucking it within his doors, a little Girl (his Daughter-in-law) went out of his house, and left the door open, by which means, the owner of the Goose passing by, espyed the wretched thief
very diligently picking what he before had been stealing, to whom the owner said, Neighbour, I now perceive which way my Geese use to go, but I will have you in Question for them, and so away he went; the Caitiff being thus reproved, grew desperate, and his Child coming into his house, ye young whore, quoth he, must ye leave my door open for folks to look in upon me, and with that word he took a hatchet, and with a cursed stroak, he clove the Childs head, for the which murther he was condem∣ned and judged to be broken alive upon the wheel. Upon the day of Execution, about the hour of 12 at Noon, the peo∣ple of the Town in great multitudes flocked to the place of Execution, which is half a mile English without the Gates, the Prisoner came on foot with a Divine with him, all the way exhorting him to repentance; and because death should not terrifie him, they had given him many Rowses, and Carowses of Wine and Beer; for it is a custom there to make
such poor wretches drunk, whereby they be made sensless, either of Gods mercy, or their own misery, but being pray'd for by others, they themselves may die re∣solutely, or (to be feared) desperate∣ly. But the Prisoner being come to the place of death, he was by the Officers delivered to the hang-man, who entring his strangling fortification with two grand hang-men more, and their men, to assist their Hamburghian brother in this great and weighty work; the Prisoner mounted on a mount of Earth, built high on purpose that the people about may see the execution a quarter of a mile round about, four of the hang-mens men takes each of them a small halter, and by the hands and the feet they hold the prisoner extended all abroad lying on his back, then the Arch-hang-man, or the great Master of this mighty business, took up a wheel much about the bigness of one of the fore, wheels of a Coach, and first having
put off his Doublet, his Hat, and being in his shirt, as if he meant to play at Tennis, he took the wheel, and set it on the edge, and turn'd it with one hand like a Top or Whirly-gig; then he took it by the Spoaks, and lifting it up, with a mighty stroke, he beat one of the poor wretches legs in pieces (the bones I mean) at which he rored grievously, then after a little pause he breaks the o∣ther leg in the same manner, and conse∣quently breaks his arms, and then he stroke four or five main blows on his breast, and burst all his bulk and chest in shivers; lastly, he smote his neck, and missing, burst his chin and Jaws to mam∣mocks, then he took the broken man∣gled Corps, and spread it on the wheel, and then fixed the post into the Earth some six foot deep, being in height a∣bove the ground some ten or twelve foot, and there the carkass must lye till it be consumed by all consuming time, or ravening fowls.
This was the terrible manner of the horrid Execution; and at this place are twenty posts with those wheels or pie∣ces of wheels, with heads of men nailed on the top of the posts; with a great spike driven through the skull. The several kinds of torments which they inflict upon offenders in those parts, puts me to imagine our English hanging to be but a flea-biting. There manner of beheading. MOreover, if any men in those parts are to be beheaded, the fashion is, that the prisoner kneels down, and being blinded with a Napkin, one takes hold of the hair of the crown of the head, holding the party upright, whilst the hangman with a backward blow with a sword, will take the head from a mans shoulders so nim∣bly, and with such dexterity, that the owner of the head shall never want the
miss of it. And if it be any mans fortune to be hanged for never so small a crime, though he be mounted whole, yet he shall come down in pieces, for he shall hang till every joynt and limb drop one from another. Strange Torments and varieties of deaths. THey have strange torments and varieties of deaths, according to the various nature of the offences that are committed; as for example, he that counterfeits any Princes Coin, and is proved a Coiner, his judgment is to be boiled to death in Oil; not thrown into the Vessel all at once, but with a pulley or a rope, to be hanged under the Arm-pits, and let down into the Oil by degrees; first the feet, and next the legs, and so to boil his flesh from the bones alive. For those that set houses on fire wilfully, they are smoaked to death; as first there is a pile or post fix∣ed
in the ground, and within an English Ell of it is a piece of Wood nailed cross, whereupon the offender is made fast sit∣ting, then over the top of the post is whelmed a great tub or dry fat, which doth cover or over-whelm the prisoner as low as the middle. Then underneath the executioner hath wet straw, hay, stubble, or such kind of stuffe, which is fired, but by reason it is wet and dank, it doth not burn, but smother and smoak, which smoak ascends up into the Tub, where the prisoners head is, and not being able to speak, he will heave up and down with his belly, and people may perceive him in these torments to live three or four hours. Adultery there if it be proved, is punished with death, as the loss of the parties heads, if they be both marryed, or if not both, yet the marryed party must die for it, and the other must en∣dure some easier punishment, either by the purse or carkasse, which in the end proves little better then half a hang∣ing.
One thing more: In Ham∣burgh those that are not hanged for theft, are chained two or three toge∣ther, and they must in that sort six or seven years draw a dung-cart, & cleanse the streets of the Town, and every one of those thieves for as many years as he is condemned to that slavery, so many bells he hath hanged at an Iron above one of his shoulders, and every year a bell is taken off, till all are gone, and then he is a free-man again, some of the thieves had seven bells, some five, some six, some one, but such a noise they make, as if all the Devils in hell were dancing the Morrice. A Pretty Story. THe Hangmans place being void, there were two of the bloud (for it is to be noted that the succession of the office doth lineally descend from the Father to the Son, or to the next
of the bloud) which were at strife for the possession of this high indignity. Now it happened that two men were to be beheaded at the same Town, and at the same time, and (to avoid suit in Law for this great Prerogative) it was concluded by the Arbitrators, that each of these new hangmen should exe∣cute one of the prisoners, and he that with greatest cunning and slight could take the head from the body, should have the place; to this they all agreed, and the prisoners were brought forth, where one of the executioners did bind a Red silk thred double about his priso∣ners neck, the threds being distant one from another but the breadth of one thred, and he promised to cut off the head with a backward blow with a sword, between the threds. The other called his prisoner aside, and told him that if he would be ruled by him, he should have his life saved, and besides (quoth he) I shall be sure to have the office. The prisoner was glad of the
motion, and said he would do any thing upon these conditions, then said the hang-man, when thou art on thy knees, and hast said thy prayers, and that I do lift up my Axe (for I will use an Axe) to strike thee, I will cry Hem, at which word do thou rise and run away (thou knowest none will stay thee if thou canst once escape after thou art de∣livered into my custody; it is the fashion of our Country) and let me alone to shift to answer the matter. This being said or whispered, the heads-man with the sword did cut off the prisoners head just between the threds as he had said, which made all the people wonder at the steddiness of his hand, and most of them judged that he was the man that was and would be fittest to make a mad hang-man of. But as one tale is good till another be told, and as there be three degrees of good, better and best, so this last hang-man did much exceed and eclipse the others cunning; For his prisoner be∣ing
on his knees, and he lifting up his Axe to give the fatal blow, Hem (said he according to promise) whereupon the fellow arose and ran away, but when he had run some seven or eight paces, the hang-man threw the Axe after him, and struck his head smoothly from his shoulders: Now for all this, who shall have the place is unknown, for they are yet in Law for it, and I doubt not but before the matter is ended, that the Lawyers will make them exercise their own Trade upon themselves to end the controversie. This tale doth savour somewhat Hyperbolical, but I wish the Reader to believe to more of the matter than I saw, and there is an end. Hamburgh a free City. HAmburgh is a free City, not be∣ing subject to the Emperour or any other Prince, but only governed by twenty four Burgo-masters, whereof
two are the chief, who are called Lords, and do hold that dignity from their first Election during their lives. The build∣ings are all of one uniform fashion, very lofty and stately, it is wonderful popu∣lous, and the water with boats comes through most of the streets of the Town. Their Churches are most gorgeously set forth, as the most of them covered with Copper, with very lofty spires, and within sides they are adorned with Crucifixes, Images and Pictures, which they do charily keep for Ornaments. In St. Jacobs and in St. Katherines Chur∣ches there is in one of them a Pulpit of Alablaster, and the other a pair of such Organs, which for worth and Workman∣ship are unparallel'd in Christendom, as most travellers do relate.
The Womens Habit. THe Women there are no fashion-mongers, but they keep in their degrees one continual habit, as the richer sort do wear a Huick, which is a Robe of Cloth or Stuff plated, and the upper part of it is gathered and sowed together in the form of an English pot∣lid, with a tassle on the top, and so put upon the head, and the garment goes over her tuffe and face if she please, and so down to the ground, so that a man may meet his own Wife, and perhaps not know her from another Woman.
Men and Women draw Carts, their Office. THey have no Porters to bear bur∣dens, but they have big burly∣bon'd Knaves with their Wives that do daily draw Carts any whither up and down the Town, with Merchants Goods, or any other imployments. And it is reported that these Cart-drawers are to see the Rich men of the Town provided of Milch Nurses for their Children, which Nurses they call by the Name of Ams; so that if they do want a Nurse at any time, these fel∣lows are cursed, because they have not gotten Wenches enough with Child to supply their wants.
The Lawyer a bad Trade. A Lawyer hath but a bad Trade there, for any Cause or Con∣troversie is tryed and determined in three days, Quirks, Quiddits, Demurs, Habeas Corpus's, Cercioraries, Proceden∣does, or any such dilatory tricks are abo∣lished, and not worth a button.
THE Lamentable Destruction, OF THE Ancient and Memorable City and Temple OF JERUSALEM; Being destroyed by Vespasian, and his Son Titus. WArs hath brought dreadful Jars and Confusions, both of hor∣rour and terrour unto Domestick, For∣reign, Inward and Outward Estates: In Jehovahs ire were shafts shot at Juda,
so that War, Fire, Sword, Famine, In∣fectious Plagues, Depopulations and Desolations, was the final Conquest of old Jacobs Land. These are the Theames of my mournful Muse, these are the grounds of my Lamentation; Josephus wrote these things in ample manner, which I do here Epitomize. That worthy Author in a large scope relates, and the Books of his Antiquities do tell his Countries altera∣tions, how oftentimes they rose how of∣ten they fell, how often God favoured them, and how often his frowns was up∣on them, and at last in his anger he cast them head-long down. The seventh Book of Josephus's wars, declareth plainly how the Romans did by Conquest gain the Kingdom, how death did in sundry shapes tyrannize, both in Sword, in Fire, in Famine, and in Rapes. Since Hebers Sons enjoyed the Coun∣try, it hath been six times wasted and destroyed; so that if you account all
the Wars since the Creation that hath chanced, they are nothing to Jerusalems desolation: No story, no Memory de∣scribes the calamity of old Israels Tribes to be parallel'd: And indeed if each Land in the universal did recount the bloudy broyls to them, it were but a Molehill to a Mountain; all which for sin, the Almighty in his anger heaped upon this sinful Land. It is now about sixteen hundred years since great Vespasian, Romes Imperial Prince, with his stout Valiant Son, brave young Titus, did over-run Judea's King∣dom, and with a Royal Army renown∣ed, did beleaguer Jerusalem with Forces and stratagems, as with Rampiers, En∣gines, scaling Ladders and Towers, with all the Art that either might or sleight could do. The besieged amongst themselves, in this interim, fell to Sedition, like Bavines that lyeth near one to another, if one burn, and burning, each one burneth another; so did the Jews each other
madly kill, insomuch as their streets were fill'd with their slain Corpses. Eleazer, Simon and John disagreeing, rent Jerusalem in pieces, each contending who should be the chief; John scorned Eleazer, as thinking himself most wor∣thy to be Superiour, on the other side Eleazer thought John to be his Inferi∣our, and Simon scorned them both, and each scorned another, and would not by any be ruled or over-born. The City being thus divided into three Factions, sad it is to relate how horrid their bloudy and inhumane acti∣ons were, there all impieties were com∣mitted in sundry sorts of varieties, all sacrilegious acts were counted most no∣ble and meritorious facts: In evil they strived each other to surpass, and labour∣ed most how to serve the Devil. These men had no thoughts of grace and goodness, but daily each against the o∣ther most madly fought, and over-turn∣ed all things by their hurly burly, so violent were they one against another,
that they burned each others store∣houses, with their Victuals: And with hearts more harder than the Adamantine Rocks, they drailed Virgins by the hair of their heads, as also the Aged they spared not to drag about the streets, some Infants their brains they dashed out, and some upon the points of Lances, they bore about the streets: It is not possible to write with Pen, the devillish out-rages, and barbarous acts that was committed by them. The advantage upon this seditious and most inhumane disorder that the Romans took, is most incredible; yet credible it may be, because the Jews were altogether unmindful of their own safety, they wasted and spoiled one another without remorse, insomuch as their enemies, their cruel foes, relented and wept in pity of them, whilst they (relentness Villains) void of pity; did their Mother City consume and ruinate, the Channels flowed all with gore bloud, the streets were bestrowed with
murdered carkasses, the Temple with unhallowed hands defiled; there was no respect to any, to Man, Woman, or Child. Thus this three headed multitude, or hellish crew did waste themselves, till indeed they did at length subdue themselves: but you must note they were not altogether neglective, some vi∣gilancy they had upon their enemy, and whilst they were making their strength more sure within, the Romans with∣out with their dreadful Batteries, made not only the City to tremble, but the Walls to break, at which the factious wisely bethought themselves, and assembled themselves together with all their powers; and, as a won∣derment it was united together like good friends: And then like swoln Ri∣vers bounded in with Banks, they sally forth and fight their enemies, like as the ambitious torrent breaks his bounds, and over-runs whole Lordships; so did these Jews out-dare and challenge any
that would withstand the fury of their insulting pride, whereupon they out of the City came, and entred the Romans Army like a flood, and in their despe∣rate madness, all was overwhelmed that durst withstand them; the Walls then could not be assaulted, the enemies fearful Engines was then by them set on fire, and bravely fighting they bravely made their enemies to retire! The Battel done, back go these hair∣braind men, and divide again, and each becomes the others foe, and then pell mell they go to it, and begin to disor∣der, and bring all things to confusion; with fire their Corn and Victuals they consumed, all their provision in a mo∣ment spoiled and wasted, which if well kept, might have lasted them many years; upon which the Famine, like a Tyrant, roams and rages, and makes all, both Old and Young, Rich and Poor to starve and dye with fleshless A∣natomies.
This was a Plague of Plagues, a Woe of Woes, death on every side did in∣close them; this being their condition, they knew not what to do, to sally forth they durst not, for then their lives they were sure to lose, to stay within for want of food they starved, out they could not go, for the Gates were shut and strongly warded, their throats were cut if any staid within; so that if they stay or go, or go or stay, every way De∣struction they are sure to meet with. But of all torments, hunger is the worst, for that will burst through the stony Walls; therefore these people having been with War, Woe, and want on every side beset, do now begin to con∣sult and strive how they might get to the Romans, for there was their hopes, that in their swords they should find more mercy, then their still dying famisht state afforded them: And indeed when man is opprest, then is wit most sharpest, and then wisdom amongst evils, chuseth the least.
Now they knowing Vespasian for a noble Prince, and one that did not glo∣ry in their Woe, they thought it best to try his clemency, and not with hun∣ger and famine to die, and therefore de∣spairing of all hopes, resolved with Ropes to slide down the Walls, which a number of them did, and fled to Titus, who bemoaned the sadness of their con∣dition, and relieved and took them to his grace and favour. Thus when all hopes failed, they were by their foes preserved, to the number of at least 40000. The City Souldiers searched every house where they thought any Victuals were conveyed, and if they found any, the owners were most certainly bea∣ten for concealing it; but if they saw a man look plump and fat, his throat they would surely cut, for they thought him too much pampered, and too full fed; they would therefore strike him dead to save meat and drink. The Richest and Noblest that was born both
of Men and Women, gave all they had for one poor strike of Corn, and hid themselves and it under the ground in some close Vault, and there they would eat it under the ground unground; if any could get flesh, they would eat it raw: Thus the weaker were over-awed, and kept under by the stronger. No respect of persons where hunger came; natural affection was then banish∣ed; then the Husband did his own Wife reject, the Wife she snatches the meat from her Husband, all pity from the Mother was exiled, she from the Child tears and takes the Victuals, the Child plays the thief with the Parents, and steals the food, though with grief the Parents pine away. There was neither Free-man, nor Bond-man, Fathers nor Mothers, Wives, Husbands, Masters, Servants, Brothers, Sisters, be it propinquity or strong affi∣nity, no Law, or reason, or rule could bear sway; and indeed obeysance must be given where strength commands; the
pining Servant will not know his Ma∣ster, the Son will not shew his duty to his Father, the Commons regardless to the Magistrate, each for one, and but for one he cared; disordered, like the cart before the horse, force caused all respect to yield. These Miscreants with vigilancy did watch where a door was locked or latch∣ed that they could spy, for there they supposed the people were at meat, and in their out-rage the doors they would beat open, where entring if they found them feeding, they would tear it in haste out of their throats, half eaten and half uneaten; these wretches would constrain the people to cast it up again, they hauld them about the house by the ears, to force them to bring out their Victuals, which they supposed they had; some by the Thumbs they hanged up, and some by the Toes, some had many blows, others were pricked with Bod∣kins, sadly were they tormented to re∣veal their meat when they had none to
conceal; and in truth all was fish that came into their net, and all was food that could be got by fraud or force. Grass, Hay, Barks, Leaves of trees, Cats and Dogs, Frogs, Worms, Rats, Mice, Snails, Flies and Maggots, all stinking and contagious roots, the cover∣ing of their Coaches, Boots and Shoes, and the dung of Fowls and Beasts, were Feasts for these poor miserable starved wretches; things loathsome to be na∣med in time of plenty, is now dainties among these starved distressed Jews. This Famine run beyond all natures bounds, (as before I have hinted) and confounded all Motherly-affection, no compassion was there had to bloud or birth: It forced a woman to kill her on∣ly Son, she ript and dis-joynted him, and dis-joynted him limb from limb, she drest, she roasted, she broiled and boil∣ed him, she eat him, she interr'd him in her womb; his life by nature proceed∣ed from her, and she her self most unna∣turally did feed upon him, he was her
flesh, her bloud, her bones, and there∣fore she eating him her self, her self made food: No woe can equal her mi∣sery, no grief can match her sad cala∣mities, the Souldiers they smelt the meat, upon which they straitly assem∣bled, which when they saw, they trem∣bled, and with staring hairs, and ghast∣ly looks were thereat so affrighted and amazed, that thereupon they presently left the house: This horrid action did more with them, then any force of man could ever do, for this sad sight over came them. Oh then thou that dost live like a fatted Brawn, and cramst thy guts as long as thou canst; thou that dost eat and drink away thy time, accounting it no crime for gluttony to be thy God, thou that must have fowl of all sorts, and hast the bowels of the Ocean search∣ed to satisfie thy appetite, and hast thy dainties from all parts and places, near and remote, and all to satisfie thy de∣vouring throat, whose pamper'd paunch
never leaves to feed and quaff. Think on Jerusalem, perhaps it will move thee in the midst of thy Diet and rio∣tous courses, to a more temperate and sober demeanor. And you brave Dames, adorned with Jems and Jewels, that must have Grewels and Caudles, Conserves and Marchpanes, & that too in sundry shapes made, as Castles, Towers, Horses, Apes, and Bears; think on Jerusalem in the midst of all your glory, and then you will be more sorrowful and less dainty; poor Jerusalem had once Beauty, Strength, Riches, spacious Buildings, Authority and honour, yet these avail∣ed them nothing, wrong trode down right, and Justice was quite forgotten, which was their chiefest, their greatest, their only earthly good. But now one little piece of bread they reckoned more upon, then ever before they did of bags of Gold. Scraps, parings, and fragments, &c. which your full sed Corps did usually fling away,
with them had been a ransom for a King, the loathsome garbage which our dogs refuse, had been amongst the Jews a dish of state. Whilst within Famine plaid the Ty∣rant, the Romans Army strived to win the Walls, their Pioners, and all their Engines were at work to batter and as∣sault the Wall: Now note, Jerusalem had three strong stone Walls, and long it was ere the Romans could get one, but the dearth so spread, and death of the sword, as that in the streets the living trod upon the dead, the Carkasses which the Seditious kill'd, fill'd many great houses, so that with the stinck of bodies putrefied there dyed a number number∣less of people, for burial they afforded none, but where they fell they let them lye stink and rot, yet very unsensible were they of the sad condition of each other, by hundreds and thousands: then did the souldiers throw their liveless Corpses over the Walls, upon this and their dis-uniting, the Romans had high
advantages, and could with more securi∣ty batter and scale the Walls. When the Romans saw their dismal fall from the Walls, they told it to Ti∣tus▪ which when he perceived he wept, and lifted up his hands to Heaven and called on God to witness with him this. These flanghters saith he, were no thoughts of mine, neither was it my fault. Indeed those wretches that e∣scaped from out of the City, and came amongst their foes in my Army, found both relief and pity, if any of those that fled to my Army had by the Seditious been caught, they had without remorse strook them dead. But another misery I must unfold un∣to you, many Jews had swallowed store of Gold, which they supposed in their need should help them, but from this treasure did their bane proceed, the Gold was the cause that many of them perisht, amongst them all, one unhappy poor creature went privately to do the needs of Nature, and in his dung he
looked for his Gold, where being by the straggling souldiers took, they ript him up and searched his Maw, to find what Gold or treasure there remained: In this sort was many a Man and Woman ript and slain for the gain of Gold that the souldiers gaped for. In some they found Gold, in many none, but had they Gold or not, it was all one with them, they were unbowelled and searched most barbarously whither they had any or no. But my story briefly to conclude, Ve∣spasians Souldiers had subdued the walls, & his triumphant banner was displayed, and that in the midst of the streets, at which the Jews were all dismayed, and upon which they desperately did retire to the Temple, which with ungodly hands they set on fire; which noble Ti∣tus with great care intreated them they would spare: Oh save the house (quoth he) and I will spare you for the Temple sake, quench the fire,
put out the flame! Oh let not after∣times report that you have burnt the worlds unmatchable glory! For your own sakes, your wives, and your chil∣drens, if from Vespasians hands you ex∣pect grace, if from Vespasians hands you expect your lives; oh save your Temple, Titus doth command you to save the Temple. The Jews heard of the mercy they might have had, but with hearts hard they refused the offer, they refused mer∣cy, and themselves regarded not; but in their madness they burned, consumed and confounded to the ground King Solomons great Temple, that Temple which did cost thirty Millions, was in a moment lost and consumed. The blest Sanctum Sanctorum, the holiest place of∣ten blessed with Johovahs sacred grace, where as the Text saith, were 22000 Ox∣en slain, and 12000 sheep besides, dyed at the same time for an oblation. That house of God whose glorious fame
made all the World to wonder, was burnt, and ransackt, and laid level to the ground, which when it was seen by Ve∣spasian and young Titus, they cry'd kill, kill those wretched Jews, spare not to kill, use speedy and Marshal Law; the Roman souldiers then fell on and spared none, they slew while they were weary of slaying, and had no respect to Age or Sex, the streets were drowned in bloud, and slaughtered-Carkases did swim in in bloud, the ablest men that were saved they carryed away for slaves, John, Si∣mon, and Eleazer, as they deserved were brought to violent ends. Now from that time that the Romans began their siege, until the City was won by Sedition, by the Sword, Fire, and Famine, were depri∣ved of their lives eleven hundred thousand, be∣sides one hundred thousand were taken as beasts and sold for slaves, and from the time it was first erected, till the Romans had take it, it stood as appears in Histories twenty one hundred seventy and nine years.
But before Gods vengeance was showred down upon them, what strange prodigious Wonders did he shew, as warnings how they should avoid their destruction, and cause them to repent the wicked evils they had done. 1. The Firmament shewed them a Comet like a fiery Sword. 2. Divers nights the Temple and the Altar were environed with bright burning lights. 3. In the midst of the Temple though un∣a Cow did bear a Lamb. 4. No Bolts or Bars could restrain the Temple-gates, but they would fly open of themselves. 5. In the Air assembled Armed men and Chariots, the pondrous Earth quaked, affright∣ed and trembled. 6. To this sense a voice cryed in the Temple, & the people cry'd oh let us from hence depart! These supernatural accidents, foretold some fearful Judgment was to come, but toyes they were accounted to the Jews, or scar-crow-bug∣bears to fright children with, and not minding them, nor no way by them being affrighted, they did in Jerusalem securely revell, they thought these signs were against their foes, and not them.
But when war, when death, when spoil, when ruine had storm'd them, appear'd the place so desolate as none could have known there had been a City. Thus Juda, and thus Jerusalem fell, which Christ did foretell, and was now fulfill'd, that all their joys they should be bereft off, and that one stone should not be left to stand upon ano∣ther. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK. SHeweth that in Asia did God begin his marvellous work of Creation, and there was the first Church Collected; also the Saviour of the World born and slain: In this Asia abounds Myrrhe, Frankinsence, Nutmegs, Pepper, &c. and it breeds Ele∣phants, and many other Beasts and Serpents. page 1. 2, 3, 4. In the City Medina in Arabia, is Maho∣met Intombed in an Iron Chest supported
by Art from falling to the ground. 5 A brief Description of Africa, in one of which Cities there is 700 Churches, and a Castle whose Globes are pure Gold, weigh∣ing 130000 Barbury Duckets in one Pro∣vince; they allow not a man to Marry till he hath killed twelve Christians, where they also Circumcise Male and Female. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 A brief description of Europe, wherein is plenty of Corn, Plants, Fruits, Rivers, and Fountains of admirable vertue. 12, 13 A brief description of America, in which are that Worship Sun, Moon, and Stars, and adore Images made of Cotton-Wool, which by the delusion of Satan utters an Hideous noise, which works on them a great awe. In Peru doth Gold and Silver so abound, that it's reported they ordinarily shooed their Horses with Gold an Brassel men live for the most part in the Bodies of trees? In this Re∣gion is an herb called Viva, which if toucht will shut up, and not open till the party that injured it be out of sight. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
A brief description of Greece, wherein was first setled the Christian Religion by Ti∣mothy. 20, 21 A brief description of Germany and Bo∣hemia. In Cullen is received a Tradition a∣mongst the Inhabitants, that the bodies of the Wise-men which came from the East to Wor∣ship Christ are Interr'd in Acon, they Worship a Clout, which they take to be our Saviours Mantle, in which he was wrapped. 24, 25 A brief description of France, in one of which Provinces called Aquitania, was fought the great Battel betwixt our Black Prince, and John of France, where with 8000 he conquered 40000 took the King and his son Philip prisoners 70 Earls, 50 Barrons, and 12000 Gentlemen. 29, 30 In the Dukedom Lutxenburge, Quick is this Memorable story, that at one time their studyed 9 Kings Sons, 24. Dukes Sons, 29 Earls Sons. 31 A large description of a Tortoys, from p. 47. to p. 51 A discription of Great Brittain in very Remarkable stories from p. 51. to p. 106
Amongst which is a notable story in Essex 1581. of an Army of Mice, that so over∣run the Marshes near unto South Minster, that they shore the Grass to the very roots, and in Suffolk was taken a fish in all parts like a man, and kept in Orford Castle for six months after escaped, and went to Sea again. 68, 69 In the year 1571. Masley-hill in the East of Hereford-shire removed, travel∣ling for three days together, began upon the 7th of February at six of the clock at night, and before 7 next morning had gone forty pa∣ces, carrying with it sheep in the coots, hedge rows and trees mounting to an hill of twelve fathoms high, and there rested after three days travel. 75, 76 Under Knaves-brough in York-shire, there is a Well called Dropping-Well of that vertue and efficacy, that it turns Wood into Stones. 87 A description of Scotland and Ireland. 107 to 116 A description of the Spanish Invasion in Eighty eight. 116, 117
A description of the Turkish Empire, their Religion, and Manners, with the rise of Mahomet from 118 to 126 A description of China and Tartary, from 126 to 138 Rare Observations of a Gentleman in his travels to Bohemia. 139 to 148 The priviledges of the Grand-hangman of Hamburgh, with the manner of executing Thieves and Murderers; the habit of their Women, and how their men draw Carts and Carriages. 148 to 165 The Lamentable Destruction of the An∣cient and Memorable City of Jerusalem, with the sore and terrible Famine, while Grass, Hay, Barks, Leaves of Trees, Cats and Dogs, &c. with the dung of Fowls and Beasts, was dainties to the distressed Jews. 165 To the end. FINIS.
