r1912 09602448 43791
THE Two MEMORIALS Delivered this Instant January by Mr. SYDNEY, His MAJESTY of Great Britains Envoy Extraor∣dinary Residing at the HAGƲE, to the States-General of the United Provinces, to Induce their Lordships not to enter into a League Defensive with the French King. Together with the Reasons delivered to the States-General by the FRENCH AMBASSADOR residing in the same place, for their entring into such Defensive Leagues as by his Master the French King is desired and prest for. Worthy of all good English Mens Perusing. The Memoir of Mr. Sydney, Extraordinary Envoy of the King of Great Britain, presented to my Lords the States-General of the Ʋnited Provinces the 9th of January, 1679/80. THE subscribed extraordinary Envoy of the King of Great Britain, doubts not but your Lordships are well informed by the Embassa∣dor you have near His Majesty, with what astonishment and trou∣ble he received the Instances made to your Lordships by the most Christian King to enter into a Defensive League with him; and since the French Embassador by his Memoir presented yesterday to your Lord∣ships, hath so vehemently reiterated the same; he cannot forbear to represent by express order from his Master, that he cannot look on this Alliance other than as a League to be made against him, after your Lordships had made such difficulty to pass the Act of Guaranty of the Peace concluded at Nimmeguen, to which you were obliged by the two solemn Treaties of the 10 January, and 26 of July, 1678. That the King his Master cannot comprehend this Alliance to have other prospect than the sole defence of France, or of this State: The French King being in a profound Peace, fearing nothing from the Princes his neigh∣bours; and your Lordships also not having any subject to apprehend you may be unquieted by them; so that this League can have no other end but to facilitate the means for his resentment and displeasure conceived from the separate Peace made between his Master, and this State in 1674; and the zeal his Majesty ex∣pressed in obtaining for your Lordships and your Allies, a Peace more advanta∣geous than that concluded at Nimmeguen, and to have Guaranted that Peace also. If your Lordships reflect upon the French King's Declaration given the Embas∣sadors, that he should regard this Guaranty of the Peace, as a League made against
him, though solemnly stipulated by his and your Lordships Plenipotentiaries at Nimmeguen, you will not be astonished at the Resentments of the French King on this occasion; and my Master cannot perswade himself that your Lordships who have always expressed a desire to live in good and strict union with Him, will engage your selves in an Alliance so opposite to His Interest, to which your Lord∣ships are no ways obliged, the which will certainly break this Union wholly, and oblige His Majesty to take other measures. Given at the Hague this 9th of January, 1679/80. SYDNEY. The Memoir of Mr. Sydney, Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great Britain; presented to the States-General of the Ʋnited Provinces, the 23. of January, 1679/80. THE subscribed Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great Britain, seeing by the Memoir which the Embassador of France presented yesterday to your Lordships, that he continues by urgent instances to induce your Lordships to enter into that Defensive League which the Most Christian King proposed to your Lordships sometime since; he finds himself obliged by new Orders from the King his Master, to renew the Instances by him made to your Lordships by his Memoir of the 9th Instant, That you will not enter into such a Treaty as the King his Master cannot take to be other than an Engagement against His Majesty, who pretends not to use such Menaces as the Memoirs of the French Embassador are filled with; although the King his Master hath more cause to complain that your Lordships have but even now passed the Act of Guaranty, to which your Lordships were obliged by two such solemn Treaties. But as His Majesty takes nothing more to heart than the advantage of this Republick, yet he will not press them upon any thing that is not for their Conveniency and their Interest. The King his Master perswades himself also, that after all those assurances of his Amity and Assistance in whatever may happen, which He hath given your Embassador at His Court, whereof without all doubt he hath informed your Lordships; you will not make an Alliance which He cannot judg to be other than against Himself; and that the Instances of the Most Christian King, though too pressing and importunate to be presented to a Free Commonwealth, will not be capable to divert your Lordships from your True Interest, nor from the Amity and strict Union between His Majesty and this State, in a Time and on an Occa∣sion when He gives your Lordships so essential Marks, and when your Lordships have assured His Majesty that you will continue and encrease the same on your parts. Given at the Hague this 23d of January, 1679/80. SYDNEY. Considerations upon the Alliance with France. THE French King having by his Ambassador demanded of the States to re∣new their Alliance with him: His Majesty hath all reason to believe that the States would accept of so advantageous an offer, and would the sooner com∣pleat this Alliance. In regard they have renewed their Alliances with all the Princes with whom they have been in War. And that having made peace with England, they have not only renewed their former, but concluded a more strict Alliance than before.
And in the same Treaty wherein they made Peace with Sweden, they renewed their former Alliances. The French King demands but the same thing of this State, which if they do not do, his Majesty will have grounds to believe that the States have particular rea∣sons why they will have no Alliance, nor more strict Friendship with him, and then his Majesty hath just reason to take his Measures upon that Foot. And his Majesty will have the greater reason to do so, seeing the States have Alliances with all the other Princes of Europe, and the French King being the only Prince with whom they have not, nor will not have any; His most Christian Ma∣jesty hath reason to perswade himself that all the Alliances the States have with other Princes, are designed only to take their Measures against him the first op∣portunity that shall present; nor will it at all excuse them to say that the Alliances the States have with England and Spain were made during the States being invol∣ved in War, seeing the Alliance that France now proposeth, consists  of any par∣ticular Engagements, nor contains but the same Conditions that were demanded by these States Anno 1662. If in the present Conjuncture of affairs they refuse the renewing the Alliance with France, his Majesty will have no ground to believe that they esteem the in∣terest of France and the States incompatible, and by consequence that it will be∣come him for ever to take other Measures, seeing the Estates declare to him that they believe it not for their Interest ever to allie themselves with France. If any one object, That notwithstanding this Alliance may be necessary and good, yet they ought to remit the concluding of it to another time. His most Christian Majesty being ignorant of any thing that can be a reason for this delay, he ought to believe that the States not daring absolutely to refuse this Alliance, they protract time only with a design not to make one. And if these Reasons, be they what they will, be not the same in six Months or a year, that they are at present, do not they then by consequence imply a perpetual obstacle to the renewing of friendship or alliance 'twixt France and the States? Whether the Complaints that some Princes have made of the renewing this alliance, ought to be suspected or not? Whether a Prince, be he what he will, can oppose himself to the States in their making of innocent Alliances, and such as he hath with them himself, without ma∣king it appear at the same time, that he will attack the one or the other, or that he hath some other hidden design? The French King is so far from taking it ill that the States create themselves new friends and alliances, that he would himself procure them for them, if he knew of a Prince with whom they have not already an alliance. It is no reason to be given for the hindering the Alliance with France, to say that they will not make a League of Guarantie with England, seeing that League is as Declarative against France as the Triple League was. That there is no comparison in making a League of this nature with a Prince with whom they are already allied; and the renewing of an Alliance with one with whom they have none, although formerly they were ever straitly allied. Whether it can be said that the States do remain neuter, and not do for one Prince what they have already done for another; as if they would straitly allie themselves with the one during the War, and refuse to do so with the other du∣ring the Peace, and yet call it a State of Neutrality. For if the Alliances made by the States during the War, hinder them from ma∣king an Alliance with France now; it is sufficient to make his most Christian Ma∣jesty know, that the same Spirit that ruled against him, during the War, conti∣nues still during the Peace.
And His Majesty cannot believe that the States are sincerely returned to him as he hath sincerely given them his friendship, seeing they refuse to give him those marks of affection that he offers them, and that they have at other times so ar∣dently wished for. If they consider the foundation of the most Christian Kings demand to the States to renew the Alliance, they will find themselves under a precise Obligation to per∣form it, seeing the French Kings Letter of the 18 of May, 1678, which the States accepted of, did not contain the Propositions of Peace, which were so agreeable to them, but under condition to re-enter into the same Bonds and Alliances, that they were anciently in with His Majesty. That notwithstanding the French King hath no grounds to fear that his Forces are not sufficient to defend himself against all the attempts of those that bear him ill will; yet however, he thinks himself obliged to know what the States inclina∣tions are as to his regard, as he is already satisfied of their ill intentions, who op∣pose the renewing of this Alliance, because they cannot without fear and envy behold the advantages of such an Union. It is without good grounds that some affirm that the States have never made Alliances, but upon pressing occasions, as those were with the several Princes du∣ring the War, and that these Alliances cease with the Peace; for those that know better the state of things, are satisfied that the Alliance was not proposed upon any particular account, but at the Instances of the States during the Peace; whereas the Alliances made with other Princes continue firm since the Wars, so that some are to continue yet 20 years, others 30 years, and others for ever, whilest there is not one Prince except France, with whom the States will not have an Alliance. It is easie to answer those that say publickly, that the Alliance with France is assuredly advantageous; but however, the States ought to be judg of their own time when to make it. Upon which 'tis agreed, that if the States would propose a new Alliance, it is just they should chuse their own time; but when his most Christian Majesty doth require them to renew the ancient Alliance they had with him, and they do it not, then it may be concluded, that they have respects, which they consider more than the friendship of the French King. Whereas if one duly consider this Proposition in it self, one may say they have had more than time enough to determine it, since they have discoursed of the renewing this Alliance; seeing there was a Proposition of this nature made in May last by a Minister of the Court of France. And the French King ought to presume, that the States are so vigilant in their own affairs, and so affectionate to him, that they would have resolved since May last, of what they were to do in this affair; and now that his Ambassador came in conclusion to propose this Alliance, His Majesty beholding their silence, cannot but doubt of their intentions for him, and demand a Decisive answer, to the end he may once take his due measures. Nor can the French King do otherwise than draw an ill consequence from their denying to renew the Alliance with him, for fear of offending those that without reason oppose it, and who can have no other design than hopes to make an offen∣sive League against him, do therefore hinder this Defensive Alliance. Nor can it be expected that the French King will always wait the States lea∣sure to resolve, nor after so many advances of amity made by his Majesty, but that the States must thank themselves if His Majesty, seeing his Alliance refused or neglected, take such measures as shall not please them. LONDON: Printed for A. M. and R. R. 1680.
