18533 18533.5 99900381 176510
A declaration of the recantation of Iohn Ni∣chols (for the space almost of two yeeres the Popes Scholer in the English Seminarie or Colledge at Rome) which desireth to be reconciled and receiued as a member into the true Church of Christ in England. 1 Esdr. 4.38, 41. Magna est veritas & praualet. Tertul. de virginibus. Whatsoeuer sauoreth against the truth, is an heresie, be it neuer so ancient a custome. 1. Peter 2.17. Feare God: Honour the King. Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. Anno 1581. Fe∣bruarii. 14. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE decorative border incorporating the royal English blazon or coat of arms
❧Illustri Equiti, clarissi∣moque Regiae Maiestatis Londini Castrorum praesidi, custo∣dique insigni, praestanti, ac nobilitate verae sa∣pientiae, & virtutis insignibus decorato, Do∣mino Odoeno Hopton, domino suo obseruan∣do, Iohannes Nicholaus gratiam & pa∣cem a Deo patre, & a Domino nostro Iesu Christo. PATER ille coelestis (vir praestantissime, omni pietatis, atque religionis genere perpo∣lite & exculte) sic mei pesti∣lentis papistici erroris tabe pe∣nè consumpti, & ab omni ferè virtute remoti tandem misertus est, vt ex densissima mortis caligine, atque profunda ignorantiae abysso, me sibi ingratum & inobedientem filium eruere dignaretur: atque in suae ecclesiae,Luk. 15.20, 21. nullis ido∣lolatriae sordibus maculatae, gremium reuoca∣re non negaret: & omnimoda bonarum lite∣rarum eruditione refertos, satisque sanctita∣tis notis cumulatos viros excitaret, qui suo fraterno labore & industria, contenderent quàm maximè possent, in Christi Euangelicae veritatis agnitionem me demùm vendicare:
quorum incorruptis, nullis hypocrisews inuo∣lucris, & integumentis, documentis, praecep∣tisquè inuolutis imbutus ac instructus, quo∣rum (inquam) consilio fretus, & suffultus, (di∣uina illa gratia animum meum ad bonita∣tem disponente) non ambigo, neque animi pendeo, me posse causam meae religionis suscipere, tueri ac defendere, in conspectu illo∣rum aduersariorum, quos aliquandiu diurna cōsortij familiaritas mihi nō ignotos fecit. Ea sunt Dei omnipotentis in me collocata bene∣ficia, quae enumerando percensere, & expli∣cando consequi non est mearum virium. Ali∣quando fedissimae orationis, vanitatis & ig∣norantiae seruituti mancipatus eram: iam verò omnis mendacij & inscitiae obscuritate noc∣teque fugata, clarissimum mihi veritatis lu∣men affulget: ingenium meum antehàc adèo deprauatum, & a verbo Dei alienum erat, vt maiori delectatione, atque vehementiori desi∣derio, hominum commentitias traditiones ci∣tiùs approbarem et amplecterer, quàm profes∣sionem illam Catholicam, quam Christi Apo∣stoli tradiderunt, martyres suo sanguine effu∣so confirmauerunt, & fideles hucusque con∣seruant, amplexibus exciperem, sinuque foue∣rem: Nunc verò ingenio meo Spiritus sancti flamme accenso & inflammato (depulsis men∣tis  erroribus, quibus constrictus & irretitus fueram,) Sathanae imposturas intelligentia & ratione comprehendo, falsae opinionis tene∣bras ab oculis depello, (auxilio diuino mihi suffragante) & salutarem Euangelij verita∣tem magno cum amore prosequi incipio. Ante hoc conuersionis meae tempus, verbo Dei au∣res erant mihi clausae, vt illud audire abhor∣rerem, atque reclamarem, in me caecitas ita dominatum habuit, vt fulgentes Christi E∣uangelij radios videre aspernarer. Iam duc∣tore Spiritu sancto, atque atroci conscientiae vulnere stimulatus, animaduerto Papista∣rum fabulas prorsus incerto niti fundamento, illorúmque religionem non modò nulla affer∣re conscientiae multis delictis obrutae & cir∣cuncessae efficacia medicamenta, verùm eti∣am altiùs tela infligere, animam, (vitae pri∣mam causam) diris infaustísque vinculis at∣que compedibus arctare & constringere, & planè apertéque Deo eius{que} verbo vim infer∣re. Turpia illorum idola, crassissimi errores, blasphemiae infinitae, superstitiones detestabi∣les, vanissima commenta, ac denique vitae inaudita & horrenda turpitudo, atque dede∣cus ob oculos mihi versantur. Meditor ita∣que at{que} cogito quantis quam{que} varijs astutijs & blandimentis, homines cuncti doli frau∣disque  expertes, immunesque, versuti Papistae alliciunt atque titillant, ad suam pernitiosam doctrinam amplexandā. Ad hos praefatos ho∣mines deludendos, & in sempiternam fraudē conijciendos, in angelos se lucis transferunt, & eam vitae exteriorem pietatem prae se ferunt, qua faciliùs incautorū hominum mentes cir∣cumuenire queant. Sed plus gloria & praedi∣catione sua bona opera (si bona dici possint) efferunt, atque extollunt, quàm veritas conce∣dere possit. Non verentur illi (omnibus pudo∣ris velis reuulsis, cunctoque dei altitonantis ti∣more deposito, omnique charitatisnota relega∣ta & in exilium pulsa) dicere illos coelitum dignitatem, moribus & institutis, atque vitae sanctimonia consecutos. O impudentes Pàpi∣stas, mendacij sordibus illinitos, & omni ani∣mi funestae prauitati succumbentes, atque à fide Christiana, & charitate fraterna auer∣sos! Quotus enim quisque inter vos vitam non degit belluinam? Quis Dominum timet? Quis illum diligit? Quis pietatis ruinas ede∣re formidat? Quis inter vos (vt breui com∣prehendam) fontem aquae vitae non deserit, & cisternas sibi fodit maximè dissipatas?Iere.
2.13. Si quorundam Papistarum vitam, omnium sce∣lerum, libidinúmque maculis notissimam, La∣tinis verbis explicare conarer, Latinae linguae  rudes nihil inde fructus perciperent, quia quod diceretur, neutiquam intelligeretur. Qua de causa operaepretium me facturum duxi, si nu∣da ac impolita (bona tamen cum fide, animó∣que syncero) exarata narratione beneuolo Lectori satisfacerem, lingua nostra Angli∣cana narrando & exponendo ea, quae vidi at∣que audiui à viris fide dignis inter illos gesta. Praeterea nostros sacrificulos Romani Ponti∣ficis (filij perditionis) mandato missos & dele∣gatos in hanc florentissimam Angliae Insulam ad peruertendos huius terrae accolas, & veri∣tatis splendori insidiantes, quo studio perpetuò tenebras moliuntur in hoc regnum reducen∣das, quas huic solo suo paterno minas commi∣nantur, atque quibus conuitijs optimos quosque viros insectantur, in hac epistola dedicatoria silentio praeteribo. De Papistis satis hoc in lo∣co verba fecisse videor, & hinc te (vir claris∣sime, religione, iusticia, liberalitate, caeterìsque heroicis animi dotibus nobiliter stipate & vallate) hac oratione crasso filo mihi scripta affari liceat, cui inter homines mortales plu∣rimum debere, ac cui ob tuam erga me cha∣ritatem, ad extremum vitae anhelitum me obstrictum sentio, deuinctum{que} fateor. (Blan∣da absit verbo vanitas.) Quem laborem pro me, cùm verae Ecclesiae septis non tenebar in∣clusus  suscepisti, omnibus patefaciā, cùm fue∣ram carceribus detētus, eò quòd in Papistarū partem propendebam, (& in Seminario An∣glicano, Romae duos (plus minus) annos sedē collocassem, quàm saepe me ad te accersi voca∣ríque fecisti, quàm mansuetè humanitérque mecum semper egisti, quàm salubre mihi cō∣silium impertitus es, vt Papisticae idololatriae faecem exuerem! nonne concionatores per∣multos, non vulgari doctrina praeditos ad me accedere voluisti? vt si qua possent ratione, me coelesti Euangelij veritati reconciliarent at∣que deuincirent. Plerosque mihi insuper li∣bros suppeditasti, quibus nonnunquam lectis, immenso Dei beneficio, magnam inde vti∣litatem salutiferam mihi (paruo temporis in∣teriecto spatio) comparaui. Habito identidem sermone cum peritis, atque crebris concioni∣bus auditis, ex indubiae veritatis inimico (Deo adiuuante) dum in his inclusus cor∣poris compagibus fuero, verum meipsum prae∣stabo amicum, & ad studia sacrarum litera∣rum animum applicabo, quarum praesidio, Pa∣pistarum fraudes detegere, & furta conuin∣cere valeam, & omnibus (Deo meis conatibus auspicante) demonstrabo, quod sit illis artifici∣um, quo priùs persuadent quàm doceant, vbi autem veritas docendo potiùs suadeat, quàm  suadendo doceat.Ambros. in 1. cap. ad Rom. Declarabo cunctis istos se nō putare reos, qui honorem nominis Dei deferunt creaturae, & relicto Domino, con∣seruos adorant, sibique persuasum habent Deum sine mediatore inexorabilem esse, & prorsus ignorant ad reges per tribunos & comites eūdum esse: quia homines vtique sunt reges, & nesciunt quibus debeant Rē∣publicam credere. Ad Deum autem, quem nihil latet, omnium rerum merita nouit, ad promerendum suffragatore non est opus, sed mente deuota. Vbicunque enim talis loquutus fuerit ei, procul dubio responde∣bit illi. Sed aduersarij nostri, etsi videāt scrip∣turas sacras suae sententiae oppositas, confiteri tamen nolunt se in tetra erroris caligine ver∣sari. Quare haec Sancti Hilarij verba in illos haud indignè quadrare videntur:Hilarius de Trinitate li. 6. cap.
84. Grauis & periculosus est lapsus in multis, etsi enim se intelligant, tamen pudor exurgendi autori∣tatem sibi praesumit, vt quod errant, prudē∣tiam velint existimari, quod cum multis er∣rant, intelligentiam asserant veritatis. Et vnde illud quaeso? Ex contemptu certè scrip∣turarum, & ex insolenti superbia qua inflati sunt. Si circundarent sibi quasi murum firmis∣simum, scripturarū doctrinam, nunquam tàm citò ad illorū interiora irrumpere posset hostis.  Tunc omnes errores, & idola, & similitudines veritatis comminuerent atque dispergerent, & adeò iudicarent immunda, vt ea (menstrua∣tae mulieris) sordidissimo sanguini cōpararent. Si corde non ficto diuinum auxilium compel∣larent, sibi{que} nihil inaniter arrogarent, Do∣minus supernè intrans in corda sua, claro suo lumine mentes illorū illustraret, rationi (ani∣mae formae) iubar suum infunderet, detegeret occulta, doctor{que} fieret eorum quae ignorarent, tantum si illi ea quae ab illis sunt, auferre vel∣lent. Sed omnia haec media, quibus possent sal∣uari, tanquam si nulli essent vsui, respuunt sper∣nunt{que}, qua de ratione illorum salus valde dé∣speranda est. Concedat Deus Optimus Ma∣ximus vt resipiscant, & veritatem agnoscāt, dum huius lucis vsura, & hoc vitae curriculo fruuntur, at{que} omnia figmenta, quae multis sim∣plicibus aditum ad coelorum regnū penitùs in∣tercludunt, seponant, at{que} abijciant, & Sancti Dauidis verborum recordationē obliuio nun∣quā deleat,Psal.
34.13, 14. quae in Hebraico textu sic se habēt. Iamim oheu chaiim hecaphets hais mi tou liroth vsephatheca, merag, lesconecha Netsor: Mirma Middabber. id est, Quis ille vir qui vult vitam, diliget dies ad videndum bonum, custodi linguam tuam à malo, & la∣bia tua à loquendo dolum. Et Beatus Paulus:  , id est,1. Cor. 6.20. 1. Pet. 1.19. Empti estis pretio magno, glorificate igitur Deum in corpore vestro, & in spiritu vestro, quae sunt Dei. Temerè fortassis magis quàm prudenter hanc epistolam, nullis verborum phalaris flosculísue Ciceronianis exaratam, tuae amplitudini di∣care conabar, sed meae temeritati tua igno∣scat humanitas, at{que} dignetur, vt sub tuo pa∣trocinio & tutela, haec breuis recantationis meae declaratio in lucem aspectum{que} omnium intrepide prodeat, & impiorū maleuolentiam flocci pendat, quibus nocendi voluntas non deest, sed officiendi potestas abest, & declina∣ta recumbit. Ne epistola haec longior sit quàm par est, diutiùs tuam amplitudinem detinere nolo, sed vt hoc meae erga te qualecunque ob∣seruantiae monumentum beneuola manu ex∣cipere ne grauè tibi ducas, mirum in modum posco & imploro. Dominus Iesus te tuos{que} (vir magnifice) muneribus suis ornet, augeat{que}, & in multos annos Ecclesiae suae conseruet & re∣tineat: Serenissimam verò Reginam Eliza∣betham, (quam exteri pleri{que} omnibus laudis ornamentis efferunt) protegat, & longaeuam in terra faciat, ad gloriam Dei propagandā, & ad comprimendam & confringendam ini∣micorum
suorum audaciam, denique ad con∣solationem nostram: Nobilissimòs Proceres, adeo{que} omnes huius regni potentissimos ordi∣nes defendat, & omni benedictionum genere cumulet, & ad verae pietatis, & regni Christi propagationem per∣ducat. Amen. Tuae amplitudini addictissimus & humilimus seruus Ioannes Nicholaus.
The preface to the gentle Reader. GOD that is my recorde, and searcher of all mens heartes (good Christian Reader) knovveth,Ier. 11.20. & 17.10. &
20.12. 1. Chron. 28.9. 1. Sam. 16.7. Psal. 7.10. Esay. 29.13. that with vnfeyned heart I greatly wished this de∣claration of my repentance, & desire to be receiued to the true Church, to be imprin∣ted, for two principall causes: the one, to certifie my deare countrey men of my re∣conciliation to the true Church, the other of my disposition to do them good hereaf∣ter, when it shal please God to increase me with greater knowledge, and to manifest how it hath pleased Christ our Sauiour the head shepheard,Heb. 13.20. to call me away by his in∣struments the faithfull and godly, from the whore of Babylon,Apoc. 18.9. from the schole of error and from the temple of heresie, to the City of righteousnesse, the true Church, his vn∣defiled spouse. I doubt not but that the godly and vnfeined louers of the glorious and comfortable Gospell of Iesus Christ will heartily reioyce and giue God thanks,
that it was his diuine pleasure to bring me a lost sheepe into his folde,Mat. 18.12. Luk. 15.4. & to him make their prayers in my behalfe, that he of his bountifull mercie will vouchsafe to graunt me continuall perseuerance therein euen vnto the ende of my life, that I may neuer swarue from his heauenly trueth vnto blindnesse and errour,Psal.
125.5. wherewith once se∣duced by false prophets, I was holden cap∣tiue. But nowe hauing the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, the trueth of his sacred worde, and perfect loue of the faithfull on my side, I passe not what wicked Papistes speake or do against me: their immode∣rate and vnciuill bitternesse proceeding from the furious and stormie passions of their poysoned heartes I may well lament, but restraine I can not: therefore I say, Let the Papists here in England fret and fume, and say of my name what euill or slaunder they can deuise, let them write their letters to Rheims in Fraunce, and from thence to Rome with the poste, and certifie all the English Scholers there, that the Popes scholer their owne companion and fellow student is reuolted from papistrie, hath left the Pope in plaine fielde, and quite deny∣ed him, protested against his blasphemies,  and renounced the deuilish dregges of all his Idolatrie. So soone as these letters shal come to viewe,Robert Parsons sometimes of Bailyol Colledge in Oxford. they will name one Father Parsons Iesuite a Prophet, or Southsayer, for that he at Rome in the English Semi∣narie in a certaine exhortation made to the schollers, prophecied that one or other of that company (my selfe being then pre∣sent amongest them) shoulde degenerate from their faith, and be the ouerthrowe of that colledge: he confirmed also the profe thereof by example, beginning with Christ and his Apostles,Mat. 26.16. Luk. 22.4. Ioh. 6.71. & pyking out Iudas one of the colledge of Christ that forsooke his master, and then from the colledge of the Apostles he named Nicholaus that reuol∣ted.Actes. 6.5. Apoc. 2.6. Nowe will their diuines declayme in the refectory pulpit of my sudden seque∣stration, and estranging from their bro∣therly societie. The triall and experience of their rash iudgement, hatred, and enuie, mocking & scoffing, had & pronounced a∣gainst others, giueth me sufficient notice that I shall incurre their like rayling, and misreport. I knowe that I cannot be voyde of their imagined slaunders, in iudging me to be the first begotten sonne of the deuil, I cannot escape their sinister exposition of  all things to the worst: wherefore I must arme my selfe with patience, and seeing through Gods goodnesse I am reduced from the miserable captiuitie of blindnesse and errour, to the true vnderstanding and knowledge of Gods holy trueth, I neede take no great thought for their conceiued choller, slaunderous speach, and rayling wordes of Sathans prompting, sithens they haue dealt so maliciously with my betters. And as for their holy father the Popes curse with booke, bell and candell, it shall not grieue me at all, neither will I take one vnquiet nappe for al his banning and cursing: and seeing I haue renounced his Popish church, wherein I neither heard the worde of God syncerely taught, the Sacraments rightly administred, nor the Name of God duely called vpon: Seeyng that (I say) I forsooke the idolatrous church of Rome, and haue so gone from it,Dan. 6.23. & 3.26. as Daniel went out of the lyons denne, and the three children out of the furnace, and am come to that Church, wherein the most earnest Papistes them selues can not deny (if they will say truely and as they thinke in their owne conscience) but all things be gouerned purely and reuerent∣ly  in this true Church of Christ, I haue a desirous minde to profit my louing coun∣treymen, according to the Talent which God of his bountifulnesse shall giue vnto me, in preaching vnto them his holy word, in exhorting them vnto watchfulnesse and prayer against Romish doctrine, which is builded vpon false miracles and traditions of men, beeing the fantasticall deuises of their busie braine for lucre and ambition sake: fynally in warning them vnto a∣mendement of life, that both by their faith and conuersation Gods name may be glo∣rified. If thou art a member of that church the spouse of Christ, whereof he is head, and not Antichrist, the Bishop of Rome, it needeth not then (good christian Reader) much to entreat thee to take in good part this vnlearned declaration of my recon∣cilement made as it were ex tempore, my selfe being in prison and wanting bookes, to the great impediment and hinderance of this my discourse. The beneuolence of the Papistes I seeke not, for if I shoulde, it were but in vaine, I can not obteine it, for that I haue with vpright conscience made a true rehearsall of such thinges as I haue seene at Rome, yet not all, nor the twen∣tyeth  part thereof, but here one thing, and there another, and so fewe thinges in all: and this I adde in the ende, if they can not afforde one good worde by mee, yet for good fellowshippe sake let them then say, Requiescat in pace, but let it be a solemne dirge for Aristotles soule, who neuer knew the true God, but euer liued in gen∣tility & blindnes of the trueth, that he may be deliuered out of Purgatory where they hold him to be, so that we may haue con∣ference with him, & know of him whether it be substantiall & true diuinitie such as he taught and set forth in writing, or els whe∣ther it be Plato his diuinitie, who was an Heathen or Gentile, and which of them is best: and as for the diuinitie which Christ preached, and was deliuered by the Apo∣stles, and receiued of the faithfull, they are not acquainted with. God euermore en∣flame and direct me with his holy Spirit, that the zeale of his trueth may throughly pearce and possesse my heart, that I may safely walke in the wayes of righteousnes & holines al the dayes of my life, & vtterly abandon & detest all hypocrisie, & idola∣trous superstition. I. N.
A declaration of Gods benefites towardes me a wretched sinner.
HOwe prouident a patrone, and bountifull a father the Lorde of life hath bene vnto me his vn∣thankeful and rebellious childe, his sundry and manifolde benefits doe testi∣fie, and this my vnfeyned reconciliation to the true Church doeth verefie the same, yea the continuance of his louing kindenesse was herein principally declared: for where∣as mine owne natural corruption wrought dayly in me the banishment out of his fa∣uour, and the danger of reprobation, he not∣withstanding in consideration of my frail∣tie, neuer withstoode to helpe me in all dan∣gers both bodily and ghostly, and to plucke me out of the pit of perdition, whereinto the haynousnesse of my offences haled me by violence. Oh gratious God, howe shall I a sinner, conceiued in sinne, and brought vp in iniquitie, worthily aduance the excel∣lencie of thy loue? who shal giue me a heart to conceiue this thy kindnesse? whence shal I haue vtterance to sound out thy mercie?  Of my self (because I am a vessell of wrath subiect to sinne, death, hel & condemnation) I can not conceiue so perfect a worke: thou therefore which art the euerlasting foun∣taine of all goodnesse,Ier. 2.13. Iam. 1.17. giue it me, oh giue it me, and I shall haue it, and in the hauing of it I shall magnifie thy Name, extoll thy power, & marueile at thy mercy. Thou hast had speciall regard to my fraile estate, and safetie of my soule. I had once lost the pre∣cious pearle of thy blessed Gospell,Matth. 13.45, 46. which is the true iewel of all christian ioy, but by thy gratious gift I haue found it againe, in con∣sideration whereof, Christian duety bindeth me to take the sacrifice of thankesgiuing,Psal. 116.12, 13. and burne the same vpon the altar of an humble heart, that the redolent & perfumed incense thereof ascending vp into heauen,Psal. 51.17. may be acceptable to thy diuine Ma∣iestie, whose speciall delight is in such a burnt sacrifice and oblation.
A discouerie or laying open of my zeale in Poperie, and howe I preached before that Antichrist of Rome, and also of the causes of my most happie conuersion to the trueth.
IT is not yet a twelue-moneth past (good Christian audience, & welbeloued brethren in our sauiour Christ) since that, before some of you nowe pryso∣ners, and thē my scholefelowes, I preached, as you knowe, com∣maunded by our superiours at Rome, in defence of the Romishe Religion, which nowe (God be thanked therefore) (being redu∣ced by the godly and dayly coun∣sell of the ryght worshipfull Syr Owyn Hopton Knight, Lieute∣nant of her Highnesse Towre of London, the strōg & pith thy per∣swasions  of learned Preachers, which through his meanes and permission, had accesse vnto me, and the hearing of their fruiteful sermons, confirmed by the true and liuely word of Christ Iesus) I vtterly detest. How earnest I was then in perswading the English Students to embrace Papistrie, and in exhorting you sometimes my Scholefellowes, (as the Popes Apostles,) fayth∣fully to doe your message, con∣stātly to take the crosse of Christ vpon you in all troubles and afflictions, and couragiously to abide Martyrdome, I thinke you haue in remembrance. A∣bout halfe a yeere past,Anno. 1580. I was also requested by the Prefect or Master of the English Stu∣dēts, named father
Peter Iesu∣ite, a Spaniarde borne, to make a Sermon in the Latin tongue, vpon the festiual day of Peter ad  Vincula, certayne English Doc∣tours of the citie, and some of the Popes Chappel, with other strā∣gers being present at dinner. I preached then contrary to ye true Religion, against faith, the buck∣ler of our defence, the Towre of refuge, the enemie of desperatiō, the comfortresse of the afflicted, and the perfecte way to saluati∣on. I preached also repugnantly to maintaine popish idolatrie, a∣gainst the heauenly Gospell, the newe Testament, and last wil of our Sauiour Christ. Thus dyd I wilfully fyght agaynst Gods worde, albeit my conscience cry∣ed within me day & night, This is not the right way to get eter∣nall life, thou must worship God,Apoc. 22.9. and not a stocke or stone. Well, it pleased God of his mercifull goodnesse to visite me with grie∣uous sicknesse both of bodie and minde, two dayes after I made  this Latin Sermon, which was the Wednesday after S. Peter ad Vincula his day.August. 5. Truely then lying very sicke in my bedde, and more like to die, then liue, consci∣ence so pricked and disquieted me, that I feared condemnation: my conscience alwayes suggesting, and as it were telling me, Papi∣strie to bee an idolatrous and su∣perstitious religion. Yet for all that, I thought that religion to haue bene best, although I dis∣puted often against the same, in∣somuch that many of my schole∣felowes suspected me to haue bin an heretike (for so terme they Protestantes.Act.
24.14.) One of you that was prefecte of our chamber in the Englishe Seminarie, may easely gather that I was no true louer of the Gospel, when as I so sharply spake, and preached a∣gainst the professors therof. And how vnwisely I slept, in the col∣dest  time of the yere the last win∣ter, vpon hard boards, forsaking my bedde,1. Reg. 18.28. Luk. 18.12. howe I scourged my selfe with whipcordes, and how I fasted twise in the weeke: you may coniecture by this, that I was a Papist, which woulde seeke so to shorten mine owne life: you knowe also, how I tooke thereby a vehement cough with continuall spitting, which since your departure grewe to a dan∣gerous disease, wherof I thanke God I am nowe recouered. My Confessor dyd aduise me to such and so extreme discipline and cor∣rection of my bodie, as had I stil followed his directions, I had bene dead yer nowe, and put in the grotte, for graues haue they none at Rome, but Vawtes. If this be good or wholsome coun∣sel for a man so to correct himself, that hee shall bee the cause of his owne death, iudge you. But I  left those superstitions, and suf∣fered reason to rule my wil, be∣fore it was too late, and hauing recouered my health, I presen∣ted my selfe before the Pope, and obteyned leaue to goe to Rheims, for that the ayre there was more tēperate. I had before that time made an Oration & a Sermon in the Latin tongue, presēted be∣fore the Pope and foure Cardi∣nals, and before all them that were with the Pope in the Con∣sistorie. If you my brethren yet prisoners within the Towre, deny the assertion thereof, yet to your shame, and my credit, they that shall goe to Rome for plea∣sure sake, may safely goe to the Popes Protonotary, dwelling fast by Saint Peters church in the inquisitory palace, or to any of his clarkes, and there make inquisition of my name, which is registred in three great paper
volumes, of such as are alwaies present, wryting in chambers, to whom all men without daunger may resorte: where, turning to my name, they shall finde ye Ser∣mon and Oration conteyning tenne sheetes in Paper, for the which the Pope gaue me great thankes, and so did the Cardi∣nals, with all the rest. Moreouer (which I had almost forgotten) being before the Pope, I had a wallet for foure Priestes, and a Doctor, & others, full of Agnus deis, Grana benedicta, Medel∣las, Crosses, and Beades, with other trasshes: and forasmuch as I had neuer before that tyme seene the Pope blessing wallets, I did hold ye wallet before him, and would haue had him to hold it vpon his lappe, and so to haue blest it with his red cappe. Well, I neuer drewe backe my hand from him, vntill extraordinarily  he had blest it three times, which before that time as I thinke, was neuer seene. So that Eng∣land is happie, which hath got∣ten such a wallet, with so many blessings, wherby (perhaps) they may deliuer their Grandsiers a∣pace out of purgatory: it is a strange thing to see what vertue may be thrust into a wallet. O vnwise people that trust to such trasshes. If I had money plen∣tie, I would get you a thousand blessings, but God blesse vs all from such hypocriticall benedici∣ties. Well, concerning my iour∣ney, I forsooke Fraunce, & came not at Rheins: but traueiled tho∣rowe Germany, and arryued in Englande, and was within eight dayes taken prisoner, and brought to the Towre: and be∣ing there kept in prison for Papi∣stry, I thought it good to cōsider the estate of my religion, not fea∣ring  the death of the bodie,Matt. 10 28. Luk. 12.5. so much as the condemnation of my soule, to burne in hell fire for euer, if I helde not true religion, although that others in their bookes should write me a holy Martyr. Thus in prison with a sorowfull minde, a carefull thought, and a troublesome con∣science, I spent the time, where with sobbing teares and hearty prayers, I craued of GOD, that he of his merciful goodnes, would vouchsafe to assist mee in al troubles and persecution, that valiantly I might bee able to fight vnder his banner, stoute∣ly to ouercome the subtil assaults of the deuill,Mat. 10.38. & 16 24. Actes.
5.41. 1. Pet. 3.14, 15. 2. Tim. 2 11, 12. prudently to despise the deceitful promises of worldly felicitie, manfully to abandon the frailtie of the flesh, and ioyful∣ly to take vp the crosse, and fol∣lowe Christe, euen to the death, the death of martyrdome. It  pleased God, hearing this my foolish petition, & knowing me to be seduced by false prophets, (I say not, ne dare say, such as you my brethren are,) for that I hope you haue determined to recant your wicked religion: but I doe, and may boldly say, such as you were before your apprehension, and imprysonment here in the Towre. Well, I say, it pleased God of his goodnes, knowing me to bee in errour, to lighten myne eies, that I might clearely see the abominable Idolatrie, the per∣nitious superstition and vaine ce∣remonies, which are vsed & prac∣tised in al Coūtries, where Anti∣christ reigneth, who is an enemy of God, a robber of his honour, a false seducer of ye people, a distur∣ber of cōmon weales, a corrupter of Gods holy word, a Coziner of princes, a setter downe of newe lawes & strange cōmandements,  otherwise then our master Christ in his blessed word doeth allowe: & briefly, a great stumbling blocke of offence to infinite thousandes of the true louers of the Gospell, an open persecutour, & a bloudie butcher. Whē my heart was pre∣pared to perceiue the fickle fun∣dation of this vnsauored religiō, I recanted from the bottome of my heart, and bewailed that euer I was a Papist: but afterwards somewhat comforting my selfe, I craued, and doe craue, and shall with Gods helpe aske mercy and forgiuenesse, for al my idolatrous crymes and faultes committed a∣gainst his diuine maiestie. I shal become of a Rebell a true subiect, of an enemie of the trueth, an em∣bracer thereof. I will study and endeuor by God his grace during my life, that his wrath and indig∣nation worthily deserued, may be pacified, & that I may be founde  acceptable in his sight at ye dread∣full day of iudgement,Rom. 2.16. Apo. 20.12. when eue∣ry man shall giue an accompt of his Stewardship. I wil moreo∣uer do what I can to reforme the iudgement and conscience of our Aduersaries, and to bring the e∣nemies of the Gospell to the loue thereof.Rom. 6.16, 18. But it is not in him that willeth, neither in him that run∣neth, but in God that sheweth mercie. There shall want no dili∣gence in me by gods helpe, in this my first sermon after my recanta∣tion, to haue you my brethren brought into the way of saluatiō, who yet hitherto (as it seemeth) either ignorantly or wilfully wā¦der from the same. I haue cho∣sen a Theame fit for my purpose to discouer the errours and va∣nities of your religion. But be∣fore I enterprise to discourse o my text, I thinke it most needeful to make my prayer to God, that
I the preacher may with a pure minde, feruent zeale, wholesome doctrine and bolde vtterance, in∣struct you that bee here present, and that you the hearers may di∣ligently marke, & obediently fol∣low yt which is taught, yt you may heare Gods word with reuerēce, & practise the same in your life & conuersation, that I may preach to the honor of God, to ye extolling of his benefits towards vs mise∣rable wretches, to the edifying of his church, to the enlargement of his holy kingdom, to ye aduance∣ment of the trueth of his sacred Gospel, to the extirpatiō of sinne, to the abolishing of Papistry, to ye reformation of you yt bee infected therewith, to the plucking down of Babylō, & finally to ye building vp of the walles of Ierusalē. In which prayer I cōmende to your good deuotion the whole estate of Christ his church militāt here on earth, &c.
The recantation of Iohn Nichols a Seminarie man, & lately the Popes Scholer, made in the Tower of London, the fifth day of February, 1581. & the 23. yere of her Maiesties most blessed reigne, before Syr Owyn Hopton, Knight, with diuers other Gen∣tlemen Citizens of London, and many others. Where also were present certaine of the same sect, and lately his fellowes and companions. Matth. 7.15. Cauete a falsis prophetis, qui veniunt ad vos induti vestibus ouium, sed intus lu∣pi sunt rapaces. Beware of false prophetes, which come to you in sheepes clothing, but inwardly they are rauening wolues. IN this parcell of scripture, good Chri∣stian audience, and welbeloued brethrē, we haue three things worthie to be noted. The first is a caueat, warning, or watch word giuen by our Master Christ, whē
he sayth, Cauete a falsis prophetis? Beware of false prophets. False teachers of mens traditions, Ro∣mish Priestes, craftie seducers, he biddeth vs take heede of such de∣ceitfull Iuglers. In the seconde poynt or cōma, he telleth vs their outward habit, by the which we may distinguish and know them from true Prophets, when as he saith,
Qui veniunt ad vos induti ve∣stibus ouium: Which come to you in sheepes clothing. In the thirde poynt, which is the shutting vp of the sentence, he sheweth vs their inward habit, Sed intrinsecus sunt Lupi rapaces: But inwardly they are rauening wolues, deuourers of the flocke. These three poyntes or diuisions will I handle, God willing, in order, as the text gi∣ueth me occasion. Our auncient aduersary the serpent (derely be∣loued in our sauiour Christ) was neuer more busie to seeke the de∣struction  both of body and soule, the time neuer more dangerous to fall, the people neuer so leude & prone to sinne and idolatrie, the Papistes neuer so vigilant to de∣ceiue their owne countrymen, as in these our latter dayes, whereof Christ prophecied: neyther seeke they onely to spoyle them of their goods, but also to plucke them from the trueth and ready waye to saluation, vnto wicked errour and idolatrous superstition, and from the perfect path that leadeth to life euerlasting, vnto the lamē∣table way of endelesse torment & vtter destruction. Wherefore my brethren, if you haue the feare of God before your eyes, if you haue the loue of trueth dwelling in you, if you haue an especiall care to saue your soules, yeelde not to the serpentes perswasion, take heede of false prophets, cōsent not to the doctrine of Romish priests,  the Popes Apostles: For sayeth one, Dum Romani sacerdotes quā maxime possunt, enituntur multa praedicare, quae saluti animarum cō∣uenire videantur, non pauca praedi∣cant, quae ad perennem animarum perniciem ducūt: Whiles that the Romish priests endeuor as much as they may, to preache many thinges, which seeme to agree to the saluation of soules, then teach they not few things which tende to the perpetuall destructiō ther∣of. The first point of their deuilish doctrine, in seducing the blinde and ignorant people, is this, To tell vs, that we leaue this article of our Creede vnbeleeued, Credo sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam, I beleeue in the holy Catholike Church, if we acknowledge not the Romane church to be the ho∣ly catholique Church. As though that were true. In the iudgemēt of all the learned and godly, the
Catholique Church is dispersed ouer the face of the earth, not tied or vnited to any proper place as Rome, or person as the Pope. The Councill of Nice, in tyme past committed the charge of the Catholique Church, to three prin∣cipall Patriarkes, Rome, Alex∣andria, and Antioch, which after∣wards came to Constantinople. Nilius in his booke de primatu Romani Pontificis, of the supre∣macie of the Bishop of Rome, sayth,
Quandoquidem quaedā pro∣uinciae spectant ad ecclesiam Ro∣manam, aliquae ad Episcopum Ale∣xandriae, & aliquae ad Episcopum Constantinapolaeos, iam non magis subditae sunt Romano Episcopo, quam Romanus Episcopus subditus sit illis:Prima∣cie by ly∣mitatiō. Forasmuch as certayne countries are limited to ye church of Rome, certeine to the Bishop of Alexandria, and certeine to the Bishop of Constantinople, they  are now no more vnder him, then he vnder them. I gather by this Councill of Nice, which all Pa∣pists of Rome do allowe, that the Church of Rome was not onely accompted Catholique, but also the Church of Alexandria was taken to be Catholique, & in like maner the Church of Antioch. I am certeine you wil not deny the Bishop of Rome euer heretofore to haue bene, & as yet to be Pope, therefore I inferre the Bishop of Alexandria, and the Bishoppe of Antioch to be Popes, & Christes Vicars, and so consequently to be three Popes, and three Christes Vicars. Haue you taught our English men so, yt there be three Popes, & three Catholique chur∣ches, and are you put in prison therefore? No, no, I know it is o∣therwise. I take you to be hire∣lings. Pope Gregory the xiii.Greg. 13. of that name, or rather by his right  name, Hugo Bon compaignion, Hugh goodfellowe, hath brybed you with his money, that you should preach him to be Pope a∣lone, and none other. Is this pre∣tie stuffe, vt amor nummi esset ca∣sus multorum, that the loue of mo∣ney should be the fall of many? I will speake a litle more touching your Catholique church. Athana∣sius saith, Roma est metropolis Ro∣manae ditio nis, Rome is the mo∣ther church (not of the whole worlde) but of the prouince of Rome. I wil not speake of En∣glād, Ireland, Scotland, Frāce, Dēmarke, Polonia, Suetia, Bohoe∣mia, of Germanie, Heluetia, Prus∣sia, Russia, Lituania, Pomerania, Austria, Rhetia, Vallis, Tellina, &c. where the Gospel florisheth. But is your church ye mother church? and hath your Pope gouernmēt and iurisdiction ouer the chur∣ches in Asia and Affricke? It is
well knowen that there is Chri∣stianitie in Asia, Affricke, Arme∣nia, Aethiopia, Cyprus, Constan∣tinople and other places, where the Pope dareth not once peepe, for all his pontificalitie at Rome. And in respect of all Christian assemblies & faithfull members, wheresoeuer the church is called Catholique, that is meant vni∣uersall. So that your church and all churches are to bee tried and knowen not by your erring coun∣cils, canons, constitutions, de∣crees and glosses, but by ye word of God, which is the touchstone of trueth. Ireneus saith,Lib. 3. cap. 11. Colum∣na & firmamentum ecclesiae est E∣uangelium & spiritus vitae. The pil∣lar and buttresse of the church is the Gospell and spirit of life.August. de vnitate Ec∣cle. lib. 3. cap. 3. Au∣gustine vnto ye Donatistes saith, Sunt certe libri dominici quorum authoritati vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus:  ibi quaeramus ecclesiā, ibi discutia∣mus causam nostram: There are verely bookes of our Lorde, vnto the authoritie whereof eche part agreeth, eche part beleeueth, and eche part regardeth,Church to be sought in the scrip∣ture. there let vs seeke for the church, and thereby let vs examine and trie our mat∣ters. This I thought good to note here, least that any of this faithfull congregation should at any time be caried away with ye bare name of your catholique churche. Nowe moreouer you seeke to proue your church by an∣tiquitie, multitude, succession of person or place, none otherwise then false coyners, who will not haue their money knowē by the finenesse of golde, or by the touch∣stone, but by the waight, by the sounde, by the coyne, and by the colour which they may easely counterfeite. Therefore they al∣ledge antiquitie vnto vs, follow∣ing  that which was spoken vnto Iob by one of his friendes,Iob. cap. 8.8. Con∣sule quaeso priscam aetatem, et com∣para te ad peruestigationem maio∣rum illorum: Aske for the auncient generation, and prepare thy selfe to seeke for the fathers.Iob. 32.7 Prouecti aetate loquentur, et annosi notam facient sapientiam: Dayes shall speake, & the multitude of yeeres shall teach wisedome. To whom I could answere by Iob himself, euē in ye verse next following,9. vers. Ma∣gistri semper sapientes non sunt, ne∣que senes omni tempore intelligunt Iudicium. The masters are not al∣waies wise, neither do ye olde men alwayes vnderstād Iudgement. Profectò spiritus ille in mortali,8. vers. et afflatus omni potentis efficit eos in∣telligentes: It is ye spirit of God, & not yeres, that ought to speak in man.August. ad Pet. Diac. cap.
34. If antiquitie should pre∣uaile, why then (I pray you) is the Church compared to a litle  Barke or Ship, which the more she is vpon the sea, the more shee leaketh: vnto a house, which with age decayeth & falleth to ruine: to a Citie and the policie of it, which is corrupted from tyme to time, if it be not brought backe to the first institution: & to a mans body, whereunto yeeres do bryng all kindes of euill: to be short, age is euen as sickenesse it selfe to the most healthfull and temperate body in the world. I say thē that antiquitie alone ought to make vs thinke, yt in the Church there is a great sicknes, and much fil∣thynes, & that euen for this cause alone, without any longer con∣futation, it is requisite to bring a broome to purge it, and to call for a Physition. So farre is it off, that for these things a man should mainteyne your Churche to bee pure & holy, as you do. Further∣more I demand, how you wil an∣swere  vnto Saint Augustine, entreating vpon the threescore and fourth Psalme, who sayth, That Ierusalem began by Abel, and Babylon by Cain. The pro∣mise was made by Isaac, and the bastardise by Ismael. Who were the elders? If antiquitie were a marke of the trueth, how woulde you haue answered vnto ye Iewes, who tolde Christ that they were the children of Abraham,Iohn 8.33. who was the first father of the belee∣uers? They had their Genealo∣gie from the creation of the fyrst man, they did alledge the coue∣nants that were made betweene God & them. Notwithstanding, Christe being sent vnto them ac∣cording to these promises, vnder the shadowe of this antiquitie, they maliciously called hym the carpenters sonne, a Samaritane,Matth. 13.55. Iohn 8.48. Marke 1.27. one that had the deuil, & a prea∣cher of Noueltie. And there is  great likelyhood, yt if some of you Papists had bene thē there, seeing at that time they vsed ye selfe same arguments, you would haue hol∣pen to haue crucified him. Fur∣thermore, what wil you answere vnto the Greeke Churches, the Armenians, Ethiopiās, &c. foun∣ded by the Apostles, and as olde as the church of Rome, yea and elder too, seeing that the Church of Christ, as we knowe, tooke her beginning from the East to the West? If antiquitie be a marke of holines and puritie, they are ho∣ly and pure: and if they bee holy and pure, then the latin Church in comparison of them, is moste vnholy and impure. If they bee Heretiques and impure, then it followeth that antiquitie is not a marke to proue the holines or ve∣ritie of the Church. Howe then? shall we reiect antiquitie? nay ra∣ther, we imbrace it with all our  hearts, so that it bee agreeable to Gods worde. Tertullian de Vir∣ginibus velandis, saith, Consuetu∣do initium ab aliqua ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita, in vsum per suc∣cessionem corroboratur, & ita ad∣uersus veritatem vendicatur. Sed Dominus noster Christus veritatē se, non consuetudinem cognomi∣nauit. Viderint ergò, quibus nouum est, quod sibi vetus est. Haereses non tam nouitas, quàm veritas reuincit. Quodcūque aduersus veritatem sa∣pit, hoc erit haeresis, etiam vetus cō∣suetudo: Custome either of sim∣plicitie, or of ignorance, getting once an entrie, is inured & streng∣thened by succession, and then is defended against the trueth. But Christ our Lorde calleth himselfe trueth, and not custome.Ioh. 14.6. Let them take heede therefore, vnto whome the thing seemeth newe, that in it selfe is olde. It is not so much the noueltie of the
matter, as the trueth that repro∣ueth an heresy. Whatsoeuer sauo∣reth against the trueth, is an he∣resie, be the custome thereof ne∣uer so olde. Victi ratione opponunt consuetudinem, quasi consuetudo sit maior veritate. Beyng ouer∣come with reason, they defende themselues with custome, as though custome were better thē the trueth. We may not prescribe of custome, but wee must ouer∣come with reasō. Custome with∣out trueth is the mother of error. Istud non est curandum quod ali∣quis ante nostrū tempus fecit, sed id precipue nobis curae debet esse, {quod} a Christo factum est. Non est imi∣tanda nobis hominum consuetudo, sed dei veritas expectanda: That is, We must not regard yt which any other hath done before vs, but we must regarde that which Christ hath done, which is before all. For we must not followe the  custome of men, but the trueth of God. Againe he saith,De seipso ad Pompeian. epist. 9.
Mos sine ve∣ritate, est vetustas erroris. Et dixit dominus, Ego sum veritas: & nō lo∣quutus est Dominus, Ego sum con∣suetudo: Custome without trueth is an old error. And ye Lord hath said, I am the trueth, and not, I am custome. Ignatius sayeth,Ignatius ad Philadelph. Canon. con∣suetud. dist. 11. Quem non audire est manifesta perditio: Whome not to heare is manifest perdition. See then howe the most auncient sende vs alwayes to learne the trueth of him, which is most ancient of all. Thus much briefely touching antiquitie or custome. Nowe let vs come to multitude. It is sayde expressely,Exod. 23.2, Exodus. 23. Ne insistito vestigiis potentiorum ad mala: Thou shalt not folowe a multitude to do euil. Also, Mat. 7. Lata est porta, & spatiosa via quae ducit in exitium, multique sunt qui ambulāt per mediū eius. Wide is ye  gate, and broade is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Cō∣trariwise, Luke. 12. Ne time, ô par∣ue grex, nam visum est patri meo dare vobis regnum: Feare not, my litle flocke, for it is my fathers will to giue you a kingdome. Moreouer, wee see how that all the worlde was brought to one Noah, and afterwardes came to Abraham, then God chose one people of Israel, the least (as it is sayd) of all peoples, and finally of all peoples the least parte, that is to wit, Christendome: which for this cause he calleth a litle flocke, so farre forth, that S. Augustine saith, That ye Church was some∣time in one Abel, & in one Enoch. August. super Psalm. 128. Where∣fore multitude ought rather to be presumption, then a marke of the true Church. Forasmuch also as man by nature is alwayes
more prone to euill, then to any goodnes, if multitude shoulde take place, then Paynims should be happier then we be, for yt they surpasse in nomber. For whereas there is one that beleeueth in Christ our Sauiour, you haue a thousande that beleeue him not. What a multitude is there of Turkes, of Iewes, and other in∣fidels? Also in Noah his tyme, what a multitude there was yt would not acknowledge God, nor folow his commandements, nor giue credit to Noah his prea∣ching, but with one consent con∣spired against him, mocked him, & his religion, Gen. chap. 6. The Samaritanes were more in nō∣ber, then they of the tribe of Iu∣da. And in Iuda and Israel, the multitude of the idolaters was the greater. For the Prophet E∣lias made his complaint, that he was left alone, & that all the rest
had forsaken their liuing Lorde, and giuen them selues to idola∣trie: and as you may reade in Ie∣remie 4.1. King. 22.6, 13, 24. There arose vp 400. false Prophets, who swarued from Gods lawe, and folowed their owne imaginations, against one good Prophet Micheas. And the Prophets crie,Ierem.
18.18 Omnem popu∣lum seductum fuisse, a regibus vs∣que ad Sacerdotes & Prophetas: That all the people were decei∣ued, euen from the Kings, to the Priestes and Prophets. In the Church of Christ also, nomber & multitude shall haue as small roume: for euen at the beginning thereof,Esa. 53.1. Ioh. 12.38. Rom. 10.16. it was sayde, Who hath beleeued our word? and to whom hath the Arme of the Lorde bene reueiled? Anon after the death of our Sauiour, the Scholemen hold, yt for one instant, the church stood in the Virgin Mary alone. In the time of Arrius, almost the  world throughout, was of ye Ar∣rian heresie, and fewe besides A∣thanasius, with fiue of his com∣pany, professed the true fayth.Theod. lib. 2. cap. 16. Wherefore the Emperour of the Arrians sayd, That foure or fiue persons with their Athanasius, woulde trouble the peace of the world. To whom Liberius the Bishop of Rome answered, That his solitude or fewnesse did not a∣ny whit diminish the worde of faith. As for the declining estate of the Church, wee are giuen to wit, That when ye sonne of man shall come, before whose cōming Antichrist shall seduce the world, Neque fides,Matt. 24.12, 37. neque charitas inuen∣ta erit in terra, & isti dies erunt tan∣quā dies Noah & Lot: There shall neither faith nor charity be found on the earth, and those dayes shal be as the daies of Noah & Lot, &c. The Eclipse then of this Moone shalbe as it were vniuersal, al the  whole earth being put betweene ye Church & the sunne. And there∣fore if we shall finde no other di∣rection in such darknes, then the multitude, we shall haue no part with that litle nomber. So much for multitude, whereof the Pa∣pists make great account. Nowe will I speake a litle of Successi∣on, which you, my brethren, take to bee a very substantiall argu∣ment of the trueth. But Christ saith in the 23. of Matthewe, In cathedra Mosis sedent Scribae & Pharisaei: By order of Succession, the Scribes and Pharises sit in Moses chaire. Annas and Cai∣phas touching Succession, were aswel Bishops as Aaron and E∣leazar. Of Succession S. Paul saith to the faithfull at Ephesus, Scio quod post discessum meum in∣trabunt lupi rapaces, ex vobis ipsis exurgent viri peruersa loquentes: I knowe that after my departure  hence, rauening wolues shall en∣ter and succeede mee, and out of yourselues there shall (by Suc∣cession) spring vp men speaking peruersly. Therfore S. Hierome saith, Non sanctorum filii sunt, qui tenent loca sanctorum: They bee not alwayes the children of holy men, that (by succession) haue the places of holy men. Notwith∣standing the Pope himselfe will say, as it is before alledged, In Pa∣pasi desint bona acquisita per meri∣tum, sufficiunt quae a loci praedeces∣sore praestantur: If the Pope want good things by his own merits, the good thinges which hee hath (by Successiō) of Peter his pre∣decessor, are sufficient. And the glose vpon Petrus fecit Papas hae∣redes bonitatis suae: Peter made ye Popes, heires of his goodnes by Succession. And againe, Papa recipit a cathedra sanctitatē. The Pope receiueth his holines by  succession of his chaire. Such affiance sometime had ye Scribes and Pharises in their succession: therefore they sayde,Ioh. 8.33, 53. We are the children of Abraham. Vnto vs hath God made his promises: art thou greater then our father A∣braham?Iohn 9.29. As for Christ, we know not from whence hee came, or what can he shewe for his succes∣sion? And when our Sauiour went about to reforme the abu∣ses and errors, they sayde vnto him,Matt. 21.23. Iohn 2.18. By what power doest thou these things? and who gaue thee this authoritie? where is thy succession? Vpon which wordes Beda saith,Beda in Matth. 21. Intelligi volunt diabo∣li esse quod fecit: They woulde haue the people vnderstand (for that he had no solemne successi∣on) that al that he did was of the deuill.Cyrillus Ca∣rena in Luc. 39. And Cyrillus frameth their words in this sort, Tu ortus ex Iuda, commissos nobis fasces v∣surpas:  Thou beeing of the tribe of Iuda, (and therefore hauing no right vnto the priesthoode) ta∣kest vpon thee the office that is committed vnto vs. Likewise Chrysostom imagineth ye Pha∣rises thus to say,Chrysost. in Mat. Hom. 39. Tu de sacerdo∣tali familia natus non es, Senatus tibi hoc non concessit, Caesar non donauit: Thou art not of ye house of priests, the Councill hath not graunted it thee, the Emperour hath not giuen it thee. Thus to mainteine themselues in credit, (for that they had succession, and continuance from Aaron, and sate in Moses chaire) they kept Christ quite out of possession,Matt. 23.2. and sayd vnto him then, euen as you my brethren saye nowe vnto vs, Who euer taught vs this perni∣tious doctrine before? what or∣dinary succession of persons, and vocation haue we? what Bishop admitted vs? who confirmed vs?
who allowed vs? Therefore (good christian hearers) let not these the Papistes great wordes much abash vs. The Scribes & Pharises in the like cases vsed the like language long ago. But let me aske you a question. Howe can you shewe any demonstrati∣on or probabilitie, that the succes∣sion of your church is lawfull? If there were any church that could alledge succession of persons, it were the church of the Iewes, for they were of the house of Aa∣ron, from the father to the sonne, and besides them none might sa∣crifice. Moreouer to them it was promised, that they should conti∣nue so for euer. And in deed, when the Prophets exhorted them to reformation, they had no other thing in their mouth, but this, Lex a Sacerdote non peribit, neque consilium a sapiente, neque ver∣bum a propheta: The lawe shall  not perish from the priest; nor the counsell from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. But the spirit of ye Lorde answered them, Quomodo dicitis, Sapiētes sumus,Iere. 8.8. & lex Iehouae penes nos est? vtique ecce ad falsitatē operatur stylus, ad falsitatem operantur legis periti: fe∣cerúntne sapientes vt erubescerent? consternatíne sunt & capti? ecce verbum Iehouae spernunt, eccuius rei sapientia inesset eis? Howe say ye, We are wise, and the lawe of the Lord is with vs? For it is in vaine, that the pen is made, and that there is a scribe: wise men are confounded, and seeing that they haue reiected the worde of the Lord, what shalbe their wis∣dome any more? In like maner when the Iewes boasted to Ie∣sus Christ, that they were of the seede of Abraham,Iohn 8.44. I know it wel (saith he) but the deuil is your fa∣ther. And in very deede this suc∣cessiue  and hereditarie wisdome crucified Christ, and reiected sal∣uation offred vnto them, as also this self same successiō (although it be only pretended) worshippeth Antichrist, and interteyneth her owne perdition. Moreouer I de∣mande what these alledgers of succession would haue answered to the Arrians, Samosetans, Nesto∣rians, &c. who had their begin∣ning continued from the first Bi∣shops euen to themselues, and namely to Nestorius and
Samose∣tanus, both which were lawfully called to ye patriarchal churches, the one to Constantinople, and the other to Antioch? Also, what will you answere to the successi∣on alledged by al the Greeke and east churches? To be short, to the reformed churches of England, Dēmark, Swethē, a great part of Almaigne, through all which there is at this daye this succes∣sion  from Bishop to bishop, from Pastor to Pastor? If you wil al∣ledge the Popes succession, wee deny it you, & it is another que∣stion. If simply succession, you haue lost your cause. If your doc∣trine, then we gaine this poynt, yt the simple succession of persons without ye succession of doctrine, is nothing worth. With this sen∣tence of Pope Adrian the fourth, I end to discourse any further of antiquitie of persons, Succedi∣mus, non Petro in pascendo, sed Ro∣mulo in parricidio: We succeede, not
Peter in feeding, but Romulus in killing. And so is it truely: for you shall haue no Pope, that tea∣cheth the people howe to liue in the true feare & loue of God, but such an one as persecuteth and killeth the Christians, that chere∣fully embrace, and comfortably receiue the glad tydinges of the Gospell. Thus being comman∣ded  to instruct the ignorant, and to feede them with the heauenly word of God, he practiseth tyran∣nie against them. Wherfore this is an euident signe (that if wee should seeme to grant, (which in no case is to be graunted) the suc∣cession of Peter vnto your Bishop of Rome) that he doeth farre de∣generate from the diligence of Saint Peter, who had more care to saue soules, then to become riche & famous in the face of the earth: yea, to haue all men subiect vnto him, euen Emperours and kings to kisse his foote. Your Pope do∣eth alter from the doings of S. Peter, for Saint Peter neuer warranted to any man the pos∣session of heauen for monies sake: but your Pope, like a good ped∣ler, setteth all things to sale, and he that bringeth most, shal in hea∣uen beare the greatest swaye. Wherefore these wordes of Bapti∣sta  Mantuanus are true, speaking of the vnhappie state of Rome: — venalia nobis Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, Sacra, coronae, Ignis, thura, preces, coelū est venale, Deus{que}: Amongst vs in Rome, churches, priestes, altars, masses, crownes, fire, incense, prayer, and heauen are set to sale, yea God himselfe a∣mongst vs may be had for mony. Budaeus sayth, Sanctiones Pōtificiae nō moribus regendis vsui sunt, sed, (propemodum dixerim) argentariae faciendae autoritatem videntur ac∣commodare: The Popes canons serue not nowe to guyde mens liues, but, (if I may so say) they serue rather to make a banke, & to get money. Bernard of Clunice sayeth thus, Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus. Omnia Romae cum pretio: Rome giueth all things to them that giue all thinges. All things at Rome wil passe for mo∣ney. Yea euen in the Popes own
Decretals, you shall find it noted thus, in sexto de elect. & electi po∣testat. fundamēta in margine, Roma est caput auaritiae, ideo omnia ibi venduntur: Rome is the head of al couetousnes, & therfore al things there are set to sale. Yea Thomas Becket himself (whom you call a saint, (& whose festiual day about Christmas time you keepe with great solemnitie,Gul. Neub. lib. 2. cap. 15 & 25. & a fewe of his bones you keep in such reuerēce, yt God himselfe is not honored so much) whē for his wilfull disobe∣dience, & treason cōmitted against his prince, he had fled for ayde and succour to Rome, and sawe that nothing woulde be wrought there without mony) wrote thus thereof to the Bishop of Menze, Mater Roma facta est meretrix, & prostituta est pro mercede: Rome our mother is become an harlot, and for money and meede layeth her selfe to sale. To be short, you  know that our fathers long si∣thens were wont to say, Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana: The court of Rome wil not take the sheepe wtout the fliece.Iohn 2. Matth. 21. Christ sometime thrust such byers, sel∣lers, brokers and coarsers out of the Temple: but contrariwise, you haue receiued in byers and sellers, and thrust out Christ, and so haue turned the house of God into a denne of theeues. Saint Paul sayth thus vnto the people of Ephesus, Argentum & aurum nullius concupiui: I haue desired no mans golde or siluer. Vpon which wordes, in the glose it is noted thus,
Per hoc lupi cognos∣cuntur, qui talia concupiscunt: Hereby they yt desire such things, are knowne for wolues. Saint Hierome saith,Hierom. 1. quaest. 1. lib. Nunquam diuinatio. Quia Prophetae pe∣cuniam accipiebant, prophetia eo∣rum facta est diuinatio: For that the Prophets fel to taking of mo∣ney,  therfore their prophecy was become a soothsaying, that is to say, it was of the Deuill, and not of God. This I saye, that ac∣cording to your dealing, hee that is poore, is not like to go to hea∣uen, but ye rich is sure to be saued. Nowe you alledge succession of places, not farre vnlike to the Iewes, who will inclose orbem in vrbe, the whole worlde in one citie: but we see that God hath chosen many out of Ierusalem, & the Church is not tyed therunto, & God hath suffred by his righte∣ous will, many Christiā churches to be turned into the tēples of the Turks, as that of
Ephesus, foun∣ded by S. Paul, & S. Iohn, & that of Bonne in Barbarie, where Saint Austin preached, &c. And further it is sayde there expresly, Glossa communis in eum versiculum, A∣pocal. 12.8. &c. that ye Church of God for a long time, by reason of  the persecution of Antichrist, shal retire herself into the wildernes, as the common glose it selfe doeth expounde. If euer there were church that might alledge succes∣sion of place, it was Ierusalem, for of it was said,Deut. 12.11. 2. Sam. 7.10. 1. King. 8.29 Dominus in hoc Templo in aeternum habitabit: The Lord wil euermore dwell in this house. Also,. King. 21.7. Psal,
132.14. Elegi  hanc domum, vt nomen meum  in perpetuum maneat: I haue cho¦sen this house, to the end that my name may dwell there for euer. And therefore the Priests had no other answere to al the Prophets that reprooued them, but this, Templum Domini,Iere. 7.4. Templum Do∣mini: The Temple of the Lorde, the Temple of the Lorde. But see what the Lorde himselfe answe∣reth vnto them, Ite (sayth he) ad locum meum in Shiloh, vbi habita∣uit nomen meum a principio, &c. Go, and see Shiloh, I haue cho∣sen  it from the beginning for my house: nowe see what I haue done vnto it for the wickednes of my people, I wil do euen so to the place, which I haue giuen vnto you, and to your fathers. But if you will that I dwell there, a∣mend your wayes, & turne from your euil deedes. Now therefore I say, if God hath forsaken his owne Temple, for the iniquitie of the Priestes, euen then, when he had none besides erected in the whole worlde, must we tye our selues to the church of Rome, or to any other place, where all the clymates of the world are equal∣ly his temple? I can not but mar∣uaile, why any of our countrey men shoulde take the church of Rome, to be the mother church of all churches, and the same to be an article of our faith. We are not expresly commanded by the word of God, to acknowledge ye church  of Rome, Caput mundi, the head of the worlde: neyther is it expres∣sed in holy scripture, that we are condemned, if we beleeue not at all the traditions of men: but the Scripture manifestly doethEsay 29.13. Matth. 15.3. Colos. 2.8. for∣bid vs to beleue them. If you can find one only text of the scripture, that willeth and commandeth vs to beleeue in the Romane church, as hauing prerogatiue ouer all churches the world throughout, I will be on your side to ye death. But no such place, I am certain, you can shewe in the whole Bi∣ble, that the Romane church is ye holy Catholique Church, which all men (of what countrey soeuer they be) must acknowledge to be chiefest. It is not sufficient to claime succession of place, it beho∣ueth vs rather to haue regard to the succession of doctrine.Bernard. in Concil. Rem Bernard sayth, Quid prodest, si canonice eli∣gantur, & non canonice viuant?
What auaileth it, if they be chosē in order, & liue out of order? So sayeth Saint Augustine contra Donatistas,August. lib. 6. 1. q. 3. Vo∣catur canes. Ipsum characterem multi lupi & lupis imprimunt: The outward marke, or right of a Bi∣shoppe many giue to wolues, and be wolues them selues. There∣fore the auncient father Ireneus giueth vs this good counsell, Eis qui sunt in ecclesia praesbyteris, obe∣dire oportet, qui successionem ha∣bent ab Apostolis: qui cum episco∣patus successione charisma verita∣tis certum, secundum beneplacitum patris acceperunt: It becommeth vs to obey those Priestes in the church, which haue their successi∣on from the Apostles, and toge∣ther with the succession of the Byshoprickes, according to the good wil of God the Father, haue receiued the vndoubted gyft of the trueth. Saint Cyprian be∣ing likewise charged for dissen∣ting
from his predecessours, an∣swereth thus,Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. Si quis de anteces∣soribus meis non hoc obseruauit & tenuit, quod nos dominus exemplo & magisterio suo docuit, potest sim∣plicitati eius venia concedi: nobis vero ignosci non potest, qui nunc a Domino admoniti & instructi su∣mus: If any of my predecessours haue not obserued and kept the same that our Lord hath taught vs both by his example and com∣mandement, his simplicitie may be pardoned: but we (if we doe the like) can hope for no pardon, being now admonished & instruc∣ted of our Lorde. Compare ye vse & order of our churches (my bre∣thrē) with ye Primitiue church of God, and you shall easely see the right of our succession. S. Cypri∣an sayeth, (ad Pompeium contra Epistolam Stephani) Si canalis aquae quae copiosè priùs & largiter profluebat, subitò deficiat, nonne ad  fontem pergitur? &c. Hoc & nunc facere oportet Dei sacerdotes prae∣cepta diuina seruantes, vt in aliquo si mutauerit & vacillauerit veritas, ad originem Dominicam & Euan∣gelicam, atque Apostolicam tradi∣tionem reuertamur: & inde surgat actus nostri ratio, vnde & ordo & origo surrexit: If the pipes of the conduyte, which before ranne with aboundance, happen to faile, doe wee not vse to search to the head? &c. The Priestes of God keeping Gods commande∣ments, must doe the same: that if the trueth haue faynted or fayled in any point, wee returne to the very originall of our Lorde, and to the tradition of the Gospel, & of the Apostles, that from thence wee maye take the discretion of our doings, from whence the or∣der it selfe and originall first be∣gan. Thus much touching suc∣cession of place. Now I exhorte  you brotherly to be reconciled to the true church of God, I meane the Church of England, wherein you finde not so many idolaters, Necromancers, heretikes, adul∣terers, Sodomites, churchrob∣bers, periured persons, mankil∣lers, Runnagates, mōsters, Si∣cophants, Clawbacks, slaunde∣ring tongues, scribes and phari∣ses, as you may easely finde in the church of Rome. Boast not of the succession of your Pope. S. Paul sayth,Rom.
10.17. Faith cōmeth (not by succession, but) by hearing, and, hearing commeth (not of legacie or inheritance frō Bishop to Bi∣shop, but) of the worde of God. They are not alwayes godly, that succeede the godly. Manas∣ses succeeded Ezechias, and Ie∣roboam succeeded Dauid the Prophet. By succession, ye Turke this day possesseth and holdeth the foure great patriarchal Sees  of the church, Constantinople, A∣lexandria, Antioch, and Hierusa∣lem.Dan. 9.25. Matt.
24.15. Mar. 13.14. Luk. 21.20. By succession, Desolation shal sit in the holy place, and An∣tichrist shall preasse into ye roome of Christ. Thus much (welbelo∣ued brethren) touching succession of place. Now I will speake a li∣tle in confutation of your forged myracles, wherewith you seeke to oppugne the true church of Christ, and defende your wicked church of Antichrist, polluted with all maner of detestable ido∣latrie and cursed superstition. There are two maner of myra∣cles,Miracles. the one true, the other false. Myracles are counted false, when either they be not that which they seeme to bee, or if they be, they are not supernatural, but are done by vertue of nature, and that, the Angels either good or bad, three maner of waies may bring to passe. For sometime the  force of nature which they best knowe, they accommodate to the matter, of which coniunction with efficient causes folowe the effects, and that suddenly, which effectes are of the beholders, thought to bee myracles. The de∣uils knowe, that frogs, wormes, or serpents bee ingendred of pu∣trefacted and rotten things, so that there be put heate in certain degrees, in consideration where∣of, (seeing that it is not a hard thing for them to do these things which by nature maye bee wrought) it is ye easier to deceiue the weake of beliefe. And by this meanes S.August. de Trin. lib. 3. Augustine thought (as he writeth in his third booke of Trinity) Pharaos Magicians sometime to haue done the same. Moreouer the coniunctions of the spirits, of bloud and of hu∣mors, do much disquiet mens bo∣dies, from whence proceede the  sights or visiōs of things, which are in those things conserued in ye same motion, before they come into the phantasie or imaginatiō: and by the same reason and or∣der wherewith the spirit is trou∣bled, it ioyneth them together, which thing appeareth in such as be Phrentique. Wee are not bound of necessitie to beleeue all such myracles whatsoeuer, with∣out exception. Alexander of Hales sayeth, Par. 4. quaest. 53. Mem. 4.
ar. 3. solut. 2. In sacramen∣to apparet caro, interdum humana procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica: In the Sacrament it selfe there appeareth flesh, some∣tyme by the conueyance of men, sometime by the woorking of the deuill. Likewise saith Nicholaus Lyra,Lyr. in 14. Dan. Aliquando in ecclesia fit ma∣xima deceptio populi in miraculis factis a Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhae∣rentibus propter lucrum: Some∣time  euen in the church the peo∣ple are shamefully deceiued with feigned miracles, wrought either by the Priestes, or els by their companions for lucres sake. Mi∣racles be not euermore vndouted proofes of true doctrine: therfore Saint Augustine saith vnto the Manichees, Miracula non facitis,Aug. lib. 13. quae si faceretis, tamen ipsa in vobis caueremus: You woorke no my∣racles, and yet if you wrought a∣ny, at your hands we would take heede of them.Iere. 23. The Prophet Ie∣remie saith, Seduxerunt populum meum in mendaciis suis, & in mira∣culis suis: They haue deceiued my people by their lyes, and by their myracles. Aug. in Ioan. tract. 23.13. saith, Contra istos (vt sic lo∣quar) mirabiliarios cautum me fe∣cit Deus meus, dicens, In nouissi∣mis temporibus exurgent pseudo∣prophetae, facientes signa & porten∣ta, vt in errorem inducant (si fieri  potest) etiam electos: praedixi vobis. Ergo cautos nos fecit sponsus, quia & miraculis decipi non debemus: My God hath warned me to be∣ware of these myracle mongers, saying, In the last dayes shal rise vp false prophets, working signes & wonders, to ye end (if it be possi∣ble) to bring the elect into error: beholde, I haue forewarned you. Therfore ye bridegrome hath wil∣led vs to beware, for we may not be deceiued, no not by miracles. S. Chrysost.In Matth. Hom. 49. saith, In fine tēporis cōcedēda est potestas diabolo vt fa∣ciat signa vtilia, vt iam ministros Christi non per hoc cognoscamus, quia vtilia faciūt signa, sed quia om∣nino haec signa non faciūt: In ye end of time power must be granted to ye deuill to worke profitable mira∣cles, yt then we cānot know ye mi∣nisters of Christ, by yt they worke profitable myracles, but by yt they worke no myracles at all. S. Au∣gust.
sayth, Non dicat, Ideo verum est, quia illa vel illa mirabilia fecit, vel iste vel ille, aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum orant, & exaudiuntur: aut quia illa vel illa ibi contingunt, &c. Remo∣ueantur ista vel figmenta mendaci∣um hominum, vel portenta fallaci∣um spirituum: Let no man saye, Therefore it is true, for that this man or that man wrought this or that myracle, or for that men make their praiers at the tombes of our dead, and obteine their de∣sires, or for that these miracles be wrought there, &c. Away with these things, they may be either the iuglings and mockeries of deceitfull men, or els illusions of lying spirits. Againe saint Chry∣sostome saith,In Matth. Hom. 49. Per signa cognosce∣batur qui essent veri Christiani, qui falsi: Nunc autem signorum opera∣tio omninò leuata est, magis autem inueniuntur apud eos qui falsi sunt  Christiani: In olde tyme it was knowne by myracles, who were the true Christians, and who the false: but nowe the working of myracles is taken quite away, and is rather found among them that be false christians. Neither is the Gospel of Christ preached this daye vtterly without myra∣cles. The blinde see, the dombe speake. Your idols are fallen. Your great Babylon is come to ground. These thinges my bre∣thren, (if you haue eies to see) are no small miracles. Saynt Chry∣sost. sayth,Chrysost. in. 1. Cor. hom 8. The conuersion of the worlde is a miracle. Saint Aug. De verbo Domini secund. Matth. Serm.
18. sayeth, Modo caro cae∣ca non aperit oculos miraculo Do∣mini, & cor caecum aperit oculos sermone Domini: Now a dayes the blind fleshe openeth not her eyes by the myracle of our Lorde, but the blinde heart openeth his  eyes at the worde of our Lorde. And againe,Ibid. Modo aures corporis surdae non aperiuntur: sed quàm multi habent clausas aures cordis, quae tamen (verbo Dei penetrante) patescant. Nowe a dayes the deafe eares of the body be not o∣pened: yet many they are, that haue the eares of their heart shut vp: which eares notwithstan∣ding are opened by entring of the worde of God. Therefore I may rightly saye to you with other wordes of Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei,Lib. 22. ca. 8. Quisquis adhuc pro∣digia vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui mundo creden∣te non credit: Whosoeuer yet re∣quireth myracles to bring him to the fayth, is himselfe a great my∣racle, who seeing that the world beleeueth, remayneth still in vn∣beliefe.Matt. 27.4. Whereas the Pharises said of Christ, Let him now come downe from the crosse, & we will
beleeue him. Saint Hierome in Matth. 27. sayth vnto them,
Eti∣amsi de cruce descenderet, similiter non crederetis: Yea, although he shoulde come downe from the crosse, yet would you not beleeue him. But it were a worlde to be∣hold the glorious countenance of your myracles, your crosses can speak,Popish miracles. your idoles can goe, your i∣mages can light their own lāpes, your holy water is able to calme the sea, to chase away myce, & to make barren women to cōceiue. If you doubt hereof, cōferre with Master Cope,Dial. 1. Pag. 18. whome (as I thinke) you knewe aliue, & were present at his burial at Rome in ye English Church: you knewe him a Canon of S. Peters church at Rome, and one whom Cardinal Hosius greatly esteemed. But now both Hosius and Cope are dead. Conferre also with that worthy Prelate the Bishop of  Verona, your holy father Lypo∣manus. I am sory, welbeloued, that you are so readie to approue your myracles with false reasōs, and vnstable grounds: howbeit such religion, such myracles. Saint Hierom sayeth,Ad Algasi∣am. Mendaci∣um Antichristi Christi veritas de∣uorabit: The trueth of Christ shall deuoure and consume the falsehood of Antichrist. The hea∣then had their deuilish myracles in the temple of their false gods, & in effect true, as may appeare by all their histories. Reade Ti∣tus Liuius in many places.Et M. Cic.
1. Diuinat. Si∣mon Magus, who would be ac∣knowledged as Christ, wrought miracles. So much touching your miracles. Touching reuela∣tions & visions, which are a kind of myracles, wee haue the playne text which decideth this matter: Cum surgens in medio tui Prophe∣ta, somnians somnium, ediderit ti∣bi  signum aut prodigium, (quamuis eueniat signum illud aut prodigiū, quod praedixerat tibi) dicendo, Se∣quamur deos alienos, quos non no∣ueras, & colamus eos, &c. If there shall arise (sayeth the Lorde in Deut. 13.) amiddest thee a Pro∣phet or a dreamer of dreames, and that the signe or myracle which he hath tolde thee come to passe, & thereupon woulde turne thee away to strange gods, &c. thou shalt not heare him, &c. There are then both Prophets and visions true in effect, and yet false in their ende, and the tryall of them (as wee may see by this text) is the doctrine. Likewyse when Saynt Iohn (to the ende to keepe vs from false prophets) exhorteth vs to proue the spirits,1. Iohn 4. and by and by he addeth, Hereby shal you knowe the spirit of God, Euery spirite that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in ye flesh, is  of God, &c. that is to say, Proue the spirits by the doctrine which they preach. Therefore Saul & Caiaphas haue prophecied, but (as Saynt Augustine sayeth) as Balaams asse once spake,August. lib. 2 ad simpli. quaest. 1. & yet for all that, they might haue once spoken the trueth: for the deuill himself (to colour his lying) some∣times speaketh the trueth. Howe weake (my brethren) your reue∣lations be, and howe small credit ought to be giuen therunto, there is no man but shoulde know. At Rome you haue them that re∣ceiue reuelations daily, as for ex∣ample: A poore man there is in the citie of Rome (of whome I doubt not but you haue heard) who maketh men beleeue, that our blessed Lady, with her garde of heauenly mayds, saluteth him, and hath conference with him dayly. This man is no otherwise then a Saynt counted among  the Iesuits. The Pope hath him to pray for him, the people regard him as a holy holy man. This man helpeth the citizens, to bring the wood from Tyber syde to their houses: of his gaine hee re∣serueth nothing else, but yt which is sufficiēt for meat, drink & cloth: ye rest he giueth to ye poore. Father
Hieronimus Iesuite, repetitour of the Logiciās in the English Se∣minarie at Rome, reported that there was there dwelling, an old woman (I wil not otherwise cal her, for I deale gently & mildely wt you) which would (as he sayd) tell him euery thing that hee had done in his life time, and when he came to her house at any time, she would tell one of her maydes (not hauing seen him) that there was such a felowe comming vnto her house. She also foretolde him, yt he shoulde become a Iesuite. Hee reported in like wise, how ye Pope  in diuers matters cōsulted wt her. He praised this womā out of mea∣sure, & sayd how she was greatly in fauor with God, who reuealed such hiddē & secret mysteries vn∣to her. He cōmended thereby the happie state of Rome, that there shoulde be such in yt city, as were worthy to receiue these reuelatiōs & visions: he counted her a Saint. No dout, if one yt I knew at Cow∣bridge in Wales, in the Towne where I was borne, had bene there, they would haue taken him as a Saint, and familiar felowe with Christ. For, (whē he was a∣liue, as he wandred the countrey) he made men beleeue, yt he woulde tell them their fortune, what thinges had before chaunced in their time, & thinges that shoulde happen afterwardes euen vnto their dying day. But this man (as he was wont to saye) tooke his reuelations frō the Pharies: But  the Romanists affirme, that their reuelations come from God, or from some Angell or Saint of heauen, where as in very deede, if a man had the straight exami∣nation of them, I am perswaded they would confesse, that they haue their reuelations from the Phairies, or frō the deuill, as the other had, whereof mention is made. Moreouer, there was a rich man in Lombardy, that had ye like reuelations, but farre more excellent then the other: vpon consideration whereof hee solde all that he had, and gaue it to the poore frankly. For it was reuea∣led vnto him in a vision by Christ & his Apostles, and the same also confirmed with the bodyly pre∣sence of our blessed Lady, that he should be Pope of Rome, and should trāslate the See of Rome into the citie of Hierusalem. This man, not able to reade, presumed  to preach, and gathered vnto him twelue Apostles, who (at his cō∣mandement) preached in like∣wise. They had many folowers, and such as beleeued him, so much the sooner, for that he told them, that hee had receiued a re∣uelation. He was presented be∣fore Cardinall Bromeo Cardinal of Milaine, who examined him: and when he had tolde this visi∣on, he was dismist, and sette at libertie. They counted not this man an heretique, for crediting such false reuelations, making himselfe Christ, & choosing to him self twelue Apostles. Oh my bre∣thren, deceyue not your selues, & seeke not to deceyue others that meane you no hurt. It is but in vaine to swim against ye streame. It is not wisdome to mainteyne an error knowē. I am sure your consciences are burnt with hoate yrons, speaking and mayntey∣ning  lyes in hypocrisie. Oh giue not your selues ouer into repro∣bate & wilful mindes, despise not the wisdome of God within your selues. Seeke not to be offensiue and grieuous to any which bee of the Church of Christe. Doe what you can, Gods trueth is mightie, & shall preuayle. Dagon shal fal down headlōg before the Arke, the darknes shal flee before the light, & the more fiercely mās wisedome shall withstande, the more glorious shal God be in his victorie: the more you doe falsely slaunder the faithfull and true meaning ministers of God, the greater shal their reward bee in the heauenly kingdom of Christ. If you take my conuersion to the true church, to be outwardly and not inwardly, and the same to be spotted with hypocrisie, I may bee sorye, not for my selfe, (as though I were such a one as you  take mee to be, for GOD kno∣weth it is nothing so, his name be praised therefore:) but for your rashnesse in iudging that which you knowe not. It is God that is the searcher of mens heartes, and none other. If I recanted, eyther for feare of punishment, or for prefermentes sake, you mought count me then (if it were so, as it is not) to be farre worse then a Turke or Pagan, who neuer receiued the trueth. Howe can I be a Protestant outward∣ly, and a Papist in heart, with a minde to be saued? You knowe, that according to your owne pa∣pisticall lawes, no man dare in cōmon assembly deny the Popes authoritie, and afterwardes to name himself the member of that church of Rome. I am sure that no man is a true christian, which with his lippes doeth professe Christ, and with his heart doeth  flatly denye him. As I doe ac∣knowledge that there is a God, a Trinitie in vnitie to be woor∣shipped, who hath most glorious∣ly beautified the heauens, most plentifully enriched the earth, most Angelically created man, who hath ordeyned the heauen to mayntaine life and light, the earth to succour and sustaine na∣ture, all creatures liuing in land and water, to supply his wants, nothing to be reckened & named, which he hath not most libe∣rally giuen vnto man, as appoin∣ting him lord and soueraigne, but them his vessels and seruants. Against hunger, (lest we shoulde famish) he hath prouided nou∣rishment, against thirst, (lest we shoulde perish) he hath ordayned sauoury liquors. Against colde, (lest we should die in our naked∣nesse) he hath giuen vs clothing. As I acknowledge the omnipo∣tencie  of God, and confesse the vnmeasurable greatnesse of his goodnes & loue towardes man: so do I verily, from the very bot∣tome of my heart, detest your Po∣pish religion, & embrace the vnde∣filed trueth of Christes Gospell. I cal God to witnesse, that what I haue already spoken with my lippes, that doe I establish in my minde. I beseech you all, (such as haue forsaken the Pope) some∣times to praye for mee, that it would please God to make me a profitable member of his church, and stedfast in the faith of Iesus Christ, euen vnto ye end of my life. So much for Antiquitie, Mul∣titude, succession of persons or place, miracles and reuelations. God of his mercy graunt you, my brethren, true repentance. Nowe good Christian audience, and welbeloued brethren, I will speake a worde or two touching  the images, which Papistes al∣low, and haue in their churches. The scriptures in sundry places plainely forbid any image to bee made. The Lorde warned the people of Israel,Deut. 4.15. that they should remēber that they sawe no image in the day that ye Lord spake vnto them in Horeb, out of the mids of the fire.Isa. 40.18. And in Isaiah, Cui assi∣milabitis Deum, aut qua similitudi∣ne illum exprimetis? To whome then wil you liken God, or what similitude will you sette vp vnto him? And againe, the Lorde con∣firmeth the same,Isa. 44.9. to the 19. saying, Quis au∣debit effingere Deum, aut fusile aut sculptile facile, quod nihil prodest? Who hath made a god, or molten an image, that is profitable for nothing? Beholde, all they that are of the fellowship thereof, shal be confounded, for the workmen themselues are men: let them all be gathered together, and stande  vp, yet they shal feare, and be con∣founded together. I can not a li∣tle maruayle, that among you, my brethren, (I meane the Pa∣pistes) that Dominicke Asotus, writing vpon the Epistle to the Romanes, the first chapter,Rom. 2.21. durst so boldly affirme, that in the same commādement of God, the Chri∣stiās were not forbidden to make images, representing the fourme of man: for (sayde hee) the lawe there onely maketh mention of birdes, of fourefooted beastes, & of creeping wormes, whereas in very deede they are strayghtly charged not to make the images of male or female. Moreouer it is expressed in the Psalme,Psal. 115.4, 5, 6, &c. Os ha∣bent, & non loquuntur, pedes ha∣bent, & non ambulant, aures habēt, & non audiunt, nares, & non odo∣rantur: They haue a mouth, and speake not, they haue feete, and walke not, they haue eares, and  heare not, they haue noses, and smell not. The Carpenter is bla∣med in Isaiah,Isaiah 44.13, 14. which of one part of the hewen tree, maketh an i∣mage, of the other parte he ma∣keth fire, and vpon the same he baketh bread, he carueth and la∣boureth much, that he may ex∣presse the similitude of a man. By all these places it doeth manifest∣ly appeare, that the images of men are vtterly forbidden, which are instituted to a religious end: And yet you (though you knowe that all maner worshipping of images is forbidden by expresse testimonies of the holy scripture) must haue them forsooth, (as you say) for bookes vnto such as can not reade. What thinke you in making the image of God the fa∣ther, and God the holy Ghost? You knowe God is a Spirite:Iohn 4.24. whereof it followeth, that you can not expresse his forme, with  lineaments, with paintings and colours. It is writtē,Iohn 1.18. 1. Tim. 2.16. 1. Ioh.
4.12. that no mā hath euer seene God. Why then, if he can not be seene, or if he pos∣sesse inaccessible light, howe can he be pictured? or howe should a picture make him to bee seene? Moreouer, God is vnmeasura∣ble and infinite, but the thinges which are paynted, grauen, or molten, are measurable & finite. Likewise, Images are made of men, that the absent, after a ma∣ner may be thought present: but God is euery where, neyther is he absent from any thing. It is written in the Psalme,Psal. 139.7, 8, 9. Si ascen∣dero in coelum, tu illic es. There∣fore it behooueth vs, not to make God present, with images, seeing he is alwaies present, & to al men. The image should with apt simi∣litude expresse yt which is to be re∣presented. Howe doeth the image of God the father rightly & truly  represent him, whereas he hath no beginning? The images are made by man, and haue a begin∣ning. Who can set forth the quan∣titie of God and his wonderfull woorkes, howe he is neuer idle, but euermore doing that which tendeth to the saluation of man? Contrariwise, images sleepe, and doe nothing at all. Moreouer God is altogether wisedome and knowledge: whereas your ima∣ges feele nothing, and vnder∣stande as much. Saint Paul sayeth,Actes 17.29. that we must not thinke the Godhead to be like golde or siluer, or stone grauen by arte. God that made the worlde and all thinges therein,Actes 7.48. seeyng that he is Lorde of heauen and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with handes, neither is worship∣ped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gi∣ueth to all life and breath, and all  things. Fortunate doe I thinke those stones to be, whereof ima∣ges are made, and put vpon your popish altars, because they are had in such reuerence and honor amongst you, whereas other stones not vnlike vnto thē, lye in ye streetes, are troden with feete, and spet vpon.Papistes obiection. You obiect vnto vs the authoritie of the Scrip∣tures, and say, It is lawfull to paint God in the forme of man: which you seeke to proue by the vii. of Daniel,Dan. 7.13, 22. I behelde (sayeth the Prophet) till the thrones were set vpon, and the ancient of dayes did sitte, whose garment was white as snowe, and the heares of his head like ye pure wooll, his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheeles as burning fyre. In Ezechiel, speaking of God,Ezech.
1.5. is expressed the figure of man. Isa∣iah sayeth,Esay 6.1. that he sawe God sit∣ting vpon a Throne. Moses also  with the Seniours sawe God, when hee sate in his Throne or tribunal seate.Exod. 33.20, 23. And in the mount he sawe God in the forme of man departing. Seeing these things nowe vttered were seene of the Prophets, why then is it vnlaw∣full for vs to paint God with co∣lours and karuing? I answere thus vnto your obiection, The diuersitie of bodily members, which is ascribed vnto God in the holy Bible, hath shewed in a mysterie, that the Diuine nature should take vpō it ye humane na∣ture, and likewise it signified my∣stically, that God should take vp∣on him fleshe, and become man. Yea (to let this answere goe) I say, it was the goodnesse of God, wherewith he so applyed himself vnto our infirmity, that whereas we could not vnderstand his na∣ture, GOD appeared so in the sight of man, as though hee had  bene man himselfe. By his eyes hee described prouidence, by his armes, strength, by his handes, workemanshippe, by his no∣strelles, wrath, and many things of like sorte. And whereas you say that it is lawfull for vs (for the expressing of God) to vse the like lineaments, colours, and caruings, it followeth not. To GOD there is no lawe giuen which hee ought to obserue, ney∣ther are all thinges lawfull to men, which he iustly and rightly hath done.Exod. 7.5. God reuengeth him on his enemies,Gen. 22.2, 10 hee giueth com∣maundement to the father to kill his sonne,Exod. 11.2. and he willeth the He∣brues to take with thē the goods of the Egyptians: which thinges if men should doe or commaund, they could not cleare themselues of a great offence, committed a∣gainst God. The Lorde hath deli∣uered a law to men, and to him∣selfe  hath hee giuen no lawe: for seeing that hee is the Authour of the lawe, hee may thereof except what he lyst. Wherefore it is to be graunted, that hee hath done nothing without considerati∣on and infinite iudgement. I woulde gladly bee briefe: there∣fore I refer you to the chapters which speake against Images. Reade Exod. 20.4. Leui. 9.4. Num. 33.52. Deut. 4.15. Psal. 115.4. Psal. 135. Esa. 40.18. Ierem. 10.5. Ezech. 6.6. Heb. 2.18. Wis. 13.10. Baruc. 6. Act. 17.42. Rom. 14.3. 1. Cor. 5.11. 1. Cor. 6.6. Gal. 5.19. Iohn 4.5, 21. You see, my brethren, in howe many places the scripture doeth forbid vs to haue images, yet you will haue them, though God say nay, if your holy father the Pope doth allow them. Let vs see now what the auncient Doctors and graue fathers haue sayd by your images.Tertul. in lib. de Ido∣lolatria. Tertulliā in his booke of
Idolatrie, sayeth, God hath for∣bidden an image as well to bee made, as to be worshipped. As far as making goeth before wor∣shipping, so farre is it before that the thing be not made, that may not be worshipped. Some man will saye, I make it, but I wor∣ship it not, as though hee durst not worshippe it for any other cause, but onely for that same cause, for which he ought not to make it: I meane, both wayes procure Gods displeasure. Nay rather thou worshippest ye image, thou giuest the cause to other to worshippe it. Some one or other that maintaine idolatrie, wil say, And why then did Moses make the image of the brasen Serpent in the wildernesse?Num. 21.8. The olde ido∣laters founde out and vsed the same, aboue fourteene hundreth yeres agoe. One & the same God, hath by his generall Lawe both  forbidden any image to be made, and also by his extraordinarie & speciall commandement he hath bidden an image of the serpent to be made. If thou be obedient to the same God, thou hast his Lawe, Make yu no image: but if thou haue a regard to the image of the Serpent that was made afterwarde by Moses, then doe thou as Moses did, Make not a∣ny image against the law, vnlesse God commaunde thee, as hee did Moses.Origen. libr. 7. contra Celsum. Origen sayth, We make no image of God, as knowing him to be inuisible, & wtout bodie. Againe he sayeth,Ibid. lib. 4. contra Cel∣sum. The minde of the Lawe was this, that they shoulde in all thinges so behaue themselues, as the trueth requi∣red, and that they shoulde beside the trueth, counterfeite nothing, representing the shape of a man or woman.Cyprian in lib. de Ido∣lorum vani∣tate. Cyprian sayth, Ima∣ges were first drawen, thereby  to keepe the countenance of the dead in remembrance, vpon occa∣sion whereof, thinges grewe at length vnto holinesse, that at the first were taken onely for solace. Againe,Ibid. tract. 1. in Deme∣trian. what doest thou bowe thy captiue bodie before foolish images, & earthly counterfaites? God hath made thee vpright: and whereas all the beasts of the earth are depressed in shape, ben∣ding downe to the groundward, thou hast a loftie state towardes heauen, and to God thy counte∣nance is erected. Then looke vp thither, thither cast vp thine eies, seeke God aboue, that thou maist want hell belowe: lift vp thy doubtfull heart to hygh and hea∣uenly thinges. What doest thou throwe thy selfe with the deuill, whome thou seruest, into the pit of death? Clement sayth,Clement to Iames the supposed brother of our Lord. The de∣uill by the mouth of other, is wōt to bring forth such words, We to  the worship of the inuisible God, worship the visible images. And this is most certeinly false. For if you will truely worship Gods I∣mage, you should (by being bene∣ficial vnto man) worship the true image of God in him. What ho∣nour of God is this, to runne a∣bout the counterfeites of timber and of stone? and to worship the shapes that are without soule, & despise man, in whom is the true shape of God? Arnobius in his eight bookes against ye Gētiles: We neither worship, nor wish for crosses: you that consecrate wod∣den gods, peraduenture worship your wodden crosses, as partes of your gods. If you had not this image, should Christ be ignorant that he were serued of you? Will you thinke that there is no honor done him? Then doeth he receyue your seruings and worshippines by certaine traynes, by other put
in trust, & before he, to whome the worship is due, haue any feeling of the matter, you doe your sacri∣fice vnto the image, and send him but the scrappes from another mans boorde. And what can be deuised more iniurious, slaunde∣rous, & vncourteous, then to ac∣knowledge one God, and make thy sute to any other thing? to hope for helpe of God, and powre out thy prayers to a senselesse i∣mage? Is not this (as the Pro∣uerbe sayth) to haue a quarrell to Alfonsus, & fight with Ferdinan∣do? and where thou seekest for ad∣uise of men, to aske the sentence first of porkelings, and of asses? Is not this an errour? Is it not properly a madnes, in trembling wise to make thy humble sute to a thing that thou madest thy self? And whereas thou doest knowe, and art assured, that it is thine owne workemanship, the fruites
of thine owne fingers, to fall gro∣ueling vpon thy face before it? Very children knowe, that your images haue eyes, and see not, mouthes and speake not. Where∣fore then doeth the holy Ghost so often teach vs, and admonish vs the same thing in the Scrip∣tures, as if we knewe it not? For that the very shape and proporti∣on of a man set aloft, after it once beginneth to bee adored and ho∣noured of the multitude, it bree∣deth in euery man that most vile affection of error, that although he find there no naturall mouing or token of life, yet he thinketh some god or godly thing is with∣in it, and so being deceyued, part∣ly by the forme that he seeth, and partly by the waye of authoritie and credite of the authors & ma∣kers of it, whome they take to be wise, and partly also by the exam∣ple and deuotion of the people,  whome they see obedient to the same, he thinketh that the image being so like a liuing bodie, cā not be without some liuing thing vn∣derneath it. Lact. sayeth in plaine wordes, Non est dubium, quin reli∣gio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrū est: Out of all doubt, there is no religion, wheresoeuer there is an Image. S. Aug. speaking of the image of God the Father, sayeth thus, Tale simulachrum Deo fin∣gere, nefarium est: To deuise such an Image of God, it is abomina∣ble. Theodorus the Bishop of
An∣cyra saith, Sanctorum imagines & species ex materialibus coloribus formari minimè decorū putamus: manifestum enim est, quod vana sit huiusmodi cogitatio, & diabolicae deceptionis inuentum: We thinke it not conuenient, to paynt the images of saintes wt materiall or earthly colours: for it is euident, yt it is a vayne imagination, & the  procurement of ye deceytfulnes of the deuil. To like purpose writeth Epiphanius, Estote memores dile∣cti filii, nec in ecclesias imagines in∣feratis, neque in Sanctorū coemite∣riis eas statuatis, sed perpetuò cir∣cumferte Deum in cordibus vestris. Quin etiam neque in domo com∣muni tolerentur. Non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem men∣tis: My deare childrē, be ye mind∣ful, that you bring no images in∣to the churches, & that you erect vp none at the burials of the Saints, but euermore cary God in your heartes, nay, suffer no images to be,Marke wel no not in your pri∣uate houses. For it is not lawfull to leade a Christian man by his eyes, but rather by ye studie or ex∣ercise of his minde. For this cause Epiphanius sayth, The superstiti∣on of images is vnfit for ye church of Christ. It is a worlde to see,
how welfauouredly, and howe towardly touching religiō, these men agree with the fathers, of whom they vse to vaunt. They bee your owne good, and yet you see, how they speake against your images. If time should permit, I were able to recite many such places out of the fathers, in con∣futation of your worshipping such vaine images. You doe not onely allowe images to be had in churches, but also you cause them to be deuoutly and reuerently ho∣noured, and that with the same honour that is due to God him∣selfe. One of the Bishops of the council of Nice sayth,
Venerandas imagines recipio & adoro, & id perpetuò docebo: I receiue and worship ye reuerēt images, & this wil I teach. Another saith, Sacras imagines perfectè adoro. Qui verò secus confitētur, eos anathematizo. I do perfectly adore the holy ima∣ges,  and I accurse all them that hold the contrary. Another saith, Non sunt duae adorationes, sed vna, ipsius imaginis, & primi exempla∣ris, cuius est imago: There be not two kynds of adoration, but one, which is as well due to the image, as to the paterne of the image. Saint Augustine sayth, Sic omninò errare meruerunt,August. de consensu E∣uangel. lib. 2. cap. 20. qui Christum & Apostolos eius non in sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis pa∣rietibus quaesierunt, nec mirum, si a pingentibus fingentes decepti sunt: So were they worthy to bee de∣ceiued, that sought Christ and his Apostles, not in the bookes of holy Scripture, but in paynted walles. Neither may one mar∣uaile, if the feyners by Paynters were deceiued.In Epist. Io∣an. Episcop. Hier. The old father E∣piphanius sayth, It is a horrible wickednes, and a sinne not to be suffered, for any man to set vp a∣ny picture in the church of the  christians, yea though it were the picture of Christ himselfe: yet you store all your Temples, and eche corner of them with paynted and carued images, as though without them religion were no∣thing worth. Thus (good brethrē) you see both scriptures & fathers against you. Forsake then your worshipping of images. Nowe will I speake a litle, after what maner they worship images at Rome. I haue seene, and so haue you, that on euery altar in Rome, there are set vp either Idols or images. In S. Peters church, they haue the image of S. Peter in brasse, holding out his finger to blesse them as they passe by: be∣fore the which image the people fall downe, and make their pray∣ers vnto it, kisse his foote, and touch it with their Beades. I would aske you once again, why they paynt God the Father, and  God ye holy Ghost. Euen because lay men (when they see God to haue a body) shoulde thinke God the father, & God the holy Ghost to be men, as we be. Their priests in Italie for the most parte are altogether vnlearned. I deman∣ded of some of these Italian priestes in the Italian tongue, whether God the father and God the holy Ghost had bodies. They answered, Yea. Wel then, seeing their priests are ignorant in these thinges, you may perswade your selues that the simple countrey∣men are likewise ignorant. Fa∣ther Pais reader of scholasticall diuinitie at Rome, in the Romane colledge (beeing demanded of Doctor Allen) whether it was as lawfull to worship the thing that represented, as well as the thing that was represented by the Image: This graue & lear∣ned Father answered, it was  lawfull to worship the tymber, whereof the Image was made. If this be not idolatrie, that a mā should worship that thing which is more fit for the fire or for some other purpose, then to be worship∣ped, thē there is no idolatrie wor∣thy to be named at al. Thus much briefly touching images. God giue you a heart to conceiue the trueth. You worship ye pillar vp∣on the which the cock crew, whē Peter denyed his master Christe. Why do you thus? What, doe you make the cocke a saint? The Ro∣manes haue made them a cratch or manger, representing the oxe & the asse, & also the byrth of Christ, to the which workmanshippe of man, they fal down and worship. Can you shewe me a reason, why you shoulde kneele before these stones, or why you shoulde kisse them, and touch them with your beades? What, haue you canoni∣zed  the oxe and the asse Saints, & doe you saye in your Letanies, Sancte bos, & Sancte Asine orate pro nobis: Saint oxe and Saint Asse, pray for vs? Why do ye wor∣ship the thirty pence, which Iu∣das tooke to betray his master Christ? What, doe you count the thirty pence holy Reliques, for yt Iudas had them, or for that they came from ye chief priests? What, do you make Iudas the traytour a Saint, or ye chiefe priests of the Scribes and Pharises holy mē? The reliques of Saints are wor∣shipped, as bones &c. they fall downe likewise on their knees before them, they crye vnto them, they touch the boxe with their beades, they see not the bones be∣ing wrapped in silke, and put in a boxe, or in the altar, in boards, or in Christal. The beades touch not the bones, but the outward boxe. The priest may beguyle the peo∣ple,  putting in the boxe the bones of a dead horse, or the head of a foxe, in stead of ye Saints bones: for the people seeth not what is in the boxe, or wrapped in silkes. Why doe the poore men for their asses bring offrings to stations, as candels, torches, and such like? And why do the poore Romanes bring their asses to Churches, & cause the priestes to say a fewe prayers ouer them, and sprinkle holy water vpō thē? Belike, they thinke to get a roome or place in heauen for them, & s to ryde vpon Asses in heauen, or else to get in∣dulgences of the Pope for their asses. In deede they are (as the Prophet Dauid sayth) sicut equus & mula quibus non est intellectus:Psal. 32.9. They are like horse & mule, who haue no vnderstanding. If I should recite all those Idolatrous practises, which I haue seene at Rome, a whole day were not  sufficient to tell them: but by these few things layd downe, you may gather the rest to be as bad, or ra∣ther worse. Now I will speake a litle of the wickednesse of Rome, which you count holinesse, and make our Englishmen that were neuer there, beleeue so. First I wil begin with your Cardinals, the pillars of your Church. Haue they not beautifull boyes, with whom they commit the sinne of Sodom,Gen.
19.5. as I haue heard by the Romanes, and by a Gentleman who serued to Cardinal Sforsie, who trauayled by land with me, from the citie Ancona to Venice? Haue not these yong Cardinalles pretie wenches in their palaces, whom in the day time they cal ei∣ther their sisters or cousins, & in ye night time make them either their bedfelowes or cōcubines? And do you not knowe, howe that there was a yong Cardinall a Prince,  burnt at Rome not long since, by a common queane of the stewes, & toke from her the french disease, wherwith he dyed miserably? Do not your priests at Rome, with∣out shame & punishment, openly in the sight of all men goe to the stewes? I haue seene them with mine eies, (as I walked ye streets) embracing the Queanes. O if a minister heere in England should commit such abomination, and scape vnpunished, howe woulde you cry out against him and a∣gainst the Magistrates! Yet to see your owne priests so to doe, & your Magistrates to suffer it, you holde your peace, you seeme to al∣lowe it. What shall I speake of your Monkes? Was there not at Rome a whole monastery of such as beare a siluer crosse in their hands, & are apparelled in blewe, full of women, that went in habit of those monkes, and were they  not spied at the last, and escaped vnpunished? Be these the holy mē that haue renounced the world, and haue vowed chastitie? Now of the lay men, because I will not stand to discourse vpon euery thing that I recite. How doe the citizens liue? Was there not late∣ly a great rich citizen, that had a place to the which resorted many yong Romane Gentlemen, who committed the sinne of Sodom one with another, and were they not spyed out at the last, and did not they all scape punishment, ex∣cept one poore man which dyed for all? And did not the Romanes saye, that he dyed wrongfully, for that the sinne of Sodom was but a tricke of youth? Count you me that a light offēce,Gen.
18.20. & 19.13. that cryeth vp to heauen to God for venge∣ance? Moreouer, haue not ye Ro∣manes sixe streetes full of Curti∣zants, and harlots, who pay a  yeerely tribute to the Pope? And be there not throughout al Rome Queanes, who lay out of their windowes carpets, and their gownes, which is a signe to them that passe by, that there they may haue a woman for money? At Shrouetide, what horrible abu∣ses are there practised at Rome without punishment! Doe not men go in womens apparell, and women in mens apparell? The Gentlewomen out of their win∣dowes throwe rosewater, which is a token to them that passe by, that there they may defile their bodyes one with another. What murther is there, insomuch, that no mā can sit in his wagon with∣out daunger of his life? These words of Petrus Bembus are true, Roma est sentina pessimorum ho∣minum: Rome is the sinke of pe∣stilent varlets. I would not for a great deale of money, but that I  had seene Rome: otherwise I should haue stood in doubt, lest I had misreported ought of them, but what I sawe, yt speake I, and testifie, and cry with Mantuan, Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum: Ye yt desire to liue godly, depart frō Rome: for when al things are lawful there, it is not lawful to be honest. Peraduenture nowe, you wil say yt the Pope is a holy man. Although I am indebted vnto him 50. or 60. li. in money, yet wil I not, neither can I but speake the trueth of him, vnlesse I should sinne, (which God forbid.) Hath not this Pope, at his hauen citie Ancona, prised & taken away the marchandize of the Turkes mar∣chants, for that one of the Turks had offended one of his seruants? The Pope perceiuing the mar∣chandize to bee of great valewe, tooke an occasion thereby to de∣priue ye marchants of their mar∣chandize.  The emperour of the Turks wrote a letter to ye Pope, desiring him to restore the goods againe to his marchants: ye Pope refused so to doe. Wherefore the Christian marchants were in like sort dealt withal at Constantino∣ple. At Macerata, the Pope put a County out of his possession, and gaue it to his own sonne Iames, whom (of a begger) he hath made a Marques, able to spend by the yeere, thirty thousande crownes, and is richly maried to a Dukes daughter: He gaue the countie for his possession, not halfe so much as it was worth. There was also a monke, who came from the In∣dians, who at Venice refused a hundred thousand crownes, for two precious stones which hee brought with him, who thinking to please this Pope now liuing, & to get a greater rewarde, presen∣ted the precious stones before this Pope Gregorie, who taking the  gemmes or precious stones, in steade of reward, committed the Mōke to prisō, alledging nothing against him but this, that hee for∣sooke his cloyster, or monasterie. Master Alet (whom you know) hath reported this to bee true: for he knewe this sayd Monke, as he reported to two Gentlemen of ye North that had byn at Hierusa∣lem, and to mee, and to three other scholers. Thus much tou∣ching his iniquitie. Nowe I will not speake of the Popes pontificalitie, howe hee is caryed on mens shoulders, how the peo∣ple kneele before him, howe the trumpets sound, how ye ordināce or double canons are dischar∣ged, and howe the people cry out, Viuat papa Gregorius: (Let our dissembling Antichrist) Let Pope Gregory liue and reigne ouer vs. You faine (my brethren) yt there is a purging place for the soules  after this life, wherein they abide and suffer the selfe same punish∣ment which is in hell, and are in no better case (to speake of the tor∣ments) then they of hel. But here∣in they are farre happier then the damned, for that they of purga∣tory are sure to be saued, and they of hell, are sure neuer to finde end of their miserable condition. You say, that such as be in purgatorie, may be released, and deliuered to heauen, by the praiers and dirges of such as be on earth. That there is such a place named as Purga∣torie, you seeke to proue by the Scriptures. First out of ye booke of ye Maccabees, where it is read, that good and profitable it was to pray for the dead. From hence you go to Zacharie the Prophet, where it is said in the ninth chap∣ter, Eduxisti vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo non erat aqua: Thou hast deliuered thy prisoners out of the  dungeon wherein there was no water. Also in Ecclesiastes the 4. De carcere atque catenis interdum quis progreditur ad regnum? Who at any time commeth from prisō, and frō fetters vnto the Crowne? You alledge the Psalme, Transi∣uimus per ignem & aquam, nosque in refrigerium eduxisti: We haue passed both fire and water, and thou hast brought vs to a refre∣shing place. Out of the newe Te∣stament you bring this place, where it is said, that the sinne of the holy Ghost is not forgiuen, neither in this worlde, neither in the world to come. Ergo (say you) in this life sinnes are forgiuen, & also in the life to come. And out of Saint Matthewe you obiect, Take him, and binde him hand and foote, and cast him into vt∣ter darkenes, and there let him stay vntill hee hath payde the vt∣termost peny. Ergo (say you) he  meaneth Purgatorie. Also you obiect the historie of Lazarus and the rich glutton. You al∣ledge moreouer this place of the Apocalypse, where it is sayd, that nothing impure and defiled with sinne, shall bee admitted to that holy citie of the Lorde. And you thinke that these wordes of S. Paul doe serue to your purpose, that al knees must bowe to God, that be in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth. Finally, you bring foorth this place of the A∣pocalypse, that euery creature in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth giueth prayses vnto the Lord. You thinke that these, and such like places of Scripture doe make greatly for your purpose. But it is knowen, that amongst you Papists there be diuers opi∣niōs touching purgatorie. Some say that it is a true opinion, and an article of our fayth, to teach,  and beleeue, that there is a pur∣gatory: Others there be, who not so firmely and constantly affirme the same, but they either suspect, or thinke yt there is such a place. First, I will shewe, that Purga∣torie belongeth not to any article of our faith, neither is it a necessa∣rie thing to bee credited. Se∣condly, I will declare, whether the suspition and opinion of pur∣gatory standeth with reason, and is iust. I answere vnto them, which say it is a necessary opini∣on, and an article of our fayth, to acknowledge that there is a pur∣gatorie: If it were a certaine and firme article of our faith, it should then most euidently so appeare out of the testimonies of the scrip∣tures. For we do not descend in∣to their sentēce, which be fathers, or will make men the authors of the matters of religion. It should be a reproch vnto the holy Ghost,  if we should perswade our selues, that whatsoeuer they write, doth tend to our saluation, and that the saluation of our soules doeth stand vpon their wordes. What thing soeuer apperteyneth to our saluation, the same by the vertue of the holy Ghost is expressed in the Scriptures. Saint Paul to Timothie saith,2. Tim. 3.16, 17. that the whole scripture is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to conuince, to correct and to in∣struct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, be∣ing made perfect vnto all good woorkes. If you doe contende to set foorth any good woorke, or any thing necessary to be credi∣ted, which may not be confirmed by the scriptures, I would take that to be neither good, nor profi∣table, if the Scriptures doe not plainly allow the same. We must not beleeue your wordes to bee  true, whereas you say, The Apo∣stles haue not taught all things, which touch the saluatiō of man. This wil I graunt in politicall, but not in spiritual matters, that it should be true, which you saye, that all things are not conteyned in Scriptures, which belong to the gouernement of a common weale. But to proue that ye scrip∣tures wrote sufficiently touching our soules health,Tertul. de praescrip. Tertullian in libro de praescript. sayth, Foelix ec∣clesia cui totam doctrinam Apo∣stoli cum sanguine profuderunt: Happy is that church which hath receiued the whole doctrine con∣firmed with the bloud of the A∣postles. Our sauiour Christ saith, Quae audiui a patre meo, omnia feci nota vobis: Those things which I haue heard of my father, I haue reuealed vnto you. Moreo∣uer, that I may returne to my matter, often it is doubted of
Purgatory. The Greeke church in the councill of Florentine long stoode in doubt. And the common places of the scripture, which are brought foorth, to proue this opi∣nion, let them expound them no otherwise then the proper and lawfull interpretation doeth re∣quire, and there shall then bee left no place to proue Purgatorie. Saint Cyprian in his first trea∣tise against Demetrian saith thus, After we be once departed out of this life, there is no more place of repentance, there is no more ef∣fect or working of satisfaction, life is here either lost or wonne. Euer∣lasting saluation is here prouided for, by ye due worshipping of God and the fruites of fayth. Saint Augustine saieth, de ciuitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 13. Quidam nullas poe∣nas nisi purgatorias volunt esse post mortem: Some men wil haue no punishment to be after death, but  onely the paynes of Purgatory. Euen in Pauls time there were some,1. Cor. 15.29 that being aliue, were bap∣tized for the dead. And by the Council of Carthage. 3. canon 6. it appeareth, there were some yt vsed to thrust the sacrament into the mouth of the dead body, mea∣ning thereby (as it maye bee thought) to procure some reliefe of the soule: The words be these, Placuit vt corporibus defuncto∣rum Eucharistia non detur.Concil. 3. Can. 6. Di∣ctum est enim a domino, Accipite, & edite: Cadauera autem nec acci∣pere possunt nec edere: We thinke it good, that the Sacrament be not giuen to the bodies of ye dead. For our Lorde sayeth, Take and eate: but dead bodies can neyther take, nor eate. These were aunci∣ent errours in olde time, as it is easie to be seene. As for the fanta∣sie of purgatorie, it sprang first from the heathen, and was recei∣ued
amongst them in that time of darkenesse, long before the com∣ming of Christ, as it may plainly appeare by Plato and Virgil. Plato in Timaeo. Virgil. Aeneid. 6. in whom you shal finde described at large, the whole common weale, and all the orders and degrees of Purgatorie. Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei, lib. 7. cap. 7. sayeth, The olde heathen Romanes had a sacrifice, which they called,
Sa∣crum purgatorum: A purgatorie Sacrifice. You will say, The A∣postles of Christ haue taught vs purgatorie, (not by any worde that euer they wrote, but) by tra∣ditiō. This is as true, as that S. Peter sayd Masse in Rome with a golden Cope, & a triple crowne, vnlesse perhaps some man will thinke, whereas S. Paul sayth, Homines priuati veritate, existimā∣tes quaestum esse pietatem: They be men voide of trueth, thinking  that their gayne is godlinesse: or whereas Saint Peter sayth,2. Pet. 2.3. Per auaritiam fictis sermonibus nego∣ciantur de vobis: Through coue∣tousnesse, by feyned talke, they make sale of you: that by these words, they gaue vs warning of the very fourme and doctrine of your purgatorie: for better au∣thorities then these be yt I recken, you can lightly finde none. And whereas you tell vs out of some heathenish fantasie, that sinnes can not be washed away, but by long space of time, and payne in purgatory, Saint Cyprian saith, In eodem articulo temporis, cum iam anima festinet ad exitum, & e∣grediens ad labia expirantis emer∣serit, poenitentiā clementissimi Dei benignitas non aspernatur, nec serū est, quod verum est: In that very moment of time, euen when the soule is ready to passe, and is euen at the lippes of the partie ready
to yeelde vp the spirite, the good∣nesse of our most mercifull God refuseth not repentance, & what∣soeuer is truely done, is neuer too late. Saint Chrysostome sayeth, Latro in cruce, neque vno die opus habebat. & quid dico vno die? Ne∣que breui hora: tanta est Dei erga nos misericordia: The thiefe on the crosse needed not so much as one daye to repent himselfe. What speake I of one day? No, he nee∣ded not one houre: so great is the mercy of God toward vs. Saint August. Epist. 80. sayeth, If any man depart hence without repē∣tance,
Imparatum inueniet illum dies Domini, quem imparatum in∣uenerit suae vitae huius vltimus dies: Him shall the daye of the Lorde finde vnprouided, whom the last daye of this life findeth vnproui∣ded. Saint Ambrose sayth in his booke de bono mortis, Qui hic non accipit remissionem peccatorum,  ibi non erit: He that here in this life receiueth not remission of his sinnes, shal not be there. And S. Hierome in Lamentationes Ierem. lib. 1. cap. 1. Thou shalt not goe foorth thence, vntill thou haue payed ye last farthing, sayth thus, Significat semper non exiturū esse, quia semper soluat nouissimum quadrantem, dum sempiternas poe∣nas terrenorum peccatorum luit: Christes meaning is, yt he shal ne∣uer come out, for that he must e∣uermore paye the last farthing, whyles he suffereth euerlasting punishment for his sinnes com∣mitted in this worlde. So sayeth Saint August. de sermone Do∣mini in monte, lib. 1. Donec soluas nouissimum quadrantem, miror, si non eam significat poenam quae vo∣catur aeterna: Vntill thou pay the last farthing, I maruaile, but it meaneth that payne, which is called euerlasting. Hereby, my
brethren, I thinke it may partly appeare, that you maintaine your paynted fyre and paper walles, with painted authorities and pa∣per reasons. Verely the Christian people of the East church of God, which sometime was as great & as famous as the Church of the West, notwithstanding they be∣leeued in God, and his Christ, & knewe there was both hell & hea∣uen: yet in your Purgatory they had no skil. One of your Doctors saith, Alphonsus de haeresibus lib. 8. de indulgentiis. Vsque in hodiernū diem Purgatorium non est a Graecis creditū: Vntil this day, of the Gre∣cians, or of the East church, Pur∣gatory was neuer beleued. Ther∣fore you can not iustly say, yt your fantasie herein was euermore ac∣compted vniuersal, or catholique. Augustine in Psal. 85. in deede sometime sayeth, There is such a certaine place, sometime he deny∣eth
not but there may bee such a one, sometime he doubteth: some∣time againe hee vtterly denyeth there is any at all, and thin∣keth that men are therein decei∣ued, by a certaine naturall good will they beare their friendes de∣parted. But yet of this one er∣rour hath there growen vp such a haruest of those massemongers, that the masses being sold abroad commonly in euery corner, the Temples of God became shoppes to get money, and silly soules were borne in hand, that nothing was more necessary to be bought. In deed there was nothing more gainefull for these men, then to sell masses for the dead. Your owne Roffensis sayeth, Nemo nunc dubitat Orthodous, an pur∣gatorium sit, de quo tamen apud priscos, vel nulla, vel quam raris∣sima fiebat mentio: sed & Graecis ad hunc vsque diem non est credi∣tum,  quamdiu enim nulla esset cura de purgatorio, nemo quaesiuit indul∣gentias: No Catholique man nowe doubteth of Purgatory, wherof notwithstanding among the auncient Fathers, there is eyther no mention at all,Marke well. or very seldome, yea euen vntill this day the Grecians beleeue it not, for so long as there was no care of pur∣gatory, no man sought after par∣dons. So much for Purgatory. Nowe I thinke it not amisse (my brethren) somewhat to speake a∣gainst your praying for the dead. First I wil disproue your praying for the dead by scriptures. Then after, I will confute the same by the authoritie of the Doctours. To beginne with Scriptures, I cite the 2. of Samuel
12.22. While the childe was yet aliue, I fasted and wept, for I sayde, who can tell, whether God will haue mercy on me, that the child  may liue? But nowe beeing dead, wherefore shoulde I nowe fast? Can I bring him againe any more? I shall goe to him, but hee shall not returne to mee. Psalme 49.7. A man can by no meanes redeeme his brother, hee cannot giue his ransome to God, so precious is the redemption of their soules, and the continuance for euer. Ecclesiastes 9.5. The dead knowe nothing at all, ney∣ther haue they any more reward, for their remembrance is forgot∣ten, and they haue no more porti∣on for euer, in all that is done vn∣der the Sunne. All that thine hande shall fynde to doe, doe it with all thy power: For there is neyther worke, nor inuention, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the graue whither thou goest. Al∣so 1. Thessalon. 4. I woulde not haue you ignorant, brethren, con∣cerning them which are asleepe,  that you sorrowe not euen as o∣thers which haue no hope:1. Thes. 4.13. for if we beleeue that Iesus is dead, & is risen, euen so them which sleepe in Iesus, will God bring wt him. Wherefore comforte your selues one another with these woordes. Thus much for scripture. Nowe will I alledge the ancient testi∣monies of the Fathers.Cypr. serm. de mort. Cyprian in his sermon of mortalitie sayth thus, Seeyng that we knowe, that our brethren, which bee de∣liuered out of this worlde, by the hande and calling of the Lorde, are not lost, but sent before: wee must not here take on vs blacke gownes, syth that they haue al∣ready there put on whyte gar∣ments: we must not giue occa∣sion vnto the Paynims, that they may deseruingly, and by good ryght blame vs, or lay to our charge, that we doe lament, and bewayle them, as perished and  lost, whome wee doe affirme to liue with God, and so to proue with the testymonies of our hearts, and breake the same faith that we doe professe and set forth by our communication & talke. Againe hee in his first treatise a∣gainst Demetrian, When we bee once departed out of this life, there is no more place of repen∣tance, there is no more effect or working of satisfaction, life is here eyther lost or wonne, euer∣lasting saluation is here prouided for by the due worshipping of God, and the fruites of faith: then we shall bee without the fruite of repentance, & griefe of payne. In vaine shall weeping bee, & prayer shal be of no force or effect. Augu∣stine in his first booke and 12. chapter of the time:August. De temp. Therefore all these thinges, that is to wit, the looking vnto the corpes, or caring
for it, the conditiō of the burying, and the pompe of the funerals, are rather for the comforte of the liuing, then for the ayde and helpe of the dead. If costly and preci∣ous burying doe profite the vn∣godly, vyle burying, and none at all shall hurt and hinder the god∣ly. The multitude of seruants did in the sight of men make ex∣cellent and glorious funerals vn∣to that rich man that was all clo∣thed in purple: but the ministe∣ry of Angels made much more excellent and noble funerall in the sight of God, vnto the poore silly creature that was ful of skabbes, blaynes and sores: for they did not lay him in a tombe of marble, but did cary him into the bosome of Abraham. Likewise in his fyrst treatise vpon the Epistle of Iohn, Whereof doe Schismes come? Hereof they come, when men say, We are righteous, we  doe pray, we doe obteine. Hie∣rom in his 13. quest. and 2. chap. We knowe that in this worlde wee can be helped one of ano∣ther, eyther with prayers, or with counsell: but after wee bee once before the iudgement seate of Christ, neyther Iob, Da∣niel, nor Noah be able to pray for any body, but euery man shall beare his owne burthen. The councill of Toledo. 3. cap. 22.23. qu. 2. cap. qui diui. We doe bidde & commaunde, that they which de∣part out of this life by the diuine calling of the Lorde, bee caryed foorth to their graues, onely with Psalmes: for we doe altogether forbid ye same prayer of funerals, that they be wont to sing com∣monly for the dead. Item senten. 4. distinct. 45. Neque. Hee that prayeth for a Martyr, doth wrōg vnto the Martyr. Against pray∣ing for the dead, I thought it  sufficient to speake thus much. Nowe I will speake a worde or two of praying to Saintes. First the Scripture forbiddeth it: for it is written, Psalme 80.11. Giue vs help against trouble, O Lord, for vaine is the helpe of man. Psalme 115.17. The dead praise not the Lorde, neyther they that goe downe into the place of si∣lence. Esay 63.16. Doutlesse thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of vs, and Israel knew vs not, yet thou, O Lord, art our Father, and our Redee∣mer.
Nowe for the fyrst. If the helpe of man bee in vayne, why then do you pray vnto Saintes? And, If the dead praise not the Lorde, to what ende then should they be prayed vnto? If Abrahā and Israel (who were counted holy in the sight of God) knewe not of them that were in earth, shall wee thinke that other  Saintes haue preeminence a∣boue the rest? No, no, we deceiue our selues, and the trueth is not in vs. Iere. 15.1. Though Mo∣ses and Samuel stoode before mee, yet mine affection coulde not bee towardes this people. Thus sayeth the Lorde, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh fleshe his arme, and withdraweth his heart from the Lorde. Ezechiel 14.14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Iob were among them, they shoulde deliuer but their owne soules by their righteousnesse, (sayeth the Lorde) yet I am the Lorde thy God, which brought thee from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no God but me, for there is no Sauiour besides me. Esther 14.3. O my Lorde, (thou onely art our King) helpe me desolate woman, which haue no helpe but thee. Matth.
11.28.  Come vnto mee all yee that are weary & laden, & I will ease you. Iohn 14.6. Iesus sayde, I am the way, and the trueth. No man commeth vnto the Father, but by mee. To the first. If Gods  wrath kindled against his peo∣ple coulde not be pacifyed at the intercession of Moses and Sa∣muel, who were Saintes, howe can you perswade your selues, that Saint George or Saint Gregory, or any other Saint may be heard of God praying for you? To the second. Here is com∣mination  of God pronounced a∣gainst them that put their trust and confidence in man. But you put trust & confidence in saintes, who interpretiuely bee men. Ergo this curse toucheth you. These holy men, Noah, Daniel, and Iob can doe no more but saue their owne soules, they can not with their prayers procure the  saluation of other mens soules. These three were Saintes, and in fauour with God, as others be, they had the viewe of the glo∣rious maiestie of God as others haue: Ergo I inferre, If there coulde no helpe be found in them, then you may be assured, no helpe is to be founde in others. To the
thirde. God telleth vs there is no other Saluation besides him, but you (my brethren) hope to bee saued through the clemencie of your Patrones that be Saynts: wherefore I conclude, that you breake the commaundements of GOD, when hee sayeth that none can saue you, but hee alone.  To the fourth. The desolate woman tooke GOD onely to bee her king, (& not some Saint or other) her shield, her buckler, her defence, her comforter & hel∣per. In this her distresse & neede, she ranne not vnto some Saint  to craue helpe at his handes, but vnto God himself, who was most ready to graunt her requestes. Therefore you are much to bee blamed, that you will not follow the allowable exāples of others. To the fift. Christ biddeth vs, when wee are driuen to anye straights, or are grieued wt any kinde of troubles, to make our praiers vnto him, and not vnto Saints, for he maketh no menti∣on thereof: and hee promiseth that our petitions shall be accep∣table in his sight. Seing that of his bountifulnes hee willeth vs to come vnto him, why come you not to him, why goe you vnto o∣thers? O stubburne and froward generation, O vnthankfull, and disloyall subiects! You will not come when as you are bidden, you wil not receiue Gods gentle∣nes of himself offred, but seeke to craue of his seruants, against his will and pleasure. To the sixt. Christ telleth vs, that no man can come to ye Father but by him. If no man can come to the Fa∣ther, but by Christ, Ergo in vayne do you then make your prayers vnto Saints. Act. 4.12. Neither is there saluation in any other: for among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen, wherby we must be saued. Rom. 10.14. How shall they cal on him, in whom they haue not beleeued? Iames 1.5. If any of you lacke wisdome, let him aske of God, which giueth to al men liberally. Euery good giuing, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and cōmeth downe from the father of lights. You see in these places of scripture God telleth vs playnly, we cānot be saued (by any other, neither by this Saint nor that Saint) saue onely by Iesus Christ. Thus much out of the
scriptures. Now let vs see what the Doctors speake against your praying vnto Saints. First I wil begin with Augustine in his second booke and 8. chap. against the Epist. of Parmenian. Saint Paul maketh not himselfe a me∣diatour betweene God and the people, but requireth that they pray all one for another, being all the members of Christ. If Saint Iohn would saye, This haue I written vnto you, that you sinne not, and if you sinne, you haue me your mediatour before God, and I will intreate for your sinnes, as Parmenian (the heretique) in a certaine place, made the Bi∣shop a mediatour betweene God and the people: what good and faithfull christian man could a∣bide him? Who would looke vp∣on him, as the Apostle of Christ? or rather who would not thinke him to bee Antichrist? Also vpon  the 108. Psal. All praier, yt is not made vnto god by Christ, not on∣ly doth not put away sin, but also is turned into sinne. Item in his 3. booke of freewil. Wee are not cōmanded to goe to any creature yt we may be made blessed, but to the creator & maker of al things, of whom (if we be perswaded o∣therwise then ye trueth is) we are deceiued wt a damnable error. Itē in his booke of ye spirit & the soule, 29. cha. The soules of thē that are dead, are there where they do not see, neither heare what thinges are done, or chaunce in this life: Such is their care for the liuing, that they know not what we do, euen as our care is for the dead, that wee knowe not what they doe. Item, in his tenth treatise vpon Iohn. My mother whome you haue called blessed, therefore is blessed, because she hath kept the worde of GOD, and not be∣cause  in her the word was made fleshe. Item, in his booke of the remission of sinnes, the 14. chap. The Apostle said truely, Bee you folowers of me, as I am of Christ He neuer durst saye, Bee you iu∣stified of mee, as I am iustified of Christ. None is iust, but Christ iustifying. Therefore he sayd, He that beleeueth in him that iusti∣fieth the vngodly, his fayth is counted for righteousnes. Who is so bolde therefore to saye, I iustifie thee, which may not bee said of the Saints, but of the holy of holiest, yt said, Beleeue in God,Ioh. 14.7. beleeue also in me? Againe in his first treatise vpon the Epistle of Iohn: From hence commeth schismes, when men say, We are righteous, we make holy the vn∣holy, we doe iustifie the wicked, we doe pray, we do obtaine. Item in 84. treatise vpō Iohn. Though we dye brethren for brethren, yet  the blood of no Martyrs is shed for the forgiuenesse of sinnes, which thing Christ hath done for vs. Ambrose vpon the 1. chapter of the Romanes: But we obteine Gods fauour, from whome no∣thing is secret, as knowing what euery man is meete to haue, wee neede no spokesman, but a de∣uout minde, for whatsoeuer such a one speaketh vnto God, God wil answere him. Chrysost. in his 2. hom. of the woman of Canaan: Tell mee woman, sith thou art a wicked and sinfull woman, how durst thou go vnto him? I know (sayth shee) what I do. Beholde the wisedome of the woman, she prayeth not vnto Iames, she en∣treateth not Iohn, she goeth not vnto Peter: shee did not get her selfe to the company of the Apo∣stles, shee sought for no mediator: but for all these things, she tooke repentance for her companion,  which did fulfill the roome and place of an aduocate: and so shee did goe to the high fountaine. Item in his sermon of going for∣ward of the Gospel: There is no neede of a Porter, of a Mediator or minister, no neede of Aduo∣cates with God, nor of any run∣ning, and gadding about for to speake fayre vnto other: for al∣though thou be alone, and with∣out an aduocate, and praye vnto God by thy selfe, thou shalt ob∣teyne thy petitions. Cyrill in his booke of right faith: He was ta∣ken vp into heauen: but as God he is shewed to graunt the petiti∣ons of them that worship him, if they make their prayers in his name. For why is it more meete to giue Saints their asking, and to graunt them their petitions, then for him, which is onely by his owne nature, & truely God? Leo Bishop of Rome, in his 81.  Epistle: Although the death of many Saintes hath bene preci∣ous in the sight of the Lorde, yet the killing of no Innocent, hath bene the propitiation for the worlde. The righteous receiued, but gaue no crownes, and out of the valiantnes of the faithful are grauen examples of patience, not giftes of righteousnesse. For their deathes were euery one singuler to himselfe, and none of them did by his ende paye the debt of ano∣ther, forasmuch as there is our Lord Christ, in whom all are cru∣cified, all dead and buryed, and raised vp againe. Erasmus in his booke called the Preacher: If a∣ny man lacke wisedome, let him aske it of God, and not of the Saints. So much against pray∣ing vnto Saintes. Here in the first parte of my declaration, I haue (as you knowe) declared a true report of the wickednesse of  Rome: I beganne with the Car∣dinals liues, proceeded to the Priestes, Monkes, and citi∣zens, and ended with the Pope. Seeing you know these reportes to be true, for your owne saluati∣on returne to the trueth. Bee not obstinate and frowarde in your false opinion. You are courteous∣ly and gently intreated, yet are you neuer the better, but rather the worse, like Frogs that keepe a great crooking & sturre against the light of the Sunne: so do you against the glorious and comfor∣table beames of Christ his Gos∣pell. Be satisfied with trueth, and abuse not the mercifull lenitie of our gracious Soueraigne, lest that the Lordes discipline be re∣stored, which shall restraine your spreading poyson, and auoyde the hazard whiche otherwise should happen, not onely to the church of God amōg vs, (which
might not thriue amidst such pe∣stilent & cōbersome weeds) but e∣uen to the endāgering (which the Lorde of glorie turne from vs) of this florishing common weale, & her Maiesties most royal person, crowne & dignitie. Your malici∣ous & cursed practises, as cocatri∣ces, haue brought forth & hatched great dangers to ye cōmon weale already. If you should be set at li∣bertie, without recantatiō escape vnpunished, winked at, fauoured and spared: greater mischiefe shal insue your treasonable practises, to ye ruine and desolation of this blessed lande, which God of his mercie turne awaye from vs. What pestiferous bookes haue our English fugitiues thrust foorth vnto vs, defacing Gods holy trueth, the Queene her roy∣all Maiestie, many of her hono∣rable counsell, and sundry of her louing and faithfull Subiects?
Haue thei not also procured Anti∣christ, Pope Pius Quintus, to excō∣municate our Redoubted Soue∣raigne, & al thē that cōtent them∣selues, christianly & quietly to liue vnder her gouernment? But an vnderserued curse hurteth not. A∣bout Midsōmer last was twelue-month, they renued these bulles of excommunication, graūted by this Pope Gregory, vnder the co∣lor & name of Pius Quintus publi∣shed. There were fiue hundreth copies printed at Rome, as two of you (my brethrē) can verifie the same, and how they were publi∣shed, as I heard at Rome, in the Englishe Seminarie at Rhea∣mes, and were put fast to pillars in the citie. These Bulles of ex∣communication were scattered throughout all Italie, Spaine, & parte of Germanie. In these buls of excōmunicatiō, (forsooth) they haue discharged (if their dis∣charge shoulde bee credited) her  highnesse Subiects from their loyaltie & obedience to her Ma∣iestie, their natural Prince. Haue not their Bulles pronounced her Maiestie to be no lawful Queen, whom God hath placed ouer vs? Haue not their attemptes bene the seede of rebellion? and haue they not caused, and doe cause to this day, many to practise secret∣ly her graces destruction?The loyaltie of Papists. One of your Readers in Diuinitie posi∣tiue, I am certayne, before two hundreth scholers, and not so fewe, as one of you may testifie the same, most impudently and deuilishly spake, that it was law∣full for any man of worship in Englande, to giue authoritie to the vilest wretch that is, to seeke the death of our soueraigne Queene. But God who hath defended her, still preserue her: And then let K. P. who threat∣neth, and Antichrist, Pope Gre∣gory  an Italian borne in the citie of Bolonia, who prouoketh, ioyne their powers together: yet shee shall preuayle, to their shame, & to her honour. Father Pais a Spa∣niard borne, reader in scholastical diuinity in ye Romane colledge at Rome, said in ye presence of three hundreth scholers at least, these were his woordes, Bona Papae voluntas trita & manifesta est, & eius crumena parata, sed R. P. aut metus subtrahit, aut potestatis defe∣ctus vetat, vt suū in Angliam exer∣citum ducere non audeat. That is, the Popes good will is tried and knowne, and his purse rea∣dy, but K. P. either feare with∣draweth, or power forbiddeth him that hee dare not venter, to bring his Army of Souldiers into Englande. But least that I be too tedious to my hearers, of this first part I wil make an end,  beseeching you my brethren to become loyall and faythfull to your naturall Prince, forsaking your superstitious Idolatrie and cursed religion, your pompous glorie, and prowde hierarchie, and thus much for the first part. The second part. Qui veniunt ad vos vestitu ouium, &c. Which come vnto you in sheepes clo∣thing, &c.
In this place (being the secōd part of my diuision) whē the ho∣ly Ghost biddeth vs: Beware of false prophets, he addeth also a note or marke, to know them by, in these words: Which come vn∣to you in sheepes clothing. In the first words, which come vnto you, there is also giuen vs one mark of a false prophet, yt is, to go before he be sent, in ye last words, In sheepes clothing, is shewed, that when false prophetes come,  it is but wt flatterie & dissimula∣tion. For to come in sheepes clo∣thing: is nothing else, but to feine himselfe a sheepe, that is, to make thy selfe holy, whereas thou art nothing lesse, to name thy selfe a follower of Christes holy worde, wheras thou art obedient to the traditiōs of mē, to name thy selfe a Prophet, whereas yu art not, to name thy selfe a teacher of the trueth, wheras thou art a main∣tainer of lies: to resemble a sheepe in outward shew, but in wardly to be a Foxe. What a false pro∣phet is, you may know if ye reade these places of scripture that fol∣low, to witte, Esa. 56. Ierem. 6.23. Ezech. 22.34. Philip. 3.4. and the 2. to Timoth. 3. Titus 1.2. Pet. 2. Luk. 16.
Rom. 16. For whiles they giue themselues vnto couetousnesse, (and that vnder a colour of god∣linesse,) what can otherwise fall out, then that which S. Peter  sayth, With fained wordes they shoulde make marchandize of Gods people.2. Pet.
2.3. So did the false Prophetes amongst the Iewes: so did their sacrificers, Matt. 15.5. with them, as our massemōgers haue done with vs. What maner worshipping of God haue they feyned? what snares haue they laide? namely Indulgences, pur∣gatorie, watchings, masses for the dead, workes of supereroga∣tion, & in fine to that passe they brought it, that obscured ye grace of our redemption, wherewith al such as beleue, by Iesus Christ are freely redeemed, and get e∣ternall life. No man thinketh a∣mongst the Papistes, but they ei∣ther deserue eternall life (by rea∣son of their owne workes:) or els if their outward workes fayle, to be damned for euer. This is yt same diabolicall perdition, with the sway whereof, a great part of  Christendome is caried headlōg. And the cause hereof is, that men haue ytching eares, and therfore procure vnto themselues heapes of teachers,2. Tim. 4.5. to feede their fonde humors, men are highminded, self willed, louers of themselues, beyng wedded to their owne wayes, and marryed vnto their owne deuices, they leaue the law of God, and follow after the tra∣ditions of men. What (I praye you) is the cause, that there be so many papistes in England? is it not, because the true preachers are not beleeued? The trueth of∣fendeth them, the Scriptures mislike them, they are delighted with falsehoode, and content to staye themselues vpon mens in∣uentions. Preceptes are giuen, & yet the precepts of God are not regarded, ensamples abounde, and yet the ensamples of the con∣stant & faithfull martyrs of God  are derided and scoffed at, the wholsome counsels of the godly eyther are lightly contemned, or else heard with so small profite, that they enter in at the one eare, and goe out at the other. Is it then to be maruayled, if Christ suffer these pretensed prophetes, (the Papists I meane) to seduce them from his trueth? reade 1. of the kings 22.22. In Achab the like hath bene done before, and in Ezech. 13.10. & 22.28. we reade of them that buylded with vntem∣pered morter. Seeing then that they will not giue credite vnto Gods worde, and therewith be contented, God is not to be bla∣med, if (that these false prophetes deceyuing them with an out∣ward shewe of holinesse) he giue them vp to strong delusions,2. Thess. 2.11 that they fall from the trueth to error, from light vnto darkenes, from heauen to hell. Such as  teach them the trueth, are despi∣sed, and others that instruct them in the dregges of idolatrie, are esteemed and had in great repu∣tation. These false prophets, that they may bring these carnal men vnto perfection: they tell them how their forefathers liued, whē they embraced papistrie, howe that in comming to Churches, they were very diligent, in wor∣shipping of images they were de∣uoute, howe paynefull in visi∣ting holy places, howe liberall vnto the poore, howe mercifull to the afflicted, and lastly, howe carefull they were to keepe Gods commandements. Where be all these good workes (saye they) what is become of them? Nowe one man seeketh to beguile ano∣ther, one man speaketh euill of an other, their deuotiō to the church is waxen colde, charitie towards the poore is more then frozen. &c.  And whereof (say they) procee∣deth this heape of all mischiefe, the ripenes of this impietie what roote hath it, springeth it not frō the corrupt doctrine of the newe fangled Preachers? Vnto all these supposed cauilles, and most manifest slaunders (for other are they not, but slaunders and those meere supposed) I answere, whereas they speake of the godly liues of their forefathers (if their liues had bene holy) these their good works, whereof they boast, were not vndoubted markes of true religion. For reade the hy∣storyes of the Gentiles, let the liues of the olde Philosophers both Greekes and Latines bee perused: and it shall not bee a∣ble to be gaynesayed, that for the ciuill state of their life, and the morall vertues, they lyued as vp∣rightly as euer your forefathers did: yea, and that in such excel∣lencie,  that some of them were e∣uen beautified by the names of the vertues themselues: as So∣crates the Constant, Plato ye reli∣gious, Regulus the promise kee∣per, Cato the sober, and such like: yet neyther did their liues proue their religion to be true, neyther was heauē able to be scaled by so short and weake a ladder. As for that they blame the liues of them that professe the Gospell, & there∣upon inferre that they haue no true religion, they speake more (by their leaues) then trueth wil warrant. For the imperfections of Gods children, and the sinnes of particular men, are not auaile∣able to disherite them of true reli∣gion:Gen. 9.2. & 19.33. 2. king. 11. & 12. Matth 26.72.74. as the drunkennes of No∣ah, the incest of Lot, ye adultery & murther of Dauid, ye backsliding of S. Peter, &c do declare, of whō to say they sinned, & therfore they were not in the right way, were  to conclude very impertinently, & without all rule of reason. Now wheras vpon this weake suppo∣sall grounded vpō an vntruth, ye misreport of ye preachers of Eng∣land, saying, that they allow all licentiousnesse of life, it is cleane contrary, for they diligētly exhort the people to amendement of life: they condemne not good workes, no, they commend them highly. herein truely you and they do dif∣fer: they make workes to followe faith as the fruites, according to that S. August.August. de fide & ope∣ribus. cap. 14 & epist. 106. sayeth, Opera se∣quūtur iustificatum non praecedunt iustificandum: You make workes the grounde and faith the roofe, putting the cart before the horse, and heate before the fyre. The Queene goeth before, & her hand∣maydes folow, not that she is not able to go without them, but that as necessarily to the Maiestie & Royal port of a prince such atten∣dance  is necessary: so is it in faith, and works. You my brethren say that good workes are necessary, thereby to merite heauen and de∣serue saluation. But as the scrip∣tures are flat against you, euen so are the doctours also, none of thē do beare with you, they all beare against you. We teach the people trueth, you fables. Wee preach faith, and yet exhorte vnto good workes, you seeke more for the huske then for the kernel. We are not such as Cardinall Hosius mis∣deemeth vs to bee , naughtie and euil preachers, nei∣ther preach wee any thing that Gods worde alloweth not. How your Elders and our forefathers liued, it standeth you in hande to consider of: they put their sonnes into monasteries, & their daugh∣ters vnto Nunneries, what they did they haue answered, if they did well, they are pardoned by  mercie in the promise made vnto Abraham: if euil, no mā shal haue a crowne but hee that fighteth lawfully. yet herein ye offer them a great deale of wrong, yt as blind guides leading them into by∣pathes, robbing thē of their inhe∣ritance, spoiling thē of the trueth of Gods worde, ye put the sheepe to answere for ye blindnesse of the shepheard. That they liued in ig∣norance it can not bee denyed, it was not of faith,Rom. 10.14. for it was not grounded vpon the writtē word of God: They did as they were taught, if they had bene taught better, better woulde they haue done, yet is it not fit yt we shoulde condēne any mans seruant whe∣ther he stande or fall. Neither is their early rising to Mattens, to their Complyn at midnight, their going barelegged and barefoote, their fasting and wilful pouertie, their hard lying, their whippings  their going in sackecloth, their lōg praying in the streetes, nor all o∣ther ye like practises able to drawe vs from the trueth. nay what wil ye answere when God shall aske you,Esa. 10.12. Mat. 15.9. Why did ye worship me with mens traditions? who hath re∣quired this at your handes? Reade the booke entituled, Hie∣rosolomitanus peregrinus, you shal finde, that the Turkes liue more austerely in their Monasteries and abroad, then euer any of you did. It were too long to rehearse their outwarde godlinesse, they fast and pray as you doe, they build Temples, they maintayne hospitals, they visit the sicke, they pray in the night time more then you doe, and the day tyme they spend either in prayer, or in some good woorke. They clothe the naked, feede the hungry, har∣bor the harborlesse, they followe you in al points of good woorks,  yea, and they farre surpasse you. For proofe hereof, I referre you to the reading of their Histories. yet will ye not say (I thinke) that the Turkes for all their good workes are like to bee saued. If this were a good argument, yt by good works men are saued: then could I reason thus:
The Turkes do good works, But they which doe good workes shalbe saued: Ergo the Turkes shalbe saued. And whereas you say, yt they did well which make their daugh∣ters Nonnes. For (say you) they serue God and our Ladie: if their seruice be good & commendable, seeing that they attribute and apply that vnto our Lady, which (in Dauids Psalmes) is spoken of God the father and the sonne, iudge you. For when they pray, they pray after this maner, In te domina speraui, miserere mei do∣mina,  dixit dominus dominae meae, sede mater mea a dextris meis, &c. In thee O Lady haue I trusted, O Lady haue mercie vpon mee, the Lord said vnto my Ladie, sit my mother at my right hand, &c. In such sort, that these blasphe∣mies, which they call our Ladies houres, were the chiefe deuotion of those that were most deuoute. Nowe seeing the blessed virgin was put in Christs place: I aske what remayneth for him? and if, because shee bred hym and bare him, and brought him forth, she accomplished ye saluation of those that cal vpō her, what then was there, that he should deliuer him∣selfe to death for vs? But let mee (I praye you) speake a worde or two, concerning the doctrine of these false prophets, which tea∣cheth a man to be iustified by his good workes. If I should iusti∣fie my selfe, myne owne mouth
shall condemne mee (saith Iob:Iob.
20.) for if I woulde bee perfect, mine owne mouth shall condemne me, we haue bene all as an vncleane thing (sayth Esay) & all our righ∣teousnes is as filthy cloutes.Esa. 64.6. When yee haue done all those thinges which are commanded: (saith our Sauiour) say thē, We are vnprofitable seruants, wee haue done but yt which was our duetie to doe. And there is none righteous,Rom. 3.10. no not one: by the workes of the lawe shall no flesh be iustified in his sight, and all these words come from ye mouth of God. But seeing ye wil hardly admit the testimonie of Gods worde, without the witnesse of men: go to, let vs see what say the fathers in this behalfe? I doe scarcely (saith Origen) beleeue that there can be any worke,Origen. lib. 44. cap. 4. that may of duetie require a reward.Basil. In Psal. 32. Basill saith that hee trusteth not  in his owne good deedes, nor ho∣peth to be iustified by his works, he hath the onely hope of his sal∣uation in the mercies of GOD. And Saint Hierome,Hierom, in Esai. cap. 64. If we be∣hold our owne merits, we must be driuen to desperation. The time will not serue to handle this matter at large, therefore I ende this part, beseeching al those that loue the Gospell vnfeinedly, to take diligent heede to such false Prophetes, as come vnto them in sheepes clothing, faining them selues holy, and by their holines thinke them selues iustified. The thirde part. Sed intrinsecùs sunt lupi rapaces. But inwardly they are rauening wolues.
Although our English popish Priestes, (that come from Rome, or else from Rheimes in France,  to this our natiue soyle) tell vs that they haue taken great labor, passed many daungers, yea and hazarded their owne lyues to saue our soules frō eternall dam∣nation, and endles miserie, they are not to be beleeued for all these their brags. They are rauening wolues, they seeke ye euerlasting confusion both of our bodies and soules. What doe they teach, but false doctrine? doe they not seeke to persuade vs to worship stocks and stones, yea (which is worst) to worship that idole in the Sa∣crament? They teache more, then they are well able to performe. Howe can they proue, yt Christ is really & transsubstantially in the sacrament of the altar? This is the effect and force of all their ar∣guments: Christ spake it, whē he sayde, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. They will haue no Tropicall figure herein to be ex∣pressed,  for that Christ sayde and promised, that he woulde speake no more in parables. This argu∣ment is nought, if you saye, that Hoc est corpus meum, be a para∣ble. If you saye, that Christ pro∣mised to vse no more figuratiue speaches, you are farre deceyued. For hee vsed a in this phrase, Hic est calix noui Testa∣mēti, quem si biberit quispiam, &c. This is the cup of the newe Te∣stament, which whosoeuer shall drinke, &c. You knowe no man can drinke the cuppe: wherefore here is Continens pro contento, the thing conteyning, for ye thing conteined. If Christ vsed a figure in this phrase, Hic est calix, &c. Why shoulde he not in like wise vse a  in this phrase, Hoc est corpus meum?
Fe The death of Christ is not re∣ally present in the Sacrament. ri But the blood of Christ is pre∣sent  in the Sacrament, as his death is present. Amb. de sac. 4. cap. 4.o Therefore the precious blood of Christ is not really present in the Sacrament. The Minor proposition is proued out of Ambrose, in his fourth booke of the Sacramentes, and fourth chapter, Vt recepisti suae mortis similitudinem, sic bibis simi∣litudinem sui preciosi sanguinis: As thou hast receyued the similitude of his death, so doest thou drinke the similitude of his blood. Dis The true naturall bodie of Christ is placed in heauen. am But the true natural body of man, can bee but in one place. is Therefore the true naturall body of Christ can be but in one place, and at one time in heauen. Luk. 24.51. Act. 1.9.The
Maior is proued thus, Ie∣sus receptus est in coelos, & sedet  ad dexteram Dei, &c. Iesus was receiued vp into heauen, and sitteth at the right hande of GOD the Father.Matt. 26.11. Pauperes semper habetis vobiscum, me ve∣rò non semper habebitis: The poore haue you alwayes with you, but me shall yee not haue al∣wayes. Ioh. 12. Desero mundum, & eo ad patrem: I forsake the worlde, and goe to my Father. Multi dicent in eo die, Ecce,Matt. 24.23. Mar. 13.21. hic est Christus, & ecce, ibi: Many wil say in that day, Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there he is. Whatsoeuer is in many & diuers places at once, is God. The body of Christ is not God, but a certaine creature. Therefore the body of Christ can not be in many places at once. Da Euery quantitie (that is) eue∣ry body that hath lēgth, breadth, and thicknes, is conteined in one peculiar place.
ri Christes bodye hath length,  breadth and thicknes, and is a quantitie. o Therefore Christes body is contained in one peculiar place. The Maior is prooued out of Cyrill in his thirde booke of the Trinitie, pag. 245. Quic quid intel∣ligitur habere corpus, hoc indubiè est in loco, & in magnitudine & in quantitate. Et si sit in quantitate, euitare non potest circumscriptio∣nem, hoc est habere suum locum: What thing soeuer is vnder∣stoode to haue a body, that with∣out doubt is in a place, in magni∣tude and in quantitie. And if it be in quantitie, then it must needes be in some peculiar place. Fe No naturall body can at one and the same time haue contrarie and diuers qualities.
ri But to be in one place local, in another not locall, in one place with quantitie, in another with∣out quātitie, in one place finite, in  another infinite, is to admit con∣trary qualities to a natural body o Therefore the body of Christ can not be in one place locall, in another place not locall, in one place with quatitie, in another place without quantitie.
We must so defend the huma∣nitie of Christ, that we destroye not his diuinitie. If we assigne to Christes body plurality of pla∣ces, wee destroye his diuinitie: wherefore we must not assigne to Christes body pluralitie of pla∣ces. The mysticall signification that you haue imagined of your shewes and accidents, that the formes of breade and wine out∣wardly represent the spirituall nourishing of the soule, is vaine and fantastical, without the wit∣nes of any auncient Doctour, or father, & is confirmed only by the authority of ye Pope himselfe. For what maner of feeding is there in  these accidents and holy formes, or howe can that thing that fee∣deth not the body, represent vnto vs ye spiritual feeding of ye soule? The matter is plaine ynough of it selfe, and needeth no cauill. The signification and substance of the Sacrament is to shew vs, how we are fed with the body of Christ, that is, that like as mate∣riall bread feedeth our bodie, so the body of Christ nayled on the crosse, embraced & eaten by faith, feedeth the soule. The like repre∣sentatiō is also made in the Sa∣crament of Baptisme: that as our body is washed cleane with water, so our soule is washed cleane wt Christes blood. There∣fore S. Aug. saith, Nisi Sacramē∣ta similitudinem quandam earum rerum, quarum Sacramēta sunt, ha∣berent, omninò Sacramenta non es∣sent: If Sacraments had not a certaine likenes and representa∣tion  of the thinges whereof they be sacraments, then in deede they were no Sacraments. This re∣presentation Rabanus Maurus lib. 1.23. expoundeth thus, Quia panis corpora confirmat, ideò ille congruenter corpus Christi nuncu∣patur, & quia vinum sanguinem o∣peratur in carne, ideo refertur ad sanguinem: Because (not the acci∣dents or formes of bread) but bread it selfe confirmeth the bo∣dy, therefore it is conueniently called the body of Christ. And be∣cause wine worketh bloud in the flesh, therfore it hath relatiō vnto ye blood. so likewise saith Druth∣marus in Matth. cap. 28.
Vinum laetificat & sanguinem auget, & ideo non inconuenienter sanguis Christi per hoc significatur. This I speak briefly of the sacrament of your Masse. Reade the olde and newe Testament, & marke if you finde any one word directly, or indi∣rectly,  secretly, or plainely, which speaketh nigh or farre, of the sa∣crifice of your Masse, which is in controuersie betweene vs. Contrariwise, see if you doe not finde therin from line to line, that Christ is the onely sacrifice once offered vp for all: that there is one onely washing in ye bloud of Christ, yt there is one only God, to be called vpō in the onely name of Iesus Christ. If you finde there the doctrines which we cō∣demne, then in heart & voyce con∣demne vs, and cry fagot & fire a∣gainst vs. If not, recant then, & be sory for your errors, cry God & the Queene mercy. Be sorowful that you haue miscalled our soue∣raigne Lady, and that you haue sayd you would burne her bones, and burne all them of her most honorable counsel, that fauoured not your cursed attempts, eyther
aliue or dead: Many of whose names I could rehearse, but for certaine causes I wil put the first letter of their names. let L. serue the roome of a Lorde, and S. of a Knight. B. for a Bishop. &c. L.K. who is dead, L. T. who is aliue, E. L. aliue, E. B. aliue, E. W. a∣liue, E. H. S. F. K. S. F. W. S. H. S. M. R. of L. Ar. B. of C. M. D. of C. and all such as haue punished (or fauoured not) their idolatrous religion. B. of L. M. D. of P. L. D. of Yor. L. B. of Win. who is dead, B. of Salisb.
D. of Salisb. M. I. F. preacher at London. D. H. at Oxenforde. D. F. preacher at Cambridge, with diuers others, vpon whom you sayd, you would shew no mercy. A man had neede to take heede of such, as yet you are, who make men beleeue (for all this their spight and malice  towards their own natiue soyle, which they greatly wish to be de∣stroyed wt fire, sword, & famine: this am I able to verifye by such as are already conuerted to the trueth of Christ his Gospell, and yet I haue omitted many things of their hatred & practises against this Realme of Englād) yt they hazard their liues to saue our soules from hell, whereas in very deede, they haue wrought (as much as lieth in them) our eternall damnation, and so in∣wardly are rauening woolues. what do they teach our English∣men, but yt the Pope is supreme head, & that, if they will be saued, they must acknowledge ye Pope to be soueraine Lord? This they teach without proofe of scripture. Saint Cyprian sayth,Cyprian de simplic. praelat. & in senten. Episc. & in lib. 1. Epist. 5. Vnum esse Episcopatum, cuius quilibet Epis∣copus tenet suam partem integrā sine diuisione. Praeterea nullum sui  tēporis vocasse aut fecisse seipsum Episcopū Episcoporum, aut tyran∣nide suos sibi subiecisse socios. That is, yt there is but one Bisho∣pricke, of which euery Byshop holdeth his part wholy without any diuision. Also, that none of his time eyther called or made himselfe Bishop of Byshops, ey∣ther made through tyrannie his companions subiect to his obedi∣ence. Also he complayning that prophane men, & Schismatiques withdrew themselues to the By∣shop of Rome, sayeth that there were none yt did so, but certeyne desperate and wicked felowes, perswading themselues that the Bishops of Affricke haue lesse po∣wer then the Bishop of Rome. Saint Chrysost. sayeth in homil. 83. in Matt. cap. 23.
Quicunque E∣piscoporum primatum in terra de∣siderabit, confusionem in coelis re∣periet, et qui caput omniū esse con∣tendet,  non cōputabitur in nume∣ro seruorum Christi: Whosoeuer (sayth hee) of the Byshops shall desire supremacie in earth, he shal finde confusion in heauen, and he that shal desire to be the chiefe, he shall not be reputed in the num∣ber of the seruants of Christ. Loe here, the fathers of your owne Church say, that the Pope is not supreme head. As for scriptures, reade them throughly, and you shal not finde one onely text to ground your supremacie vpon. Wherfore (good brethren) seeing that your owne Doctors speake against you, bee reconciled with me that am conuerted by Gods grace, and the industrie of his instrumēts, the right wor∣shipful sir Owyn Hopton knight, the Queenes Maiesties Lieute∣nant of this towre of London, & diuers godly preachers. Be with me reconciled, I say, and let vs  with one accord embrace ye truth, and become loyall and obedient subiectes to our soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, who so graci∣ously & fauourably dealeth with vs, that, whereas (forsaking our countrey, & submitting our selues to the gouernment, or rather ty∣rannie of an Italian priest) wee haue deserued the heauie wrath of our louing Queene to be puni∣shed with death, by our recanta∣tion our trespasse may be forgot∣ten, life graunted, & wee brought into fauour againe. Wherefore, my louing brethren, (considering the promise of the bountifull cle∣mencie of our gracious Queene, ready at al times to pardō our re∣bellious and traiterous offences committed against her Maiestie, and the dayly labour that this right worshipful knight sir Ow∣yn Hopton by name taketh, to cō∣uert vs to the trueth of the Gos∣pel)  recant, recant, cast not away wilfully your bodyes and soules to endlesse paine: shorten not your dayes, which God hath lent you here vpon earth to do good, and make not an ende of thē in a bad cause. Allowe not the Popes su∣premacie, canons of council, de∣crees of fathers, constitutions of men, rites and ceremonies, par∣dons and indulgences, inuocati∣on of saintes, merites by workes, pilgrimage, masses, diriges, tren∣talles, images, pictures, reliques, altars, shrines, liues of fayned saintes, false miracles, visions, dreames, fantasies & such other trashes without warrāt of Gods worde, as it appeareth to ye world in your sermōs & Romish postils. And in fine, be not Pharises, set not light by the Gospel of Iesus Christ, forsake not ye law of God, to folowe after the traditions of men. In vanum mihi seruiunt (saith  our sauiour Christ in the Gospell of saint Matthew 15.) cum nihil, aliud docent quàm traditiones ho∣minū: In vaine do they serue me, while they teach such doctrines as are nothing but the comman∣dements of men. Say not, that there be seuen sacraments, seeing the Church of God receiueth but two, numero paucissima,August. de doct. Christi. lib. 3. cap. 9. & ad Ianu∣ar. Epi. 118. of the smallest number, (as Augustine writeth) which are Baptismus trinitatis nomine cōsecratus, & cō∣municatio corporis & sanguinis ip∣sius: Baptisme halowed in the name of the trinitie, and the com∣municating of his blessed body and blood, figured in the olde Testament by the circumcision and the paschall lambe. Repent (my brethren) repent, and crye to God for grace and mercy. Let it neuer grieue you to returne from these princes of darkenes, the de∣uill and the Pope. And in deede  what haue you seene in the court of Rome? Christ in exile, and An∣tichrist reigne in his stead, Beel∣zebub the iudge, wolues let loose, and the lambes in ye stocks. Ah good God, who shall deliuer the world from this oppression? who shall gather together the sheepe? who shall reproue and conuince the wicked pastors? Shall there neuer be a limitation and ende of this intolerable mischiefe? Howe long shal the Pope and his shaue∣lings, who haue neyther fayth, godlines nor trueth, deceiue thy poore sheepe? Howe long shal the sonne of perdition reigne ouer thy flocke? who being but a man, lifteth vp him selfe aboue Kings, yea aboue Angels, and aboue the heauen of heauens, and hath cau∣sed men to dispute that hee is notPope Inno∣centius. De transl. C. quanto. Prohoem. Clement. Glossa: Papa stupor mundi. The Pope is the wonder of ye world. simply a man, but a partaker of the diuine nature with Christ, and that he hath the fountaine &  roote of ye spirite of Christ in him. To be short, whereas thou, O Christ, hast submitted thy self vn∣der heauen, earth and hell, he wil cōmaund kings, angels,Gloss. ex∣trau. de sede ad Aposto∣latus. Distinct. 40. C. si Papa. deuils & all, vnder colour of the key of the word, which thou hast deliuered to thy ministers. I aske, (thou being God, and made man for the saluation of the worlde) how it can bee that this man, which maketh himselfe God, shoulde be any other, then that sonne of per∣dition, come for the perdition of the worlde. Thou that hast bene wounded for our transgressions, and smitten for our iniquities, & with whose stripes we are hea∣led, gouerne, helpe, and succour thy flocke: let Antichrist perish, and be discomfited by the breath of thy holy mouth, and abolished by the brightnesse of thy blessed & wished comming. Come Lorde  Iesu, come quickly, for thy names sake. Let all the people saye, Amen. . FINIS. ¶Jmprinted at London, by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most ex∣cellent Maiestie. Anno 1581.
