e751_2 50796672 167029
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. FOR The Calling of an ASSEMBLY OF Learned and Godly DIVINES, to be con∣sulted with by the PARLIAMEMT For the setling Of the Government and Liturgy of the CHURCH of ENGLAND. And for Vindicating and Clearing the Do∣ctrine of the said Church from false Aspersions and Interpretations, as shall be most agree∣able to the WORD of GOD. With the Names of all the Ministers appointed for the same. Die Lunae, 12. Iun. 1643. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Par∣liament, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London, Printed for J. Rothwel at the Fountain in Cheapside, 1658.
An ORDINANCE of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the Calling of an Assembly of Learned and Godly Divines and others, to be consulted with by the Parlia∣ment, for the setling the Government and Liturgy of the Church of England, and for vindicating and clearing of the Doctrine of the said Church from false Aspersions and Interpretations, WHereas amongst the infinite blessings of Almighty God upon this Nation, none is, or can be more dear unto us, then the purity of our Religion, and that for as yet many things remain in the Liturgy, Discipline, and Government of the Church, which do necessarily require a further and more perfect Reformation, then as yet hath been attained: And whereas it hath been declared and resolved by the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament, That the present Church-Government by Arch∣bishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers depending upon the Hierar∣chy, is evil and justly offensive and burthensome to the Kingdom, a great impediment to reformation and growth of Religion, and very prejudicial to the State and Government of this Kingdom, and that therefore they are resolved that the same shall be taken away, and that such a Government shall be setled in the Church, as may be most agreeable to Gods holy Word, and most apt to procure and preserve the Peace of the Church at home, and neerer agreement with the Church of Scotland, and other reformed Churches abroad, and for the better effecting hereof, and for the vindicating, and clearing of the Doctrine of the Church of England, from all false calum∣nies and aspersions, It is thought fit and necessary to call an Assembly of learned, godly, and judicious Divines, who together with some members of both the Houses of Parliament are to consult and advise of such matters and things, touching the premises, as shall be proposed unto them by both or either of the Houses of Parliament, and to give their advice and counsel therein, to both or either of the said Houses, when and as often as they shall be thereunto required. Be it therefore ordained by the Lords and Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, That all and every the persons here∣after in this present Ordinance named, that is to say. Algernon, Earl of Northum∣berland. William, Earl of Bedford. Philip, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. William, Earl of Salisbury. Henry, Earl of Holland. Edward, Earl of Manchester William, Lord Viscount Say and Seal. Edward, Lord Viscount Conway. Philip Lord Wharton Edward Lord Howard. John Selden Esquire. Francis Rous Esquire. Edmund Prideaux Esquire. S. Hen. Vane Knight senior John Glyn Esquire, Re∣corder of London. John White Esquire. Bulstrode Whitlocke Esquire Humphrey Salloway Esq Mr. Serjeant Wild. Oliver Saint John Esq His Majesties Sollicitor. Sir Benj. Rudyard Knight John Pym Esquire. Sir John Clotworthy Knight John Maynard Esquire. S. Hen. Vane Knight junior William Pierpoint Esquire. William Wheeler Esquire Sir Tho. Barrington Knight Walter Yong Esquire. Sir John Evelin Knight. Oliver Bowles of Sutton, Batchellor in Divinity Herbert Palmer of Ashwel, Batchel∣lor in divinity Henry Wilkinson of Waddesdon, Batehelour in Divinity. Thomas Valentine of Chalfont Giles, Batchelor in Divinity Dr. William Twisse of Newbury. William Reynor of Egham Mr. Hannibal Gammon of Maugan Mr. Jasper Hcks of Lawrick Dr. Joshua Hoyle late of Dublin in Ireland William Bridges of Yarmouth Thomas Whincop of Ellesworth, Do∣ctor in Divinity Thomas Goodwin of London, Bat∣chellour in Divinity John Ley of Budworth in Cheshire Thomas Case of London John Pyne of Bereferrers Mr. Whidden of Mooreton Dr. Richard Love of Ekington Dr. William Gouge of Blackfriers London Dr. Ralph Brownerigg Bp of Exeter
Dr. Samuel Ward Master of Sidney Colledge John White of Dorchester Edward Peale of Compton Stephen Marshal of Finching∣field, Batchelour in Divinity Obadiah Sedgewicke of Cog∣shall, Batchelour in Divinity Mr. Carter Peter Clerk of Carnaby William Mew of Eslington, Batchelour in Divinity Richard Capell of Pitchcombe Theophilus Bathurst of Over∣ton Watervile Phil. Nye of Kimbolton Dr. Brocket Smith of Bark∣way Dr. Cornelius Burges of Wat∣ford John Greene of Pencombe Stanley Gower of Brampton Bryan. Francis Taylor of Yalding Thomas Wilson of Otham Antho. Tuckney of Boston, Ba∣chelour in Divinity Thomas Coleman of Bliton Charles Herle of Winwicke Richard Herricke of Manche∣ster Richard Cleyton of Showell George Gibbs of Ayleston Dr. Calibute Downing of Hack∣ney Jeremy Boroughs of Stepney Daniel Cawdrey George Walker Batchelour in Divinity. Edmund Calamy Batchelour in Divinity Joseph Caryll of Lincolns Inne Lazarus Seaman of London Dr. John Harris Warden of Winchester Colledg George Morley of Mildenhall Edward Reynolds of Bramston Thomas Hill of Titchmarch Batchel or in Divinity Dr. Robert Saunderson of Booth by Pannell John Foxcroft of Gorham John Fackson of Marske William Carter of London Thomas Thorowgood of Mas∣singham John Arrowsmith of Lynne Robert Harris of Hanwell, Bat∣chelour in Divinity Robert Crosse of Lincoln Col∣ledge, Bachelour in Divinity James Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh Dr. Matthias Styles of Saint George Escheape London Samuel Gibson of Burley Jeremiah Whitaker of Stret∣ton Dr. Edmund Staunton of King∣ston Dr. Daniel Featley of Lam∣beth
Francis Coke of Yoxhall John Lightfoote of Ashley Edward Corbet of Merton Col∣ledge Oxon Samuel Hildersham of Felton John Langley of Westuderley Christopher Tisdale of Uphus∣borne Thomas Young of Stowmarket John Philips of Wrentham Humphrey Chambers of Claver∣ton, Bachelour in Divinity John Conant of Lymington Batchelour in Divinity Henry Hall of Norwich, Bat∣chelour in Divinity Henry Hutton Henry Scudder of Colingborn Thomas Baylie of Manningford Bruce Benjamin Pickering of East∣hoately Henry Nye of Chapham Arther Sallaway of Seaverne∣stoake Sidrach Sympson of London Anthony Burgesse of Sutton Coldfield Richard Vines of Calcot William Greenhill of Stepney William Moreton of Newcastle Richard Buckley Dr. Thomas Temple of Batter∣sey Simeon Ashe of Saint Brides Mr. Nicholson Thomas Gattaker of Rother∣hithe, Batchelour in Divi∣nity James Weldy of Sylatten Dr. Christopher Pashley of Ha∣warden Henry Tozer Batchelour in Di∣vinity William Spurstow of Hampden in Com. Bucks Francis Cheynell of Oxon Edward Ellis of Gilsfield, Bat∣chelour in Divinity Dr. John Hacket of St. An∣drews Holborne Samuel de la Place John de la March Matthew Newcomen of Dedham William Lyford of Sherborne in Com Dorset Mr. Carter of Dynton in Com. Bucks William Lance of Harrow in Middlesex Thomas Hodges of Kensington in Com. Middlesex Andreas Perne of Wilby in Com. Northampton Dr. Thomas Westfield of Saint Bartholomew le great Lon∣don, Bishop of Bristoll Dr. Henry Hammon of Pen∣shurst in Kent Nicholas Proffet of Marlbo∣rough in Com. Wilts Peter Sterry of London
John Erle of Bishopston in Com. Wilts Mr. Gibbon of Waltham Henry Painter of Exeter, Bat∣chelour in Divinity Mr. Micklethwaite of Cherry∣burton Dr. Iohn Whincop of St. Martins in the fields Mr. Price of Pauls Church in Covent Garden Henry Wilkinson junior, Batche∣lour in Divinity Dr. Richard Oldsworth Master of Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge M. William Duning of Coloa∣ston. And such other person and persons as shall be nominated & appointed by both Houses of Parliament, or so many of them as shall not be letted by sickness or other necessary impediment, shall meet and assemble, and are hereby re∣quired and enjoyned upon summons signed by the Clerks of both Houses of Parliament, left at their several respective dwellings, to meet and assem∣ble themselves at Westminster in the Chappel called King Henry the sevenths Chappel on the first day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand six hun∣dred forty three: And after the first meeting, being at least of the number of forty, shall from time to time sit and be removed from place to place, and also that the said Assembly shall be dissolved in such manner as by both Hou∣ses of Parliament shall be directed: And the said persons, or so many of them as shall be so Assembled, or sit, shall have power and Authority, and are hereby likewise enjoyned, from time to time during this present Parlia∣ment, or until further Order be taken by both the said Houses, to confer and treat among themselves of such matters and things, touching and concern∣ing the Liturgy, discipline and Government of the Church of England, or the vindicating and clearing of the doctrine of the same from all false asper∣tions and misconstructions, as shall be proposed unto them by both or either of the said Houses of Parliament, and no other, and deliver their Opinions and Advises of, or touching the matters aforesaid, as shall be most agreeable to the Word of God, to both or either of the Houses, from time to time, in such manner and sort, as by both or either of the said Houses of Parliament shall be required, and the same not to divulge by printing, writing, or other∣wise, without the consent of both or either House or Parliament. And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that William Twiss Doctor in Divinity shall sit in the Chair as Prolocutor of the said Assembly, and if he happen to dye, or be letted by sickness or other necessary impediment, then such other person to be appointed in his place as shall be agreed on by both the said Houses of Parliament: And in case any difference in Opini∣on shall happen amongst the said persons so assembled, touching any the mat∣ters that shall be proposed to them as aforesaid, that then they shall represent the same together with the reasons thereof to both or either the said Houses
respectively, to the end such further direction may be given therein as shall be requisite to that behalf. And be it be further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,; That for the Charges and Expences of the said Divines, and every of them in attending the said service, there shall be allowed every of them that shall so attend, during the time of their said attendance, and for ten dayes before and ten dayes after the summe of four Shillings for every day, at the charges of the Common-wealth, at such time and in such manner as by both Houses of Parliament shall be appointed. And be it further Ordained, That all and every the said Divines, so as aforesaid required and enjoyned to meet and assemble, shall be freed and acquitted of and from every offence, forfeiture, penalty, losse or damage which shall or may arise or grow by reason of any non-residence or absence of them or any of them, from his or their, or any of their Church, Churches or Cures, for, or in respect of their said attendance upon the said Service, any Law or Statute of Non-residence, or other Law of Statute enjoyning their attendance upon their respective Ministries or Charges to the contrary thereof notwithstand∣ing; And if any of the persons before named shall happen to dye before the said Assembly shall be dissolved by Order of both Houses of Parliament, then such other person or persons shall be nominated and placed in the room and stead of such person and persons so dying, as by both the said Houses shall be thought fit and agreed upon: And every such person or persons so to be named shall have the like Power and Authority, Freedome, and acqui∣tal to all intents and purposes and also all such wages and allowances for the said service, during the time of his or their attendance, as to any other of the said persons in this Ordinance is by this Ordinance limited and ap∣pointed, Provided alwayes that this Ordinance or any thing there in con∣tained, shall not give unto the persons aforesaid, or any of them, nor shall they in this assembly assume to exercise any Iurisdiction, Power, or Authori∣ty Ecclesiastical whatsoever, or any other Power, then is herein particu∣larly expressed.
Many of the PERSONS who were called to attend the ASSEM∣BLY appeared not; Whereupon the whole Work lay on the hands of the Persons hereafter mention∣ed.
The PROMISE and Vow taken by every Mem∣ber admitted to sit in the ASSEMBLY. I A. B. Do seriously Promise and Vow in the presence of Al∣mighty God, That in this Assembly, whereof I am a Member, I will maintain nothing in point of Doctrine, but what I believe to be most agreeable to the Word of God; nor in point of Discipline, but what may make most for Gods glory, and the peace and good of his Church. William Twisse Prolocutor. Cornelius Burges. Assessors. John White. Assessors. William Gouge. Robert Harris. Thomas Gataker. Oliver Bowles. Edward Reynolds. Jeremiah Whitaker. Anthony Tuckney. John Arrowsmith. Simeon Ashe. Philip Nye. Jeremiah Burroughes. John Lightfoot. Stanley Gower. Richard Heyricke. Thomas Case. Thomas Temple. George Gipps. Thomas Carter. Humphrey Chambers. Thomas Micklethwaite. John Guibon. Christopher Tesdale. John Phillip. George Walker. Edmund Calamy. Joseph Caryl. Lazarus Seaman. Henry Wilkinson senior. Richard Vines. Nicholas Proffet. Stephen Marshal Joshua Hoyle. Thomas Wilson Thomas Hodges Thomas Bayly Francis Taylor. Thomas Yong Thomas Valentine William Greenhil Edward Pele John Green Andrew Pern Samuel de la Place John de la March John Dury Philip Delmé. Sidrach Simpson John Langley. Richard Cleyton Arthur Salwey
John Ley Charles Herle, Prolocutor after Dr. Twisse. Herbert Palmer, Assessor after John White. Daniel Cawdrey Henry Painter Henry Scudder Thomas Hill William Reynor Thomas Goodwin William Spurstow Matthew Newcomen John Conaut Edmund Staunton Anthony Burges William Rathband Francis Cheynel Henry Wilkinson jun. Obadiah Sedgwick Edward Corbet Samuel Gibson Thomas Coleman Theodore Backhurst William Carter Peter Smith John Maynard William Price John Whincop William Bridge Peter Sterry William Mew Benjamin Pickering John Strickland Humphrey Hardwick Gasper Hickes John Bond Henry Hall Thomas Ford Thomas Thorowgood Peter Clark William Good John Foxcroft John Ward Richard Bifeild Francis Woodcock I. Jackson. Commissioners of Scotland. John Maitland. Alexander Henderson. George Gillespie. Samuel Rutherford Robert Baylie. Scribae. Henry Robrough Adoniram Byfield John Wallis.
Books Printed for John Rothwel at the Foun∣tain in Cheapside. Mr. CHristopher Love's Works in Two Vollumes. 1. Vollume. Mr. Love, Of the Different degrees of Grace, in 4o. — Combate between the Flesh and Spirit, in 4o. —Of Heavens Glory, and Hells Terror, in 4o. 2. Vollume. Mr. Love's Zealous Christian. —The Dejected Souls Cure, To which is annexed The Ministery of Angels. Gods Omnisciency. Sinners Legacy. Penitent pardoned: Of the Confession of Sin, and the priviledge of par∣don of Sin, in 4o. An Exercitation on Confirmation, the ancient way of compleating Church-Members as an expedient to promote peace and unity among Bre∣thren. The Good Old Way, or Perkins Catechisme, in 8o. By Charles Broxolme.
