C2353 E316_29 99861255 113386
VVHereas much time hath been spent in meet∣ings and debates betwixt His Excellency James Lord Marques of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant and General Governour of His Majesties Kingdom of Ireland, Commis∣sioner to His most Excellent Majesty, Charles, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, &c. for the Treating and Concluding of a Peace in the said Kingdom with His Majesties Hum∣ble and Loyal Suhjects, the Confederate and Roman Catho∣liques of the said Kingdom of Ireland of the one part, and the Right Honorable Donnogh, Lord Viscount Muskerry, and others Commissioners Deputed and Authorised by the said Confederate Roman Catholique Subjects of the other part; and thereupon many difficulties did arise, by occasion whereof sundry matters of great weight and consequence ne∣cessarily requisite to be condescended unto by His Majesties said Commissioners, for the safety of the said Confederate Ro∣man Catholiques, were not hitherto agreed upon, which re∣tarded, and doth as yet retard the Conclusion of a firm Peace and settlement in the said Kingdom. And whereas the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Glamorgan is intrusted and authorised by His most Excellent Majesty, to grant and assure to the said Confederate Catholique Subjects further Grace and favours, which the said Lord Lieutenant did not as yet in that Latitude as they expected, grant unto them; and the said Earl having seriously considered of all matters and due circumstances of the great Affairs now in agitation, which is the peace and quiet of the said Kingdom, and the importance thereof, in order to His Majesties service, and in relation to, a Peace and settlement in His other Kingdoms; and hereupon
the place having seen the ardent desire of the said Catho∣liques to assist His Majesty against all that do or shall oppresse His Royal Right or Monarchick Government; and having discerned the alacrity and cheerfulnesse of the said Catho∣liques to embrace Honorable conditions of Peace, which may preserve their Religion and other just Interests. In pursu∣ance therefore of His Majesties Authority under His High∣nesse Signature Royal and Signet, bearing De at Ox the 12. day of March in the twentieth Year of His Raign, Granted unto the said Earl of Glamorgan, the tenour wher∣of is as followeth: Viz. Charles Rex. Charles by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To Our trusty and right welbeloved Cosen Edward Earl of Glamorgan greeting. We reposing great and especial trust and Confidence in Your approved wisdom and fidelity, Do by these (as firmly as un∣der Our Great Seal to all intents and purposes) Authorise and give you power to Treat and Conclude with the Confederate Roman Catholiques in Our Kingdom of Ireland, if upon necessity any thing be to be condescended unto, wherein Our Lieutenant cannot so well be seen in, as not fit for Us at the present publikely to own; Therefore We charge you to pro∣ceed according to this Our Warrant, with all possible secrecy, and for whatsoever you shall engage your self upon such va∣luable considerations, as you in your judgement shall deem fit; We promise in the word of a King and a Christian, to ratifie and perform the same that shall be granted by you and under your Hand and Seal; the said Confederate Catholiques ha∣ving by their Supplies testified their Zeal to Our Service; and this shall be in each particular to you a sufficient Warrant. Given at Our Court at Oxford under Our Signet and Royal Signature the 12. day of March, in the 20. Year of Our Raign, 1644. To Our right trusty and right welbeloved Cosen Edward Earl of Glamorgan. It is therfore granted,
accorded and agreed by and between the said Earl of Gla∣morgan, for and on the behalf of His most Excellent Maje∣sty, His Heirs and Successours on the one part, and the Right Honorable Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Lord President of the Supreme Councel of the said Confederate Catholiques, the said Donnogh, Lord Viscount Muskerry, Alexander mac Donnel, & Nicholas Plunket Esq; Sir Talbot Barronet, Dermot O Brien, John Dillon, Pa∣trick Darcy, and Geffrey Brown Esq; Commissioners in that behalf appointed by the said Confederate Roman Catho∣liques Subjects of Ireland, for and in the behalf of the said Confederat Roman Catholiques Subjects of the other part, in manner and form following; (that is to say) 1. IMprimis, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That all and every the professors of the Roman Catholique Religion in the Kingdom of Ireland, of whatever e∣state, degree or quality soever he or they be or shall be, shall for evermore hereafter have and enjoy with∣in the said Kingdom, the free and publique use and ex∣ercise of the said Roman Catholiques Religion, and of the respective function therein. 2. Item, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and on the behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That the said professors of the Roman Catholique Religion, shall hold and enjoy all and every the Churches by them enjoyed within this Kingdom, or by them possessed at any time since the 23. of October, 1641. and all other Churches in the said Kingdom, other then such as are now actually en∣joyed by His Majesties Protestant Subjects. 3. Item, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the
said Earl, for and in the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That all and every the Roman Catholiques Subjects of Ireland, of what estate, condition, degree or quality soever, shall be free and exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Protestant Clergie, and every of them; and that the Roman Ca∣tholique Clergie of this Kingdom shall not be punish∣ed, troubled or molested for the exercise of their Juris∣diction over their respective Catholique flocks, in matters Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall. 4. Item, It is further granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and on the behalf of His most Ex∣cellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That an Act shall be passed in the next Parliament to be holden in this Kingdom, the tenour and purport whereof shall be as followeth, viz. An Act for the relief of His Ma∣jesties Catholique Subjects of His Highnesse King∣dom of Ireland: Whereas by an Act made in Parlia∣ment held in Dublin the second Year of the Raign of the late Queen Eliz. Intituled, An Act restoring to the Crown, the ancient Jurisdiction over the state Ec∣clesiasticall and Spirituall, and abolishing all Forraign power repugnant to the same; And by one other Sta∣tute made in the said last mentioned Parliament, Inti∣tuled, An Act for the Uniformity of Common-Prayer and Service in the Church, and the Admini∣stration of the Sacrament, Sundry Mulcts, Penalties, Restraints and Incapacities, are and have been laid up∣on the professors of the Roman Catholique Religion in this Kingdom, in, for and concerning the use, profes∣sion and exercise of their Religion and their functions therein, to the great prejudice, trouble and disquiet of the Roman Catholiques in their Liberties and Estates, and the generall disturbance of the whole Kingdom.
For remedy whereof, & for the better setling, increase and continuance of the Peace, Unity and Tranquility of this Kingdom of Ireland; His Majesty, at the humble suit and request of the Lords and Commons in this present Parlia∣ment assembled, is graciously pleased that it may be En∣acted, And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual & Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from and after the first day of this Session of Parliament, it shall and may be lawfull to & for all the professors of the Roman Catholique religion, of what de∣gree, condition or quality, to have, use and enjoy the free & publike exercise and profession of the said Roman Ca∣tholique Religion, and of their several & respective functi∣ons therein, without incurring any mulct or penalty what∣soever, or being subject to any restraint or incapacity con∣cerning the same; Any Article or clause, sentence or provision in the said last mentioned Acts of Parliament, or in any other Act or Acts of Parliament, Ordinances, Law or usage to the contrary, or in any wise notwithstanding. And be it also further Enacted, That neither the said Sta∣tutes, or any other Statute, Acts or Ordinance hereafter made in Your Majesties Raign, or in the Raign of any of Your Highnesses most Noble Progenitors or Ancestors, & now of force in this Kingdom; nor all, nor any branch, article, clause & sentence in them or any of them, contain∣ed or specified, shall be of force or validity in this Realm, to extend to be construed, or adjudged to extend in any wise to inquiet, prejudice, vex or molest the professors of the said Roman Catholique Religion, in their Persons, Lands, Hereditaments or Goods, for any thing, matter or cause whatsoever, touching and concerning the free and publike use, exercise and enjoyings of their said Religion, function & profession. And be it also further Enacted and
Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That Your Maje∣sties Roman Catholique Subjects in the said Realm of Ireland, from the first day of this Session of Parliament, shall be, and be taken, deemed and adjudged capable of all Offices of Trust and advancement, places, degrees and di∣gnities, & preferment whatsoever within Your said realm of Ireland, Any Acts, Statutes, Usage or Law to the con∣trary notwithstanding. And that other Acts shalbe passed in the said Parliament, according to the tenour of such Agreement or Concessions as herein are expressed; and that in the mean time the said Roman Catholique Sub∣jects, and every of them, shall enjoy the full benefit, free∣dom and advantage of the said Agreements and Conces∣sions, and of every of them. 5. Item, It is accorded, granted and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That His Excellency the Lo: Marques of Or∣mond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other or others authorized or to be authorized by His Majesty, shall not disturb the professors of the Roman Catholique Religion in their present possession and continuance of the profes∣sion of their said Churches Jurisdiction, or any other the matters aforesaid in these Articles agreed and condescen∣ded unto by the said Earl, untill His Majesties pleasure be signified for confirming and publishing the Grants and Agreements hereby articled for, and condescended un∣to by the said Earl. 6. Item, And the said Earl of Glamorgan doth hereby engage His Majesties Royall word and Publique Faith, unto all and singular the professors of the said Roman Catholique Religion within the said Kingdom of Ireland, for the due observance and performance of all and every the Articles, Grants & Clauses therein contained, and the Concessions herein mentioned to be performed to them.
7. Item. It is accorded and agreed, That the said Publike Faith of the Kingdom shall be ingaged unto the said Earle, by the said Commissioners of the said Confederate Catho∣liques, for sending ten thousand men to serue his Majestie, by order and publike Declaration of the Generall assem∣bly now sitting, And that the Supreame Councell of the said Confederate Catholiques, shall engage themselves to bring the said number of men armed, the one halfe with Musquets, and the other halfe with Pikes, unto any Port within this Realme, at the Election of the said Earle, and at such time as he shall appoint, to be by him shipped and transported to serve his Majestie in England, Wales or Scotland, under the Command of the said Earle of Gla∣morgan as Lord Generall of the said Army, which Army is to be kept together in one intire body, and all other the Officers and Commanders of the said Army are to be na∣med by the Supreame Councell of the said Confederate Catholiques, or by such others as the Generall Assembly of the said Confederate Catholiques of this Kingdome shall intrust therewith: In witnesse whereof the parties to these presents have hereunto interchangeably put their hands and Seales the 25. day of August, 1645. Glamorgan, Signed, Sealed, and delivered in the presence of John Somerset, Jeffery Barron, Robert Barry. Copia vera Colata fideliter cum Originali: Thomas Cashell, Franc. Patricius Waterford de Lismore. This is a true Copie of the Originall Copie, found in the Archbishop of Tuams Carriage, compared by Us, Arthur Annesley, Rob. King.
Articles of agreement made and concluded upon by and betweene the Right Honourable Edward Earle of Glamorgan, and in pursuance, and by vertue of his Majesties authority under his signet and Royall signa∣ture, bearing date at Oxford the twelfth day of March in the twentieth yeare of his Raigne, for and on the be∣halfe of his most Excellent Majesty of the one part, and the Right Honourable Rich: Lord Viscount Mountga∣ret, Lord President of the Supreame Councell of the Confederate Catholiques of Ireland, Donnogh, Lord Vis∣count Muskerry Alex: M. Donnell, and Nicholas Plun∣ket Esquires, Sir Robert Talbott Baronet, Dermot o Brien, John Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and Jeffery Browne Esquires, for and on the behalfe of his Majesties Roman Catholique Subjects, and the Catholique Clergy of Ireland, of the other part. IMprimis, The said Earle doth grant, conclude and agree, on the behalfe of his Majesty, His Heires and Successours, to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Don∣nogh Lord Viscount Muskerry, Alex. Mach Donnell, and Nicholas Plunket, Esquires: Sir Robert Talbot Barronet, Dermot o Brien, Iohn Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and Ieffery Browne, Esquires: That the Roman Catholique Clergy of the said Kingdome, shall and may from hence-forth for ever, hould and enjoy all and every such Lands, Tenements, Tithes, and He∣reditaments whatsoever by them respectively enjoyed within this Kingdome, or by them posessed at any time since the three and twentieth of October one thousand sixe hundred forty one: And all other such Lands, Tenements, Tithes, and Heredita∣ments belonging to the Clergy within this Kingdome, other then
such as are actually enjoyed by his Majesties Protestant Clergy. Item. It is granted, concluded and agreed on by the said Ri∣chard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donogh Lord Viscount Muskerry, Alex: Mach. Donnell, and Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot o Brien, John Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and Jeffery Browne, on the behalfe of the Confederate Roman Catholiques of Ireland, that two parts in three parts to be divided of all the said Lands, Tythes, and Hereditaments whatsoever, mentioned in the precedent Article, shall for three yeares next insuing the feast of Easter, which shall be in the yeare of our Lord God. 1646 be disposed of and converted for and to the use of his Majesties forces, employed or to be em∣ployed in his service, and the other third part to the use of the said Clergy respectively, and so the like disposition to be renu∣ed from three yeares to three yeares, by the said Clergy during the Warres. Item. It is accorded and agreed by the said Earle of Gla∣morgan, for and in the behalfe of his Majesty, his Heires and Successors, that his Excellency the Lord Marquesse of Or∣mond, Lord Lievtenant of Ireland or any other or others au∣thorised or to be authorised by his Majesty, shall not disturbe the Professors of the Roman Catholique Religion in their present possession and continuance of the possession of their Churches Lands, Tenements, Tythes, Hereditaments, Iurisdiction or any other the matters aforesaid in these Articles agreed and condescended to by the said Earle, untill his Majesties plea∣sure be signified for confirming and publishing the grants and herein articled for and condescended unto by the said Earle. Item. It is accorded granted and agreed by the said Earle, for and in the behalfe of his Majestie, his Heires, and Suc∣cessors that an act shall be passed in the next Parliament to be
held in this Kingdome, according to the tenour of such Agree∣ments or Concessions as herein are expressed, and that in the mean time, the said Clergie shall enjoy the full benefit, freedome and advantage of the said Agreements & Concessions and eve∣ry of them. And the said Earle of Glamorgan doth hereby engage his Majesties Royall word and Publique Faith unto the said Lord Viscount Mountgarret, and the rest of the said Com∣missioners, for the due observation and performance of all and every the Articles, Agreements, and Concessions here∣in contained and mentioned, to be performed to the said Roman Catholique Clergie, and every of them. In wit∣nesse whereof the parties to these presents, have hereunto interchangeably put their hands and Seales the 25 day of August, Anno Dom. 1645. Glamorgan, Signed, Sealed, and delivered in the presence of John Sommerset, Jef∣fery Barron, Rob. Barry. Whereas in these Arrticles touching the Clergie li∣vings, the right honourable the Earle of Glamorgan is ob∣liged in his Majesties behalfe to secure the Concessions in these Articles by Act of Parliament: Wee holding that manner of securing those grants as to the Clergie Livings to prove more difficult and prejudiciall to His Majesty then by doing thereof and securing those Concessions otherwise as to the said Livings, the said Earle undertaking and pro∣mising in the behalfe of His Majestie, his Heires and Suc∣cessors, as hereby he doth undertake to settle the said Con∣cessions, and secure them to the Clergie, and their respe∣ctive Successors, in another secure way, other then by Par∣liament at present, till a fit opportunity be offered for secu∣ring the same, doe agree and condescend thereunto. And
this Instrument by his Lordship signed, was before the perfecting thereof intended to that purpose, as to the said Livings, to which purpose We have mutually signed this endorsement. And it is further intended that the Catho∣lique Clergie shall not be interrupted by Parliament, or otherwise as to the said Livings, Contrary to the meaning of these Articles. Glamorgan, Copia vera Colata fideliter cum Originali, Thomas Cashell, Fra. Patricius Waterford & Lismore. This is a true Copie of the Originall Copie, found in the Archbi∣shop of Tuames Carriage, compared by us, Arthur Annesley, Rob. King. I Edward Earle of Glamorgan do protest and sweare faithfully to acquaint the Kings most Excellent Ma∣jestie with the proceedings of this Kingdome in Order to his service, and to the indeerment of this Nation, and punctuall performance of what I have (as Authorized by his Majestie) obliged my selfe to see performed, and in default not to permit the Army intrusted into my Charge to adventure it selfe, or any considerable part thereof untill Conditions from his Majesty, and by his Majestie be perfor∣med. Glamorgan. September the third▪ 1645. Copia vera concordans de verbo ad verbum fideliter cum originalis. Tho. Cashell. This is a true Copie of the originall Copie, found in the Archbishop of Tuams Carriage, compared by us, Arthur Annesley, Rob. King.
A Copy of a Letter in Cipher. Honourable Sir. THere are some passages which we omitted in our letters to the Committee, because we judge it expedient to expresse them in Cipher, the Re∣bels grew higher in their demands since the Kings affaires have beene in a declining condition, which with their abusing the Kings and authority in the ta∣king our Garrisons in Connagh, and turning the English out of some of them, hath so incensed the Marquesse of Ormond, that he desires but power and oportunity to breake of all Treaty and fall upon them, and in order thereunto we have had an Overture by one that came from him to us, for the Brittish and Scotts Forces to joyne with him a∣gainst the Rebells upon these conditions. First that the Treaty betweene England and Scotland, should be observed. Secondly that the Covenant should not be prest upon the Forces under his Lordships Command, and that it should be left free for those of them that would to use the Common-Prayer booke, and the established Govern∣ment, till the King and Parliament settle some other. Thirdly that the Brittish Army be left to the chief Governour for the time being, he appointing them a Go∣vernour of their owne chusing. Fourthly that every party out of his estate or charge be restored. Fiftly that none be sent out of the Kingdome without consent on both parts. Sixthly that some Ammunition be lent to them of Dublyn. Seventhly for our security Drogheda should be given
into our hands, we giving assurance that use should not be made of it against his Lordship. Eightly both parties to sweare to performe. We sup∣pose some good effect might be produced from these begin∣nings, but without the Scots Commissioners we have no power, and therefore expect your directions therein, and desire that in the meane while they may be kept secret, for if any notice of a transaction in this kinde come to the Rebells, it would hazard the putting Dublyn and those parts into their hands, the proposition is the more considerable because your Armyes here will much want a port in Lein∣ster for a Magazine, but we shall doe nothing in it till we heare from you, but what may keepe them on ha∣ving nothing more to advertize you of at present, we re∣maine. Belfast this nineteenth of November. 1645. Your most humble servants, Arthur Annesley. Rob. King. William Beale. If you thinke fit to proceede we doubt not but to bring the busi∣nesse unto far better conditions then are proposed. SIR, THe same Letter which We have written to the Com∣mittee of both Kingdomes, We have also written to the Lords and Commons, and if either give redresse to the wrongs complained of, it is well, What We wrote to you of the nineteenth of this moneth in Character, might as well have beene done with lesse trouble, For Master Gal∣breth that delivered to us the same under an injunction of great Secresie, hath since communicated it to most of the Collonels of the Brittish Army, so that it was evidently a Plot to draw this Army under the Command of the Mar∣quesse, I was jealous of it at first, and wee tooke bonds of
him to appeare before the Committee when the Scots Commissioners shall land, but it was not thought fit to commit him till then, because there be divers other Malig∣nants whom we intend at that time to lay up together, who perhaps would not appeare then, if there were any very strict course taken now. Wee thinke the strength of the Army stands well affe∣cted, but both Armies have knowne Malignants in them, who being removed, there will be no danger. Since my for∣mer, Sir Patrick Wemys is come from Dublyn, & brought his whole Family with him. I thinke he hath done his part exceeding well, and if it be not effectually prosecuted, you shall plainly know where the fault lyes, We want our mo∣ney and meale extreamly, without them wee are as it were wind-bound; We intend to visit the Major Generall shortly, He saith he hath no Commission to command the Army, but you may see by his warrant that wee have sent to the Committee he wants not a Commission to leavy Mo∣ney; Our Letters lye here for want of a Vessell to waft them over, nor have we heard a word thence since our land∣ing, but I will forbeare that further trouble till there bee more cause. Belfast, 26. Novemb. 1645. Your most humble and most affectionate servant, Rob. King. Postscript. SIR, You will receive herewith, Copies of such Papers as were found in the Archbishop of Tuams Carriage, they are of very high consequence, for they shew you what His Majestie grants the Papists here, and how farre the peace with the Rebels is advanced, be pleased to read them I pray you.
The News from Sligo. ON the Lords-day, Octob. 17. 1645, the Rebels (before the Ulster-Forces from the Laggan were come to Sligo) sur∣rounded the Town with about Two thousand Foot and Three hundred Horse. The Garison seeing little hopes of the Ulster-mens advance (not knowing they were then at Bundrous) con∣ceived it of absolute necessity to hazard the fighting with the Rebels with their own strength and Sir William Cole's Troop, rather then to lose themselves and the out-Garisons, which were in a manner all blocked up by the Rebels lying between them and Sligo. Captain Richard Coot and Captain Cole, com∣manded the Horse, being neer Two hundred; and after some skirmishing with the Rebels Horse, fell pell-mell into their se∣veral Divisions of Foot, routed them and pursued them: And Lieutenant-Colonel Sanderson sallying out of the Town with his Foot, and Sir Francis Hamilton coming in the nick of time with his Troop, they had all execution upon the Rebels for Five miles; and at the end thereof, left slain the Popish Arch∣bishop of Tuum, the Rebels President of Connaught, for a memorable Mark. They took One hundred and fifty Horse, with their Arms, their Tents, and all other Baggage and Am∣munition, and had much Spoil; several Colours of Horse and Foot, and many Officers of note, to the number of about Twenty eight, Prisoners; about Two hundred killed: and our losse but of one man, and Six hurt. Many more of the Rebels might have been killed, but that our Foot left the chase and fell to plunder. Their whole Army being thus defeated, One thousand Foot
and Three Troops of Horse that were coming to joyn with them, upon the news thereof returned. And our men, with the Laggan-Army joyned with them, have since entred the Barony of Tereragh, and taken Thirteen Castles there well provided of Corn, which was our chief want, and like to be the losse of that whole Province, if God in this miraculous manner had not supplied it. The Oxen which drew the Ene∣my's Waggons, drew our Ordnance for the taking in of the said Castles. And now our men have good Quarters for this Winter about the said Castles, which keep the Countrey un∣der Contribution. The Archbishop of Tuum was a principal Agent in these Wars, and one of the supreme Councel of Kilkeny. He atten∣ded their Army at this time, to visit his Diocesse, and to put in execution an Order for the Arreres of his Bishoprick, grant∣ed to him from the Councel at Kilkeny; which Order, toge∣ther with the Popes Bull, and several other Letters of Corre∣spondence between him and his Agents from Rome, Paris, and several parts of this Kingdom, were found about him: The Particulars of which Letters (in order to the Irish affairs) are as followeth. That the Pope would not at the first engage himself in the sending of a Nuntio for Ireland, till the Irish Agents had fully satisfied him that the establishment of the Catholike Religion was a thing feasible and attainable in this Kingdom; whereupon he was content to sollicite their Cause with Florence and Venice, &c. and also to delegate Farmano his Nuntius to attend this Kingdom: who the said Nuntius, after some delays in France, was at last expedited thence by expresse Order from the Pope; and he arrived at the River of Kilmare in a Frigot of One and twenty Pieces, Six and twenty Italians of his retinue, Secretary Belinges, and divers regular and secular Priests, Octob. 22. The Irish are much encouraged with these Supplies which he hath brought; the List whereof found about the Archbishop, is:
Imprimis, Two thousand Muskets, Four thousand Bande∣liers, Two thousand Swords, Five hundred Petronels, and Twenty thousand pound of Powder, (all which arrived in another Barque by it self at Brook-haven, Octob. 10.) together with Five or Six Desks or small Trunks of Spanish Gold, the sum uncertain. These Letters likewise inform us that the Kings hopes are from the Irish Nation; and if they desert him, he is like to be in a hard condition very speedily. Several other things they contain concerning Priuce Rupert, Colonel Legg, the King's Losses at Bristol and Chester. Something there is also of the Treaty of Peace. Ormond (says one) is fonnd a Machevilli∣an: Dillon, Muskerry, Talbot, are for Peace: Conditionibus quibuscun{que} iniquis, says another: Our publike Affairs are in via, non in termine, says a third: The Propositions high, the Answers high and sly. There are some mysteries of State in this businesse, which I cannot commit to Paper. Yet morally certain it is, there will be Peace, saith a fourth. It seems al∣so there were some differences amongst the Rebels themselves, as between Muskerry and Brown, insomuch that Brown is dis∣patched from Dublin to Kilkeny between Castle haven and Pre∣ston; insomuch that Father Scaramppe went from the supreme Councel to reconcile them. There was also a private Letter of suspitious informations against Dominico Spinola an Agent in Ireland, wherein he is said to hold Correspondence with the Queen of England in France, and to be a lover of their Enemies. Prisoners at Sligo. Great  as Dom. ô Flaherty, Lieutenant-Colonel to  Cousin German to the Earl of Clanrickhard, and his next Heir.
John Gerdy, Lieutenant-Colonel to Sir Tibbot Bourk, eldest son to the Lord of Mayoe. Richard Bourk, Major to Richard Bourk aforesaid. Captain William ô Shaghuise, brother to Sir Roger ô Shag huise. Captain Garret Dillon, son to Sir Lucas Dillon, who saith that his father was shot in the thigh. Captain Costologh, with divers other inferiour Officers. The titular Archbishop of Tuum was slain. Captain Brown, brother Geffry Brown the Lawyer who brought One hundred Muskets from Galloway, was also killed. A true and fuller Relation from Ireland of the Service performed by the men of Iniskillin, of Sir William Cole's Re∣giment and Troop at Lowtherstowne, upon Thursday Novemb. 27, 1645, about One of the Clock in the night; wherein they did not onely (by Gods providence) rescue their prey, but having there routed a Party of Four or Five hundred men of the Rebels, did likewise put the whole Army of Owen mac Arte ô Neale to flight. Viz. SIr William Cole, upon Sunday morning, Novemb. 23, recei∣ved a Letter from Sir Charles Coot Lord President of Con∣ght; who, to satisfie his Lordships desires, commanded his Troop to march unto him to be at Sligo, on Thursday night,
Novemb. 27, to joyn in some expedition by his Lordships Or∣ders, against the Rebels in that Province. The greatest part of his Troop with their horses, were then in the Island of Baawe, Sixteen miles Northward from Iniskil∣line, who upon his notice did march away upon Munday, Nov. 24, together with almost all the Foot-Souldiers of Two Compa∣nies of his Regiment that quartered with their Cattel, and many of the Cows of Iniskilline in that Island, unto Bellasha∣none, which was their place of Rendezvouz. The Cornet of that Troop, upon Tuesday Novemb. 25, with about Twenty Horse-men, marched from Iniskilline to the Westward of Loghern, with resolution to lodge that night by the way, within Fifteen miles of Sligo; but a little Snow fall∣ing, altered their determination, and so took their course to Balleshanone without appointment, God in his high Providence for the advancement of his own glory and our good, directing them thither: where assoon as they got their horses shod, they were still hastning towards Sligo, whither sundry of their Foot-Companies aforesaid on horseback rid before them: And a great part of the Troop were advanced as far as Bundrowis, where the Alarm overtook them, with Orders to return to re∣sist the Enemy, to the number of Four or Five hundred men of Omin mac Artes Army, under the Conduct of several Ca∣ptains, led by Roury mac Guire in chief, who upon Wednesday morning, Novemb. 26, being provided with Two of our own Boats by the Treachery of one Bryan ô Harran and others of our bosome-Snakes, protected Synons, had entred the said Island of Baawe at the South-end of it, and was burning, spoil∣ing, preying their goods; wherein they prevailed, even to the stripping naked of all our women, plundering and taking theirs and our then absent Souldiers Clothes, Victuals and Arms away. That party of our Horsemen speedily returning to Bellasha∣none, whence with the Cornet, the rest of the said Troop, some
of the Foot-souldiers on horseback, and Captain John Falliot, accompanied with as many horsemen as he could make, hast∣ned towards the North-end of that Island, which is distant from the South-end thereof Three English miles. But the Enemy having driven the prey of Cows, Horses and Mares forth at the South-end, our Horsemen with Captain Folliot fol∣lowed by Termon-Castle, whence they marched thorow very inaccessible Woods and Boggs in the night, to the Cash (distant Sixteen miles from Bellashanny) being the first place that they could guide themselves by the track of the enemy and prey, which they still pursued with cheerfulnesse to Lotherstowne, where overtaking them about One of the clock in the morning of Nov 21. 1645, their Trumpet sounding a Charge, they followed it home so resolutely, that after a fierce Confliction, in a short time, they routed the Enemy, and had the execution of them for a mile and a half, slew many of them in the place, took some prisoners, rescued most part of their prey, recover∣ed their own Souldiers that were then the Enemy's prisoners, with some of the Rebels knapsacks to boot: Which sudden and unexpected fright did so amaze Owin mac Arte and his Ar∣my, consisting of about Two thousand Foot and Two hun∣dred Horse (as prisoners do inform) who after they had made their Bravado on the top of an hill within a mile of Iniskillin in the evening of Nov. 26, to keep the Town from issuing forth to resist or stay the prey, encamped that night at Ballena∣allght within Four miles of this Town, that they all in a most fearful and confused manner ran away to the mountains so vehemently scared and affrighted, that their Van thought their own Rere were my Troops, and their Rere likewise ima∣gined (those that escaped the Fight by flight from Lther∣ne) to have been also my party that pursued them; where∣by their Mantles, Clokes, and all that could be an impediment to their more speedie slight, were cast upon the ground and left behinde them; and so continued until they passed the moun∣tains
of Slewbagha into the County of Monnaghan, where they are quartered upon the County Creaghts which lies from Arthur Blanye's house, and from Monaghan Duffe neer the Town of Mo∣naghan, all along to Doghedah, consisting of the banished in∣habitants of Tyrone, Ardmagh, Monaghan and Lowth. My Troop returned with Captain Folliot in safety (praised be God) without hurt of man or beast, save one horse of Lieutenant Edw. Grahames that was shot and killed under him. And having put the said prey again into the said Island, upon Friday Nov. 28, they marched to Bellashanny, whence again they came home to Iniskilline on the North side of Logherne, the 30 of Novemb. 1645. Among those that were slain, the Grand son of Sir Tirlagh was Henry ô Neal was one. One Captain killed. Two Lieutenants killed. And I finde there is some man of more eminent note then any of these killed, but as yet cannot learn certainly who it is. Lieutenant Tirlagh ô Moylan, of Captain Awney ô Cahans Com∣pany, taken prisoner, who upon examination saith that Inchi∣quin hath given a great blowe of late unto Castlehaven and Pre∣ston in their Quarters neer Yoghel; and also saith that the intent of this Army was, that if they could come off with our said prey without check, they purposed then to have besieged this Town, and according as Fortune favoured them, to have pro∣ceeded against the Lagan and other places of Ulster. And yet I finde by the Answer of some others of the Priso∣ners, that by direction from the supreme Councel of Ireland, this Army of Owen mac Artes are to serve in nature of a running party to weaken our Forces of Iniskillins, Laggan and Clanebyes by sudden incursions, to kill, spoil and prey us upon all occa∣sions of advantage, according as by their successes therein they shall assume encouragement to themselves to go forwards against us, but especially against Iniskilline, which they con∣ceive is worst able to resist their Attempts.
Captain Falliot had Sixteen Horsemen, with Four of Man∣nor Hamiltons men and Four of Castle-Termon Horsemen that joyned very fortunately in this Service with my Troop: for which God Almighty be ever glorified and praised by William Cole. Die Lunae, 12 Januarii. 1645. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Par∣liament, That the Committee of Lords and Commons for Irish Affairs, do take care that the Relation of the late good Successe in Ireland be forthwith Printed. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
