C2372 E470_11 99864949 117182
His Maiesties LAST MESSAGE TO THE PARLIAMENT, WITH His desires for the Bishop of Armagh, Bishop of Exeter, Bishop of Rochester, Bi∣shop of Worcester, And other Doctors to come to HIM. AND HIS Majesties Declaration concerning the Marquis of Ormonds Negotiation in Ireland. ALSO The Votes of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, in Answer to His Majesties Message. With a Letter to the Commissioners in the Isle of Wight, which passed both Houses on Saturday last being the 4th of November 1648. Printed for R. Smithurst, neer Pye-corner 1648,
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms HIS Maesties last Message to the Parlia∣ment, with his desires for the Bishop of Armagh, Bishop of Exceter, Bishop of Rochester, Bishop of Worcester, & other Doctors to come to Him. Right Honourable, ACcording to the votes and instru∣ctions of both Houses, his Maje∣sty was acquainted that the con∣cession which he delivered in, was not satisfactory in the businesse of the Church, and so the other Votes not satisfactory, sent by Sir Peter Killeygrew, were delivered to his Majesty. And also that concerning the bu∣sinesse
of Ireland, with a request in behalfe of both houses of Parliament to desire his Ma∣jesty, that whereas there was a Letter inter∣cepted from the Marquesse Ormond, of such dangerous consequence, by complying with Irish Rebels, under pretence of Authority; Which being against the Parliament, could not be in any o∣ther, except his Majesty should give any such com∣mission, and therefore it was desired, that his Majesty to clear himself of such a compliance with those bloo∣dy Rebels, would declare against the same: And if the Marquis of Ormond had any Authority from him to agitate there that seeing he did comply with those Rebels against the Protestants, that his Majesty would be pleased to recall his Commission, or declare against that action of joyning with the Irish Rebels, and Ormonds compliance with the Romish Catholick councell at Kilkenny. To these papers and desires, his Majesty delivered in severall papers, (Viz.) That in regard that the two houses of Parliament were not satisfied in his offers concerning the Church. That he is not satisfied in his conscience to doe more then what hee hath offered therein. Yet to the end that his Majesty may be the better satisfied herein, hee desireth that 4 Bishops and 2 Doctors, may be admit∣ed to him, to confer with him about the same, and then he will return as speedy an Answer as may be. And his Majesty doth desire that the time of Treaty may be lengthened, that so he may proceed with the Commissioners to a finall conclusion, if it may be.
As to the businesse of Ireland, concerning the Mar∣quis of Ormonds Negotiation there with the Rebels, His Majesty returned this Answer: That hee thinks it not fit to have new Propositions put upon him, such as that, which was none of those formerly presented. That hee hath given in his Answer to all and every one of the old Propositions, which they presented to him from the Houses, and hath no answer to any of his, which he hath made, and doth therefore desire that such things may not be put upon him. The Commissioners answered his Majesty, that they could not looke upon that as a positive Answer. That the businesse was a businesse of great consequence, Or∣mond having negotiated with the Irish Rebels, and concluded an agreement, to the great danger of this Kingdome, and the Protestant Religion, and that their desire was, that his Majesty would be pleased to De∣clare against those barbarous and bloody Irish Re∣bells, and to this pressed his Majesty for a full and fi∣nall answer. To this his Majesty again replyed by another Pa∣per, that he had not since the Treaty beganne, given out any Commission, nor acted in any such thing, nor passed any thing in that nature. That the whole businesse of Ireland is in∣cluded in the Treaty, in every part of it, and by his Majesties offers, the power of that king¦dome is made over to the Parliament, so that if all things were concluded by the Treaty, then that would fall in amongst the rest; But for doing any thing in the interim, his Maje∣sty
did not give his consent, saying, that he desires the Treaty may conclude all. It is desired that the Commissioners from the Parliament or some of them may have leave to come to London, about some busi∣nesse that doth much concerne them: as also to give an account to the Houses vire voce, and not by Letter, that the Parliament may be rightly informed of all things. Newport 2 Novemb. 1648. The names of the Bishops, and Doctors desired by His Majesty to be sent to Him. CHARLES. R. The Bishop of Armath, The Bishop of Exce∣ter, The Bishop of Rochester, The Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Fearne, Doctor Mor∣ley. Die Sabbati 4 Novemb. 1648. 1 Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled. THat 14 dayes be added to the Treaty be∣tween His Majesty and the Commissio∣ners
of both houses of Parliament, for a safe and well-grounded peace to be proceeded in according to their former Instructions at Newport in the Isle of Wight. 2 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That leave bee given to Doctor Vsher, Doctor Brumrigge, Doctor Prideux, Doctor War∣ner, Doctor Fearne, And Doctor Morley to goe to His Majesty, 3 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That His Majesties paper concerning the Mar∣quesse of Ormond in Ireland is not satisfactory, and that the Commissioners be desired to presse His Majesty for a full and finall answer therein. 4 Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That all the Votes of both Houses in Order to the Treaty, except that of Delinquents be sent to the Commissioners forthwith.
5 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That a Letter be sent to the Commissioners with the said Votes inclosed, to be communicated to His Majesty, and that they be desired, to presse His Majesty to a full and finall answer. 6 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That leave be given to the Commissioners at New∣port for such of them to returne as they shall agree upon, provided they leave six behind, whereof 2 Lords and 4 Commoners, and of them, three to be of the Corum, whereof one Lord, and two Commoners. FINIS.
A DECLARATION Of His Excellency Robert E. of Warwick Lord High Admirall of ENGLAND, CONCERNING The uniting of the two Navies, and restoring of the Kings Majesty, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York and the rest of the Royall Issue, to their just Rights and Priviledges. And His Resolution touching all those who endeavour to obstruct the Treaty, and hinder the setting of Truth, and a happy Peace, in this unsetled Church and Kingdome. With His Majesties last and finall Propositions to all Loyall and reasonable Subjects. Subscribed CHARLES R. Printed for satisfaction of all those who desire Peace, 1648
A DECLARATION OF ROBERT EARL of WARWICK, Concerning the Kings Majesty, and the Prince of Wales, and his resolution touching all those who are opposite to Peace. VVHereas, there are divers persons with∣in the City of London, and parts ad∣jacent, who endeavour to inflame the Kingdom in a most inhumane, bloudy, and intestine War, and to involve them in a Labyrinth of trouble,
and Calamities, by their present commotions, actings, and contrivances, in making the King and Parliament odious to the People, and stirring up their hearts a∣gainst them, for the obstructing and blasting the hope∣full Issue and Blossomes of this blessed Treaty. There∣fore, for preventing thereof, and propogating the pre∣sent Work in hand, his Excellency Robert Earl of War∣wick, Lord High Admirall of his Majesties narrow Seas, hath declared his Resolution in reference to the same, protesting, That He will use his utmost endeavours towards the setling of truth, and a happy peace in this unsetled Church and Kingdom and that He will be instrumentall for the bringing of his Majesty to London, and setling of His Maiesty, the Prince of VVales, the Duke of York, and the rest of His Royall Issue in their just Rights and privi∣ledges, so soon as His Majesty shall be pleased to satisfie and confirme the Desires of his two Houses of Parliament so much tending to the good and preservation both of Re∣ligion, Crown and Kingdoms. Some Overtures have been lately ade betweene his Highnesse the Prince of Wales, and his Lordship, in relation to a conjunction and uniting of both Navies; but his Lordship hath utterly detested against the sme, slighting the Princes invitation and representing a Letter unto his Highnesse, That he takes it as the greatest dishonour that can be incident to man, for any Personage whatsoever to betray the trust reposed in him, and that He is resolved to sacrifice his life in the Cause and Engagement which he hath undertaken, not doubting but that the omnipotent God of Heaven (to
whom the Honour of his Engagement doth belong) will cause the Wnids and Seas to fight for them, whose Truth is their Banner, Shield and Bucker; and therefore dehorts his Highnesse to persist no longer in the way he is in, but forthwith to come in, and unite himself with the Parliament, that so his person may be preserved from all violence and injury and a resto∣ration made of all due Rights and priviledges, and that he may render himself instrumentall for the compo∣sing of all differences, and establishing of a firme and lasting Peace throughout His Fathers Realmes and Dominions. This Letter is said to be sent from aboard the St. George, to the Prince at Helver-Sluce, and signed WARWICK. Letters further from the Navy say, That the Prince is desirous to spin out some longer time at Gorea be∣fore he puts to Sea, in expectation of what the Treaty will produce, and that if it takes not effect, he is resol∣ved for Ireland, to joyn with the Marquis of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiqueen, and to land an Army in the West of England at the Spring, for the re-investing of the King, and restoring of Him, to his just Rights, Po∣wer and Authority The said Letters do further intimate, That the Lord high Admirall hath received a Letter from his Maje∣sty, purporting things of great concernment, and how farre he hath condescended to the desires of his two House  desiring him to be instrumentall for the set∣ling of a firm and lasting peace.
His Majesties finall Answer touching Episcopacy. Right Honourable, ON Wednesday morning last the Kings Majesty nd the Commissioners met in the Treaty Chamber, and taking their places at the Councell Table according to the usuall manner, the Earl of Northumberland rose up, and made a short Speech, Humbly desiring his Majesty to remove his a∣versnesse from the setling of Religion, and to hearken unto the advice of His great and loyall Councell, so much tending to the honour of His Majesty and Posterity, and the setling of a true and lasting peace throughout all His Realms and Dominions. Which done, his Lordship presented a Copy of the Parliaments last Votes brought by Sir Peter Killegrey, on Tuesday night last, in answer to his Majesties En∣largement of Concessions touching Episcopacy. His Majesty (after reading the same) rose up out of the Chair of State, and made a very learned and excellent Speech to the Commissioners. His Majesty having thus graciously declared Him∣self, the Commissioners began to proceed according to their Instructions, and desired a more fuller and sa∣tisfactory Answer, touching the utter extirpation of Episcopacy, which took up some time of debate in pro and con, and the day being far spent, they referred the further results thereof to the happy succession of the morrow following. And (accordingly) yesterday morning they met a∣gain, where the streames of joy issued from the cur∣rent of the hearts both of Prince and People, who
came to a finall close upon all the Proposals, His Ma∣jesty promising upon his Royall Word to passe those Bills into Acts which He had already assented to. And being further pressed by the Commissioners to signe to the Bill for the establishing of Episcopacy, his Ma∣jesty desired respite of time till Saturday morning, which was accordingly granted. And this morning (about the accustomed houre) his Majesty gave the Commissioners a visit, and sitting down in the Chair of State, presented a Paper to them, which is said to be very satisfactory, containing His Royall Assent to the Proposition of the Church, and likewise to all the rest of the Bills and Proposals. This joyfull tydings were soon eccho'd throughout the I∣sland; insomuch that the Bels rang tryumphantly in all the respective Parishes. But by reason of the sud∣den dispatch of the Post, I am forced to conclude, and remain Your Honours devoted servant, J. RISHTON. Newport 5 Octob. 1648. Postscript. SIR, SInce my last, Here hath hapned severall Overtures between his Majesty and the Parliaments Commis∣sioners; they have had much debate upon the Propo∣sitions, especially that concerning the Church, which the King stuck much at; but the dark Cloud being ex∣pelled, and the splendor of the Gospell shining most gloriously in the eyes of his Majesty, He was graci∣ously pleased to declare his Royall Assent to all the Propositions, and to grant His Royall Word to passe all things desired by his two Houses, that may be agreeable and consonant to the fundamentall Lawes
of this Kingdom. And as to the busines of the Church (which is all they stick at) the King hath promised to give his concurrence therein, rather then his People shall suffer for his disassenting. And 14 dayes more being added to the Treaty, it is hoped a fair conclusion will attend the happy beginning. His Majesty hath de∣livered another Paper to the Commissioners, which I have here inserted, viz. CHARLES, R. HIs Majesty resteth very much unsatisfied. That you have now again wholly declined the answe∣ring of those three questions so clearly proposed by him, which your selves also confesse to be of grea im∣portance, upon this only pretence, That the whole volumn of Ecclesiasticall policy is contained in them: Whereas his Majesty did neither expect nor require from you any large or polemicall Discourse concerning those Questions conceiving that you were in some sort ob∣liged to have declared what your judgment was there∣in, with the grounds thereof. For certainly untill one of these three things can be clearly evidenced unto his Maj. 1. Either that there is no certain form of Church Government at all prescribed in the Word. 2. That the Civill power may change the fame as they see cause. 3 Or if it be unchangable, that it was not Episcopall, but some other, his Maj. thinks himself excusable in the judgment of all reasonable men, if he cannot be indu∣ced to give his consent to the utter abolition of that Government of the Church which he found here set∣led to his hands, which hath continued all over the Christian world, from the times of the Apostles untill this last Age. FINIS.
