E2420 E278_6 R200012 99860814 112939
Two ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The one, For exempting the UNIVERSITY of Cambridge From TAXATIONS. The other, For the Regulating of the said University by the Earle of Manchester, and to remove scan∣dalous Ministers; providing a fifth part of their Estates for their wives and children. Die Veneris 12. April 1645. ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances be forthwith printed and published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the old Bayley, 14. April. 1645.
Die Jovis 11. April. 1645. VVHereas humble representation hath beene made to the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament on the behalfe of the Vniversitie of Cambridge, that the said Vniversity and the severall Colledges therein are brought to such necessity, by reason of the failing of their Rents (a great part where∣of cannot be received in these times of Trou∣bles and Distractions) as they shall be altoge∣ther unable to support any longer the Students of the said Societies, unlesse they may be freed and exempted (according to their Charter and the indulgence of former Parliaments) from all Military Taxes and other contributions to the publike service, which are imposed by Ordinance of Parliament▪ The said Lords and Commons taking the premises into consideration, and to the end they may give as much ease and reliefe as the times will beare to these eminent Schooles and Se∣minaries of Learning, for their better encourage∣ment to continue their Studies with diligence for the publike benefit both of Church and Com∣mon▪wealth, thinke fit and Ordaine, and be it
Ordained, That nothing contained in any Or∣dinance or Ordinances of Parliament for and concerning the imposing, leavying, or paying of any Assessements, Tares, and charges whatso∣ever, as well already made and charged as here∣after to be made and charged by vertue of any of the said Ordinances, shall be▪ extended to charge the said Vniversity of Cambridge, or any of the Colledges or Halls within the said Vniversity, nor any the Rents and Revenues belonging to the said Vniversity or Colledges, or any of them; nor to charge any Master, Fellow, or Scholler of any the said Colledges, nor any Rea∣der, Officer, or Minister of the said Vniversity or Colledges, or any of them, for and in regard of any Stipend, Wages, or Profit whatsoever ari∣sing or growing due to them or any of them in respect of their said severall places and imploy∣ments in the said Vniversity, any thing in the said Ordinances, or any of them, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And all Assessors, Collectors, and others whom this may concerne, are hereby required to take notice of this Ordinance. Provided that the Tenants who enioy Lea∣ses from the said Vniversity and Colledges re∣spectively doe claime no freedome, exception, or advantage by this Ordinance. Ioh. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum.
An Ordinance for Regulating the Univer∣sity of CAMBRIDGE, and for removing of Scandalous Ministers in the seven Associated Counties. VVHereas many complaints are made by the well affected Inhabitants of the Associated Counties of Essex, Norfolke, Suffolk, Hertford, Cambridge, Hunting∣ton▪ and Lincolne, That the service of the Par∣liament is retarded, the Enemy strengthned, the peoples souls starved, and their minds diver∣ted from any care of Gods Cause, by their idle, ill affected, and scandalous Clergy of the Vni∣versity of Cambridge, and the Associated Coun∣ties; And that many that would give Evidence against such scandalous Ministers, are not able to travell to London, nor beare the charges of such a Iourney: It is Ordained by the Lords & Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, That the Earle of Manchester shall appoint one or more Com∣mittees in every County, consisting of such as have beene nominated Deputy Lieutenants, or
Committees by any former Ordinance of Par∣liament, in any of the said Associated Counties, every Committee to consist of ten, whereof any five or more of them, to sit in any place or places within any the said Associated Counties where the said Earle shall appoint▪ with power to put in execution these Instructions following, and in pursuance thereof, to give assistance to the said Committees. First, They shall have power to call before them, all Provosts, Masters, and Fellowes of Colledges, all Students, and Members of the Vniversity, and all Ministers in any County of the Association, and all Schoole-masters that are scandalous in their lives, or ill-affected to the Parliament, or Fomentors of this unnaturall Warre, or that shall wilfully refuse obedience to the Ordinances of Parliament, or that have de∣serted their ordinary places of residence, not being imployed in the service of the King and Parlia∣ment. And they shall have power to send for any Witnesses, and examine any complaint or testi∣mony against them, upon Oathes of such per∣sons as shall and may be produced to give Evidence against them, and shall certifie their Names with the Charge and Proofes against them, to the said Earle of Manchester, and
he shall have power to eject such as he shall judge unfit for their Places, and to sequester their Estates, Meanes, and Revenues, and to dispose of them as he shall think fitting, and to place other fitting persons in their Roome, such as shall be approved of by the Assembly of Di∣vines sitting at Westminster. The Earle of Manchester, or the said Com∣mitteé or Committees shall have power to ad∣minister the late Covenant taken and to be taken of all the threé Kingdoms, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to all persons in any of the said Associated Counties, and the Isle of Ely, upon such Penalties as are or shall be assigned by the Parliament in this behalfe. And be it ordained, That the said Earle of Manchester shall have power to dispose of a fifth part of all such Estates as they shall sequester, for the benefit of the Wives and Children of a∣ny of the aforesaid persons. The said Committee or Committees shall imploy a Clerke for the registring of all War∣rants, Orders, Summons, and Ejectments made by them: And that they choose some con∣venient place for the preserving of the Writings of this Committee. That the said Earle of Manchester shall have
power to examine and inhibite all such as doe obstruct the Reformation now endeavoured by the Parliament and Assembly of Divines. And be it further declared, That all such as shall doe any thing in execution of this Ordi∣nance, shall be kept indempnified by the Autho∣ritie and power of both Houses of Parlia∣ment. And further be it ordained, That the Earle of Manchester shall have power to appoint a con∣venient number, consisting of one or more out of everie Countie, one out of the Citie of Norwich, and one out of the Countie and Citie of Lin∣colne: Provided, that three of these be Deputie-Lieutenants to sit at Cambridge, for the better ordering of all Businesses of the Association, according to Ordinances and Orders of Par∣liament, and according to his Commission granted by his Excellencie the Earle of Essex; And that the present Committee for the Associ∣ation sitting at Cambridge, shall cease, when the Earle of Manchester shall have appointed ano∣ther under his hand and seale. Joh. Browne Cler. Parliament. FINIS.
