E2356 E452_14 R204859 99864315 116542
THREE DECLARATIONS OF THE Lords & Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, THE ONE, Declaring the Duke of Buckingham, Lord Holland, and Lord Peterborough Traytors & Rebels, And for their Estates, and all that shall adhere to them, to be forthwith Sequestred. The other, For securing all just Debts and Engagements to such as have been or shall be engaged for the Parlia∣ment before any final Conclusion of a Peace. The third, Declaring it an acceptable Service of all such as have or shall serve the PARLIAMENT in sup∣pressing Insurrections and Tumults. Also several Votes concerning Major General Skippon. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Declarations and Votes be forthwith printed and published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons, July 12. 1648.
Die Martis, 4 Julii, 1648. REsolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That they do Resolve and Declare, That before any final Conclu∣sion of Peace, they will take especial care to secure all just Debts, and make good all En∣gagements to all persons that either have been or shall be engaged for the Parliament. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Die Iovis, 6 Iulij, 1648. Resolved, &c. THat this House doth Declare, That they do and shall accept it as an ac∣ceptable Service in all and every such person or persons as have risen, or shall rise, and act in order to the opposing and sup∣pressing all Insurrections and Tumults that shall be raised against the Parliament, to the endangering of the Peace of the Kingdom. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Die Veneris, 7 Julii, 1648. Resolved, &c. THat this House doth Declare, That the Duke of Bucking∣ham, Earl of Holland, Earl of Peterborough, and all that have or shall adhere to them, have and do Levy VVar against the Parliament and Kingdom, and are Traytors and Rebels, and ought to be proceeded against as Traytors and Rebels. Ordered, &c. That the several Committees in the several Counties and places where there lies any of the Estates
Real or Personal of the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Holland, Earl of Peterborough, or any other that have or shall adhere to them in this Action of Levying VVar against the Parliament and Kingdom, do forthwith proceed to the Sequestra∣tion of their Estates Real and Per∣sonal. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Die Lunae, 10 Julii, 1648. I. IT is Resolved upon the Question by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That a Printed Paper entituled, A Motive to all Loyal Subjects, to endeavor the Preservation of His Majesties Person; wherein Major General Skippon is slanderously char∣ged with notorious falsities, is a malicious and scandalons Libel.
II. Resolved, &c. That this House doth Declare, That it doth appear to them, That Captain Rolph, charged by Mr. Osborn to conspire the ta∣king away of His Majesties life, is not Son in Law to Major General Skippon, neither hath any relation unto him, as is falsly charged in the said Paper. III. Resolved, &c. That it doth appear to this House, That Mr. Rolph who is Son in Law to Major Ge∣neral Skippon, hath no Command in this Army, nor hath or ever had any Command in the Isle of Wight. IV. Resolved, &c. That the foul Aspersions in the said Libel cast upon Major General Skippon, tended to blast him in his Reputation, to raise Mu∣tiny and Sedition, and to stir up the hatred of the People against him, thereby to ren∣der
him useless in these distracted Times, he being a person of such eminent worth. V. Resolved, &c. That these Votes be forthwith Printed, and set up in the most publique places of the City, to discover to the people the wicked Designs of these Libels, and to Vin∣dicate Major General Skippon in his Honor from the false Calumnies hereby cast upon him. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
