E2677 E383_16 R201438 99861948 160183
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For a Bill ordered to be sent to the KINGS MAIESTY, to be transmitted under the great Seale of England. CONCERNING The qualifications of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, who shall be admitted to sit in Par∣liament for this Kingdome of IRELAND. And for disbanding of those who re∣fuse to take the Oath. THis Ordinance of the House of Commons (in Par∣liament assembled) is Printed and Published according to ORDER. Printed by C. A. DƲBLIN. Ann: 1647.
AN ORDINANCE of the COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, for a Bill ordered to be sent to the Kings Majesty; to be transmitted under the great Seale of England, &c. THis house taking into seri∣ous consideration the la∣mentable condition of this Kingdome at this present, in a man∣ner wholly wasted, and brought to utter ruine and desolation, by the im∣pious
and wicked conspiracies and practi∣ces of many of the Popish Profession. And seeing plainly that the Rebellion was begun under the pretence and colour of Religion, tendeth to the destruction of the Kings Majesty, his heires and succes∣sours, to draw the Subjects of this Realme, from the subjection and allegiance, which by the Lawes of God and nature, they owe unto his Sacred Majesty, and the Crowne of England. And for as much as many the Members of this house betraying the trust reposed in them, by the Common wealth; have treate∣rously shewed themselves prime conspira∣tours, and actors in this horrid Rebellion. For the avoiding therefore of such hurts, perills, dishonours, and inconveniences as at present, and hereafter His Majesty, and this Kingdome do and may suffer by reason of the said Rebellion, stirred up and fomen∣ted by those; who depend upon the juris∣diction and power, of the Sea of Roome, unjustly claimed and usurped within this Realme; and also of the dangers by the fa∣vourers of the said usurped power, of whom so many are at this time appearing in open
Rebellion now acting such unpareled Cruelties, and unheard of bloody inhuma∣nities towards the Brittish, and Protestants of this Kingdome. It is on the considerations aforesaid or∣dered, and ordained, that any person that heretofore hath been elected, and now is a Knight, Citizen, or Burgesse for this present Parliament, and now present shall be no longer deemed a Member of this House, or have any voice therein, unlesse he shall forthwith openly in this house accept, and take the oath expressed, and forthwith in one Act made in this Kingdome, in the se∣cond yeare of Queene ELIZABETH of fa∣mous memory, entituled an Act restoring to the Crowne the antient jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiasticall, and spirituall, and abolishing the forraigne power repugnant to the same according to the tenor and ef∣fect hereafter following, that is to say. J. A. B. do utterly testifie and declare in my consci∣ence that the Kings Highnesse is the onely supreame Go∣vernour of this Realme, and of all other His Highnesse Dominions, and Countries, as well in all spirituall or Ec∣clesiasticall things or Causes, as temporall, and that no forraigne Prince Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, hath or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
prehemenence, or authority, Ecclesiasticall, or srituall within this Realme. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all forraigne jurisdictions, powers, superiori∣ties, and authorities, and promise, that from henceforth I shall beare faith and true allegiance to the Kings High∣nesse, his Heires and successours, and to my power shall assst and dfend all jurisdictions, priviledges, prehemi∣nencies, and authorities granted, or belonging to the Kings Highnesse, his Highnesse, his Heires, and Suc∣cessours; or united and annexed to the imporiall Crowne of this Realme. So helpe mee God by the Contents of this booke. And it is further ordered, and ordained, that all other the Members of this house, who are now absent, and have no hand in the said Rebellion, and every other per∣son which hereafter shall be elected a Knight, Citizen, or Burgesse for this Parli∣ament, or for any other Parliament or Parli∣ments, hereafter to be houlden within this Realme, shall from henceforth before he shal enter into the Parliament House, or have any voice there, openly accept and take the said Oath before the Lord Chancellour, or Lord Keeper of the great Seale of this King∣dome for the time being, or in his absence before the Lord chiefe Justice, of His Ma∣jesties
Court of Chief-Place, or the Lord Chiefe Justice of His Majesties Court of Common-Pleas, or the Lord Chiefe Barren of His Majesties Court of Exchequer, for the time being, or such other person or per∣sons of His Majesties privy Councel, or of his Majesties Judges of this Kingdome, as shall be authorised to minister the said Oath. And that he which shall for the present continue in, or hereafter enter into the Par∣liament-House, without taking the said oath, shall be deemed no Knight, Citizen, or Burgesse for this present, or any other Parliament or Parliaments to be hereafter, nor have any voice therein; but shall be to all intents, constumations and purposes as if he had never been returned, nor elected Knight, Citizen, or Burgesse for the present nor any other succeeding Parliament, and shall suffer such paines and penalties, as if he had presumed to sit in the same without relation, returne, or Authority. And it is also ordered and ordain∣ed that the Committee under named Sir Paul Davis Knight, Mr. Recor∣der
of Dublin, Mr. Recorder of Drog∣heda, Mr. Roger Brereton, Mr. An∣thony Dopping, Mr. Stephen Stephens, shall attend the Right Honourable the Lord Justices of this Kingdome, and humbly move their Lordships in the name of this House, that a bill be drawn to the effect of the order with such additions, alterations, and in∣largements as shall be thought fitting to be transmitted into England, under His Maiesties great Seale, and to be thence returned into the Kingdome, to be passed as a Law; To which end the said Committee are forthwith to draw a draught of the said Bill, and to present the same unto the said Lord Justices. Copia vera ex. 16. 41. Per phil Ferneles, Cler: Parl: Dom: Com: FINIS.
