h1839 e302_16 99861086 158744
THE LIFE and DEATH OF DAVID. A SERMON Preached at the Funeralls of that Worthy Member of the Ho∣nourable House of COMMONS, William Strode Esquire, In the Abbey Church in Westminster, Septemb. 22o. 1645. By GASPAR HICKES, a member of the Assembly of Divines. LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for Christopher Meredith at the Signe of the Crane in Pauls Church-yard, 1645.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr EDWARD BARKHAM Knight and Baronet, and to his truely religious Lady, the Lady FRANCES BARKHAM. Right Worshipfull, AMong the many comforts I have met with in your family, where I found the first safe and quiet har∣bour after my wanderings and tossings in the common storme, I cannot but prize it as an eminent one, that there I injoyed the sweet company of that worthy Gentleman, our dear friend, whose name this paper bears; by whose favours I have been really helped and refreshed, and from whose wisedome and goodnesse (if I prove not defective to my selfe) I might learn much. When I was cal∣led to performe that last sad office for him, I could heartily have desired that it had ra∣ther
been put into the hands of some one of the most able and famous of my brethren, whose parts and credit might have better reached the worth, and set forth the renown of a person so worthy of the highest honour. Yet that which animated me to the taske, as a duty something fit for me, was the consider∣ation of my intimate converse with him in the last and best acted part of his time; whereby I had this advantage, that as affe∣ction stirred me to speak freely of him, so conscience prompted me, and experience in∣abled me to speak the known truth, and that only. My hopes are, that my obscurity or weaknesse, shall not leave any blemish on his excellencies, which deserve to be drawn and flourished by the most curious pencill; which will shine forth in despite of oblo∣quie and ill will, either of open enemies, or of those at home, whose ill-affected eyes could not brook the clear and lightsome beams of
his unmasked and unmixed integrity. In∣deed I doubt not but when all such shall be parables of the dust written in the earth, rotting in infamy, his memory shall be bles∣sed, and his name dear; yea so long as the name of Parliament shall be precious to England: And precious may that great name be, preserved and blessed that society, so long as we continue a people. This incult piece, such as it is, I humbly present to you, and that as your due; not only in regard of my manifold and deep ingage∣ments to you, but principally in respect of your interesses in him that is gone to God; between whom and you there passed and continued an intercourse of hearty, reall, and scarcely to be parallelled friendship. Besides, the subject matter of the Sermon is proper and pertinent to you; it sets forth the serviceablenesse of the godly to their generation. For your part, Sir, your cor∣diall,
usefull, unwearied activity for the publique, is well known to all that know you aright. And you, Madame, are every day casting in your contributions, laying out your interesses in Heaven for the common good. I know you both desire to act rather then to hear of what you do. Go on to do as you do, and still more abundantly. And the choicest blessings of Heaven and earth be multiplied upon you, and upon your hope∣full progeny. So prayeth. Your most obliged faithfull servant, GASP. HICKES. Errata Pag 3. lin. 10 for beartlesse, r. but lesse. p 4 l. 2. for will, r-well.
A SERMON PREACHED in the Abbey Church at Westminster, at the Funerals of that Worthy Member of the Honourable House of Commons, WILLIAM STRODE Esquire, Septemb. 22o. 1645. ACTS 13.36. For David after be had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was layd unto his fathers, and saw corruption. IT will not sute with our present purpose to stay long upon the discovery of the occa∣sion and coherence of these words. Let it suffice to shew that they are part of a Ser∣mon preached by Paul at Antioch in Pisidia; wherein he proves, by many invincible arguments, that grand assertion or principle of faith, that Jesus is the Christ, the promised Saviour. His arguments may be reduced to two heads, testimony and events: testimony of John and the Prophets, and events sutable to their testimonies and predictions. The events foretold and accomplished in Jesus,
and here specified are four; production of the seed of Da∣vid, sufferings from the Jews, buriall, resurrection. The last, his resurrection from the dead, whereby he was mightily declared to be the Sonne of God,  Rom. 1.4. according to the spirit of holi∣nesse, the power of his God-head being therein expressed most apparently, and beyond contradiction: this (I say) is evidenced to have been foretold by many expresse and con∣cluding authorities of Scripture, viz. Psal. 2.7. Isa. 55.3. Psal. 16.10. and which are applicable to Christ, and to him mainly: And if any should question whether David speaks personally of himselfe, or prophetically of Christ in the last mentioned authority, which runnes thus, Thou shalt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption:Psal. 26.10. the Apostle meets with the doubt by way of Prolepsis; shewing that the place cannot be competent to David properly or directly, but only as he was a type of Christ, or by way of participation, as he should, with the rest of the godly, be raised up with Christ: for David himselfe was a mortall man, whose time was li∣mited by the determination of God within the bounds of his generation, who expired according to the common ex∣igence of man-kinde; whose outward man saw and suffered some kinde of corruption. He, after he had served his own ge∣neration, by them will of God, fell on sleep &c. Which words (if I would set a title on them) might be aptly stiled, the life and death of David. Neither need I strain them into a division, they voluntarily fall asunder into these two parts, 1. The course. 2. The issue of a godly man. Consider we must that the Apostles principall-drift here is to set David below Christ, and therefore to describe him in his humane finitenesse and frailty. Yet is the men∣tion of him honourable, discovering the integrity of his course, and the happinesse of his issue. He served, but it was his honour and uprightnesse to be faithfull and profitable
in his service, to do good to them that came within his relation and reach. He died, but death to him was a sweet sleep, a rest from his labours, a lying down in peace: there∣in he was gathered to his fathers, nothing befell him but that which was incident to those glorious Ancients the Pa∣triarchs and holy men of God; and though his perishable part, his dust was liable to a temporary heartlesse corru∣ption, yet is that deposited, reserved intire and safe to an hap∣py reunion with his soul; and his immortall precious spirit is lodged in the armes of glory. The very order of nature prompts to me a method fit to be followed in handling my text. David served, and died: and needfull it is that I first endeavour to teach, and to learn how to live, before death come. I shall therefore now ter∣minate or stint my speech to the godly mans course. David served his own generation by the will of God. Wherein I might point out unto you these things consi∣derable. 1. The person, David. 2. His imployment, he ser∣ved. 3. The object on which he bestowed his pains, his own generation. 4. The moving and ordering cause, the will of God. David, a man whom the Lord found out and framed af∣ter his own heart, such a one as he would have him; whom he advanced by speciall grace, in a wonderfull way, to be the ruler of his people; he served; not himselfe in an exor∣bitant, arbitrary, domineering way of government; but others, by seeking their good, and promoting their well fare in all respects: and he served his own generation, those to whom he was bound in relation, who stood within his compasse; and that to the utmost extent of his time and abilities: and all this he did by the will of God; which I take here to signifie not so much Gods injoyning or prescribing will (which is indeed the rule of all our obedience and ser∣vice)
as his determining, disposing will; the word here used, is not , but , which some will translate, Gods counsell; by which all our good works and gracious pas∣sages are fore-ordained, the measure of our time and strength, dispensed and bounded. The summe of all may be laid together in such a doctri∣nall observation as this. Doct. It is the integrity, the honour, the happinesse of the godly, by the gracious disposing and working of God, to be made truly ser∣viceable to them with whom they have converse and commu∣nion. Or thus; A godly man is a serviceable, a usefull,, a profitable man. David, a potent nad prosperous Monarch, that had the necks of his enemies under his feet, and the hearts of his people at his beck, hath this left uopn record, as a most ho∣nourable memoriall, that he served them whom he ruled. By a speciall choice, a clear call he was taken from the sheep-folds, from following the ewes great with young, from the low and laborious imployment of a shepherd, to royall dig∣nity: his advancement did not exempt him from his pains, but only altered the object of them; before, he fed, and watched, and attended sheep, and now he must do the like for men;Psal. 78 79. 71, 7. and so he did with integrity of heart and skilfull∣nesse of hands: the more sublime and noble the imployment is, the greater care and industry, dexterity and parts are requisite for the managing of it. The most eminent Saints, whether in respect of function or graces, have the highest and hardest taskes to accomplish. Paul more then once pleads the warrant of his call,2 Cor. 15.10. & 1, 11, 13. and the uprightnesse of his course, to, and in his Apostleship, from the abundance and successe of his labours. And the meanest Christian if sound, hath the honour and fitnesse to be in some way and measure profitable to the body. It is a duty of generall
concernment,Gal. 5.13. of indispensable necessity on all of us that partake of the same precious faith, and are called to the liber∣ty of Christ, to serve one another in love. Reas. 1. In must needs be so, if we consder the relation or ne∣cessitude between Saints: They are children of the same parentage, brethren of the same descent, members of the same body, fellow-citizens of the same corporation: they are animated by the same principles, walke by the same rule, minde the same end; and though they are endowed with divers and different gifts, placed in severall rankes,1 Cor. 12.1, 5, 7, 8. yet is it the same spirit, the same Lord, the same God which wor∣keth all in all; and therefore is the manifestation of the Spirit given to every one to profit withall: the exhibition of all spi∣rituall sufficiencies is for mutuall helpfullnesse. Spirituall relations are more noble and strong then those that are na∣turall; they are more near, more ingaging and endearing.Lumbard. When the Master of the Schoolmen had discoursed large∣ly and acutely of the mutuall love between the Father and Christ, he concludes all with a confession, Se non possed serte explicare, that it passed his skill to enucleate the mystery: So do you turn your bowels within you, dive to the depth of your affections, weigh the measures, and feel the tender∣nesse of your respects to the wife of your bosome, the chil∣drin of your loines, the friend that is to you as your own soul; and if there be no more but nature in them, they are but shadows or glaunces in comparison of gracious affe∣ctions: those blessed bonds are pure in their root and fruit, vigorous in their activity, necessary and indissoluble in their continuance, hearty in their whole frame and drift; being truly spiritualized, there are angelicall wings and wheels added to heighten and accelerate their motions: therefore they beget tender care, strong endeavours for the good of the them with whom they close.
2. The truth will be clear, if we notice the qua∣lification or aptitude of Saints for mutuall serviceablenesse. All graces are precious and usefull, they have their full task in doing good. The Apostle magnifies the worke of faith,1 Thes. 1 4. the labour of love, the patience of hope in the Thessalonians. True grace cannot be idle or inactive. When the Holy Ghost, after the assension of Christ, was plentifully pou∣red down on beleevers, there was an apparition of cloven tongues as of fire sitting upon each of them.Acts 2.3. The tongue is the member of communication, fire is apt to dilate and disperse it selfe so farre as it can reach combustibles, and the cloven∣nesse of these tongues, denotes not only the variety and fullnesse of graces and sufficiencies issuing from our glo∣rified head, but their aptnesse also to communicate them∣selves. The godly man is furnished with true and rich abilities, and he is expensive of them, willing to lay them out for the good of others. 3. He is animated hereunto by Gods acceptation. Ser∣vice done to the meanest member of Christ is interpreta∣tively done to Christ himselfe, so is he pleased to value it; God is not unrighteous to forget your worke and labour of love,Mit. 25.45. which ye have shewed to his Name, in that ye have ministred to the Saints,Heb. 6.10. and do minister. Gods justice, his faithfullnesse is here ingaged to remember and remunerate all good offices performed in sincerity to his Saints; and that because of his own interesses, he accounts all expressed and done to his own Name. You see the godly have dear and binding respects, usefull abilities, effectuall incouragements to make them helpefull and serviceable each to other; therefore the truth of the doctrine is clear and firm. Vse. And it may serve in the first place by way of conviction. 1. To discover and cast shame upon the mischievous disposition of gracelesse persons. Oh the strange horrid
nocivous properties that are in degenerated man! Instead of being serviceable, how pemicious is he to those of his own kinde? see this monstrous piece of his wickednesse pictu∣red, Rom. 3.13,—17. He imagins mischief, speaks poison, acts destruction: every member and faculty of him is arm∣ed with hurt fullnesse: more savage he is then a beast, lit∣tle lesse dangerous then a devil. Do we not plainly reade this in these our daies written in bloudy characters? Paul observes so much in the Jews; they were injurious to their countreymen, killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets,1 Thes. 2.14, 15. per∣secuted the Apostles, pleased not God, and were contrary to all men. And is there not now such a viperous generation a∣mongst us, that gnaw out the bowells of their mother, spill the bloud of their brethren, trample all relations under foot, make spoil, and ruine their occupation, and hate none so much as those that are dear to God? It were well if this might be verified only of such as are in professed armed opposition against Gods cause and people: I fear I speak this day to many, who by reason of impotencie cannot draw bloud: through cowardize, or covetousnesse, or such like respects, are held in from doing open mischief, yet are their hearts stuffed with rancour, and their tongues tipped with venome against the power of godlinesse, and the image of Christ in his Saints. Surely there is no trusting of a sleeping Lion, nor of a calmed sea, nor of a carnall man muzled with restraint, or smoothed over with ingenuity and fair carriage. Whiles you have your tuskes and talons about you, ye are unmeet for dalliance; perillous ye are at the best, till pared and tamed by mortification; never truly serviceable, till apted thereto by grace.2. Thes. 3.2. Of all outward mischiefs we may well pray to be delivered from unreasonable and absurd men that have not faith. 2. This may serve to raze ex sanctorum albe, out of the
catalogues of the godly,Prov. 10 20 the fruitlesse, that bring forth no∣thing conducible to the common good. The tongue of the just (saith Solomon) is as the choice silver; every part and fa∣culty in him is excellent for price and use: but the heart of the wicked is little worth, that which is best in him is vile and uselesse, In a humane, much more in a Christian so∣ciety, thou canst not be unprofitable, but thou must be burden some also; like to a rotten tooth, or a paralytique part, which are not only unmeet for their functions, but also cumbersome and apt to be dolorous. 'Tis diminuent or contradictory to speak thus of a Christian; He is a harme∣lesse soul, but good for nothing: of a Minister, He is a deep scholar, but a loose liver, or an unprofitable Preacher: of a Magistrate, He is an honest man, but a cowardly or slack justicer: of a Parliament man, He means well, but neither mindes, nor skills, nor helpes the publique. And if we should take a survey of the masse of men and women, what a heare of drosse might we finde for every grain of me∣tall? How many are there of both sexes, and those none of the rude rabble, of the dreggs of the people, but such as look high, glitter in externall pompe, flante it in bravery, and thinke themselves exalted many orbes above the or∣dinary; and yet have nothing to set their wits and hands to, but to make provision for the flesh to fullfill the lusts there∣of; that are intent or busie about nothing, but how to trifle away themselves; that hold it base and below them, to foul their fingers or beat their brains about any honest im∣ployment? I might compare you to fair statues, or well limn'd pictures, but that 'tis too good for you: ye are more like to bodies from which the souls are departed, and so are become carcases, and must needs putrifie and stinke: so do ye languish and rot in your delicate basenesse, you stinke in the nostrils of the Almighty, and are justly and grievously offensive to all good men.
3. I cannot passe by without reprehension the regardlesse ones of our times, that lay nothing to heart but that which concernes themselves, or touches their own skinnes. Care∣lesse souls, that consult for nothing but their own ease, in∣teresses, security and immunity from common calamities; that contribute nothing, no succours, no sympathy, no sense to the common cause: Let others sinke or swimme, so they suffer not, or if there be no remedy, they hold it best pru∣dence to suffer last; though God most commonly crosses them, and meets with them in the infliction of speedlest and haviest judgements. 'Twas a dogged speech of Cain,Gen. 4, 9. Am I my brothers keeper? If thou wilt not be thy brothers keeper, 'tis no wonder if thou become his murtherer. If thou carest neither for the weal nor wo of others, thou shalt never see the good of Gods chosen, nor rejoyce in the gladnesse of his nation,Psal. 106.5. nor glory with his inheritance. 2. Be exhorted hence to gracious serviceablenesse. I might speak much to you by way of counsell from God to this purpose; but I shall contract my selfe to as much bre∣vity as I may. To fit you something for this high and ho∣nourable duty, take and make use of these plain directives. 1. Be sure of a well-bottomed stock of grace, let it be sound and right, and labour the improvement of it to the utmost. True grace is singularly usefull. Indeed common gifts may do some good abroad; Cyrus was called, anointed, stiled my Shepherd,Isa. 44.28. & 45.1, 4. and he did much towards the return of Gods people; but what was he to a David? so what is a meer statist, a man of policie, or valour, or any the greatest parts, if unsanctified, in comparison of one that hath such abilities seasoned with grace? God indeed may make such instrumentall for good, he may serve himselfe upon them, or by them, they cannot heartily serve him nor his cause: And the more grace we have, the more serviceable we shall
be: every the least starre that appears no bigger then a scin∣tilla, a sparke, is a celestiall body, and hath as much light in it as it can hold; but the greater Luminaries afford strongest influences, and send forth most abundant, usefull, comfort∣able light. The least sparke of grace is an immortall seed, a parcell of the divine nature, more worth then a world but graces of prime magnitude are of most eminent usefull∣nesse, and send abroad the strongest and sweetest rayes, to the benefit and refreshment of others. Covet the most and best therefore, that you may be able to do most good. 2. Nourish and inlarge deep and tender affections. 'Tis a notable character of excellencie which Paul sets upon Ti∣mothy; he describes him to be a man of a singular spirit, he naturally cared for the state of the people, and that altoge∣ther without selfe-respects, as a sonne with his father, so ser∣ved he with Paul in the Gospel.Phil. 2.20, 21, 22. Oh for such genuine sweet strains of spirit in Christians! You that are parents of your countrey, should look upon and deal with the generation which you serve, as if it were your own generation, all issu∣ing from your own loyns: You that are spirituall parents, should tender and care for your people, as for your dear children: All you Christians should converse and imbrace as brethren of the same wombe,1 Pet. 3.8. of the same birth. I trem∣ble when I consider the distance and distastes, the heart-ri∣sings and heart-burnings that are between us that own the same name and cause; fitter we are and more ready to tear, and afflict, and confound, then to serve each other. 3. Be communicative; expend all that God imparts to you in this blessed service.2 Cor. 12.15. & 6.11. Paul was willing to spend and to be spent for beleevers. His mouth was open, his heart inlar∣ged to them: Lay out he would not his uncessant pains only in the work of the Gospel, but he was prodigall also of his very soul,2 Thes. 2. ;. ready to pour out that for their good. Noble
Patriots let it not seem much to you that you forego your profits, your preferments, all the dilights of the children of men; that you exhaust your estates, your parts, your spirits, your bloud about the great businesse of God and his peo∣ple that is in your hands. Ye faithfull servants of Christ in the ministery, let your lampes burne and shine continually, though you consume the sap, the oyl, the very Elixar of your precious lives in giving light to others. Dear Chri∣stians, cast in your all to the common stock: what any of ye pinch or spare, you lose; you quench and smother the graces that you restrain or hold in from the service of Christs common wealth. 4. Be receptive, take in helpe and supply from others. The profit of the earth is for all (saith Solomon) the King himself is served by the field. If you will subsist in spirituals,Eccles. 5 9. you must take your share of provisions in common with all Saints. Paul longed to see and to converse with the Romans, not only that he might impart, but receive, and might be comforted together with them,Rom. 1.11, 12. by the mutuall faith both of himselfe and them. Apollos a man famous for eloquence, mighty in the Scriptures, and fervent in spirit, a bold preach∣er of the things of the Lord, deigns to hear and receive more clear and prefect instructions in the waies of God from Aquila and Priscilla,Acts 18.24, 25.26. persons farre his inferiours in di∣vers respects. Sometimes you may light your torches at a little candle, and kindle your great fires with a few coles fetched from a poor mans chimney. And you do well and honourably, and like your selves, that you call in Bezaleels and Aholiabs for advice and assistance about Sanctuary worke: And I hope it is not intended as a for formality, that the advice of the Assembly might stand only on the Fron∣tispiece of your directions and Ordinances, but that you mean to follow the counsell which they bring you from
God, when it is indeed Gods counsell. God will have Chri∣stians beholden to teach other; he that will give, must take, and you cannot imagine how much a poor Saint, much more a body of Saints may helpe at a dead lift, when they set to their shoulders by counsell; or compassions, or pray∣ers, &c. 5. Be humble. Humility is a serviceable grace; it accounts nothing that is duty to be too hard or base to be attempted and acted. There is nothing more intolerable in a servant then petulancie or peremptorinesse. We must not stand up∣on niceties or high termes, if we will be truly usefull to our brethren. Yet this is frequent, such an office is too mean, such a condescension is unworthy. If such a minde had been in Christ, what had become of us? how low did he stoop to do us good? he stood not upon his reputation, but empti∣ed and humbled himselfe, vailed the beams of his deity with the forme, the habit of a servant; and he did the part of a servant, he became obedient, even to the perfection of obe∣dience, to the extremity of sufferings, and all for us: and if we will serve each other in earnest,Phil. 2.5.—9. let this minde be in us which was in Christ Jesus. 6. Be regular. Servants must know their offices, and stick to their severall taskes; Souldiers must keep their rankes, and observe their postures: So must Christians, otherwise they hurt,3 Thes. 4.2. Rom. 12., 7, 8. not helpe their fellows. This is the Apostles rule, Do your own businesse, worke with your own hands. And let every one waite on that which is proper to him. There's celestiall harmony when every one moves in his own sphere. It was the peoples acclamation to the Emperour Anastasius on his coronation day,Sut vixisti, ia etian im∣para. As thou hast lived, so reign: his private course was commendable, and they conjectured aright, that his graces, if they were found, would shine the brighter in a high place. Such is the man indeed, as he is in
his particular station; and I know not which is more dan∣gerous to society, either defectivenesse in members for that which is required, or intrusion and busie medling with that which is besides them. I should be sorry that either of these should be incident to Ministers. For the former, you do well to have their abilities and fitnesse examined and approved: In the later, you are very wary in trusting them with more then you conceive due. What is due, I dare not, I cannot now determine. Not long since you have been caught, and that satis pro imperio, magisterially enough, though by one that professes submission even below a slave; that not any thing of government is due to them: You give them e∣nough, if you give them meate and worke: And so much I thinke you will afford to your horses. I beleeve it reaches not the double honour the Holy Ghost holds them wor∣thy of,1 Tin. 5.17. and that for ruling well. And whether be more un∣beseeming a Minister, either an asse-like crouching and stu∣pour, or a dogge-like lazinesse, judge ye. The searcher of hearts knows, I speak not this for selfe respects; I can as truly say as he that decryed all Ministeriall authority, or as any man; that 'tis more sutable and satisfactory to my spi∣rit, to be thrust into the most obscure retirednesse, then to be up in the world especially, above my selfe. Let them be held as scratching brambles that usurpe over the trees; the generous vine, the fat olive,Judg. 9 8 -15. the sweet figg-tree will de∣cline such irregular undue promotion. Justly may they fear to fall with Antichrist, to partake of Babylons plagues, that affect the least particle or sippet of Antichristian papall power. I beseech you, do us the right to beleeve that it is not ambition, but conscience that makes us so instant about that which now sticks in your hands. How can we serve God, or you, or the Churches of Christ, if we are kept or thrust from that, wherein a great part of our usefullnesse
consists? 'Tis strange that the power of the Keyes, of bin∣ding and loosing, that formidable sentence, 1 Cor. 5. should be aëriall, imaginary, or only temporary and extraordinary things: that they should signifie nothing but what may be in a Romane proscription, an Imperiall Banne, or some such like civill censure. Certainly Christ hath, and will have a kingdom on earth, and therein a spirituall government; much of the managing whereof he hath trusted with his Ministers. It they should use that power to destruction, not to edification; to domineere over the faith and consciences, and not to serve the souls, and helpe the joy of Gods people, the fault would be in the persons, not in the power. How serviceable Gods faithfull Ministers have endeavour∣ed to be, according to their call and abilities, to the present generation, in the great affairs now on foot; I rather leave to cordiall men to judge, then report it my selfe. 'Tis a de∣fect and blemish to the body to have a finger amputated or disjoynted: much more hurtfull it is to have a strong bone broken, a noble part made uselesse. 7. Be assiduous, indefatigable in service. Serve out your time, that you may be free-men of Heaven. So did David in my text;2 Tim 4.7. so did Paul, he runne out his whole course; so did a greater then them both, Christ finished the worke which the Father gave him to do.Joh. 1.4. Plantus. Benefacta benefactis per∣tegito (saith the Comique) ne perpluat. Good deeds and services are like titles on an house, betwixt which if there be too much distance and disparity, 'twill rain thorow. Is it not a sad thing to see them that have been forward and eminent in serving the publique, grow rusty and uselesse, through humour, emulation or discontent, and so thrown aside as unstrung instruments, or tools whereof all the steel is worne out? Look to your selves that you lose not those things that ye have wrought, that you suffer not so
many things in vain; hold fast that you have, that no man take your crown: begin well, and grow better, and be faith∣full to the death; and you shall receive a full reward of all your services. To fasten and whet all that hath been said on your spi∣rits, give me leave to adde something by way of incentive. 1. Consider that 'tis truly noble to be serviceable to o∣thers. The Magistrate (let him be the supreme) from the multiplicity and weightinesse of his imployment, is by way of excellencie stiled ,Rom. 13.4. the Minister or servant of God. The Angels, those glorious spirits, that with eter∣nall satisfaction behold the face of God, and with nimble alacrity execute his behests, are ministring spirits, also sent forth to serve them who shall be heirs of salvation.Heb. 1.14. 'Tis a title of honour frequently given by God to Christ,Isa. 53.11. & 42.1. my ser∣vant: And himselfe professes that he came into the world,Mat. 20.28. not to be ministred to, but to minister. Yea, the glorious maiesty of Heaven and earth, God blessed for ever, God in his habitation, on his throne of excellencie, stiles him selfe a father of the fatherlesse, a judge of the widowes,Psal. 68 5. a helper in the time of need of all them that wait upon him. Who would not then be ambitious to serve Saints? Me thinks it were an apt impresse or motto for the greatest of you to bear; The more serviceable, the more honourable. 'Tis to be doubted, there are many among you that look high, whom the Lord will not honour so much as to let you wash the feet of his Saints, sweep the dust out of his Temple, tugge at an oare in the shippe that carries Christ and his Church. Happy, honoured is the man, that can do any good office for the Bride the Lambs wife. 2. Consider how helpefull and behoofefull our service may be. We may stay up a staggering brother, nay prop up a tottering kingdome: we may support a drooping
spirit, nay save a soul from death.Jam. 5.10. Sometimes a little suc∣cour stops a fatall fall, a small assistance turnes aside a dead∣ly stroke, a poor sleight medicine is made effectuall to pre∣serve life: but spirituall remedies are most efficacious, and serve for highest purposes. And shall we spare our pains which may be so helpefull to our brethren? The suf∣ferings of the meanest single Saint must turne our bowels, and draw out our compassions, and call in our succouring hand. Oh then, what flames, what flowings, what melt∣ings, what expendings of our whole selves are requisite from us, when societies of Saints, states and Churches lie a bleeding, and cry aloud to us for our hands, our hearts, our tears, our prayers, our all to helpe them? 3. This may move us likewise that the service of the godly is relative, reciprocall, mutuall. One member cannot say to another,1 Cor. 12 21. I have no need of thee. Carefull and tender we should be to restore a lapsed brother in the spirit of meeknesse,Gl. 6 1. considering our selves, that we also may be tempted.Heb. 13 3. We must remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being our selves also in the body, and may as much need compassion and helpe as the most miserable. There is an intercourse, a holy traffique of graces among Saints; wherein (and 'tis a Pa∣radox very strange) they grow rich by disbursing: we in∣large our own comforts, by administring consolation to others; clear up our own light, by informing others; in∣flame our own zeal, by rouzing up the affections of others; fortifie our own spirits, by staying or raising up our feeble fallen brethren. We cannot do any spirituall good to o∣thers, without benefit to our selves; neither can we per∣forme any service of love to the Saints, but we may need and receive the same or the like from them. 4. Take a taste of the refreshments our faithfull, painfull
serviceablenesse leaves upon our spirits.Eccles. 5.1. The sleep of a labour∣ing man is sweet, whether he eat little or much. The Chri∣stian that labours hard for the honour of his master, and ad∣vantage of his fellow-servants, whatever outward exigen∣ces befall him, hath inward peace, at least in the cause for the present, and in the issue too, when the times of refresh∣ing shall come. Our rejoycing is this (saith Paul) the te∣stimony of our conscience,2 Cor. 1.1. that in simplicity and godly since∣rity, not with fleshly wisedom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversations in the world, and more abundantly to you∣wards. When he was even in the mouth of death, the re∣cognition or rellish of his faithfull pains in serving God and his people, filled him with unspeakable joy. Oh how sweet will it be when the godly man at his dissolution can with good Hezekiah lodge his soul in Gods blessed bo∣some, thus? Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee,Isa. 38.3. how I have walked before thee intruth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight; that which is sutable to thy will, honourable to thy Name, profitable to thy Church and people. 3. And suffer me in a word or two of consolation, to bring home the refreshment of this doctrine now in hand∣ling, to the hearts of Gods dear ones. I beleeve there are many sorrowfull souls here, by reason of the sad occasion before us; many that toyl, and sweat, and serve for the publique good, and need refreshing. Were my own spirit sutable, I might draw much comfort from this fountain: I shall now be able only to let fall a few drops upon you. 1. It is exceedingly comfortable to the godly man, that he is the most usefull serviceable creature that lives on earth. He is more truly helpefull and beneficent, hee can do more reall and rich good turnes then the great∣est mortall breathing that is out of Christ. If with Mor∣decai
he be raised to outward dignity and power, he will ingratiate and endear himself to the multitude of his bre∣thren,Esther 3. by seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed. If he be mean in the world, yet let not the Eunuch say, I am a dry tree; he hath a speciall spiri∣tuall way of the helpfullnesse, above all the men of the world. The Saints are the ornament, the blessing the safety of the places that hold them: they are the pillars of Kingdoms, the props of Parliaments, the cement of societies, the horse∣men and charets of armies, the beauty of all things here below. May we not affirme this now upon just experi∣ence? who as they have advantaged the cause of God now inagitation? they consult, and act, and fight, and pray, and that not without apparent blessed successe, even many times when all seems to be dashed and lost. Without often∣tation we may boldly say,— Si Pergama dextrá desendt possent, etian bao defensa, u∣issent. If any thing under Heaven be instrumentall to keep up these shaken, distracted, dying kingdoms from utter ruin, 'tis most likely it will be the Saints service. 2. There is great reason of rejoycing to the godly, in that of all other they are best served. They have not only immediate protection and provision from God, the mini∣stery of Angels, the renewed right and sanctified use of creatures; but all their fellow Saints also to be their ser∣vants in speciall.1 Cor 3.21, 22. All things are yours (saith the Apostle) whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, &c. you have interesse in all the faithfull pains of Christs Ministers, in all the ordi∣nances of life; you have a share and benefit in the whole stock of graces and prayers, that trade and com∣merce between Heaven and earth. Solomon hath a Pro∣verbe to this purpose, Better is he that is despised and hath a servant, then he that exalts himselfe and wants bread. Alas poor rich worldling, hungerstarved Epicures, dolefull
sensualists, you that thinke ye have the world at will, that walk with your train of attendants, and glory in the crouch∣ings of your clients and slaves; you want bread, all true and confortable helps. A time is comming upon you, when that which seems most serviceable to you, shall prove most vexatious; Your table shall become a snare, your friends tormentours, your pleasures poyson, your wealth rust to your wounded spirits, your very lives a bur∣den to you, and your selves a terrour to your selves. But for you the hidden ones of God, though ye are never so much despised and down in the world, you shall never want servants, whiles God hath Angels in Heaven, or a people on earth. Kingdoms may be overturned, Parlia∣ments may be dissolved, Armies may be routed and lost; men, good men, the best of men may die, must die, do die; yet so long as that chosen generation, that holy seed, the off-spring of God continue (and continue they shall in a constant series, till they are perfected in number and graces, and translated to glory) you shall serve be served, and that in the dearest bonds of relation, the sweetest inter∣course of mutuall help fullnesse, which shall be effectuall to your spirituall and eternall well fare. And so much for to Text. Something more I have to say, and 'tis touching the ser∣vant of God and of his people, whose dust is now brought back to the dust from whence 'twas taken. For your parts, Nobles and Senatours, you do your selves right by honour∣ing his memoriall, by commanding and attending the so∣lemnities of his interrement. You have shewn your hatred of superstitious Ceremonies, and yet have appointed and are present at a Funerall, and a Sermon. Herein you deal with him, as they dealt with Jchojada, and that upon like grounds; he had an honourable sepulture afforded him,
because he had done good in Israel,2 Chro. 26.16. both towards God and towards his house. And for my own part, I thinke there are few more unapt for, or unfrequent in Panegyriques or fu∣nerall praises then my selfe. I hold it most unworthy for Ministers, upon such occasions, to paint or perfume carca∣ses, to garnish I dols. But now why should I be silent? I need not hyperbolize, nay, I know mine own weaknesse, I cannot reach this Worthies just commendations. I pur∣posely passe by the mention of the antiquity and noble∣nesse of his descent, the piety of his private course, his sweetnesse in conversation, his faithfullnesse in friendship, &c. and shall limit my selfe to the patern in my text: and indeed the few words of my text, do limme and decy∣pher him better beyond comparison, then my poor dull oratory can do it. I should say enough of him, if I sid no more but this; He served his own generation. And this shall be the summe of all that I shall say; Surely he was a very serviceable piece, a precious usefull soul, profitable to his generation. 1. He served. And in his service we may notice these re∣markable excellencies. 1. His indefatigable industry, his fervent and zealous intention upon the businesses of state. He was none of those that peep now and then into the House to inquire, What news? that sit there sometimes for recreation, that are present mainly to helpe a friend, or promote an inter∣esse: but he set his heart and shoulders to the worke, and stretched all his sinews about it. You know the solid ve∣hemencie, the piercing acutenesse of his speeches. 'Tis ob∣served of Erasmus, that he more punished the Monkes fat bellies by his Sales, then Luther did by his stomachation. refell the crossnesse or cunning of some, who could not
well be met with, but by such plain home dealing? 2. His unbiassed and unblemished integrity. As his principles were clear and sound, so did he exactly prose∣cute them, and kept close and even to them. His parts were commendable, his judgement good, his expressions rationall and quick, his experience long in the course of Parliamentary affairs: Yet I beleeve, that honesty, which is the best Logique and Rhetorique, and uprightnesse, which can never be confuted, added the most invincible force and weight to his motions and reasons. 3. His insuperable constancie. He held on his course in all weathers; was ever the same and like himselfe in all changes and events of times: He was neither wheeled a∣bout to open state-apostacie; nor warped to covert disaffe∣ction to this, or close implicite compliancie to the adverse party; nor flatted to a pretended moderation, indeed a dan∣gerous temper, made up of discontent and selfishnesse. How many glistering Mateors have we seen blaze and look bigge for a while, and at last prove falling starres, and extin∣guish in a stinke; or if they sticke amongst us, they hang doubtfully, and yeeld but uncertain and unwholesome light? He fixedly kept his orbe and his motion, till he fini∣shed his course. 4. His tedious and heavy sufferings. He was not moved by menaces, or reproaches, or hardships: he counted not his contentments, his estate, his liberty, his life dear unto him, that he might do his worke,Acts 20.14. and accomplish the mi∣nistery, the service which he received of God. Witnesse his long imprisonment, and that in the prime of his time, when the strength and delights of youth might have made him do much for freedome. In those worst, most dange∣rous, for lorne times, like another Curtius, he cast himselfe in hiatum, into the gulfe, the jaws of extreme perill, for his
countries good. Witnesse also the accusation of late cast upon him of the highest crime: 'twas his singular service∣ablenesse that caused him to be one of the first marked and destined to destruction. Thus he served: But whom did he serve? I shall brief∣ly answer this both negatively and affirmatively. 1. He served not himselfe. In all that he intended or did for the publique, I could never observe (and it was my happinesse to converse constantly and intimately with him for a good space of time) I say I could never observe any thing of selfe before his eyes, either for the present, or in expectation. A great and usefull hand he had in procuring treasure, the sinews of warre, yet I dare affirme in spite of malice and calumny, that none of it stuck to his fingers. Very scrupulous he was in receiving, nay resolute in re∣fusing the expressions of common mean courtesies from any, especially if there were the least appearance or sus∣pition of a hook in the bait. He grasped no offices, accepted not maintenance from the publique in the usuall way; though he had lost or spent all his private estate: he ra∣ther cast himselfe on beholdennesse to friends, which was averse to his most generous spirit; yet so the Lord provi∣ded for his subsistence, and he enjoyed it with all hearti∣nesse and respects. Oh never let it be said of men intrusted with the common cause,Phil. 2.21. they seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christs. 2. He served not men. I mean in the Apostles sense. If I pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ.Gal. 5.10. Great names, old acquaintance, near relations, could not sway him to mens persons or personall respects. Did you ever know him raise party, or make a motion, or drive a de∣signe to that purpose? He did not trudge up and down to Committees, nor appear in them, to advocate or intercede
for any in causes that would not hold water. Not but that he was courteous and helpefull to his friends, yea readily usefull to all that came within his reach, in a way of justice. Methinks Moses description of Levi, accords him well in this point. Who said unto his father and to his mother,Deut. 33.9. I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children. 3. He served his own generation, he served the publique. Many of the great Patriots of ancient Rome made the Com∣mon wealth their heir; In degenerated times, Court Parasites often gave all to the Emperours. The Common wealth was to him instead of, and as wife and children: to that (next to the immediate service of God) he devoted his care, his skill, his parts, his pains. How justly might he say as Chrysostome, when he was ready to be tome off from his people by banishment, Vita mihi ad vestrum pro∣fectum tantummodo ducitur.Cum de expul∣sione ipsiu age∣retur. Hon. The main drift of his life and action, was the glory of God in serving the pub∣lique. Well, this serviceable man is come to the period of his generation; he is fallen on sleep. Will you, can you hear any thing of his death? I should say nothing of the man∣ner of it, were it not to stop the black mouthes of some, that speak falsely and despitefuly of it. His disease was an Epidemicall feaver, which after some colluctations seized on his principals and spirits, before impaired and much exhausted both by sufferings' and services. 'Twas not the plaugue then, as many report; and 'tis probable the re∣port was raised by some, who will say of him, with as much malice and as little truth,  Acts. 24.5. as Tertullus said of Paul; We have found this man the very pestilence. Neither yet did he fall into raging distempers (as some give it out) which might have been feared in such a disease, and in him who
was of a constitution something hot, and of a vigorous stirring spirit. Some clouds indeed were cast upon his fa∣culties by the violence of the disease, yet was his demean∣our and his dissolution quiet. And though the nature of his sicknesse hindered his expressions, yet I doubt not but his Master found him watching, because he found him doing.Mat. 24.46. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he commeth shall finde so doing. One thing yet remains. I have a little to say to the gene∣ration that he hath left. 1. Taking it at large, for the intire body, the state and Church of which he was a member. Oh what an impo∣verishment have we suffered! Is it a small matter, that so serviceable, so usefull a labourer should be called home from worke in the middest of his day, the prime of his time? doth not this portend that the season is almost spent, or that night will come sooner then we look for? I know not how you value the losse; me thinks it should weigh heavy. We hear of the shaking, the indangering of one of the Kingdoms, which cannot but make our hearts shake, and bleed, and break within us: And in these distracted times we cannot but be obnoxious to doubts, and fears, and los∣ses: And what can more impair us then the taking away the prudent,Isa. 3., 3. the honourable, the Councellour, the pillars of state, the Atlasses of our publique fabrique? Our losse in this particular is the greater, in regard of our present poor con∣dition. A decayed Merchant cannot sustain a single wrack; whereas it little hurts one of a full estate, that ventures in many bottomes. We live in a declining, tottering, degene∣rated generation; and I assure you, a few more such losses may undo us. I might bring in a long bill, but ile summe up the totall, thus: The Parliament hath lost an ornament, the Common wealth a servant, and (let me adde one parcell
more) the Ministery a friend: I adde it the rather, because I doubt we have few (I am sure few such) friends left. All of all sorts may take the losse deeply to heart, I know none but must share in it, that have interesse in, and true respects to the common cause. 2. If we understand his generation more strictly, for them that are brethren of the same order, members of the same society with him, I shall leave a few words with them, and conclude. 1. Let a poor unworthy servant of Jesus Christ speak a word of counsell in your ears this day, and let it not be lightly set by. I hope your hearts are now in a tender frame, and fit to receive impressions. You are called an House, and that is a terme of aggregation and consociation: You sit together, and I have seen you feast together, and now you mourn together, at least in outward semblance: I beseech you for the Lords sake, for conscience sake, for the poor generations sake that hangs upon you, and some∣thing for the memory and respect of him that is taken from among you; be at one among your selves, be like minded,Phil. 2.2, 3. have the same love, let nothing be done in managing publique af∣fairs through strife or vain glory. Let this be the buriall day of all your private interesses and ends; cast your crosse and high thoughts down into the dust, and never let them rise again; let all your contention be for the common faith; all your emulation, who shall do best service to his genera∣tion. You see ye are dying, consider your selves as dead, you have something before you to provoke you to the con∣templation; and 'twere monstrous if your faner all flames should part, if your ashes could not be made to mighle. As ever you hope to be of that great Parliament described, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Let brotherly love be and continue among you; let hearts and hands meet and worke together in the publike service.
2. Take a word of incouragement, ye faithfull, usefull servants of the most High, and of his cause and people. Ima∣gine you heard the Lord speaking from Heaven, as he did once.Josh. 1.13. Moses my servant is dead, now therefore arise, Joshua, go over this Jordan, lead my people into their promised posses∣sion. The hardestraske was to do, when the most eminent instrument was removed. So it may be with you; need had you therefore to be strong and very couragious, to stir up your gifts, to quicken your spirits, to double your dili∣gence. It hath been observed sometimes, that the losse of one eye hath increased and cleared the sight of the other. God can pour out inlarged multiplied measures of spirit upon you, if you humble, and pray, and beleeve, and use well what you have: Though he worke excellent things by choise instruments, yet he doth not tye himselfe to them. Alexander envied his fathers victories, looking upon them as anticipations of his own glory: You need not do so, there's world enough left for you to conquer, worke e∣nough for you to do and we hope, we beleeve the best and sweetest of the worke is yet to come, and will come ere long. Gird up therefore the loynes of your mindes, put forth all the vigour of your best abilities, let the livelinesse and acti∣vity of your endeavours repair the wide and wofull breach which death hath made upon you. You that live, while ye have time and strength, worke on. This worthy Member of yours, your dear and helpefull fellow-labourer, over whose ashes you mourn, hath served our his time, his taske is done, he is laid downe to sleep, his dust must for a while be wrapped up in corruption, and his earthy reliques we have laid up with his fathers. FINIS. Published according to Order.
