j715b 36282212 150100
THE Jesuits Ghost, WITH THE PRAYER OF THE Turkish Monarch TO CHRIST. Through which he Obtained a Mighty Victory against the Papists, at the Field of VARNA. Occasioned by their wicked Perjury, in Breaking that League they had so Solemnly Sworn to Keep. Written by R. C. LONDON. Printed by John Wallis, for the Author. 1689.
THE JESƲIT'S GHOST. FRom restless shades, my trembling Ghost ascends, To visit Earth and some peculiar Friends, Now all things are at rest and quiet found, I only rise and walk the silent round, In this Dark moment I'll the matter end; For which the Bull does with the Test contend; And Romes Religion open from the root, Whose branches flourish with Forbiden Fruit, And such as puts ev'n Heaven to the Blush, Who does their Actions with just anger crush. Can they with great Omnipotence prevail Who Daily Vows with Bloody Victims Seal? Or he be President, to such as have So many hundred back-ways to the Grave? To Kill an Heretick, they 'count no more, Than to Debauch, and then Absolve a Whore. Tho' what's expected but a Tyburn rod. From greedy Preists that Eat and Drink their God, In Massacres their cruel rage out-flies Softning tears of beautious Virgins Eyes, Could they proceed in their unhuman way, They'd turn the World into a Golgotha, Phocus, when he had by the help of Boniface Bishop of Rome, Mardered Maricius the Emperor and all his Child∣ren, and Seated himself on the Throne, in requital for his assistance in so Barbarous a murder, made Boniface Pope, then call'd Vniversal Bishop.By Murder first the Pope, assum'd his Throne, Since to what rage is Superstition grown,
On his Dark Reign, Oppressions Duely wait, Like Pestilential Air to blast a State, When Sword, and Powder fails, than Fire must Lay splendid Cities level with the Dust: Of Perjury allow, and pardon too, So much detested by the Turk and Jew: But Varna sure might silence this blind work, When Christ gave that great Battle to the Turk. The spacious field with Popish blood was dy'd, And Conquering Amurath did in Triumph ride, Whilst Heav'n stood Neuter, the Hungarian Sword Victorious grew, but the high injur'd Lord, Viewing the League the perjur'd Christians broke, Grew pale with anger at the impious Work. Condemn'd the crime and they receiv'd their doom, From the rough Sons of the Loud Cannons Womb: But these are meritorious Acts in them, Yet what themselves in others do Condemn: Their Giddy zeal consists on bits of Wood, The Cross of Christ was carried by one Man at first, and in all the Abbys Monasteries, and Cells &c. there are so many pieces of it, as if they were Solid would build a Ship of a 1000 Tun. 3 Nails were only used in the Crucifying our Blessed Saviour, yet they produce as many Nails as are needful in the Building of such a Ship. On Crosses, Nails, and reliques of the good: In fine and costly Robes, in gaudy paint, To deck and beautify the Idol Saint, In Gilded Temples, Incense, rich perfume, As if this World was the Elizium. So Dazling Lights delude the silly fly, Who hov'ring courts the flame untill it die: But I, in vain, these fallacies deplore; Beyond the Grave repentance hath no pow'r,
Were I to live again I'd then extol, That part of heav'nly breath the pretious Soul, And all my pious thoughts with heav'n engage, And shun the flashy Priest-craft of the age, Which, just Like bubbles, bore up by the Air, Look beautifull and break, then dis-appear. This daring Nation when we'd thoughts to bring To Romes obedience as an offr'ing, We and the angry Dame in Council sat, As if we wou'd unweave the Lume of Fate, The Cyclops when for mighty Jove they wrought, Was not so toil'd and full of various thought, Then all our minutes busie were, and we, To Hellish Stratagems gave Liberty, Perfidious Petres with a Fawning smile, Said, Heaven decrees for us this wealthy Isle, Than for the promis'd Land he boldly prest, Cried out 'tis time, 'tis time we were possest, Post on he rid through fiery Zeal pretends, Gold was his Guide, at Hell his Journey ends, So smooth to his kind Prince he made the way: He Little thought rank Treason in it Lay, But Traytors, like false Coin, do fair appear To all mens eyes but the Discoverer. Seduc'd the King his Nobles to Decline, Who are the Light by which all Monarchs shine, None but false stones, no not one Glorious Gem, Was left to sparkle in his Diadem. The Test and Penal-Laws we must have down, And not one man of Sence must ware a Gown; Thus to our tickling Magick we gave way, Till we rais'd Spirits that we could not Lay, Just as the Devil did the project Start, In our Cabal we had his Counterpart:
Famous for Bawling, and suspected wise, Tho' one grain of Sence is worth a pound of Noise, This precious Plant so worthy to be prais'd Upon White-Chapel Dunghill first was rais'd: Yet was the third great Engineer of State Pick'd out to ruine the Immaculate, And Divine Church, that like a timely Spring Raises from Darkness every Living thing; By Lawless pow'r he strove to Undermine, But Heaven did Frustrate the Damn'd design, Resenting that to their Defame alone, For what's the Casket when the Jewel's gone? Even in the Nick of time, Heav'n gave the word: As Isaac's Angel stopt his Fathers Sword, So the Prophetick Frost did subject bring To its Chill Scepter every humid thing. All bodies fast in that Cold Chain were bound, No Spring to murmur, unless under ground; But in a trice Dissolv'd this Tyrants Pow'r Whose Ruins flourish in his Conquerour. And you who for Eternal Blessings call, Look up, repent, make no Demur at all, But to the Sacred Church obedient be, Heavens bright Cealing is their Canopie. In threatning storms their pious Lustre shew'd, Like Stars that Glitter through a Gloomy Cloud; But Rome's blind Zeal depends on Beads and Toys, Impious Nacks more fit for Apeish Boys, Than means to Compass Everlasting Joys, Hark! Pluto calls, the Stygian Furies quake. The Guilty Howl, in that Sulphureous Lake, I must descend to his Imperial Thron, Yet when I'm there, he's Jealous of his Crown.
THE Breaking of the LEAGUE. A League being made for ten Years between A∣murath, Sixth King of the Turks, and Ʋladis∣laus, King of Hungaria: one Swearing upon the Holy Evangelists, the other upon the Alcoran. Amurath departed with his Army against Scanderbeg: not long after the Hungarian Clergy finding an advantage in the Turks absence. Julian the Cardi∣nal and the rest of his Hopeful Brethren, perswadeth King Ʋladislaus to break the League, telling him no∣thing could be more fond or inconsiderate, than in their Consultation to have regard to their private profit only, and not to the Publick, with∣out respect of Religion, Honesty, or Consciene &c. Thus getting the consent of the King, the Cardinal absolved him, who after March'd with a very great Army into the Turks Dominion. Huniades being General, which Amurath hearing of, prepared to meet 'em, and the Armies Engaged at the Field of Varna, where there was a Bloody and desperate Battle Fought, in which the Christians had the best for the most part of the Day; so that Amurath thought of nothing but Flight, and seeing the Christian Ensigns Displayed with the Crucifix, pluckt the Writing out of his Bosome, wherein the Late League was Comprised, and holding it up in his hand with his eyes cast up to Heaven, Said Behold thou Crucified Christ, this is the League the Christians, in thy Name, made with me: which they
have, without Cause, violated: Now if thou be a God, as they say thou art, and as we Dream, revenge the wrong done unto thy Name, and me, and shew thy Power upon thy Per∣jured People, who in their Deeds deny thee their God. No sooner had Amurath ended this Prayer, but the Battle turn'd, and the Christians were totaly routed. Ʋladislaus kill'd, Huniades fled, Julian the Cardinal, the Bishop of Veradiun, and the Bishop of Agria, with most of the Clergy, all slain, who were the only Authors of that unjust War: And for all the King of Hungaria broke the League, and Invaded Amurath, yet he, by reason of his Oath, resigned his Kingdom up to his Son, of which you may see more at Large in the Reign of Amurath Pag. 277. FINIS.
