K255 E346_14 99861601 113739
portrait of King Charles CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c.
A SERMON Preached before the COMMISSIONERS of both KINGDOMES, The same day they delivered THE PROPOSITIONS TO The Kings Maiesty, FOR A Safe and well-grounded PEACE. By SAMUEL KEM, Batchelour in Divinity. Esther 1.9. And he sent the Letters unto all the Jewes, to the hun∣dred twenty and seven provinces of the kingdome of Ahasuerus, with the words of PEACE and TRUTH. 2 Chron. 29.15. And they gathered their BRETHREN, and san∣ctified themselves, and came according to the Commandement of the KING. 2 Sam. 19.14. —All the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man—sent this word unto the KING, Returne. 1 Sam. 20, 21. Then come thou, for there is PEACE to thee, and no hurt, as the Lord liveth. LONDON, Printed for R. Austin. 1646.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, The Commissioners of the Lords and Commons of the Parliament of England, assembled at Westminster: AND The Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, sent with the Propositions to His Majestie. Right honourable Lords and Gentlemen, I Speake my experience, that if a Souldier succeed well upon his first Charge, he is not to be with∣held from a second Adventure: You favoured this Sermon so much, when Preached; that I am confident you will not reject it Printed; nor this my Dedicatory, although I begin not after the common stamp of Dedication, with some hoary or gray-headed
Apophthegme, or some strained sentence out of Tully; I professe my selfe a Souldier, during this Cause, as well as a Schollar, and therefore must crave leave, to speake in such language as affectio∣nate duty can best expresse it self by the tongue. I confesse, when I meditate the height of your noble Spirits, and withall the flatnesse of my poore abilities, as I present this in love, so with much fear, lest my endeavours convert into a vapour ere they can reach the height of your merit: stoop but so low as to cherish them, and it shall ever add to your Honour. The ancient and moderne cu∣stome of Dedication of Bookes to the hands of Eminency, was, and is, either to have them powerfully protected, or in affection, as devoted; or to appeare gratefull for benefits received; all these moved me to hover under your wings; being confident, that you that under God protected me out of the jawes of the Lyons, and Beares, will also protect me from the greatest Philistims: And therefore have I presumed to prefix your names, it being none of the smallest hazards I have run, to oppose this Sermon to the worlds view, whereby I expect to be charged againe and againe; and it would conclude me guilty of Poultranisme, to feare the Sciopii and Pacientii here, when not the Zolimi at Oxford: I well know carping curiosity will have its lash to me too. Aelian reports, when Diogenes saw certaine Rod an Gallants gorgeously attyred, he laughed, saying, Hic nihil est praeter Fastum: And after, seeing certaine Laconians in sordid apparell, Et hic alius Fastus est, said he. These poore-clad lines (I feare) will not passe without envy, and without the censure of pride and ambition; how ever, whilst you keep the Front, I fear no charge, neither Oxfords sword, nor any other two-edged sword of the tongue; and the lesse, because (I perceive) opinions and censures are as various as the Arguments on which they discourse: Calumny and squint-ey'd detraction violently charging against Christian charity and
judgement in these times. And to save them a labour, eare not to let them know, although that many a storm and tempest hath beat against me, yet God hath not suffered me to be cast down; and what∣ever they shall say, (with Apollonius) I resolve, they may trouble themselves, but I will not be troubled at whatsoever the one shall say, or the other do. I have long before this time Dedicated my life in this Cause to God, in the Parliaments Service; any thing lesse then the losse of it I can easily endure: It must be a long feast to find a dish for every appetite, and many in these times will find faults, that will not mend one: I never indeed intended the pub∣lishing this Sermon before the preaching of it, nor could ever gain time to refine it since; only importunity of some friends, and the mis-report that I heard it had to his Majesty, made me pre∣sume (with your Favour) to show the world the Truth, and im∣plore your Honours to be Judges of it. My first thoughts, when I meditated this subject, were onely to breath into your unfurled sayles, such a blast as might give you the advantage to make a saving voyage to your selves, if not, a more prosperous voyage for the whole Church of God; importu∣nate prayer, being the fairest wind, can blow in the heavens to carry the Church of God to her safe Prt. And as David, rescu∣ing his wives, and recovering his goods from the Enemy, was ne∣ver a whit the lesse honour to him, because a young man made way for the discovery; so it being your happinesse to be imploy'd in this service so becoming nobility, or any of the sonnes of men, to seek peace for the Church of God, in which Gods blessing Mat. 5. attends you, is it any diminution to your honour, that I, the meanest of my brethren, pointed you the way to prosper: It being the constant prayer of my soule daily, that you may reape the fruits of those so brave and gallantly mannaged labours:
yea I hourely expect and look out for a return of those adventures from heaven; even when God shall speake by His Majesty (to his three Kingdomes) Peace, which is the hearty prayer, (as also for all your honours, that you may still do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem) of him who is Yours devoted, even by word and deed to the losse of his utmost drop of blood, To serve you, for JESUS CHRIST, Samuel Kem.
A SERMON PREACHED before the Commissioners of both Kingdomes at the Delivery of the PROPOSITIONS to the KING, UPON ESTHER Chap. 4. Vers. 16. Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three dayes, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise, and so I will go in unto the King, which it not according to the Law; and if I perish, I perish. OUr new Practises against the Church pro∣ceed from old Principles, and what an Oce∣an of Saints blood hath streamed out from the fountain of Cains malice; as it there were a  project to deluge that with blood, which God preserved from water, (his righteous family) the Scriptures plentifully demon∣strate: but with this observable hint of refreshing, That
the Red Sea, hath in the end ever devoured the devourers; and (although by division) shrunck up it self into straits, to spare a passage to the Church of God, for its deliverance: So that the Church of God is not now to learn to be con∣tent to be let blood; it may in probability prove good for it to be so afflicted; this is not the first plot intended against it for utter extirpation; nor you the first messengers called forth by Providence to speak unto Majesty for its preser∣vation; cherish then, and augment that courage that I seem to be seated in your aspects, most noble Patriots, although invironed with Enemies, invellopt with difficulties, to sense no probability to escape revilings; nor possibility to return prevailing. You have a sufficient call, you have a good and all sufficient God, a just Cause, unjust Enemies; many potent prayers, all impotent curses, a promise of a blessing, a president of good successe in this Book: put on resolution, and use importunate prayer as a preparation, so go in to the King, if ye perish, ye perish. May it please you now, as an Introduction to my Text, to premise with me these particulars. 1 The utter extirpation of the Church of God plotted; and, if you observe it, this plot hath its rise from self ends, Esther 3.5, 6. When Haman saw Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was he full of wrath, he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai, wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole Kingdome. 2. The Kings humour observed, a decree for the execu∣tion demanded, and an advance of monies promised, Verse 8, & 9. And Human said to the King, There is a certain people scatered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the pro∣vinces of thy Kingdome, and their Laws are divers from all peo∣ple, neither keep they the Kings Law; therefore it is not for the
Kings profit to suffer them: if it please the King let it be writ∣ten that they be destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talnts of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the businesse, to bring it into the Kings Treasuries. 3. The request obtained, Regina pecunia quid non? and the manageing of the businesse solely to Haman committed Vers. 11, 12, 13. And the King said to Haman, the silver is gi∣ven to thee, and the people also, to do with them as seemeth good to thee, &c. Then were all the kings Scribes called, and there was written according to all that Haman had commanded unto the Kings Lievtenants, and to the Governours that were over e∣very Province, and to the Rulers of every People, of every Pro∣vince, according to the writing thereof; and to every people after their language in the name of the King was it written, and sea∣led with the Kings Ring: and the letters were sent by Posts in∣to all the Kings Provinces, to destroy, and to kill, and to cause to perish all the Iews, both young and old, little children and women in one day. 4 The activity of the Churches Enemies, for the speedy execution of this plot observed, Vers. 15. The Post went out, being hastned by the Kings commandement. 5. A double effect of this plot deted the Court and Enemies of the Church are merry, and their spirits elevated They sit down to drink: The Church of God is perplexed, Vers. 6. The City Shushan was perplexed. 6. Mordecai's Personall sense of this misery, he is more eminently affected, Chap. 4. Vers. 1. Perceiving what was done, he rent his cloathes, and put on sackcloath and ashes, and went out into the City, and cryed with a loud and bitter cry, &c. 7 The Nationall sense of this calamity, Vers. 3. And in every Province where the decree came, there was great mourn∣ing, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing, and many lay in sackcloath and ashes.
8. The plot to Esther, discovered by her maids, Vers. 4. and by Mordicai confirmed, Vers. 7. 9 Some difficulties by sense proposed, Vers. 10, & 12. and by Mordecai answered. Vers. 13, & 14. and by her faith mastered; she puts on an heroick resolution, and returns Mordecai my Text for a concluding answer: Go, gather to∣gether all the Jews in Shushan, and fast ye for me, &c. In the words you have, The Messengers order for prepa∣ration, Nationall and Personall; for her good successe in undertaking that great action: Go, gather together. In which preparation you have two particulars. 1 The suitablenesse of the duty to the Churches diffi∣culty, or her prescribing them suitable duty to so great a difficulty. The Church is in a great strait, decreed to death; a decree also that none shall dare to aproach the Kings pre∣sence uncalled; much lesse to be a petitioner for life, to re∣verse a decree, Vers. 11. 2 Proportionable duty: Fast, pray: nay fast all; pray one and all: nay do this exactly, strictly, neither eat nor drink; nay do it importunately, ply the work, ply it night and day. The Action, these two particulars. 1 The Messengers sensiblenesse of the Churches misery, and her own difficulty, I also and my maidens will fast like∣wise. She doth not put upon others what she will not pra∣ctise her selfe; nor trust to others duties alone, as a meanes for her security; no, I also: if the Church be in misery, she will as a member put her self on exact duty. 2 The Messengers subsequent independing heroick self-denying resolution: So will I go in to the King, If I perish, I perish. The words are without difficulty; onely thus farre per∣mit
me, that I may condescend to every mans capacity. 1. The Jews were then the people of Gods love, his he∣ritage, his dear friends; against these is the decree sealed for death; for these the pit is digged, the net spread, the sword sharpened: these thus designed for death, must fast and pray heartily for the Messengers acceptance, as the onely proba∣ble means for their deliverance. 2. In Shushan, that was indeed the winter-Palace of the Kings of Persia; but to it was adjoyned a City, which was denominated so from it: Why, the Jews at the Court may think to escape (as Mordecai intimates Verse 11.) by the Kings favour; they in the City to be secure, as within Lines of Communication: No, all must to the work for the Churches deliverance. 3. Fast ye for me. Some read it, Orate prome: The O∣riginall hath it, Jejunate supra me: Arm me with your pray∣ers and Fasting, against the strength of malice, and power of a decree: Jejunium pro suffragio apud summum Deum petit. 4 So will I go in to the King: Magna fiducia Reginae in je∣junio monstratur, magnaque charitas in vitam populi. 5 If I perish, I perish: She submits to God, imbracing her own death, rather then daring to neglect the use of the means for the Churches safety; as undervaluing, trampling on, and contemning that life, that may out-live the prospe∣rity of the Church of God. There are streaming from these fountaines many eminent truths: time and your weighty occasions prohibit me to adventure upon all: I shall therefore at this present onely summon some of them to appear, and passe them by with observation: one I shall insist on for your present prepara∣tion unto the great work of this day.
First, from the first branch of the order, Go gather together all the Jews, you may observe, That unity in duty is a sweet preparation to obtain mer∣cy for the Church of God in difficulty. Indeed it is the strength of duty, and that which adaps us for mercy, Psal. 134. Verse 1, 2, 3. Behold how good for brethren to dwell together so to fast, to pray together: I, there the Lord com∣mands his blessing, even life for evermore: Act. 2.1. They were all with one accord in one place: and in the fourth Verse, Then they were all filled with the holy Ghost: Indeed there is nothing doth so unfit us for mercy, as our divisions; it is the Basis of the Churches ruines, that we cannot be got to go together unto the throne of grace for mercy in this our time of need. Unity it is the Portall at which prayer enters every supplicated mercy: When the Church is thus toge∣ther, their desires (like Peter, Act, 12.12.) waite, and knock to enter, break through all barres, shackles, bolts, difficul∣ties; to speak to them the prevalency of such Saint-like per∣formances. It is observable, whilst there was division be∣twixt Abraham and Lot, God never appeared, Gen. 13.14. &c. Truely, it is in this case with duty, as with the child in the womb, untill all the parts are rightly framed and com∣posed, the soul quickens not: nor will any mercy cordially smile on us, untill we are knit together in love: indeed our Saviour prohibits our service to God; untill we are at peace with one another; nothing like this hinders the prosperity of Gods family, or blocks up the passage for the Churches de∣liverance: and I am confident, nothing so much as this sinks your spirits, in the expectation of present successe in this dayes imployment: O what an inexpressible evill is it, that all the Church of God cannot be got together for your good successe in this businesse for peace, whilst we are all now ga∣thered
together (I hope all of one minde) with an importu∣nity to implore it, and God to soften the Kings heart to in∣cline to it. I wish heartily there be not some in this King∣dome, professing the same faith, baptized with the same Baptisme, praying God to harden the Kings heart against it, or for self-ends perswading him might and main to refuse the Propositions conducing to it: But however, let us that are together, with one accord pray, and I hope the prayers of the Saints are at this time active for a blessing upon your atchievements this day. And so I shall hold out to your view a second truth wrapt up in the Text: Observation . Representative Persons interposing for the Church in a strait, requires representative prayes. They are nationall men, and will need nationall assistance. A King∣domes strength is necessary for those that stand for a King∣domes wealth. If Esther personate the Jews to the King for salvation, the Jews must present Esthers condition to the King of Kings for preservation. All the Churches Worthies are worthy of the Churches best duties; if Paul be labouring for the Church, and adventuring for it, he had need have a stock of prayers going in all the Churches for himself. The 3. Observation (And neither eat or drink three dayes or nights together) is this; That in cases of great difficulty there is a pressing neces∣sity for the speedy and exact performance of importunate duty: A bleeding Church expects a speedy and speeding Prayer: Marriners in great stormes are very yare and take double pains: Souldiers neer a quartering enemy are up∣on serious and constant duty: then night and day at it: life is on it, as we proverbially expresse it. Souldiers grutch not limbs or lives for victory, nor must we think much of
praying and fasting; againe and againe, for a Nationall mercy: Indeed wee must never give over till wee speed; Finis operationis est opus: the end of the worke is the work it selfe. Truly it will be to little purpose for you to goe to the King, if you go not first to God, to move the Kings heart. For, it is the master-peece of his own hand to worke the heart of Princes that way as shall make most for his glory, and the accomplishing his fore-thought designes touching his Churches good, and the Kingdomes of the heart; and when hell hath plotted a designe, and found out fit instruments to suggest it to Princes; nay when cor∣ruption hath over-power'd convicting light, and be mid∣nighted the soule, that it consenteth to be guided, and fol∣lowes every ignis fatuus, or other fading meteor, nay som∣time forsaking the more eminent lights of heaven, doating on very glow-wormes, but indeed composures of corrup∣tion, and to follow what is suggested to it, and is in it self resolved to act what plotted; yet then, even then, God can alter: And what God can do for any peoples good, impor∣tunate prayer, exactly performed, may prevaile with him to do for us his people, and his Churches good. Truly, such Prayer, with Fasting; hath been of old former Messengers Preparation upon the undertaking any great and weighty action: S. Iames adviseth us before we put forth our resolves to say, if God will, I will do this or that, Iames 4.15. It is good upon every undertaking to aske Gods leave, and to consult him, to carrie him, or somthing of him with us, to effect that which we cannot promise our selves; in the 24 of Gen. 12. Abraham dispatcheth his servant upon a message of concernment; and it was concerning the winning, and perswading of a heart, as appeareth Ver. 51. It may be the wo∣man will not be willing to follow me, &c. saith his Messenger;
so that it was dubious, whether her heart might, or might not incline to his Message: Well, what course doth he take? Vers. 12. by way of Preparation, knowing it was in Gods power, to incline it, he seeks God. And he said, O Lord God, of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day: And the successe you may read in the succeeding Verses. To come a little nearer to our purpose: Esau had an old grudge against his brother Jacob, the messe of Pottage was not yet digested, but boyled the second time in his stomack, and the gaining his Fathers blessing was laid to heart, and what he secretly thought in his heart before, when the dayes of his Fathers mourning were come he begins to act now; and arrayes foure hundred men to go against his bro∣ther upon the receit of this intelligence, Jacob feareth greatly, Gen. 22.7. Nay, the Text saith, He was distressed. Well, he cannot avoid a meeting; nor can he expect lesse then ruine, there is no probability to shun his Army, or to sense, possibility to escape his fury: Well, what course takes he? Truly, he goes to God in Prayer: to change his heart, he knew that it was in the Lords power, and although sen∣sible of his unworthinesse and insufficiency, he chooseth ra∣ther first to wrastle with a good God indeed, whom he might overcome and prevaile with to change his brothers heart, then meerly to trust to his own policies or complements; or any other way to win upon him. This is the strength of all other means he useth to pacifie his brother: and vers. 28. you see the excellent consequence of his Prayer. As a Prince hast thou power with God and men, and hast prevailed. And I pray observe this for a truth. That powerfull men with God, are ever prevailing men with Man? If we can but get strengh enough to wrastle with God, let us trust God to wrastle with the hearts of men, 1 Kings 18.37. yea the greatest Princes: Oh had not this
Nation laboured under the malignant distempers of sinne; nay, did not the Covenant-Servants of God, such as passe for his own children, lie dangerously weak under sad divi∣sions; yea so that the whole body is out of joynt, and then what strength? we might have prevailed for the Kings heart it being in Gods hand, before this day. For why might not we (if rightly quallified) obtaine a heart out of our hands, and in the Lords hand, for the good of a Nation? nay, three bleeding Nations? as well as he, for himself and his family: Gen. 33.4. you have an incouraging president; where killing is come to kissing, shedding of blood, to shed∣dig of tears: They both wept: The charging each other is the imbracing each other; It will be an argument against us of Nationall weaknesse, and wickednesse; that one shall doe more then so many with God: And if this be Truth, we have none, more to cry out of, then our selves, for the continuance of our sorrow; may not the Lord say as some∣times to Israel, Perditio tua exte, we may thank our selves; his hand is not shortned that it cannot save, nor his eare hea∣vie that he cannot hear; but our prayers are weak, because our hearts are wicked; that cannot hold out a wrestle with God. Indeed, we act duty, but not proportionable for the Churches necessity; or as cordially sensible of its misery and speedy calamity, not as if we see no way but one for it, or beheld it sentenced to death under a Decree; no, we look most of us, as Eliahs servant, upon the first command, 1 King. 18.4. when misery was on Germany, Ireland, and Scotland, be∣ing often perswaded by the Eliahs of those times to look out what we could see, the return of our hearts was, that we saw nothing: Indeed we laid it not to heart, as any thing. Nay, when at this day commanded to look out, those within Lines of Communication and fenced Garrisons, can see but a
little cloud out of the Sea like a mans hand; we esteeme all the Protestant blood; nay, the Saints blood that hath been shed as nothing; do all the cruelties, Murders, Wound∣ings, Imprisonings, Fireings, Plunderings, Deformings, Reproachings, of the Saints, as yet appear as nothing? How many sighing, groaning, lamentable complaining, sad-hearted good Christians may you see in many parts of this distracted Kingdome, seeking for bread and glad to part with (their former) pleasant things to relieve their families pressing necessities? How doth many a gallant family sit solitary? How many beautifull houses forlorne? Yea, how many are aggravating their misery, by viewing over the re∣cords of their former injoyments? How in many places doth the Enemy magnifie himself against God and his peo∣ple, having possessed, and dispossessed our Congregations, and destroyed the place of the Assembly? How doth the blood of the Church spring forth as wine out of the wine-presse, and lies spilt on the ground: abroad the Sword con∣suming, at home lofty and sad divisions, even the wills of men, like wild horses, renting limb from limb the poore Church of God, the Enemy hearing of this trouble, and be∣ing glad? Nay, in a word, The cause of God in three Kingdomes, crying with them in the 1 Lament. verse 12. Is it nothing to you, O all ye that passe by? Is there any sorrow like to my sorrow? and yet who, with Mordeca, although it be past beyond a Decree, and come to the Ha∣man-like action of cruelty against the Church, before your faces, even at the doores and gates of your Cities, in heart yet saith, Is it any thing? Nay, let me adde something more; Although God be so angry, as to licence his enemies to pull out his own eyes, (for his Church is as dear to him as the apple of his eye:) and he must be incensed highly, when he will permit this: yet who laies this to heart as any thing?
Nay even now, although God hearken, and hear who speak∣eth aright at all, or if, but for a day, and then every man with the day casts off the duty, and returneth with the dog to his vomit, and with the wrinsed sow to wallow in the mire. Had Mordecai lookt thus a squint on the condition of the Jewes, he had never laid it to heart; and if never laid to heart, it had not been communicated to every one that in probability might conveigh it to Esthers eares; and had she slightly entertained it as newes onely, it had never come to the hazzarding of her life in the Churches cause, or prescri∣bing an order for so serious preparation for the Churches preservation. Will you license me to advise you? I know you will: you called me to that purpose to this duty this day: Why then, as the Prophet, 1 King. 10. Prepare your Chariots: so you, and (I wish) the whole Church of God their hearts, and improve you all your interests, (noble Patriots of the Cause of God) and let them improve theirs, by propor∣tionable and importunate duty, for successe this day suitable to the Churches necessity and misery. Esa. 22.4. you have the story of the invading the Land of Jewrie by the Persi∣ans, by reason whereof the Church of God, and the King∣dome were like to be brought into a sad condition; it was like to be a day of trouble, and treading downe, and of per∣plexity by the Lord; breaking downe walls, and breaches seen in the City of David mark in the 4. Vers. what the Pro∣phet puts immediately in practice to divert it. Therefore said I, look away from me; mind me not of any thing else, I have nothing else comparatively to look after, this is the bu∣sinesse of the time: what? I will weep bitterly: or, as the O∣riginall hath it, I will be bitter in weeping: Labour not to com∣fort me, because of the spoyling of the daughter of my people: Jer. 8, 21, 22. For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt: I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me, &c.
i. grief to an extasie hath seized on me, that I am not my self: the hurt of the Church is his hurt: I, then he seeks proportionably a remedy. Moses, when God is angry with the people, he fals sensibly to the work: and being to wra∣stle out reconciliation, and a diversion of Gods expresse re∣solution against them, he is at it 40. dayes and nights toge∣ther. So againe upon another provocation, Numb. 14.11. How long will this people provoke me? Ver. 12. I will smite them with the Pestilence, and disinherit them: and now God (if Moses had any self-ends or aimes) proposeth something to take him off, and stop his mouth, for he promiseth to make him a multiplying Nation: (Indeed self-aiming men, that shall look to their own ends; will never stand the Church in a strait in any stead;) No, he saw the people threatned to ruine: See how Moses argues, and wrastles with God, Vers. 3.14 15, 16. and then closeth, and gaines upon God by Prayer, giving as it were the other hug in this wra∣stle, in the 17, 18, 89. Verses Pardon I beseech thee the iniqui∣ty of the people: See Vers. 20. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word, See 1 Nehemiah 2, 3, 4. I have loved you, saith the Lord, &c. Acts 27. Paul perceiving the voyage would be exceeding dangerous to those in the Ship, Vers. 21. the Text saith, he used long abstinence: you have our Saviour Christ also for an example; when he be∣held the contraction of his Fathers brow, wrinkled up with full pleats of displeasure, and pure wrath against our souls, and a Decree against us, to suffer hell and damnation; and none could or durst enter, to endeavour a reverse, when he beheld the plot against us, and our precious immortall souls undone for ever, and liable to Satans fury; he immediately disrobes himself of glory, and immantles himself with the rags and badges of poverty, and enters into the veile of flesh, and then and there plies it night and day, contesting
with men and Devils; nay wrastles with God, with the deep groans of his spirit; sweats at this work water and bloud, and never quit his free undertaking untill he sweetly breathed it out to us; that the great businesse of his Church was done, and that they were delivered from all their enemies with an It is finished. Precious and high-prized mercies must cost us some labor; we must not look to carry home that which all the treasure in the Land cannot purchase, for nothing: your words, or the Propositions you present, may not take with the Kings heart; but your suitable performances (by way of prepara∣tion to the Churches present misery) to God, may take with God; and God can take his heart, and dispose of it as plea∣seth him, Ezra. 1.1. The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to build his house. There are many Arguments, and perswading Reasons, as sinewes to strengthen the Truth proved by fore-mentioned Scriptures, and Examples. First, Why exact and proportionable duty to the Chur∣ches misery is required of al those that are interested in seek∣ing its delivery. 1. Argument. That we may make it appear, we are cor∣dially sensible of its condition; that we beleeve indeed it is as miserable as it showes for; and that God is as angry as he seems to be with the Kingdome, that it complaines not without a cause; we can never yerne in our bowels with compassion to those (though never so neerly related to us) who we beleeve not be in passion and affliction. The sense of the Churches mourning in misery must precede in our hearts our groaning for mercy; the tender hearted mother then and not before, then makes it her work (all things set apart) to send for a Physitian, and to Physick and tend her sick child, when shee hath laid to heart the simptomes of its disease,
and considered the consequences of it. When we imagine slight hurts, we afford them slight healings, like those 8. Jer. 11. but when laid to heart, then, Oh! Is there no Balm in Gilead, no Physitian there? Jer. 9.1. Oh! that my head were waters, and mine eyes fountains of tears, that I may weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people, &c. It was an old fault which the Prophet complained of, that no man laies to heart the miseries of the Church. 2. Argument. That we may make it appear, that we set a high estimate on the Churches safety, that we intend to gaine it whatever it cost; that we think not much, nor re∣pine, no not any layings out for it: truly we have bid lit∣tle of nothing, nationally, or personally, for this great mercy as yet. Object. Why have we not freely offered our superfluous riches; have we not cashiered our vain pleasures? have not many hazzarded the displeasures of their eminent friends, procured to themselves many enemies, ventured their lives; nay have we not made many prayers? observed many Fasts and is this nothing? Sol. Truly, as the case may stand, it may be worse then doing nothings and God may say to us as to those that pro∣fessed to be his people, Esa. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices: here you hear of many sacri∣fices, much cost (God knowes) to little purpose of no pur∣pose: we bid very much, I confesse, for mercy; but we would have God take our publike faith for it; we would still have God take our promises for it, when he expects per∣formances for it; he is so well acquainted with our back∣slidings, that he is unwilling to trust us any more: It's true, we come often to cheapen mercy, it may be once or twice a moneth, publikely or privately, for the Church in misery, and for a day hold down our hearts like a bull-rush, as if we
were undone if we had it not; but when the price is set at a word, and God fallen as low as he can to save by it, to his glory, and the honour of his justice. For the most part the most men are apt to flink away, or to promise to come a∣gain, or the like. What is it to bid, and bid for a rich jewell again and again, yea a thousand times over; if we under-bid for it; surely it argues a slighting of the jewel, & must needs be a great provocation to the Merchant: God had as live you bid nothing, as all you have bidden or abidden, if you come not up to his price; wht's that? why it is expressed and set downe, Esa. 1.16, 17. Wash ye, make you cleane, put a∣way the evill of your doings &c. also Isa. 58.3. The Jewes question God; why though they bid faire for mercy, they cannot have it: Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest not? &c. God gives them accompt in the last words of the third and fourth Verses; Behold in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, ye fast for strife and debate, &c. wherefore he can∣not part with it at that rate, & sets down what he resolves to have, Vers. 6, 7, 8. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickednesse, to deale thy bread to the hungry. &c. you must bid as the Nenevites did, Ionah 3.7, 8. Let nei∣ther man nor beast, herd or flock tast any thing, let them not feed nor drink water, but let them cry mightily unto God, let them turne everyone from his evill way, &c. Or as the people in Joel 1.13, 14. God will not part with delive∣rance and mercy for his Church till we depart from our sin: Hosea 14.3. Take away all iniquity and receive us graci∣ously. The sacraficing our dearest sinnes, will instantly bring in the greatest mercies for the Church: We may tru∣ly say of the Land as David of himself, Psalm 28.3. There is no rest in my bones because of sinne: Lay a man upon ne∣ver so many soft Down beds, if the disease be in the bones the paines continue; the way to make him rest, is to take
the cause of the paine out of his bones. You may lay the Church at this day, and the Kingdomes on the soft downe-bed of Gods promises; on the downe-bed of Councells, Armies, Propositions for Peace, Fastings, Prayings; The way to give the Land rest, is to render and make such Pro∣positions to God as may get sin out of the heart, and pardon∣ed, and God reconciled. To conclude this Reason, I may truly say, we trouble our selves, and bid much, but this one thing is necessary. 3. Argument. Because the Lord takes no notice of easie performances or lazie prayers. He expects if the Church be in necessity, and well sensible of it, that we should use impor∣tunity; It becoms His Majesty to be so sought unto for such like mercies, Ezek. 36. Vers. 37. I will yet for this he inquired after saith the Lord, &c. A man that will have his Vine∣yard to thrive and be fruitfull, must labour and worke in it; and a man that will have his prayer thrive, must labour in prayer, it must be his daily Trade, 2 Cor. 1.11. You also la∣bouring for us in prayers: God will never answer a lazie beg∣ging Christian, we must not be reporters of the Churches necessities, but petitioners: Yea, petitioners with a kind of holy impudency, not to be put off with privitive silence, or positive deniall. Nay, although God seem to affront us for the present, yet must we give God no rest, no not hold our peace untill he make his Church the praise of the whole earth. Our labouring in prayers will soonest bring the Church to rest from calamities. You never found any rich mercy obtained by lazie duty; easie & seldom performances produce slow remedies; a strait∣ned Church cals for an active and inlarged heart. And mark it, even when the Church prayes with most ease, it reaps the least profit, or comfort: when prayer is a pennance or irksome exercise to us, as in 1. Malachy, many say, what a
wearinesse it is, and snuffe at it, it is never an acceptable ser∣vice for us. But he that is laborious and active in duty, can∣not long be passive under misery: labouring in prayer is that which puts God upon expedition: he cannot long de∣lay us, or deny us, if we industriously ply the worke of Prayer. And as a remedie to cure this malady in prayer, (by the way) take this Recipe: wouldst thou amend thy easie praying, repent of thy active sinning? You shall never shew me a man that is active and laborious in sinning, but I will show you the man that is, and must of necessity be easie and lazie-hearted in praying. 4. Argument. Because proportionable duty hath Gods promise intailed upon it, James 5.16. The prayer of the righte∣ous availeth much, if it be fervent; ever marke this, the more fervency, the more prevalency; Dauid in Psal. 14.1 desi∣reth that his prayer may come up before the Lord as in∣cense, and you know, incense never went up without fire. Prayers of words are to our and the Churches necessities, and against our Enemy, as Powder without Ball, which may make a great noise, and terrifie for a time, but hurts them not, nor helps us. Of all the Elements the Natural∣lists observe, fire gets neerest to heaven; and of all means, a zealous fervent prayer gets neerest to the God of heaven: Our earthie cold-hearted prayers are like a Bell, which whilst it lyeth on the ground, can make no musick; but when steepled, then it sounds loud: cold or luke-warme wa∣ter can never fetch out the blood, or rawnesse of flesh, it must have fire put to it to make it fit for nourishment: cold prayers can never fetch out the corruption and scum of our filthy hearts: no, a heavenly fire must prepare our prayers for Gods digestion. 5. Argument. In regard of the Churches mercies and deliverances, that we stand in need of; mercy appeareth
best when by a proportionable duty we blazon out our mi∣serie: it is a disparagement to Nationall mercy, to come at the summons of halfe-duty, or duty performed by halves: raggs and torne pieces of duty are unbecoming mercy, de∣scending from majesty: Every good and perfect gift, saith S. James, comes from the Father of lights: and if upon easie requests, we would soon slight them: if we could get mer∣cy easily, we would forget it as easily: who prodigall away their estates sooner then they that never sweat to gaine a penny of it? that penny that is got with most labour and trudging for, is not so usually rioted away in excesse, but hoarded up: That Samuel that Hanna can with difficulty wrastle out of Gods hand, shall be dedicated to his service, all the daies of his life: the things that cost us deare, we e∣ver prize most; those Colours we take with hazard of life are charily laid up as Trophies of honour: truly it much advanceth friendship, when it appeares in necessity: and it doeth as much heighten mercy, when we gaine it in our faintings for it: when in the Mount God is seen, hee can rarely be forgot. 6. Argument. Because the heart of the King is in the Lords hand, and he is able to turne it which way soever pleaseth him; every way of a man is right in his own eyes, but the Lord ordereth the heart: Prov. 21.1, 2. yea more for your encouragemen, to performe exactly Proportiona∣ble duty: the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Prov. 16.19, 21. There are many devices in mans heart, neverthelesse the counsell of the Lord that shall stand. Job 33.12. God is greater then man, and ordereth him at pleasure; Psal. 33.10. The Lord bringeth the counsell of Princes to nought, he maketh the devices of the people, of none effect. Isaiah 46.11. My counsell shall stand and I will performe all my pleasure, &c. Ver. 12. Hearken unto me you stout-hearted that are far from righte∣ousnesse.
I hold out all these Scriptures to you as lights, to show where the Kings heart is, and who hath the ordering of it, it is out of his owne hands; a decree sealed by the King is nothing to oblige Ahashuerosh, if God wil have it reversed concerning his people. Nay, (although it appeare so) it is not in Hamans hand to dispose on; nay, with comfort I dare speake it, the Kings heart is not in Digbys or Hydes, or any other such Haman-like hands in the world; no, it is in the Lords hands. God altered the heart of Abimelech, Gen. 20 Laban thought his heart to be in his owne hand, to act a∣gainst Iacob, & he pursued after him seven dayes, Gen. 31.23. but read the 24. Vers. God commands him to speake to Iacob nothing but good, and to enter into Covenant, and to blesse them: Balak thought it in the power of his heart to curse the people, Numb. 22. ult. sends to Balaam a Sorcerer, to this purpose, Balaams heart is now in his owne power: In the 8. Verse, Lodge here, and I will bring you word againe as the Lord shall speake unto me: First, read what followes Verse 12. and Verse 24. Numb. 13. There is no sorcery a∣gainst Iacob, See Esay 8. Verse 9, 10, 11. It is not to be held counsells, Saul had spent much time in the pursuit of David, and his heart was set for evill against him, and yet God up∣on their meeting disposeth of his heart and tongue to blesse him: read 1 Sam. 26.25. Princes hearts have been, nay, they still are there you see; it is but improving of proporti∣onable, Nationall, and Personall interests, and strength, with our God in duty; and without all question we may gaine this eminent mercy, and have his heart with us be∣fore his person; who thinks on, or grudgeth his hazardous voyage to the Indies, when he considereth a probability of getting gold, pearles, and diamonds; we never think of the hardships of warfare, and the difficultie of duties, when we are bent upon honour: and were we resolved for Nationall
mercy, and such a blessing, as the Kings heart to subscribe to the just desires of all his Kingdomes, we should not stick at any duty: if we were but a little love-sick of mercy, it would break a little more out of our lips. And thus, having given you reasons for this truth, I shall supplicate you for a little patience, whiles I apply it. Use 1. For information of us; how much they are to blame that do not at this day supply the lamentable implo∣ring necessities of the Church of God in both Kingdomes, but are extreme short in duty, if they consider the length, heighth, depth, and bredth of their misery: little water will not quench or decrease a great fire, no rather increase the flame: the taking away a little bloud will not cure the Calenture; the body must in such a case be brought low; the leaving of a few grosse sins will not cure the Churches evill: nor the simple performance of monethly duties: no, the Church of God is brought low, but our hearts are not brought low: no, they must (if ever we will do good on it) be brought much lower yet. 2 Such as consider not at all, or take no notice, or looke a squint on the Churches misery: Amos 6.1. Woe to those that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountains of Samaria, that put farre from them the evill of the Nation, and lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves on couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the stall: And so Ver. 5, 6. That chant to the sound of the Viole, and invent to them∣selves instruments of musick, That drink wine in bowles, and annoint themselves with the chiefe oyntment; but they are not grieved for the affliction of Ioseph. How many in the King∣dome, keeping the Churches fasting dayes as feasting days; instead of neither eating nor drinking day nor night, drink (if not eat) day and night. 3. Such as delay the answering the Churches necessity in,
misery, by performance of proportionable dutie, like Solo∣mons sluggard: A little more sleep, a little more slumber, and a little more folding of the hands: and so misery eats in like a gangrene: it is an old saying, Quod cito fit, bis fit: An op∣prtune remedy is a double curtesie: he that helps at a pinch helps to purpose: he that cryeth spare the child when the stripes are given, gives little case, gets little thanks. O that we would know what belongs to the Churches peace (Luk. 19.41.) in this our day, before these recovering mercies are hid from our eyes: he speaks too late to the Judge for a re∣prieve, when the ladder is turned: It may be God will now heare and grant, to morrow he will not. In Cant. 2. the Church that drowsily neglected her safety, after, in the third Chapter seeks it night and day, but found it not: It is good stepping into the poole upon the motion of the waters: if you misse your wind, you may lose your voyage: the sea∣son hath pantings and swounding fits already; take heed it go not away in one of these fits. Fourthly, they also are much to blame, who proportion their duties to the measure of their own pressing necessities, and so are injurious to the cause of the Church of God: Jeremy was not hurt for the hurt of himself, but the daugh∣ter of his people: Many are praying and fasting for their owne interests; no, Esther thinkes not of her self, but her people: so it must not be thy life, or my life, or thine, or my goods, estate, children, &c. or thy personall suffering that must affect thee, and afflict thee, but the sufferings of all the members of Jesus Christ: In all their afflictions thou must be afflicted, and for them all thou hast must be hazarded. And now right honourable, and well-beloved, suffer me to come to you in a word of Exhortation with some few Motives, and I shall conclude all with supplications for God to guide your hearts to such personall preparations,
that you may this day find favour in the sight of God and the King, and return (at least) with hopes of Peace, or some small branch, to show the waters are abated, and that God in due time will cause the Arke, which is the Church of God, to rest safe upon the mountaines of hope. 2. Use of Exhortation: That by way of preparation for your addresse to His Majestie, for the Churches preservati∣on, you, and the Church of God, would learn and practice that lesson, that you may be prayerfull, and powerfull. You see Esthers practice for her distressed people: Nay, you see the three Kingdomes, like that man that fell among theeves, wounded and bleeding to death: Oh be not like the hard-hearted Priests and Levites, that minded more the market then their neighbours miserie! But put on the good Sama∣ritans compassion, and go and do likewise; let your bowels yerne towards the poore, wounded, lacerated, halfe-dead Kingdomes; looke out for oyle betimes to poure into the deepe wounds of it; O apply such plaisters, as may cat out the putrifying cores; and if yet you cannot heale, yet keep open and sweat the wounds of the Church of God. I know you are men of skill, and know how to doe it; you indeed, with those Honourable Houses that sent you, under God, are the Physitians must doe it: It is you that must heale up the wounds, make up the breaches that must bring backe God to his people, and fetch the Kings heart to his God, and your selves, and his people. And I heartily pray there may be found no Mountebanks amongst you, who are more af∣fected wh the goods of the Nation, than the good of the Nation; such who mount the Stage, to vent old drugs by faire bumbasted expressions for wholesome and new Phy∣sick. The Lord give skill also to discover all such (if a∣ny before they too much retard the Churches cure. The Lord make you all men of affections and bowels, to lay to
heart and pitty the Kingdoms wounds. Nay, thirdly, men of diligence, neglecting no opportunity, the losse of time may be the losse of life. Now if ever, pray for good successe; Indeed, the conditi∣on of the three Kingdomes doth not onely require it, but the distressed of the Land expect that you croud thorough all difficulties and carnall reasonings, and by any means re∣present their condition to the Lord in the way of extraordi∣nary duty; I could wish we would at last leave mocking and deluding the poore Church of God, and deale open-heartedly with them, we promise, and professe we will doe any thing for their ease; and yet, more then show, nothing is done to this day, we are like an idle servant, alwayes go∣ing of an arrant, but never goe and do it: For shame, now at last let us lessen & weaken our sins that we may strength∣en our prayers; the life of three Kingdoms is at stake: nay, of the Church of God, for ought you know: pardon my impor∣tunity if I sollicite you to be active by a few Motives, it be∣ing upon life and death of three famous Kingdoms. 1. Motive. Yours, and everie one of our Relations to it, it is the Church of God of which you are fellow-mem∣bers, it is the ship of which you are partowners, in which your lives, nay, the lives of your precious Soules, and all the provisions for your posterities are imbarked. Since the storme began, I confesse, you have rowsed up many a lazie and shorting Jonah, nay, you have cast most of the unne∣cessary lumber, that was more burthensome then serviceable to the ships use, into the Sea; shall I say? nay, som part out of their seas: and yet all is not well, the poor ship drawes much blood yet, swims very deepe in the Red Sea: I be∣seech you rumedgy the ship once more, and if you find any seeds men of Division, S. Paul in the 16. of the Romans 17. intreats you to take notice of them as monsters; and I
have read, it is prodigiously ominous to a ship to be haunted with monsters. Raysing parties in a family, ship or army is a thing of very sad consequence; thirefore the Apostle dares give it under his hand, that God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. 1 Cor. 14.33. Truly it is a sad thing, to see the members of Jesus Christ out of joynt, for Christ falls not off from his members, why should the members fall off from one another? There can be no such reason given, why we should seperate one from ano∣ther, as there can be why Christ might seperate from us: It is the glory of Christs body, when every member is ser∣viceable to  ole in its right place. These are also weighty luggedge; and the Apostle adviseth, such after ad∣monition to be cast out, for these extreamly prevent the ex∣act performance of proportionable duty. Lastly, let every one search his owne Cabine, whether he have not secretly brought no unwarrantable goods a∣board for his own ends, that may make the ship liable to forfeiture; If so, over with them; what a shame is it to any man to forfeit a ship for his owne advantage, or the Church should perish for concealed abhominations, unpardoned sinners are dead men, and dead men are prejudiciall to a ship, and therefore to be cast over; else God will say ere long as to Abimelech,  20.3. Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman thou hast taken, so for the sin you have committed, and are taken in. Why should we joy in any thing, whilst the Chruch may take hurt; the Saints of God have ever been as tender of it as their selves, and preferred its good before all injoyments; If I forget Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its cunning. It was so deare, and went so neere to old Ely (the news of its losse) when the Ark was taken, that it is disputed whether his heart or neck brake first. Wherefore I beseech you, let your relation to it make you now in its misery, to put
forth and hazzard your selves to the utmost for relieving Mercy. Mordecais Motive to Esther was, it was her Nation, its mine to you, they are your Nations, it is your Church, your Families, your Houses, your Estates, your Children, Wives, Selves, Souls, your Gospell, Ordinances, are aim∣ed at; O pray, pray, Fast and pray, cry mightily, all's at stake. 2. Motive. Because such duty, if the Church be fick or Sentenced unto death under a decree: Nay, although with Ezekiah it hath received a message, That it shall dye and not live, yet it is of power to procure God to visit it, and one of his visites is halfe the recovering of it,  8.14. It is some comfort to men, that are labouring under hard under∣takings, that they labour not in vain; be of good courage, and of good comfort, Your labour is not in vaine with the Lord, for his decreed Church to ruine. 3. Motive. It is your last refuge; it is that besides which you have hardly any thing left you. If men have nothing left, or have spent all but their fingers ends, to maintaine them and their families, they had need ply them diligently, and cherish them carefully. If a house stand but on one pil∣lar, it had need oft to be viewed for repaires, and to see that be safe and well founded; prayer is as it were the only Pil∣lar of the Church, it is as the fingers ends, we had need im∣ploy our fingers ends, for our selves, and our fellow-mem∣bers in misery, if we intend a livelihood. 4. Motive. You are all sentenced, and by your Enemies appoynted to dye; I hope no true member of the Church but will speake a word for himselfe. (I confesse our owne guilt might sow up our lips, and we might bee left word∣lesse:) but yet if God offer thee an opportunity, ply him for thy life and the Churches safety with importunity, for if thou speed not this way, thou art undone for ever. Your
life is on it, there is no trifling with life; doe you not know what condemned men do in point of life for pardon? Im∣prove all their friends, all their time, all their skill, all for a pardon, so do you and prosper. 5. Motive. Because by this kinde of duty, if you cannot prevaile with God (and that for causes best known to him∣selfe) for complete redemption out of misery. Yet you shall for a mitigation of it, and for a sanctified use of it, and for strength of grace to undergo it, and there is a great deale of difference in mens sufferings and deaths, all men die, but some men are kil'd by death. It was the saying of a godly man, he did aegrotare vitaliter, so the godly doe mori vitali∣ter, for nothing can arme death to hurt us but sin, otherwise thou art hard, sting-free; we never feare the noise of a Fly, as the humming of a Bee, because it hath no sting. So that this kind of duty, though it cannot keep thee and me from dying by the Sword, it will keep us from dropping into hell; and it is a sweet mercy, for the members of the Church, with Stephen, at their death, to see heaven opened, and to die with the sense of Gods love, though of mans cruell ma∣lice. 6. Motive. Your paines in duty for the Church of God in misery, what ever it be, shall be rewarded to you and yours, unto many generations, this will intitle you to the most sure inheritance, and lasting legacie you can leave be∣hinde you: The Lord never forgets a cup of cold water gi∣ven to quench the Saints thirst in their necessity: how much sooner will it be ingraven upon his heart, the provi∣ding of cordiall precious portions for his languishing peo∣ple: yea God will provide a compensation for you and yours in all your afflictions. Nay, you shall treasure up praises for your selves, and prayers for your surviving families, in the ages that are to
come; and know this also, that God hath riches enough in his Cabinet to make you amends, for all you can do or suffer in this way: Indeed I have beheld you with such alacrity & noble courage expediting your motion, & endeavouring by all meanes night and day to find out him whom your souls love and long after, for the Churches good; that the quaere of the Church in the third of the Canticles, and the third, was (to any whom it might concerne) your first salute, Can you tell us of His Majesty? Yea I have seen so much of your unalterable and prepared patience, digesting the vulgar cur∣ses and affronts; as your diet and content with any thing, that you might do the Church service, that I shall ever blesse God, that he yet accommodates the Church with such Friends, and the King and Kingdoms with such Worthies, who will venture through an host of enemies (if possible) to fetch water to refresh the Church of God; therfore I will spare my self the labour, by any more Motives to put you in mind to go on, who are ready to run, for the Churches and Kingdomes peace. All therefore that now remaines, is but to hold out to your view some other Observations that I had thought to have handled to complete your preparation for this dayes great Action; but in regard you have Summons for the a∣ction, and but a small parcell of time before you attend His Majesty: that I may no way be prejudiciall to your private practice of this preparation, or any other, becoming so great a work; I will briefly shew you the jewels, they are ready; command me to place them in your ears at your pleasure, and my obedience shall eccho to your order. You have heard, 1 That Nationall and Personall preparation is necessary for the undertaking any great action for the Church: Gather all the Jewes in Shushan, I also, &c. 2. That Representative persons interposing for the Church in
a strait, deserve representative prayer. Fast, pray, forme. 3 Extraordinary and great duty is necessary for the Church in great misery. Fast, pray, night and day, eat nor drink, &c. The fourth you would have heard, and I handled, is this: 4 That Messengers of such prayers are ever Messengers of praise: they are thriving, prospering Messengers. 5 That all self must he denied, that the Church may be saved: We must not thinke of our selves and the Church at one time; if we do, we shall never go thorough stitch with the worke, If I perish, I perish: let me assure you this, if you save the Church, you cannot lose your selves: and if the Church perish, juggle and Hocus Pocus it as nearely as you can, your sleights will be found out, and you cannot save your selves: It is no time to feather our nests, and build to lay our young, when so many stroakes have been given at the root of the tree: seek we great things for our selves? for shame no more of it: what do we painting our cabines, when so many leakes in the ship: first stop the leakes, get out the water, there is a time to trim this cabine afterward. Lastly, The means must be used, although our ends are not ob∣tained; If we perish, we perish. For, although God can deli∣ver his Church without us, yet his usuall method hath been to make choice of some Moses, some Ioshuahs, Gideons, Da∣vids, &c. for the preservation of his Church, nay of Je∣sus Christ for the salvation of it. And now give me leave to wind up all with the practice of that duty for you, which I have in this Sermon commended to you: Go, and the Lord be with you; yea the God of heaven blesse you; and cause the Kings face to shine upon you, and make you glad, that he speak nothing but good unto you this day: the Lord avert all whispering flattering Degs, this day; and return you with a Message, of hope, at least, if not of present help, for these three bleeding Kingdomes: yea the Lord make
your interposing for the Church, as prosperous as Abigails, and let the Kings answer be as Davids, 1 Sam. 25.31, 33, 34. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent you this day to meet me: and blessed be your advice, and blessed be ye which have kept me this day from going on to shed any more of my Subjects innocent blood, and from avenging my selfe with my own hand: and that he may receive at your hands what you have brought him, and say unto you, Go up in peace to both my Houses of Parliament, see, I have hearkned to your voyces, and accepted your persons; & give me but favour to add one word in prayer after the Apostles directory, 2 Thes. 3.16. Now the Lord of peace himselfe give you peace alwaies; by all means, yea now peace, and let it be the Lords peace; and the Lords free gift of peace, let it be peace with him; peace with our consciences, peace one with another: such a peace as all things may prosper with you, yea that publike tranquillity and quiet in the Church may follow, that it be not troubled with Schismes and Heresies within, or with∣out by persecuting Tyrants, ruinating all by slaughters and cruell bloody warres, (O let every good heart pray for this peace, for our Hierusalem,) that there may be tranquillity in the State, and free from forraign, and civill uncivill warres, that in the peace thereof we may have peace: that these distracted Kingdomes may be in security, and void of dangers, free from the noise of terrifying alarums, and other dangers. Yea the Lord give us such a peace, that there may be an everlasting Covenant betwixt God and the King, betwixt God, the King, and the people; and let us and the whole Church of God, heartily cry, Amen, Amen, So be it. And so the Lord be with you all, to blesse you in the great worke of this day, and all other your great imploy∣ments, for his glory and the Churches good: To whom with all our hearts be rendred and ascribed, all Honour, Glory, Power, and Praise, now and evermore. Amen. FINIS.
