L1612 E671_21 R207088 99866160 118424
A LETTER Sent from the STATES of HOLLAND TO THE KING of SCOTS, Imploring his Personal Residence and As∣sistance: With their Desires, Propositions, En∣gagement, and Promise; agreed upon at a Gene∣ral Councel held at the Hague, the 23 of this instant July; and presented by the Lord BORETZ. Signed, A. Beauchurst. ALSO, His titular Majesties Answer thereunto; and the great Preparations at the Hague for his Royal Entertainment. With the Declaration of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn touching the same. Published throughout the United Provinces. London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.
A MESSAGE Sent from the States of HOLLAND, To the King of Scots; touching his Resi∣dence in the Low-Countries; with his Answer thereunto; and the great preparations at the Hague for his en∣tertainment. BY an Express from the Hague it is certified, That the Estates of the United Provinces, at a General
Councel, taking into ferious debate and consultati∣on the great and weighty Affaires of their Com∣monwealth, and how the ground-work thereof, might be carryed on with the best advantage, in this Juncture of time against England, after mature deli∣beration, it was terminated, That a Message should be sent to the King of Scots, imploring his Residence at the Hague; to the end, that by a mutual conde∣scension, all possible meanes might be used for the preservation of their Religion, Liberty, Freedom, and Interest. This Message being sent by the Lord Boretz, & presented, a Councel was thereupon called at Saint Germans, where was present divers of the English Nobility, and after serious consultation, mutually assented to leave his titular Majesty, to the fortune of his Resolutions, by reason of his ardent affection to be so far importuning, that he chose rather to communicate a satisfactory Answer to the States, then any wayes to decline or wave so cordial an in∣vitation. In pursuance whereof, great are the preparations at the Hague for solemnizing of his Reception, in tryumph and honour. There is dayly Action between our Scouts, and Trumps; and this morning captain Peacock, with the Tyger, going to relieve the Guard, was set upon
by three Dutch-men, who maintained a gallant dis∣pute, for the space of half an hour; which our Ad∣miral hearing of, dispatched captain Watson and captain Taylor to his assistance, who bearing up so drown the Countrey. The allarum whereof hath so exasperated the spirits of many, that they are ex∣ceedingly inraged, and vowes revenge. We hear that there is a general Rising from 16 to 60; and those that do refuse to to engage, are to die without mercy. They are setting forth another great Fleet of 100 sail, and the Zealanders have cho∣sen a new Admiral. Lieut. Col. John Lilburn hath caused a Declara∣tion to be published at Amsterdam; wherein he states the Case between England, and the United Provinces, in this present Juncture, whereby all true English-men may apparently discern, how much it concerneth them to be unanimous and vigilant up∣on the motion and design of the Netherlanders, who are aspir'd to such a height of Ingratitude, that they would willingly forget what was their condi∣tion when England first undertook their protection and espoused their quarrel with the loss of many thousands English-men, and the expence of eleven hundred thousand pounds sterling. Amongst the rest, there hath been a paper of great concernment dispersed throughout the several Provinces; a Copy whereof followeth:
It is no wholesom counsel to trust ano∣ther with the death of one descended of Royal bloud: he suffers him to live either through pity or policy: If he be compassi∣onate, he knows not how to be cruel; if po∣litick, he thinks the present times will not last long; his thoughts are busied on times to come; and he endeavours more to save himself, then to secure others: And whereas some there are, who say, That to take away a Kingdom, and suffer the King to live, is a cruel piece of charity, wherewith all Ty∣rants whilest they go about to deceive the World, they oft-times deceive themselves. The whole will easily meet together, the parts whereof are left alive. To set the Sta∣tue of Vertue upon a despicable foundation is as much as to build a Colossus of Gold upon feet of dirt: Piety becomes a State, for that his Government is free: Cruelty, a Tyrant, for that he is violent; courtesie be∣fits
the one, force is requisite to the other: neither yet doth that secure him; he is not unlike a belly-god, who if he persist to eat, a surfeit kils him; if he desist, a diet; if the Tyrant bloudy his hands without respect, he dies for being cruel; if otherwise, for see∣ming to be pious. In a word, that hand wil not prosper, that fights under the Banner of Tyranny; and the force and might of all those wilbe mau∣gred that fights for the interest of Usurpa∣tion. Therefore, who are ye, O ye Nether∣landers, that dare to set your selves against the Lord, against what he hath done, and is done in England, Scotland, and Ireland; to endeavor to strike out all the glorious Cha∣racters of his foot-steps and presence, what his Arm hath brought to pass for him, and his mighty Power established in these Do∣minions? Who are you that dare to think, that you can root out this Cause, and give
the Lye to all the appearances of God, the Prayer, the Faith, the Praises of the Saints in those Nations? Who are you that say their Gods, are Gods of the Hills, therefore we will fight with them in the Valleys: they stood against their own forces, but they shall not against ours: The Land is given them in possession, but the Deep is ours, and we will swallow them up as in the belly of Hell? Our God is the same, and so is Our Cause on the Sea, as well as the Land: Spain found it so in the year 1588. and all others have since our late Wars and Trou∣bles. FINIS.
