L88 E278_28 99860825 112950
THE INDEPENDANTS MILITARIE ENTERTAINMENT. OR, Certaine Reasons and Arguments why Independants ought not only to be admitted in∣to the Army raised for defence of Church and State, but also both by Law of God, Nature, and Nations, are required to put their hands to the Plough of the Kingdome. TOGETHER With the answering of such grand Obje∣ctions as tend to the contrary. By W. L. Licensed, Entered, and Printed according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head Alley. 1645.
THE INDEPENDANTS MILITARIE ENTERTAJNMENT. SInce it hath pleased God to put into the heart of, and to inable our ever honored Parliament to new forme and constitute the armies raised for the de∣fence of themselves and Kindom, by which means consequently many Malignant and disaffected instruments, formerly imployed, are outed, whose spirits daily speake out their former disaf∣fection and profane insides, the Devill also be∣gins to bee very busie to blow the coal of con∣tention, and to sowe the seed of strife and division, amongst such who are yet Ingaged in the worke, and who under God are like to be very Instrumentall to put a timely end to our unhappy troubles: And there∣fore labour might and main to beget such a disaffection betweene them, to wit, the Presbyterian and Independant party, as if the entertainment of both in the Armie were inconsistent with the well being, and successe of it. Now seeing that both of them have ever been ingaged in the worke, since the beginning, and that party so much poynted at, no whit behinde any other, either in faithfulnesse or courage; I thought good to declare to the publique, that Independant party, so much stumbled at, are not only very precious Instruments to promote the present military affairs: but are no waies to be discountenanced, or thir assistance and brotherly helpe declined for these reasons ensuing. FIrst, that our divisions are the enemies hopes and our owne hurt, and they daily endeavor to disunite us, that they may have the greater advantage upon us. 2. Those our friends whose absence we would so willingly wave, are neither Heathens nor Turkes, but men professing the same Religion with us, having the same God, the same Christ, of the same faith, partakers of the same hope, borne with us in Baptisme in the same Covenant, onely differing in and about Cir∣cumstance, not the substance of Gods Worship, not any fundamen∣tall points of religion.
3. If Papists, Malignants, and desperate Delinquents are the common adversaries of the Kingdome, these men of all other are most likely to be reall in their undertakings against them, whose principles are so utter contrary to them, they being formerly the objects of our Prelats persecution, for that they knew them utter enemies to Prelacie, Poperie, and profanenesse. 4. They have through Gods assistance behaved themselves in the Field, and in the face of the Enemie very gallantly, as the com∣mon adversarie himselfe confesseth and certainly if it be a received tenent among Commanders to entertaine fighting men, although otherwise dissolute, and prophane, certainly these men that are con∣sciencious, that abhor oathes, blasphemies, and prophanenesse, should not only be admitted, but required and desired to assist the State, if for nothing else, yet because they will fight. 5. It hath been too too apparant that divers professing them∣selves Protestants at large, as our adversaries themselves do, have proved very perfidious, who having taken up armes for their owne ends have made use of their best opportunities to attain them, by betraying their trust, and although we have had too many experi∣ments of this kinde, yet I never heard of any, usually called Inde∣pendant, since the war began, that proved perfidious. 6. Consider our Enemis are accounted ould Souldiers and Po∣lititians, and they tell us it is lawfull for the King to call to his assistance papists out of all Countries, yea and the most desperate wretches in the world, nay and our Malignants will tell you hee doth well in receiving any that will sticke to him in his necessitie, although by experiece, they are such as indeavour both the ruine of himself and kingdome, and whose tenents are so utterly in∣consistent, with the wel-being or the being of the Church or King∣dome, that a man may safer live with a Turke, a Jewe, a Pagan, then with a Papist, and shall we be so voide of reason to decline the helpe of our faithfull friends, of whose courage and zeale, we have had sufficient testimonie? Let us not suffer the children of this world, to be alwaies wiser then the children of light especial∣ly in this Generation wherein such abundance of light is dis∣covered. 7. It is displeasing to God when men of one and the same reli∣gion, whose judgements differ in point of Ceremonie, not sub∣stance, are disunited in affection, and so either decline, or denie each other assistance, and indeed we can expect little peace in the
Kingdome, so long as we have wars and fightings in our spirits, one against another, God who is our wise Father, will lash his children if they fall out one with another, beleeve it he will make a third man among them, till they agree better. 8. The cause of God and Kingdome lyes at stake, and they as well as others are bound in Conscience to helpe against the Com∣mon adversaries, and shall we tye their hands behinde them, in opposition to our owne assistance, not suffering them to helpe the Lord against the mighty? shall Herod and Pilate become friends to Crucifie Christ, and Christians suffer themselves to become a prey to the Adversarie rather then mutually to be helpefull? 9. They are not truly called Independant, otherwise then to distinguish them from the Episcopal and Presbyterians, for no true Church is independant, neither know we any such in New-Eng∣land, or elsewhere that wholly decline the brotherly advice and as∣sistance of the Neighbouring Churches in Points of difficultie ei∣ther in Doctrine or discipline. 10. What occasion of slighting have they given? have they not bin active and zealous to promote the affaires of the Kingdome, both with their persons and purses? or do we emulate and envy them for that they are more zealous then our selves, although in conscience they are bound to it, knowing a heavie curse hangs over the heads of such as do the work of the Lord deceitfully, or negligently. 11. Me thinks above all men our brethren the Scots, should be so far from disaffecting them, that they should joyne heart and hand with them, for these men were especially those that in the day of their trouble stuck closest to them, although at that time not bap∣tized into the Name of Independants; Prelates were not acquainted with any such titles. 12. Herein we shall use the same method to ruine our selves that the enemy doth to destroy us: they fight against us under the no∣tion of Brownists, Anabaptists, Separatists, and Roundheads, un∣der which termes they comprehend all not so vilde as themselves: and we quarrell one with another under the notion of Presbyte∣rian, Independant, nay we use the same tone of Brownists, Ana∣baptists, Sectaries, &c. condemning all not of their owne opinion, as men extremely prejudiciall in their very assistance of the State, although the most godly and learned in the Kingdome, viz. the Synod, dare not condemne them. Nay further in some sense I may
truly say, we are all Independants the Kingdome over: for ever since Episcopacy was condemned and made shorter by the head, no other discipline being setled in the Church, wherein the great difference lyes, every man doth that that is right in his own eyes, and how long it may be thus who knowes? 13. If we would have them cashered the Army, why not also cast out of the Kingdome? beleeve it, he that is not fit to be tru∣sted in the Army, is in these dangerous times as unfit to live in a Commonweale: he that is not with us is against us, and he that is not thought fit to assist us, must consequently be thought as unfit to live amongst us, especially such men as hate neutralizing: Yet I beleeve neither Parliament or Synod have any thoughts to deny them the liberty of free-borne subjects: nor doe they, I beleeve, at all doubt of their honesty: But as Independants accompt the Presbyterian godly, so the Presbyterian accompts also of the In∣dependant. And if they be found fit to live in the Kingdome, and men approved godly by those best able to judge, why shall wee condemne them for unprofitable and unusefull members? And al∣though doubtlesse there are some, nay too too many, that thinke if Independancy be tolerated in the Kingdome, it will be like Moses rod, &c. and therefore would gladly have it cast out of the kingdome. Truly I say this should satisfie that it was Moses rod that devoured the rest, and the rest were but the effects of inchant∣ments. And if we shall cast out Independants for their conscience, sake, by the same ground we may banish all Religion. 14. They are men knowne to be lovers of Religion and Law all of them, and as they have a birth-right in both they are bound both by the Law of God and Man, of Nature and Nations, to lend their assistance when these are indangered. Besides, they have both lives and estates to save or lose as well as others. 15. Againe, we have more need to encourage them to joyne with us, then decline their helpe, many of them already having laid downe Armes in reference to the Covenant, and many never would take up Armes to fight for any cause, or upon any termes at all, holding it unlawfull: these then that are willing, resolved, and men sufficiently knowne for their fidelity and courage, should rather be incouraged, then any way discountenanced. 16. Consider who they are that are principall opposers of In∣dependants, and would so gladly have them outed the Army, cer∣tainly,
none that are truly godly, whatsoever they pretend: for it is not that they are Independant, but that they are godly they are en∣vied: it is the power of godlinesse aimed at: and he that is now an enemy to Independants, were there not one of them left in the Army, would be as arch an adversary to Presbyterians, so farre as the power of godlinesse is held forth in their conversation: this I am confident of, if men will sweare and swill, drinke and drab, as those that would have sway in the Armies have too long done, and would still, which can neither stand with the power of godlinesse or common honesty; let them be Independant, Presbyteriall, Pre∣laticall, or Popish, all is one, Birds of a feather would flock toge∣ther. Not that I condemn all now by course dismissed their com∣mands and employments, for I know many choice, worthy, gal∣lant Gentlemen are outed by meanes of the new Modell; I onely point at the prophane Atheisticall party, for whose sakes the Army hath beene new formed: and who are the only enemies of Inde∣pendants, and the power of godlinesse, in whomsoever it is. Q. But these Independants will not take the Covenant, what should they doe amongst us? why shall we trust them? A. Many, nay most of them have or will take it, onely some few decline it in point of conscience, questioning the lawfulnesse of pressing it upon them with all its circumstances; yet men re∣solved without any such tye, having a principle within them lea∣ding them to be true to their trust, and no whit the more back∣ward in their assistance. And as a worthy Gentleman said once concerning forcing men to our publique Assemblies, by reason of a complaint made against such as used private meetings on the Lords day, quoth he, let us force them to Church that make no conscience at all, rather then force those that withdraw out of tendernesse. So I say concerning the Covenant, although many thousands both godly and consciencious have taken it, and who doubtlesse will to their utmost endeavour to keepe it, yet there are many thousands in the Kingdome that make no conscience at all what they sweare, nor ever care to keep any Oath or Covenant whatsoever: mists and milstones are alike: it is good to impose it upon such with reasonable instruction concerning it; but let us take heed of pressing it upon a tender conscience: say not, How shall we trust them? for he that feares an Oath feares God, and let him alone with his conscience, he will wrong no man, he will
neither kill his King, nor poyson his Prince, nor blow up a Parliament: his tenents are no way distructive to Church or State; nay though he sweare not, yet he will assist the kingdome to the utmost of his ability: these take heed of offending one of those little ones that desire to walke according to their light. Q. But they are principall causers of divisions in the Army, by preaching and teaching they know not what: they must be all Preachers forsooth, although they have neither call to the Mini∣stry, nor parts to discharge that function; hereby they poyson a∣bundance of ignorant people with their errors, and wrong Scrip∣tures by their mis-interpretations. A. For that generall charge of being causers of divisions, it is no more then what formerly even from the beginning to this day hath been laid upon the back of Religion, therefore was Eliah counted the troubler of Israel, Paul a sower of sedition: and in∣deed the profession of Christ hath ever beene cause of division, therefore he saith he came to set the father against the son, the mo∣ther against the daughter, &c. and it is necessary such offences should be, that the approved may be knowne: flesh and spirit, light and darknesse, godlinesse and impiety must needs be divided; and thus it hath been, and so will be to the end of the world in all Christian Kingdomes, Churches, nay and persons too, the flesh lusting and warring against the spirit: they are alwaies contrary. Indeed for that men of weak or no abilities, without any war∣rant or call from God or man, do preposterously thrust themselves into publique dispensation of ordinances, this is to be rather be∣wailed then pleaded for; and I doubt not but that the Parliament and Assembly both will take care to prevent this enormity, and to furnish our Armies with able conscencious Preachers, and so also prevent the great mischief that often necessity brings with it: yet I presume not one of forty doe take upon them publique admini∣strations, and why should we condemne all the rest for those? as well may we cry downe all godly painfull Ministers, by reason some were ignorant, some prophane, some superstitious, many of them very sots, fitter to serve swine then seed the flock of Christ: yet I hope we reverence the godly learned of them; and so though some few forget themselves in this, making an Idoll of Ignorance, as too many of us doe of Learning, yet take heed of condemning the rest that are both wise and godly.
Neither must I condemn any man for exercising his talent in the place where God hath set him, to his glory, but with Moses, hear∣tily wish that all the Lords people were Prophets, inabled for his worke, knowing every Master of a Family, every Commander in an armie, according to his light received, and the charge com∣mitted to him, ought to improve it to Gods glory, and the bene∣fit of those related to him: no man ought to hide his talent in his napkin, or put his candle under a bushell, but to pray with and for those committed to his charge, to exhort and instruct them in the waies of God, provided they deliver known practicall, and received truths, & meddle not in things too high for them, que∣stions and disputations engendring controversie, rather then tending to edification, leaving things more darke and doubtfull to the godly: learned and called by God and man to publique admi∣nistrations, know that the Scriptures are of that latitude that a Lamb may wade, and yet the Elephant swim in their Ocean, so shall men doe much good in their places, and may by their praiets, teares, and Christian duty wrastle with God, as usefully and profi∣taby as fight with an enemy, for the peace and welfare of Church and Commonweale: thus shall wee build with one hand, and fight with the other. Let us therefore blesse God for such Com∣manders and Souldiers, and not envy them for their zeale. But above all let it be our shame, that swearing, blasphemy, drunkennesse, and all maner of prophanenesse, things out of questi∣on unlawfull and sinfull, are suffered in our Armies, while such pra∣ctices as tend to the power of godlinesse are opposed and oppug∣ned: and who ever thou art that art an enemy to the Indepen∣dants entertainment in the Army, be silent till all prophane ones are cashiered, and especially prophanenesse out of thy owne heart and conversation cast out: plucke out thy beame first, and then thou wilt see more clearly the mote: if this course were taken, few or none would either spurne at the power of godlinesse, or de∣spise the day of small things. To conclude know this, he that hath the least spark of true grace in his heart, will not envie the power of godlinesse in any mans conversation whatsoever. FJNJS.
