L674 E370_22 99861820 113965
THE Antichristian Presbyter: OR, ANTICHRIST TRANSFORMED; ASSUMING THE NEVV SHAPE OF A Reformed Presbyter, as his last and subtlest Disguise to deceive the NATIONS. REVEL. 13.11, 13. And he had two hornes like a Lambe, and he spake as a Dragon, and he doth great wonders; so that he maketh fire to come down from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of men. And he deceiveth them that dwell upon the Earth, by reason of those miracles. By RICHARD LAURENCE, Marshal-Generall. Printed for the Timly information of the People, 1647.
The Epistle to the READER. CHRISTIAN READER, I Would not have thee flatter thy expecta∣tion, by thinking to meet with something in this Discourse, that should tend to the setting up, or casting down any one practice or opinion now received or held forth by the Believers (of severall judgments) in this Kingdom, which are but as so many Bub∣les risen upon the water: And when a strong gale of that Spirit, which bloweth where it listeth, shall breath upon them, they shall all break and fall, and shall become a pure River of living water, clear as Chrystall proceeding out of the Throne of GOD, and of the Lambe: But that which J do heer endeavour to hold forth to thee, is only a discovery of that Mystery of Ini∣quity, which assumes shapes and formes of Religion, for no other end, but to destroy both Moral and Divine Rights and Pri∣viledges.
And having had occasion, by rea∣son of my employments in the Army, to ride through most parts of this Kingdome very lately; I have observed these things which I here represent to thee: hoping, that not only Thou, but those whom England hath chosen to be their Overseers, and God hath used to be their Deliverers, will observe what Ʋipers they have in their Bosome, such as hold forth an Apple in their mouth, but have stings in their hearts, such as only kis∣sed with an intent to betray. That which moved me to pen it, was out of conscience to that Covenant, which many of these De∣ceivers have swallowed down: it would be well for the Kingdome, if there were more Covenant-Keepers, though fewer Co∣venant-takers. J shall direct thee to what followeth, & rest thine in that everlasting Covenant, which doth not only bind us, but affect us in truth, and faithful∣nesse one to each other. R. L.
A briefe Discovery of old Antichrist in the new shape of Presbytery. EXperience teacheth us, that it hath ever been the way and practice of that man of Sin, that mystery of Iniquity, that enemy to all peace and righteousnesse, [commonly called by us, Antichrist, and known to us onely by the names of Pope, Jesuite, and Pa∣pist, &c.] to transform himselfe into that shape or likenesse, which he conceived would he most advantagious to his designes. For, before the time of this Parliament, we thought he had onely dwelt at Rome, and Spain, &c. among the Papists, and that the hanging of those halfe-score men for the Gun-powder Plot, had frighted him cleare out of England. [But while we cried, Peace, Peace, behold trouble.] And when he thought the time of our desolation dew nigh, then the time of our deliverance was at hand. For when he saw there was no remedy, he was very forward to have a Parliament, thinking they would have done as some had done before them; to have given all the peoples rights and priviledges to the King, to purchase to themselves great estates in Court. But God gave us men of publick spirits, which resolved to offer up themselves, and al that was deare to them, to maintain the peoples rights and priviledges, so much invaded by the great-Ones of this Kingdome, and their Haers. And before they were well warmed in their seats, there came petition after petition, and complaint after complaint, they could not tell which to heare first; many of them wondring the peple
should lie under such heavie oppressions, and yet be so silent. And when they began to enquire into the businesse, they found the people were like a Horse in a quagmire, the more they strove, the deeper they sunk: For though they had appealed from Court to Court; the higher they went, the worse they were. This seemed strange to them, that in such a place as England was (where there were so many grave and learned Divines, such a powerfull Ministery, the whole Kingdome being lookt at as a Church of Jesus Christ;) there should be such unheard of oppression and tyranny. And enquiring into the cause of these things, they began first to enquire whether that old enemy of mankind, which was al∣wayes a deceiver of the people (Antichrist) was not crept in a∣mong us again. Which made Henry the eighth spill so much in∣nocent blood in this kingdome, hanging to day a Papist for his Religion, and the next day a Protestant for his Religion; Ha∣ving his reigne in burning and destroying religious people in this Kingdome, untill the end of Queen Mary, and was whol∣ly cast out of Church and State, as we thought, by the Parliament in the reigne of Queen Elizabeth. After which we grew secure, we thought Antichrist had been but of one religion. Then they began to enquire what Papists were about the King; thinking they might be the cause of all this mischiefe: for they had not heard that this deceiver had been any thing but a Pope, or Jesuit, or Papist at least. But when they had found out the truth of the businesse; this cunning Sophister had turned Protestant, a zealous Common-prayer-book man, and would goe to Church twice a day at least. And after they found it was Antichrist indeed onely changed his shape, they began to search further, to see how large his do∣minion was. And well knowing he doth not use to trouble poore folk much, they began first at the Court; and going with the King to the Church, there they found him as busie as could be, bow∣ing to the Altar, and reading Common-prayer, and singing the Letany, with a great deale more such stuffe. And when he had done that; up start he into the Pulpit in the
likenesse of the Kings Chaplain, and there he tells them the King was accountable to none but God for his actions; and, that all his subjects enjoy'd, was wholly at his disposing, whether liberties, priviledges, or estates, &c. and those that would not say so, were traytors. And after further enquiry, they found him in all the chief Of∣fices about the Court; and for feare he should not be neere e∣nough to the King, he was crept into bed to him. A little after they found he was not onely about the Kings person, but was gotten into most of the chiefe places of Judica∣ture in the kingdome. They found he had been a great Privy-Counsellor for many yeares, and had been acting many wicked designes tending to the inslaving of the people, and destroying Religion. He had been the onely means of procuring Ceremonies, and a Book of Common-prayer to be imposed upon the Church of Scotland. And because they would not submit, they being im∣posed by the Kings authority, he perswaded the King to raise an Army to force it upon them; and had not our God (which never was a friend to imposers of formes) stood for them and us by them, we had been all enslaved at that time. After further enquiry, they found he had been in the likenesse of a learned Judge, and had rode most of the circuits in England, and had sold the poore for a peece of bread. And where ever you finde him, you may observe hee loves money well: for hee did not use the Law to judge by, but judged for men as they were able to pay him. And from thence it was, you had so little protection by the Law. He could perswade the Judges, and most of the Lawyers in the Kingdome, that it were lawfull for the King to raise money of the free-born people of England, whether they were willing or no, and bids them call it Ship-money. He could make it lawful for the great men in the kingdom to take away all the poore Countre-ymens Commons, though they had never so strong Charters to shew for them, onely tell them it was the Kings pleasure. If any well-minded Countrey-man which thought his own Birthwright and his Countries priviledge worth the standing
for did but stand up in his Countries behalf, he presently must be made an example, (and was befriended if he escapt with his life though he lost all he had besides) for fear some others should play such tricks. Nay, he had almost perswaded the Lords of the Copyhold-Mr, that their nes which were never known to be but set sums to be at their wills: And thereby would haue dispossest many thousands of the Commons of England of their Inheritance their Fathers left them. Thus my honest Country-men, what ever you were born too, ye may see what you were neer brought to. If I should instance in all particulars of this nature, I should fill a Volume, as bigge as your Church Bible: If you be forgetfull, or have a bad memory, I shall commend the Star-Chamber to you for a study, which is a very convenient place for that purpose. After they had discovered what work he had made in the State, they began to enquire, whether he was not crept into the Church or no, and when the truth came to be known he was Archbishop of Canterbury. And after further enquiry, it appeared, there was not a Diocesse in the Kingdome but he was the Bishop of it, and not a Living worth a hundred pounds a year, but he had the dis∣posing of it. Nay, because he understood the people would not re∣store him all those great Livings, which Henry the 8. took from him, under the same tearmes and names; he then held them, ra∣ther then he would be without, he new christened them too, And some he calls Church-livings or Spiritual means, or the Churches Inheritance. And I believe it is all the Inheritance he desire his Churches should have: for hee can make a whole County of Temporall meanes all Spirituall in half an houre, and make you believe its Blasphemy to say to the contrary, and Sacriledge to take it away again. There are two other little stipends, which like a Carefull Fa∣ther, he hath procured for his youngest Sons; and those hee calls Globe-land and Tythes: So rather then any of his Tribe should not have an office in the Priesthood, he will have them Leviticall Priests. But if they were not fit for Priests, he had other employments
for them: for he was nor only a Courtier himself, but he kept a Court too. And this he called a Spirituall Court: it had other names, as somtimes the Chancellours Court, or the Commissaries Court: but they that gave it the right name, called it the Bawdy Court: What the Revenue of this Court was yearly, I cannot informe you: but I am sure, they maintained a great and ungodly com∣pany. And set but a-part the Crown-Land and the Inheritance of the Nobility in the Kingdom: and though his Tribe did not amount to the five hundred part of the people; yet he had engrosed into his hands the fourth part of the Commons Inheritance. And if you please to mind what work he made in the State, and how well he throve in the Church, if he had not bin discovered & stopt by the Parliament, he would have made as many goe bare-foot, and bare-leg in England, as doth in Scotland, in a very short time. After they found how rich and mighty hee was grown in the Kingdom, they began to inquire into his actions, and there they found he had been doing the very same things in this shape he u∣sed to do in the other. There were all the godly Ministers in the Kingdom either ba∣nished or silenced; except some few which were able to make good friends, or could dispense with most of his Popish Ceremo∣nies, with many thousands of godly people scattered all over the world, as they were at Jerusalem; witnesse, New-England, Vir∣ginia, with many of the remote Islands, Holland is not exempted. If you would have further satisfaction, I shall referre you to the foure Champions of these times, viz. Mr. Prynne, Dr. Bast∣wick, Mr. Burton, and Lieu. Col. Lilburn: I wish them to remem∣ber the losse of their eares, their branding in the face, their pillo∣ry, their whipping-Cart, their exile and imprisonment. Ask them, if Antichrist cannot persecute as well in the shape of a Prote∣stant as a Papist. Know of them whether the enjoyment of this Parliament be not the greatest outward mercy that ever God gave England, and themselves in particular. Ask them again, if Antichrist be not a persecuter in all the shapes he assumes? and whether the
spirit of persecution be not the spirit of Antichrist, or no. Thus (my honest and soon-deceived Countrey-men) you may see by these few hints, among the many thousands you may re∣member of the same nature, what condition you were in when God raised you up this Parlement to be your deliverers, and what a work they had to undertake in your behalfe: They had only of these two things to chuse one; either to give you and your poste∣rity up to slavery, or run the hazard of the utter ruining them∣selves and families. I need not tell you which it was they chose; but where they begun, will be worth your observation. They did not begin to lop off the branches, but to hew downe the main body of the tree: the first men they call'd in question, being the two greatest Subjects in the Kingdom, viz. the Lord De∣puty of Ireland, and the Bishop of Canterbury: if they had que∣stioned more of them, then we had been quietter since. But as soon as this wise Observer of Times, saw what would befall him, he presently would change his shape again, and would be in the likenesse of a blessed Reformation, as he called it in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth. When that trick would not serve, he knew there was no other meanes left now, but his last shift, which was to see if he could stirre up the people, to rise with the King, to cut the Parliaments throats, and by destroying them wholly, to inslave and vassalage the people for ever. Thus you see what ever he faith, you never know what hee meanes, till the last. What he did in this kind, I shall not need to rehearse to you: wofull experience I hope hath convinced you; though I am able to particalarize as many of his wicked cruell, and barbarous acti∣ons, as any one man in England. But for further satisfaction, I shall refer you to Faringdon in Berkeshire, to Prince Maurice his march, through Somerset and Dorsetshire; to Gorings Horse in Devonshire and Cornwall; to Prince Ruperts march through Lancashire; to Layton-Buzzar▪ and Wooburn in Bedfordshire: the Queens shriving of Burton upon Trent. And if you please to make each of these a Bishop, I shall fur∣nish
you with as many Rapes, Murders, Robberies, and unheard of Cruelties, as shall make them a sufficient Diocesan Priesthood. Thus have I endeavoured to trace Antichrist in his own steps to describe his habits, discover his practises, and have given thee some hint of his actions; to this end, that if ever thou seest him or hear of him again, thou mayest know him. For be you sure, as long as there is so many great and spiritual Livings in the Kingdom; so much Glebe-land, and other good things called Tythes: He will not out, he will assume some other shape: he cares not what it is, so he may but do his work, and re∣ceive his wages; which is▪ as you have heard, to rob, kill, and de∣stroy you, and will make you pay him well for it too. Now let me intreat thee by the way, to take notice, what a wonderfull deliverance God hath wrought for thee, by the hands of those men, which this Monster would have turned thy hand against; that if ever Nation or People ow'd themselves to a Parlia∣ment; this Nation doth. And though there be many Sons of Belial, which had rather see the Kingdom ruined, so they might have the destroying of it: by fighting against them, then to have it setled in truth and peace by them: yet let them know, with all the enemies they have in the world, that if that God which hitherto hath been their wis∣dome and strength, doe keepe them close to the work they have begun, viz. to lose the bands of wickednesse, to take off heavie burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoake: though all the power of Hell and Earth should set up themselves against them; The Lord of Hosts is our strength, why should we fear? the God of Battell is our salvation, why should we be afraid? But now my honest Country-men, after all this care taken and hazzards run, and bloud spilt: when the Parliament with all the rest of their faithfull friends, scattered abroad from their owne horns in the Kingdomes service, had thought their work had bin done, and nothing remained, but to receive the fruit of their for∣mer labours, which is an equall participation, with the rest of the free-born people of England, of their liberties and priviledges due to them in their severall places and callings; yet, even while they were all crying peace, peace, behold warre. There appeares another Generation of Earth and Hell, like that
Beast in the 13. of the Revel. vers. 11. Whose appearance is like a Lambe, and yet speakes like a Dragon, his voyce being nothing but of war and bloud-shed. Many thousands of such, as the Parliament had at their mercy, and hath given them their liberties and estates upon easier terms, then some thousands of their own friends have preserved theirs by taking their parts. And yet all the practice of these men is in speaking evill of the Parliament, indeavouring to render them odious to the People; saying, they are all Independent, and will have no King, with a thou∣sand such false aspersions and lyes, making their boasts, they are confident of another day, and that the war is not yet begun, & that they hope to see the Tyde turnd ere long, with many such expres∣sions. That while the Parliament is disbanding their Armies, slighting their Garrisons, indeavouring by all possible meanes to ease the people of their burdens they have so long groan'd under, by rea∣son of the warre; These servants of that wicked One are sowing a new seed, fo∣menting a new warre. And because their old Names of Papists, Malignants, Cavaleeres, &c. are grown so odious to the people; Therefore this cunning High Priest of theirs, Antichrist, teach∣eth them to call themselves Presbyterians. For, saith he, by so doing, with some other tricks I have, wee shall gain the Scottish Nation, with a considerable Party in the City to those we have there already, and set it ard to make a di∣vision in the House, by being in th likenesse of Pesbyterians till such time as we have gotten the King into his power, and a con∣siderable Army of French, and our Catholick Brethren in Ireland about him. And then we will put the Scots in minde, that they were the Beginners of all our troubles, and that they have been twice pro∣claimed Rebels for fighting against this King. We will then tell them of the old saying, It is no deceit to deceive the Deceiver. We will then put London in mind of their former Zeale to the Parliaments Cause, and let them know, our good Kig hath often times called them the Rebellious City, and had long agoe given them us for our Arrears.
We will then tell our Presbyterian Brethren, of their infirmi∣ties, our faithfull Brother Bishop Maxwell reckons up in his Book, entituled Issachars Burden. We will then convince them, as they would have convinced the Independents with an Ordinance against Heresie and Blasphe∣my &c. Thus friends, if ye have not resolved, to say its dark, when the Sun shines, if ever your parsons tell you so, you may see this Spirit of Malignance and Antichrist in all parts of the Kingdome, in the shape or likenesse of Presbyters. If there were but a Garrison slighted, or Souldiers disbanded, where the Parliament conceives them uselesse to the Kingdome, they are told it is, because they are Presbyterians. If there be but an Officer cashiered in the Army for the most vild misdemeanour that can be committed, be it Drunkennesse of Swearing, or Whoring, or plundering, &c. be cryes out, it is be∣cause he is a Presbyterian. And thus I could instance in many particulars, but I reserve them for future occasion. And if this trick be but a little better learned, the Parliament shall not call in a Malignant to pay his Composition, but hee will presently cry out, he is sequestred for being a Presbyter. Nor pu∣nish a Priest for Faction in the Pulpit in endeavouring to render the Parliament odious to the People, but he will cry out, he is a Presbyterian. As if the being a Presbyterian were a tolleration to commit all kind of wickednesse without controll. As if Faction and Sedition, with Drunkennesse and Swearing, &c. in Presbytery, were as absolute Jure Divino as their Govern∣ment. Nay further, if you ride through the whole Kingdome of Eng∣land, and Dominion of Wales, except some few Parishes, where thee is a very good Lving of 100. l. or 200. l. per annum. Who shall you find but some old-fashion'd Common-prayer-book-Priest, and all he is able to observe out of the Directory, is, to read a Chapter, sing a Psalm, and say the peace of God, and away goes he to dinner, he hath most skill of that. If yee doe now and then meet with a second sort of them;
which, with a great deale of care, and pains-taking, can write as much in a peece of paper in six-dayes, as he is able to read in halfe an houre on the seventh day, and adde but thus much (ex tempore) to it. O these cursed Schismatickes, Sectaries, Heretickes, Indepen∣dents, &c. He is a mighty well-gifted man; he is fit to make one of the Classes, at least. Nay, a man may goe into a thousand Parishes in this King∣dome, and demand but of the Parson, why he doth not weare the Surplice, and read Common-prayer, and bow to the Altar as he used to doe; And all the answer he can give, is, the Parliament hath put them down. Ask them why they observe the Directory; why, the Parlia∣ment hath put it out. Or, some of them are so learned, as to say, they have imposed it, or establisht it. So that we want nothing but a Parliament to establish Pope∣ry: for we have Priests as ready to officiate, as any Kingdom in Christendome. These things considered, what manner of Church-goverment are we like to have, think yee, when we have like people, like Priests? And yet all the ablest Ministers of the Kingdome must be ga∣thered together at London to teach one another, and the poore ignorant people in the Countrey, perish for want of knowledge. Doe yee think it would not be a more Christian brotherly way for them, to goe up and down the Countrey teaching the Gospel; then to be at London procuring punishment for the peo∣ple for their not believing it before they have heard it? A man may ride twenty miles together in some parts of the Kingdome, and not finde two men in a Parish, that know what a Presbyter, or Elder, or Deacon is, except yee mean Bishops and Arch-deacons, such as they use to have in another shape. All I would desire you to observe from these things is this: what small reason any honest people of this Kingdome have to bame the Parliament for not setting Church Government, when the tenth part of the Kingdome is not capable of re∣ceiving
it, nor the tenth part of the ministery capable of officia∣ting it. My honest Countrey men look about you, be no more de∣ceived; for all the noyse you heare in the Kingdome is not for Presbiter-Government: they do but put on the same Go∣vernment to see if they can deceiue him of his Birth-right; for godly Presbyterians, and godly Independents must all drink of one Cupp, and they that have the last draught may come to have the dreggs too for ought I know. And if not godly, ye may be Presbyters and Independents too, you are not the men they aime at. But now it is come to this passe, that if a man do but speake well of the Parliament, what ever his Judgement be, he must be an Independent. Nay I have observed it, having had occasion to ride through most parts of this Kingdome lately, that there are many godly consciencious people which have not a preaching Minister with∣in five miles of them, and if there, hardly worth the going to, and some of these people for using meanes to procure a preach∣ing Minister; for so doing are called Independents, and for such, hated and abused by their Malignant dumb Preist, and the rest of their Neighbours. I could instance many particulars of this nature, I shall onely name two. The one is at Charlbury in Oxfordshire, the Parish being great hath three Churches all in one simple fellows, ands, hard∣ly fit to make a Clarke, one of the places having a competent meanes to maintaine a Minister, hath indeavoured to procure one, and for so doing, are called Independents, and for such ha∣ted and dispised. Another place is at East hendred in Bark-shire where there is a wicked Malignant Priest called Doctor Rogers, he was the Kings Chaplin in Oxford, his parish preferred Articles against him to the Generall, the Generall referred them to the Committees, the Articles were these or to this purpose. That the said Doctor Rogers had severall times delivered in the Pul∣pet before his parishoners, these or such like expressions. That the Parliament at Westminster were Rebels and Traytors.
That he hop't to see their heads from their bodies, and their Limbs drying in the Sun. That it was Treason to call them a Parliament. In his prayer, praying for their confusion under the names of the Kings enemies. Comparing them to Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and wishing the earth might open and swallow them up: fre∣quently praying they might be like Oreb, and Zeeb, and that they might slee before the Lords annointed like Zeba, and Sal∣munna, with abundance more of this nature: For endeavouring to put him out, and to have another in his place, the poore men were calld Independents, and for such hated, nd persecu∣ted: some of the poor men being weary of their lives & homes, came to Oxford to intreate me to be their friend to the Gene∣rall professing they durst not go home to their wives and Children, the Malignants wrath not being contented to perse∣cute them himselfe with the rest of his complyces in his parish; but procured troopers of Abington Horse, o fright, slander and abuse them under the name of Independents, and Tub-preachers. Thus my honest Cuntrey men, if the enemies of your peace have but so much wit as to call you Independents; according to these practises, its policy enough to destroy you all. Its cause of admiration, that so many rationall godly men, as bee in this Kingdome of the Presbyterian Judgment should be so blind as not to see in every part of his Kingdome, that the same spirit of Malignancy, and Anti Christ which hitherto hath opposed the Parliament in their proceedings, hath alrea∣dy assumed the shape of a Presbyter, thereby to make a further rent and division in the Kingdome, to the end they may de∣stroy both Parliament and people. Let me appeale to any that have not sold themselves to par∣tiality, and have not wholly given up themselves to believe lies. What do ye think by that army of French so much feard and talkt of? Will they be al Presbyters think you, have ye forgotten the bloody massacre in France?
Were none murdered there but Independents think ye. Nay further, what kind of Presbyter-Government shal we have setled by the Irish Rebels think ye; for they must come to assist you in that precious work too. Have none of their unheard of inhumane cruelties been acted against any but Independents think ye. What do ye think of the Lord George Digby that is to com∣mand the Army for England from thence, is not there a reve∣rend Presbyter. Nay further, what do you think of the gathering together of those kind of creatures in the North we used to call Cava∣liers, are they all turned Presbyters think ye. Were they not within this twelve moneths firing of Towns, plundering of Houses, murdering of people, ravishing of wo∣men wherever they came in the Kingdome, and went under the name of dammee Cavaliers, and the Popish Army, and are they so suddenly converted, and altogether, its time we had a nationall Church Government setled then. Oh that ever men should thus delude themselves and be their own betrayers, and murderets, that at such a time as this, when there is such visible treachery, and wicked plotting, ten∣ding to the ruine of the whole Kingdome, that men should be silent which have so great an interest in it, and so much cause to defend the liberty of it. Have we not cause to feare that there is a lying spirit in the mouthes of our Prophets, that at such time as this is can flat∣ter these spirituall wickednesses in high places; if they were the Lords watchmen, they would not be stirring up Israel a∣gainst Judah, and Iudah against Israel, but would tell Iudah of his sins, and Israel of his transgression. Oh that we may never see the day that those which Englands Parliament hath chosen out of respect to their learning and piety to be their familiar freinds, and take sweet Councel to∣gether, should in the dayes of Absolom rising up against Da∣vid, act the part of Achitophel. Is it possible those which could fore-see things so long in the last plot, if not partiall could be so blind in this, and if seeing it, if not deceitfull could be so dumb in not declaring it.
Whats the reason ye have such a noyse in the pulpits against such things as could never be sufficiently proved evill, and the great crying sinnes of the nation hardly spoke of? as if one sin against the Clergy were more dangerous then a multitude of the sinns of Sodom, which this Kingdome is full of against that God of Heaven and Earth, which destroyed Sodom for sin. By this ye may clearly see they preach themselves, and not Christ Iesus the Lord. But considering it is rather their infirmities then their qua∣lities: Let us earnestly desire, the Lord would open their mouth, & they might shew forth his prayse, that seeklesse their own things and more the things of Iesus Christ: that they may no longer call evill good, and good evill, but re∣prove the infirmities of their Brethren, as the Apostle did with the spirit of love and meeknesse: and when they are speaking against the prophanesse, lewdnes and wickednesse of the Nation; to cry aloud and spare not: to lift up their voice like a Trumpet: to preach as those that have authority, and not as the Scribes. I shall for a con∣clusion desire your consideration on the 33. and 34. Chapters of the prophesie of Ezekiel.
The Postscript. Christian Reader. I Shall desire thy Impartiall Censure on these few things. Judge, but Judge not false Judgement. Though I have en∣devored to discover to thee that Antichrist is crept in a∣mongst us in the shape of a Presbyter, yet do I not in the least here strive to perswade thee that Presbytery is Anti∣christian; for we have been too forwards to judge of men, and things as they have been represented to us under good or bad names. And from thence rose that true proverb among us, a Iew would not have done such a thing. But the Apostle tells them, he is not a Iew that is one outwardly, but he that is one inwardly. Rom. 2.28. and this was the, cause the Saints in the Apostles time differed so much by judging one another according to outward appearance as they were distinguisht by their names, some of Paul, and some of Apoll. s, &c. 1. Cor. 1.12. And therefore when Christ is prophesied on to come a Judge, it is said he shall not judg after the sight of his eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of his eares, but he shall judge with righ∣teousnesse, and reprove with equity, and though our Judges be forwardest to judge for the rich, and speak in the proud mens Cause, Christ shall judge for the poor, and reprove for the meek, Esa. 11.31. Therefore take heed thou dost not by thy thus judging, condemn that which Christ shall justifie, and justifie that which Christ shall condemn, especially in things that con∣cerne Christs Kingdom: and godly people, because Christ himselfe is thereby either justified or condemned by them. Luk 10.16. Acts 9 4.
Therefore that I would desire thee to observe in these few things is this, that Jesus is Christ though Crowned with thornes and in a robe of mockery. Mat. 27.29. that Jacob is not Esau though in his garment, Gen. 27.15. and that Iosephs Coate is known to his Father though dipt in blood. Gen. 37.33. And againe, that Antichrist is a Wolfe, though in Sheepes Cloathing, Mat. 7.15, as much that beast when he appeared like a Lambe with two hornes, Rev. 13.11. as when he had the seven heads and ten hornes, v. 1. as false an Apostle when he is transformed into an Angel of light or is like the Apostle of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13.14. as when he is that great red Dragon standing before the woman ready to devoure her seede. Rev. 12.4. If thou dost aske me how thou shalt then know him? I answer, by his workes; for whatsoever his shape is, his businesse is all one. For there are some deceivers which are not Antichrist, such were Peter, Gal. 2.12. and the leaders of the Saints in the 1 Cor. 1. and severall others through infirmity or mistake, and these the Apostle reproves as Brethren. But the end of this decever is on purpose to destroy. This is that roaring Lyon which goeth about seeking whom he may de∣voure, 1 Pet. 5.8. Therefore of all decevers, beware of the devouring destroy∣ing decever, such as doth not onely come with their mouthes full of deeeit; but with their hands full of blood, who make it their businesse to root up, pull downe, and destroy; for the businesse of Christs Ministers is to plant, to build and set up. Therefore saith Christ, I come not to destroy mens lives but to save them. It was the work of the theife. Iohn 10.10. to steale, to kill and destroy. But I am come that ye might have life saith Christ, and that ye might have it more abundantly. Thus if thou art not one of those whom the God of this world hath blinded the eyes of, or that have eyes and see not, eares and heare not, thou canst not but confesse that those de∣cevers which are so much in blood that are all for imprisoning, hanging, and burning are of Antichrist what shape soever they are in.
For the Churches of Saints in the Apostle; dayes, were a∣mong Heathens and Pagans, Turkes and Iews. Such as held strange opinions, such as worshipt the Host of Heaven, would have worshipt the Apostles as Gods. Acts 14.11. denyed the resurrection. Acts 23.8. 1 Cor. 15.12. such as were so farre from calling the Apostles Rabby or Master that they called Christ himselfe Belzebub and the Apostles de∣ceevers and bablers, thought them unworthy to live upon the earth. Acts 17.18. Acts 22.22. such as had seducing spirits, tast doctrines of devills, speaking lyes in hypocrisie. 1 Tim. 4.2. Boasters, proud, Blasphemers, without naturall affection, Truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers of all good. 2 Tim. 2.3.4. such as held damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. 2 Pet. 2.1. And yet no persecution, no imprisoning, hanging, nor burn∣ing. If thou or any that tells them it is lawfull to destroy men for not believing, can but shew me out of the word of God, where the time, place, or person, where, Christ or the A∣postles, or any after them, we have ground to take example by did endeavour by any outward compulsion to force men to believe, or punish any further then excommunication, for not walking in the faith receised when they have done; if they can procure me letters, I will away to Damascus presently. But this was never the practise of Christ and his Church. But of Antichrist and his tribe, it is they that are guilty of all the blood spilt in this kind, from Abel to this present day. It is not the spouse of Christ that cometh up from the wil∣dernesse; leaning upon her beloved. Cant. 8.5. But that great Scarlet whore that comes riding upon the beast, with whom the Kings of the earth haue committed for∣nication, and the Inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Rev. 17.12. which is the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, vers. 6. Not the Lamb slaine from the begining of the world. But they which have been alwayes slaying the Lamb. Not the Shepard that have thus destroyed the Sheepe.
But the wolfe whose nature it is to destroy, not from that God that so loved the world that he gave his Son, but from the Divell, which is come downe into the earth with great wrath, having but a short time. Now reader if there be nothing here discover'd, but what you knew before, consider, it was never intended for thee, but to in∣forme the ignorant, and conforme the weak, to be a light to such as are blinded with the smoke that ascends out of the bot∣tomlesse pit, Rev. 9.2. from whence arose this High Priest, Antichrist, with all his tribe, vers 3. compared with the 11. who are scattered up and downe this Kingdom endeavouring to deceive and destroy the people: whose way of deceiving you shall finde to be after this manner, to perswade the people that the Parliament had no cause to wage warre with the King at the first. In answer to which I have pend the first part of my discourse, and where that will not take, then they transforme themselves into the shape or likenesse of Presbyters, and then endeavour to perswade the people, the Parliament are most of them Sectaries, and that they with the rest of the Sectaries of the Kingdome, (in whom they conclude all the Parliament friends, whether Presby∣ters or Independents) will have no Church-Government, but put down all religion, as they call it: Which baite is not onely taking with the scandalous and ignorant, but with many knowing people, because Church-Government is not, for the present, set∣led: In answer to which, I have endeavoured to shew the unfitnes of the generality of this Kingdom for Church-Government, with some briefe discoveries of their Presbyterian practises, and some probabilities of their ends and designes. My end in penning of it, is onely this, to let all Syons friends, see that the enemies of their peace have no such way to destroy them, as to become some thing like unto them. And that however they are now separated one from another, by names of opinions; Yet if they be Christs, then are they Abrahams Seed, and heires according to promise. And though they be not all baptised into one Church fel∣lowship
or way of worship, yet they are all baptised into that one body of which Christ is the head, by that one eternall spi∣rit, and so are Members one of another, 1 Cor. 12.13. And are thereby all imbarqu't in one Ship, and must all sink or swim together. So desiring thee, what thou findest to be truth in it, it may not fare the worse, for the rudenesse of the style. I referre it to your consieration, and shall ever be yours in the Kingdomes Cause. R. L. FINIS.
