N262 E854_8 99864253 116478
AN ANSVVER To Twenty Eight QUERIES, Sent out by Francis Harris to those People he calls Quakers: Wherein his spirit is tryed, to be contrary to that Spirit that was in all the Children of Light, by his own words and infal∣lible proof: his slanders being removed, his Queries are groundless: and so the truth cleared, in the sight of the least of the LORDS People. Written in the defence of the truth: and for the freeing the Israelite out of the hand of the Aegyptian. J. N. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses: so do these resist the truth. And they bend ther tongue like their bow for lyes, but they are not vali∣ant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the Lord. Take ye heed every one of his neigh∣bour, and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will utterly sup∣plant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders, and will not speak the truth they have taught their tongues to speak lyes, and weary them∣selves to commit iniquity. London, Printed for Giles Caler, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Black-spread-Eagle neere the West end of Pauls, London, 1655.
Francis Harris ARt not thou ashamed to call us the Grand opposers of Queries, and thy self hath put forth a whole book of Queries made up of slanders and false ac∣cusations which thou saies, if rightly considered may be a stop to prevent falling into the snares of the Qua∣kers; and if soberly answered will occasion a discovery of truth. I say, in the answer of it, will be discovered many of thy lies, by the truth, (though they be too many all to mention) and thy self in the snare of Satan, which rightly weighed with thy work thou art found in, may serve not only to pre∣vent others for joyning with thee, but also to awaken those who are a sleep in thy security, for no lyer hath the truth in him; nor no envious person hath eternall life, abiding in him; so with that light of Christ in thy conscience which thou opposest, thou maist read thy work and thy condemnati∣on; In thy word to the Reader, thou saies, that Satan in these latter yeares hath bestirred himself to destroy the Gospel and the essence of Christianity. I say, what Gopel is that thou meanes of, which in this latter yeares hath beene a de∣stroying, dost thou meane the Papists or the Bishops or some branches sprung from those roots? no other Gospel is in danger of destroying with the light of Christ and his infallible Spirit, that thou so much opposes and scornes, with which the work of Christ is now carried out against all such plants which are not of his planting, them to pluck up for the fire: nay be a∣shamed of your professions who have got the finest colours to cover you with all; the Turks and Heathen exceed you in Iustice, mercy meeknesse, and righteousness; this Nation exceeding for wickednesse, and the finest formes, the greatest hypocrisie: shall you doe all this wickednesse, and be delivered in the day of the Lords judgments, by crying the Gospel, the Sabbath, the Sacraments, the Chruches, the Scriptures, &c. When there is not a verse in the Scripture wherein you may
not read your condemnation: shall you be hid by saying, you are sinners, but harden your hearts and increase in it? such an adulterous and stifnecked generation, was never in the world before you, with whom neither judgments nor mercies hath prevailed, and now at his apperance are you gathered a∣gainst him, from all quarters of the Nations, armed with wea∣pons like your Master for whom you fight, some with lies and slanders; back-biting, and false accusing, laying to our charge (in whom he is) things we never knew, and accus∣ing us with things to come which we never intended; and these are the head of the Serpent which makes way for ga∣thering all the body and taile, some with clubs and stones, stocks and prisons, some beating in the Synagogues and hal∣ing before Rulers, some plotting in secret, hatching the Cockatrice eggs which yet you have not power to bring forth; and soe all is at work, Gog and Magog against the Lambe, and his despised ones where he is; the prisons are fulfilled throughout the Nation: and the Devill is come downe in great rage, and the Nations are mad, yet can you not believe that this is the work of the Devill, thus to make havocke, though none of God was ever found in it, but his time is short, and to judgment he must come, head and taile, root and branch, the day is at hand: here is the faith and the pa∣tience of the Saints, he that hath an eare can only heare, and he that hath an eye can see, but the world is as blind and deafe as ever. The occasion of thy Queries thou saies is the increase of the Quakers in Glocestershire; and thou saies in a rude manner thou did compose them, which some perswaded thee to correct, &c. I say they are rightly called rude, and so they will appeare in time, and thy ignorance also who thinks to stop the work of the Lord with these Queries; but if thou had taken counsell so to have corrected them as to have taken out all thy lies, thou had marred the foundation of thy Que∣ries and with the light of Christ, in thy conscience thou might have answered thy selfe, covered thy shame, and not have
brought forth such a shamefull birth as this, into the world; the first coppie of them thou saies thou dsowned; I say if ever thou own truth thou will dsowne the second also? but thou seemes to put the fault, why thou printed them upon the Quakers, who thou saies threatned to publish the Coppie in thy name, and thou saies some favorites of ours perswaded thee not to publish any thing against us; saying we would cast dirt and filth in thy face, and set out thy miscariages in a mul∣tiplying glass, alledging to thee, the Counsell of Gamaliel &c. I say: thy speech bewrayes thee, was this our friend which gave this false testimonie against us? he was a friend to thee, if thou couldest have seene it, and have taken his Counsell after Gamaliel; but he hath not spoken truth of us for I am so far from multiplying thy miscariages, that a third part of thy lies I have not mentioned. And the quakers had done thee no wrong, had they published in thy name what thou wrote, yet I judge the least of the Quakers might have been much better imployed, then to fill peoples eares with such ly∣ing vanities; which are most fit to rot had not thou brought them first to light: And thou speaks as of some feares of some reports, that are out against thee, concerning thy con∣versation, as though the Quakers should publish them; to which, I say, if thy conscience accuse thee; and being inlight∣ned with the light of Christ, owne the light and turne to it, and repent of thy sin and love the light which shews it, ther∣in should I rejoyce, more then in publishing of it; thou tells of a list & Catalogue, of as vile wretches who are lately turned Quakers as any the Country doth afford, and this thou saies to deter people from following us. I say thats my joy on their behalfe (though troubled for you) to see the Scripture fulfilled and fulfilling, they come from far and sit downe in the Kingdom, but the Children of the Kingdome cast out, yeaMath. 21. 31. 32. publicans and harlots take the Kingdome before you: good is the word of the Lord which is now fulfilling, but woe untoMat. 8. 11. you who it is fulfilled upon, and thou saies in thy Queries
the Reader may see not only the face but the whole body of the Quakers Tenets; I say they may see a body of thy lies, where withall thou art arming thy selfe against the Lord; but the body of the Quakers are out of the sight of hell and death, and all the darke fallible Spirits that are in covenant there∣with. And thou sayest, our Antiscripturall inventions will of themselves shortly fall to the ground like as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs when tis shaken of a mighty winde; I say, in∣ventions are thine who hath not the light and Spirit in thee, but for our fall, that is the false prophet that speaks in thee and so it shall be seene, every day more and more, the might of the winde of the lyer cannot shake our foundation. Yet thy Queries I shall answer, so much of them as have any truth in them, and some of thy lyes I shall returne thee a∣gaine which may seeme to slander the truth most, and for the rest let them alone as not worth mentioning, nor troubling the cares of people with them, and so in plainenesse, as followeth.
AN Answer to Twenty Eight Queries sent out by Francis Harris, to those People he calls Quakers. IN thy first Query thou askes the way of Gods discove∣ry to the sons of men, and whether we come from God, or we speak of our selves, and the Light of consci∣ence by which we walke, whether our dipensation be from Mount Sinai, or Zion &c. Our dispensation is of the Spirit of light, whereby we are led, and Mount Sinai we know, and the law received from Gods owne mouth, where the beast cannot touch, and from the wilderness of sin are we journeyed, and some journeying, and the wilderness of Judea we know, and that righteousness fulfilled, where the generation of Vipers is rejected, Scribes and Pharises; and to Mount Sion we are come, & many is coming with joy & songs of deliverance, and sorrows, tears, and fighing flies away, with the wild asses who snuffs up the wind, and never came to the yoake, kicks and scoffs at, when they see o∣thers brought to teares and sorrow, and so in vaine minds talks of wiping teares away where none is, and talks of Sion; who have the words, but are still in Egypt, and in the state of Iannes and Iambres, withstanding Is∣aels seed in the imitations, but knows not Israels light but scoffe at it, and to all such it is a Cloud, and dark∣ness, which is light by night, to such as beleive and are in their jorney towards Sion, and with that light are we separated, and our enemies condemned in darkness, and shall not come nigh us though they pursue, and through tis are we deliered from bondage, and that which tendeth to bondage; and so through the law weGal 2. 19. are made free from the law, and do not oyd the law,Rom. 3. 31
God forbid; And where is thou asks whether this be not done away. I say thou might first know it fulfilled, there shall not a jot of the law passe till all be fullfilled, goe learne what that meanes (Mat. 5. 17, to the end) and the Saints waited to have the righteousness of the law full∣filled in them, which vaine minds cast behind their backs: Rom. 8. 4: and that law we see fulfilled, and ful∣filling, which is spirituall, just, and good; and hereinRom. 7. 12 14. our teaching and the effects thereof, are one with that which the Gospel did and doth produce. And thus the summ of thy first and second Queries are answered, except such lies as these, that we press upon people nothing but horror and amazement, and that we do profess to lie under them along time, seeke to affright others into them, that we stumble at the noone day, that there is no Gospel light in us, &c. which all being but lies heaped togather, thou may take them back not worth answering. And for thy mischie∣vous words against us in that thou calls roareing, I say thou may read thy generation and thy worke, Psa. 38. while David roared, such as thou imagined mischiefe, and his enemies was lively and strong and multiplyed against him. In this Query thou asks if that religion be of God, which for the outward part consists in little else but thou and thee, and railing against Preist, and Tythes, hirelings, and grosse sins, &c, That our religion consists of any outward thing or de∣portment is false; But are not all these things thou carps at, the practises of the Saints? did not they declare against the Priests, hirelings & Tythes, which thou calls railing in us? Or did they ever use any other language but thee or thou to a particular, who ever it was, God or man? Thou shameless man! how dost thou discover thy envi∣ous Spirit against the practice of Christ and his people?
canst thou find nothing in us to envy against, but Scripture practice? be ashamed of thy doctrine, who art come forthJo 10. 13 into the world, to plead against the Saints, to hold upJob. 32.  22 Hirelings, Priests, & Tythes, which Christ & the Apostles cryed downe, & to plead for flattering Titles, against the language of Scripture, and against the true language of the Nation, brought forth only to honour the Devils pride, who is so exalted in men that he would have a better language then God, and all good men have given and taken freely in all ages, for God is one in all his, but the Devill is legions; and this thy work shews thy Master, and yet in this his work thou would have the name of Christ to cover thee with: but the light which thou hates is come, and thou art found out by thy works, thy words cannot hide thee, who is bending thy wits to lead out of the Saints practice, into Country customes, and saies, would not Christ and the pen-men of Scrip∣tures have used it, and suited with the place where they had come; I say Christ and the pen-men of Scripture were in place where the Devill raigned (as we are,) but they was redeemed from conformitie to him, and his, from customs of the world, Nations, kindreds, tongues, and People, for which they was hated, and evill spoken of by the Devills instruments, who are in his Kingdom and custome, and by such are we hated, and slandered now, for the same practises and language: and have not the pen-men of the Scripture shewed what they would do in their writings, which thou would alter, to make way for proud Haman and his devouring nature, and would accuse us for railing accusations, because we with∣stand thee: And thou askes if we doe not abuse that Scripture, Luke 10. 4. I say it is the Devill that abuses Scripture in leading vaine minds to talke of it, who doe not walke in it, but would accuse them that doe, whom Christ hath sent forth and fitted for that purpose by his Spirit and power, and such knows what to salute, and to
whom they bid God speed, and will follow no man traditions. In this thou Queries, In what the language of the Spi∣rit consists in, and Whether any mortall creature now may be said to speak the pure language of the Spirit, &c. The language of the Spirit consists in that, which the Spirit speaks or moves the Creature to speake, and such is the pure language of the Spirit though spoken through a mortall Creature; and where the fallen wisdom is si∣lent and selfe dead, there it is spoken forth without mix∣ture, but while the first borne lives, where the light is denyed, this is not knowne, who are not redeemed from Nations and their Customes. And whereas thou askest what Christ meant when he said, Simon behold Satan hath a desire to sift you: I say, he meant as he spoke, that Satan had a desire to sift the disciples, and so he hath at this day, which the prayer of the Spirit of Christ pre∣vailes against, and no man can speake the language of the Spirit in flattering titles, neither doth the Spirit frame any such speech. And they that have this Spirit have power to speak the pure language without arroga∣ting to themselves; and thou that speaks evill of this lan∣guage,Mark. 3. 29. 30. art the blasphemer thou speaks on, who saies this is contrary to the divine motions which is but contrary to thy Nationall customes, and the Devills pride, who withstands mans redemption, out of the Fall, where allJam. 2. the flattering titles, respect of persons, vain customs and worships is; which the faith of Christ denies, which brings out of the Fall. This Query is made up of lies: and do thou, and all thy generation prove wherein we refuse to give that re∣verence to Majestrates which Christ and the Apostles did both in doing and suffering; till then stop thy mouth thou slanderer, who art opening thy mouth in blasphe∣my and lying, who saith it is our pea that our Maje∣strates are not Christian Majestrates, and that the high Priest under the law had nothing to do by the law of
Moses to sit as Judge, and divers such lies not worth mentioning. The sum of this Query is to deny the infallible Spirit in the Saints, to be the same now that it was in the pen-men of the Scripture, and to deny it for te trying of all Spirits, and thou would set up the letter in its stead, for a rule to try Spirits and doctrines. And when thou hast done thou confesses the Scripture to be but a dead letter, and so death in thee, being thy rule with the dead letter, thou would try the Spirit of the living God. But to the Querie: this I say the infallible Spirit by which the Scriptures were given forth, is the sole tryer of Spirits & doctrines, neither hath it need of any additi∣on where it is, nor can thou who denies this Spirit, nor thy fore-fathers, the Jewes, ever could know Christ, nor the voyces of the Scriptures though you read them every day; and so are fulfilling them, bringing the let∣ter to oppose Christ; as they did so dost thou, Acts 13. 27. and so denys the end of the Scriptures which is to set up the Spirit of God for judge, and not themselves, and this is the right use of the Scriptures, when the man of God reads them, which the man of sin turnes them to uphold sin and wrests them to the destruction of the Creature, where he reads them: neither do we throw them aside according to thy slander, and thou that de∣nyes the infallible Spirit, art in the delusion of Satan (thou speaks on) and horrid opinions and changeable Religions, and would keepe people from closeing with the Spirit, leading them from the living to the dead and denying the light in thee, goes not to the law of the new Covenant, nor testimony of Jesus which is sealed up a∣mongIsa. 8 16. the disciples, but to the letter, which all the world hath the letter that will read it, or buy it. And whereas thou asks what Peter meanes when he calls the Scriptures a sure word of prophecy: I say that is but thy dark imaginations, who knowes not Peters
voyce; for the letter was not a surer word then the voyce from Gods own mouth, which they heard from heaven. The Spirit of prophesie thou knows not, who denyes infallibility, and so (as its said) thy faith lies in what others hath written. Thou askes whether that can be the way of God which hath nothing to warrant it but the bare words and affirmations of men, which they call infallible, and whether this be a sufficient ground to satisfy others. That Spirit of God which is infallible is the sufficient ground, and to preach; that is the way of God, neither had this ever any testimony but what is of it selfe, for the worlds wisdom, and carnall naturall man can neither receive it nor beare testimony of it, onely such who be∣leive it, beare its testimony, and to such the light and life breaks forth, but to the unbeleivers who cannot sub∣mitLuke 19. 14. to it, even the same that was from the beginning, and such as say we will not have this man to rule over us such abide in darkness and perish for ever, because they believe not in the light and submit unto it, for this is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love darkness, and here thou hast read thineJoh. 3. own condition without faith and without wisdom. Thou askes whether our way be of God because it is altogether new, and such as wherein God never yet ap∣peared unto the sons of men, nor doth the Scripture hold out any such manifestation of God, as we teach; and then saist, thou shalt undertake to discoer us in most of our tenents, &c. The way of God was ever new to the old man, but for thy saying God did never appeare in this way, nor the Scripture hold it out, those are but thy lies: it had been most like for thee (if thou had aimed at honesty) to have disproved our way or our tenents, (according to thine undertaking) before thou had proceeded to slan∣der, but the former of these is more ready with thy fal∣lible
Spirit then the latter, and ever was with the accuser of the Brethren; and thou proceeds to limit God, and saist thou art assured that this is the last, in which God wil ever appeare unto the sons of men. I say thou art in the way that that generation ever was in, putting God af∣far off, who would never own his apperance present; yet this generation of you exceeds all your fore-fathers herein, who would wholly exclud him never to appeare more unto the sons of men, as some of your Rabbies have lately said that God hath spoken his last, and so that you being spiritually deafe and blind do conclude that God is dead like your selves, and as you know him so you worship him, literall knowledge, literall wor∣ship, for who knows not in Spirit, cannot worship in Spirit, and with such as have God within, so is his wor∣ship, which stands not in outward meats and drinks nor carnall things, not in oldness of the letter but in new∣ness of the Spirit. In this Query thou asks, if we do not delude people, in affirming that there is a pure light of Christ in every man and woman by nature, according to which if they walke they shall avoyd sin, and e saved, if they refuse to hearken to it they shall perish, &c. The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, nor thou speak truth without lying: did thou ever heare us say, men and women have this light by nature, we know this light we speake of to be spirituall, and the light of Christ wherewith he enlightens every one that comes into the world, and that it is pure, and that whosoever believsJohn 1. 9. and follows it shall not abide in darkness, but shallJohn 8. 12. have eternall life, and he that beleivs it not, is damnedJohn 3. 17. and whoever draws people from this spirituall light to observe any traditions, without this light, though by God they have beene formerly commanded, are the se∣ducers, nay the Apostle calls it witchcraft, and thou thatGal. 3. saies the Scriptures tells you the contrary, belies the
Scriptures, for Christ saies the Kingdom of GodLuke 17. 20, 21. is within even the Pharises who though they were as blind as thou, and could not beleive it, yet was not they so impudent as to deny it in plaine words, as thou dost: how blind are you in this age more then ever any was before you; the Jewes who in the Old Covenant denyed Christ shall in the day of Judg∣ment arise against you, who profess the new Cove∣nant in Spirit, and yet deny the light of Christ within, to lead to God out of the world, art thou a spirituall man who hast thy law and light and word and Christ to seeke without? Is the Kingdom of God within, and is he notLuke 17. 21. in his Kingdom? art not thou he whom the God of this world hath blinded the eye of the mind, and so the Gos∣pel is hid and thou lyest groping in the dark, loe here, loe there, who art gone out into the world, to deceive be∣ing deceived, given up to beleive lies and tell lies, who would make people beleive it was Adams sin to looke to the light within, whose sin was to looke out to the Counsell of others who had lost their guid in Spirit and art now teaching people to waite for a power of2 Cor. 13. 5 Christ without them, and not Christ within: so the Re∣probate is turned teacher. And this is a full answer to thy tenth Query; onely see thy own confusion, and confession, first in denying Iohns words, Iohn 1. 9. That this light is not in the heart of every man, and then saies, till this light shine in the soule, it remaines in the dark hearts of men, and brings Iohn 1. 5. to prove it, O that ever men should be so sot∣tish to appeare in the world in print in such confusions first to deny the light within, and then to prove it re∣maines in the dark heart, till it shine forth, and brings Hos. 6. 3. Eph. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 6. to prove thy own confusions. In this Query thou goes on adding thy lies, saying that we say this light is in men and women by nature,  and as that we put the light of nature in the room of Christ
when its thy work all along to put the light of nature in his room, and thou askes if people may not by the light of nature do the things contained in the law, &c. I say, no other light nor nature but the divine light and nature, can do the things contained in the law and who follow that light have a law unto themselves with∣in themselves, written in their hearts, by which law ofRom. 8. 1. the Spirit, they are made free from the law of sin and death, their conscience bearing them witness, & excusing or accusing according as God shall judge the world by2 Cor. 1. 12 the Gospel and this is not fallen nature neither do we attribute it thereunto, but to the divine nature and po∣wer which all that beleive in the light, come to be par∣takers2 Pet. i. 3. 4 of, though they never partake of the letter: for where this Spirit is knowne and followed, the light that is in them is not darkness, that's their condition where the talent is hid neither doth the Scripture speake of any light, but the light of Christ, all else is darkness though darkness may imagine it to be light, as the blind generation ever did who put light for darkness, and darkness for light, who walke not according to the testi∣mony of the light in their conscience, neither thou nor the Preists, but according to your own wills, lusts, and imaginations, and by them are guided, and thus sets up your posts by Gods posts: your foolish hearts being dark∣ned, and o become vaine in your imaginations, who did not like to retaine God in their knowledge, because that which may be knowne of God is manifest in themRom. 1. 19 so become filled with all unrighteousnesse, and these are the idolaters thou speaks on, which are not under the Gospel (as thou saies they are) but under their imagi∣nations and so set up a naturall light to walke by, in stead of the light of Christ, which is grosse darkness to the things of God, and here thou maist read thy selfe and thy 12th Querie also answered. In this Querie having repeated thy former lies with
an addition, thou askes if our crying out against some grosse sins, railing against Priests tythes, hirelings and the like, be not Satan in us, &c. Railing is thine own and lying also: but denying the hirelings and the Priest that took tythes (with theirHeb. 6. tyths) is the work of Christ and his Apostles, which all his ever owned: and thats Satan in thee, which opposes it and thou art his minister who art pleading for the hire∣lings and his tythes contrary to Christ, and so would o∣verthrow the foundation of the Gospel, and Gospel or∣dinances, who cals the hirelings the servants of the Lord and saies they dwell in heaven, who are serving their bellies with earthly things, denying the light of Christ and his practice and the practice of all his: and whereas thou sayest under a pretence of crying downe Priests and hirelings, we cry downe all the Apostolicall institu∣tions of Christ; I say tythes and hirelings under the Gos∣pel are not of Christs instituting, nor his Apostles, but by the Pope was they instituted, and thou and all that takes part with him and his institutions, cannot keepe them from being scattered, neither are any of them the Lords people who are so gathered, but now the sheep∣heard is come to save the sheep, the wild beasts must fly every one to their harbor, from whence they came, and you that are come out from the stock of the Priests, who came out from the root of the Pope, stand up together that you may be broken; roote and off spring. Thou askes whether our selfe abasing, Quakings, trem∣blings, roaring, crying, going in sackcloath, and haire∣cloath,Nehemiah 9. 1. sitting in ashes, living apart from our wifes, si∣lent gestures till the power move, (with some other lies thou adds) be any other then a voluntary humility. &c. Herein thou hast shewed how little thou knows of the Saints conditions, or being acted contrary to thine own will: is there any of these aforementioned, but the
Saints have been brought through them: contrary toPsa. 32. Psa. 22 there own wills, and have declared them in Scripture,Luke 10. 13. which thou enemie to their Spirit which acted them thus, calls anticke gestures, and voluntary humility,Luke 41. 26. canst thou judge it in us, and not in them, would notIa. 22. 12 13. thy fallible spirit have said as much, to have seen them so acted before the Scripture declared it, who dare thus blaspheme that Spirit, now when the Scriptures hath witnessed it, and yet saith, the Scriptures is the judge of all Spirits, so with the Scripture, thy Spirit is judged to be the Spirit of the Devill, who opposes, and reproaches the actings of the Spirit of God in the Saints: lying and saying that they are acted by the light of nature, but what else canst thou judge, with thy fallible Spirit of the things of God, or the Saints liberty, or what there is in it. In this Querie thou askes whether the nature of the covenant of grace be not one of the most needfull truths that a people can be taught, and thou sayest in all our speakings and writings we seldome are never touch up∣on it, nor of Gods free actings in it, &c. With thy blind fallible Spirit thou art here judging a∣gain thou knows not what, who hath neither read all our writings nor been at all our meetings, so with thy false judgment condemnes thy selfe to be one of those that speaks evil of that thou knows not: Art not thou a∣shamed to accuse us, for not declaring the nature of the Covenant of grace, and thou thy selfe denying the light within, which is the light of the Covenant, is not that the thing for which thou art become our enemy because we declare the light and Covenant to be within, and Gods free actings therein whi'st thy envie leads thee, thinking to reproach us, how dost thou cover thy seeJee. 31. 31. 33. with thine owne shame, like the troubled sea casting up mire & dirt? Is not the new Covenant its nature & pro∣miseHeb. 8. . 10. within, whicch thou art preaching without, & re∣proachest the infallible Spirit within, and thou saies the
new Covenant attributes the whole operation onely to God: thou blind sot, canst thou atribute the work in man to God, who denies the infalible Spirit in man? doth the Spirit of God, work where it is not, or thou denies his Spirit to be infallible where it is: so thou that denies the infallible Spirit, must attribute either to the naturall light, or the Spirit of the Devills, for there is nothing of God but what is infallible, for so is his Spirit, & so is his Covnant, which are within all that know it, but thou art without, and so without God in the World; heaping up thy lies, saying that we drive people into Quaking, and glorys in it, and attributes that to the light of nature which is the proper worke of Christ, and thus thon heapes up thy lies together. This Qerie being wholly made up of lies, not being worth repeating after thee, I returne them to thee a∣gaine being thy owne condition; but Christs meekeness we owne, and selfe we deny, selfe righteousness, and selfe actings, thou art there, who hast not the infallible Spirit to act thee, so thou hast nought to act thee but thy selfe or the Devill. Thou askes if it be not the policy of Satan, now that so much Gospel ight is discovered, that he cannot out as act uncleane Spirits, nor in Popish Antichristian formes superstitious inventions as formerly to pretend in his future actings, to be for Christ: thereby he may som way or other blemish his primitive administrations, &c. Heare in thy confusion thou askes, thou knowes not what; The Gospel light is within and so was in the A∣postles time 2 Cor. 4. Luke 17. 20. but thou that hast noe light in thee, nor the infallible Spirit, art in the policy of Satan, and with thy uncleane Spirit, acting against the light of Christ with thy lies and slanders, and the primitive administrations thou knowest not but as thou hast received by tradition from the letter, and so thy Ad∣ministration
is literall, but the Saints was and is spi∣rituall in the light and not in the letter, 2 Cor. 3. And whereas thou tells of sifting us, I say what hast thou to sift us with, who denies the light of Christ in thee? and the infallible Spirit, hast thou any other but the Spirit of Satan, whose desire is ever to be sifting the Saints, but thy Spirit must not prevaile, against the Children of light, thou art without with thy sin amongst the chaffe but the wheat is within. Whether it be safe for Christians to forsake, and let goe those Gospel dispensations of the Spirit of truth, in which God hath sweetly and blessedly appeared unto their soules, and wherein they have had blessed experi∣ences of God, &c. I say what hast thou or any else who deny the light of Christ and the infallible Spirit to let goe, that is worth keeping, art thou affraid of losing the Spirit of delusions for the Spirit of truth thou hast not, for that is infallible and that which hath appeared to thy soule, who hath noe light in thee, nor the Spirit of God, is but the Spi∣rit of delusion, or somthing in thy imaginations, who art a Child of darkness, and therein is all thy experience which thou art so affraid to loose, and whereas thou would make people beleive that the dispensation of the light and infallible Spirit hath noe promise from God, and that they that doe so refuse him that speaks from heaven. I say herein thou manifest, what thou knowes of any promise from God, or voyce from heaven, whoEze. 11. 19 denies it to be in the light or infallible Spirit, withoutJo. 8. 12. which there is no promise nor word but what is sto∣lenRom. 8. 9. 14. from others, or out of a booke, and had thou had noIsa. 49. 6. book thou had no voice nor promise, who hast no light, nor that Spirit by which alone the love of God is sealed to all that hath it. Whether this power we have received, and press peo∣ple to waite for, be from God, from Satan, or from the
Spirit of bondage, and thou askes if the power of God, when it hath come, hath put his people into such strange fits of trembling and quaking as if their joynts were fallen in peices, &c. That power we have received, and presse people to waite for, is the power of God, which thou knowes not nor its effects, who calls them strange fits, when Daniell heard the word of the Lord he stood trembling; And when Moses heard the word of the Lord, he exceedingly feared and quaked; And David his bones were out ofDan.10 11 joynt, this thon calls strange fits who never knew theHeb. 12. 21. word of the Lord; who hath eyes and sees not, earesPsa. 22. 14. and heares not, and so art out of the feare of God: one of those thou maist read on, Jer. 5. 21. 20. and Isa. 56. 5, who art venting out thy malice against such as feare the Lord, and tremble at his presence: but to trembling thou shalt come, when thou shall see his face: whom thou now art reproaching, then shalt thou know Bel∣shazers condition, which now with thy vaine minde thou art talking of: And whereas thou tells of liberty where the Spirit of the Lord is, then there is none in thee, who denies the infallible Spirit in thee, but thy liberty is in thy beastly, sensuall, imaginations; and in thy naturall condition thou art, who art not borne of that Spirit; And it is thou that is in Satans work, to drive people from Christ who denies his light and Spi∣rit, and nought else hast thou received but a Spirit of bondage, who hath not the Spirit of the Father in thee, and so art bound in the chaines of darkness, and would keepe others with thee: and thy consolation, and safety is but with Carnall things; who hath not in thee, the infallible Spirit, but our consolation is in the Spirit, of God which we have in us, received of him, in his light. And whereas thou Queries, whether that which we call perfection be not rather imperfection, &c.
No, It is that which shews thy imperfection and Pharisaicall boastings, it is that which leads us from sin, and to the remission, and the love of God which thinks no evill; And from the righteous mans state which falls seven times a day (which thou tells on) to Christ which doth not fall, and from that state that doth offend, and from selfe sufficiency to the sufficiency of Christ which tells people, see they have sinned and stand in need of a Saviour, who saves them from their sin, whose blood cleanseth from all sin, and there is the time of seeing sin, and have sinned, and confessing and forsaking sin, and the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin: and perfection is not attained in thy life thou lives in, for its the man of God thats perfect, and he knowes Pauls words who serves God in newness of life, and not in oldness of letter and when thou comes to Pauls life, thou shalt know Pauls state, which we see and know, who said, As many of us as be perfect, be thus minded, and he was one of that (us) who wished their perfection, and we deny thy Spirit which keeps thee allwayes in the warfare, but we witness the Spirit of the Apostles, which is to present e∣very man perfect in Christ Jesus, and this is the Spirit the Quakers witness. Thou Queries if it be safe for Christians to be every yeare changing their religion, &c. Thou that hast not the Spirit that was in the Apostles, thou hast the Spirit of the world, where the changing religions is, and that Spirit grows not, nor with it thou grows not up in grace; which the Spirit that was in the Apostles did, and who are in it doth, and so the Ranters Levellers, and changing religions thou tells on, are of thy Spirit, whose house is not upon the Rock: so, now the wind blowes, so many of them tumbles downe, and the rest of the lies returne into thy own bosome, who art one of the tempest (thou tells on) caryed about with wind and words of men, and so not stead-fast, but with the
Spirit that is stedfast are discovered, which tendeth into Christ, where we have an interest in God, who is a con∣suming fire, who is bringing all thy actings to light; and thou askes what settlement people can gather to themselves, I say such a settlement as thou art in, which is but vaine notions, which now doth oppose the Gos∣pel and the glorious light of it, but with it thou art con∣demned, which leads to the Rock, where the love of the truth is received, and now thou art left in thy confusi∣on, having not the power, art turned away from, and this thou calls changeing, like the Pope and all sects who calls it heresie, to come out from their traditions so dost thou, and your argument is one, and where as thou tells of a wandring Spirit, I say stop thy mouth for shame, what Spirit else hast thou, who denies the light of Christ and the infallible Spirit, have not all cause who loves the Spirit of truth, or their own souls, to shun thee and thy vaine notions, which are not from the Spi∣rit of God, that was in the Saints. Thou askes whether they are carried on by the po∣wer of God in their fastings and abstinence from meate, when they are not fatter and fairer then they was before, &c. Canst thou judge what power David was carried on by, whose knees was weake through fasting, and his fleshPsal. 109. 24. 25. failed of fatness; whereby he became a reproach toPsal. 1019. 70. such as thee, who looked on him; or did the three Chil∣dren fast which thou talks on that they was fairer: bePsal. 17. 10. ashamed of thy proof, and thy experience, thou declar∣est of the Saints conditions, thou art more like one of those whose hearts were fat as greece, and whose eies stood out with fatness; who speaks wickedly and lofti∣ly, one of the ungodly who prospers in this world who increases in riches, which David spoke of Psal. 73: and such was ever scoffers at the Saints fastings: that in thy conscience shall witness it.
Thou askes if we under a pretence of crying up new light we do not bring people back to the same frame of Spirit, under which they were when they first made a profession of godliness, as crying out against pride and other gross sins, &c. The light of Christ is new to thee who art the old man and the Child of darkness, though it be the same that was from the beginning, which we cry out against pride and all gross sins, which thou who art gross in thy spirituall pride art an enemie to, and carping against; and after confesses that they are good in themselves, and needfull to be knowne, so an enemie thou art to that which is good, and an opposer of that which is need∣full to be knowne: out of thine own mouth be thou judged, and whereas thou talks of progress in godliness I say godliness thou art an enemie to; and thy pro∣gress is in opposition to it, denying the light of Christ and his infallible Spirit, and so with the Spirit of Anti-Christ art thou pleading for Preists and hirelings, such as are of thine own Spirit, which the Spirit of Christ beares witness against. Thou askest whether we do beleive that the Scriptures that speaks of quaking and trembling are to be under∣stood of the quaking and trembling of the joynts, limbs and members of the fleshly body of the Creature: and whether there may not be this trembling in a perfon unwrought upon by the power of God. The Scriptures are true what they speake, but they could never be understood by thy fallible Spirit, which is contrary to that which gave them forth, which is in∣fallible, & so to thee they are a parable, who art in that generation, that would wrest them to thy own destru∣ction,2 Pet. 3. 16 and the destruction of others, which were given forth to be fullfilled, and not to be wrested, to the un∣derstanding of the carnall Spirit. And this trembling spoken on in the Scripture is not without the power of
God, yet there may be a work upon the soule, without this trembling of the body: but who art thou that would limit him which knows neither of these who without the light of Christ and the infallible Spirit in thee, art judging in thy dark mind, how God looks up∣on man; falsely accusing us, for putting literall senses upon the scriptures which is thine own work, who art sensuall, having not the Spirit, thy sence must be literall and carnall, and devilish. In this Query thou askest, if our maine drift be not to bring men that are begun in the Spirit to look after per∣fection from the flesh: and thou saies there is little or nothing in our teaching or writing, that a soule spiritu∣allized can close with, but rather such things as do e∣clipse and darken the Spirits teaching, &c. What Spirit is it that thou art begun in who denies the infallible Spirit to be in thee is not that the Spirit of Satan which is fallible, and our maine drift is to bring people from that Spirit, by the light of Christ to him that is infallible which thou oppolest, so let all judge who knowes any thing of light and of the Spirit, be wit∣nesses against thee, whether it be not by exhorting peo∣ple to mind the light of Christ and the moving of the Spirit of God within them that darkens the Spirits teaching: or thou who denies the light of Christ and the infallible Spirit, to set up a visible teacher in its stead. And whereas thou askest what brought the Galathians who had begun in the Spirit, back, to look after perfecti∣on in the flesh. I say it was such as thou who bewitchedGall. 3. them and led them back from the teachings of the Spirit unto the letter and carnall Ordinances, and Ruidments which is thy work now, and so have been with thy que∣ry and thy practice, and thy lies, who saies we seek to Captivate the Lords People: to bring them from liber∣ty to bondage: to bring them to tremblings and feares,Phill. 2. 12. which are no waies consistent with the Gospel Mini∣stration;
that nothing from us is heard sutable to the teachings of the Spirit, that we seldome or never speake of such truths: Of the Spirits teaching, and convictions: Of Christ formed in the Saints: Of Christ in us the hope of glory: Of our being compleat in him: Of Communion with the Father through him; Of pray∣er in the Spirit: Of Gods revealing his mind to his people by the Spirit. And thou saies we have a designe yet unknowne, and that we are carryed out by another Spirit, then the Spirit of the new Testament. Which are so many lying slanders, heaped against us in one query, which I send thee back into the pit from whence they came till thou prove them against us: herein thy Spirit is seene by his fruits, not to be infallible, but art making a refuge of lies to save thy Image from the sword. And in thy next Query thou adde divers more lies under the pretence of a doubtfull Question, whether we do not at last come to deny the resurrection; To deny the Scriptures and their authority; To deny God; To deny Christ, and the Spirit and all (and yet thou saies thou sees but our outsides, though thou thus judge what we will doe) and that our teachers are but imitators; That our union is not so great as people imagine; That we have branched our selves into severall sorts. As walk∣ing, singing, creeping naked; And virgin-Quakers. And in time will break out into as many sorts of orders as there are of Fryars, and thou saies Satan must disco∣ver himselfe though he loose all. I say whosoever knowes Satans works in the least measure of light may see him sufficiently discovered in these two queries, and a great deal of his Treasure thou hast brought forth; above twenty lies all laid at stake, and all in vaine and like to be lost, and swept away, and the snake in the grass which thou tells on, which lay hid, thou hast brought into the high way, but to no purpose, but that his head might be bruised.
Query 27. In this Query thou askest, if it be not the great work of Christians to expect the comming of Christ, their glorious Bridegroom to marry him to himself, &c. Answ. I say, Christs comming will be a black day to thee, and all the Generation of Lyars and slanderers: he comes to glorifie none such, nor marry them to him, thou art married to the Devil, and brings forth of his his brood abundantly: therefore depart from iniquity, till then cease to take Christ into thy polluted lips, who still goes on bringing forth thy venom to cast upon us, as though we perswaded the Saints, that the Bride∣groom is gone, and will not return: And that we in effect deprive Gods people of all society with their Bridegroom: and that we evidently declare that we are ignorant of his glorious approaching: wherein thou e∣vidently declares, that when the Ethiopian can change his skin, then thou wilt leave false accusing and slander∣ing. And thou tells of the Children of the Bride-Cham∣ber, cannot mourn while the Bridegroom is with them, and of putting people into a watching frame of spirit. I say, what Bridegroom knowes thou with thee, who de∣ny the light of Christ, and the infallible spirit in thee: And what spirit wilt thou watch withall, the lying spi∣rit never knew him, nor must not enter with him, but is shut out with the Sorcerers and Whoremongers. Query 28. In this thou askest whether our tenents shall not decay and fall, as Satan is discovered in his mysterious actings, &c. Answ. I answer: no, as Satan is discovered with his lies and filthiness, so shall the light of Christ, and the infallible spirit be advanced, which discovers all inven∣tions new and old, and all Satans mysterious actings, whereby you cannot long continue in your forms, and changeable wayes, invented lies and slanders, covered over with a profession whereby the Nation is deceied,
which deceivers with him are for the bottomless pit. But our safety, and the safety of all Christians is to dwell in the light of Christ, and his Spirit, and so to withdraw from all disorderly walkers, hypocrites, lyers, and slan∣derers; who have not the Spirit, are out of the light, enemies to purity, who are under the power of the man of sin, fighting against God, reproaching his Spirit, deny∣ing his light under a pretence of exhorting the Lords people which is thy work, exhorting them to returne to their former works. I say what works would thou have them to return to, who are yet in the world and never was out of it; they make a bad returne who ever knew any thing of God and returne to thee and thy practice, who art opposing the light, reproaching the Spirit; pleading for tythes and hirelings, preists, heaping up lies and slanders too many to be numbered, for all which thou shalt answer, as that in thy conscience shal witness against thee herein if thou it minde though the truth thou canst not touch, for as the lyer, and envious one is discovered, so our te∣nents, which are in the truth, the light and Spirit, which cannot lie, shall prosper: so behold thy Queries, & when thou writes againe, learne to write rruth, and prove thy slander before thou spread it; and mind that which leads thee to doe as thou would be done unto, and thou wilt see the lyers mouth stopt, the slanderer and false accuser. And now I shall send thee back the summe of thy que∣ries, and of that which thou opposest, in these few words to which thou mayest returne an answer, when thou hast learned to speak truth. First whether is not the mi∣nistration of law, and Gospel both by one Spirit, and both for one end, to wit, to hold forth Christ; And whether the ministration ingraven in stone, be done a∣way in the matter of it, or in the letter of it, or both, or can it passe away as to any particular man or woman till it be fullfilled; And whether is the law of the Spirit of life, and the Covenant of grace, within or without, or
where is it to be known by them that seeke it; whe∣ther woe to the wicked be not a Gospel ministration, & is there any entrance into the Kingdome but through the woes and tribulation: whether thee and thou, de∣clareing against tythes and hirelings, was not the pra∣ctice of Christ and the Apostles, and is not that the Spi∣rit of Satan, that was and is offended at their practice now, and then; and is their language and practice, an afront to Majestrates now, more than then: whether Christ in Spirit, or the letter, be the rule of Christians and guide in all things? And can any thing be sufficient for a ground of faith, but that Spirit which is infallible? is the way of God, new or old to the world? doth Christ enlighten every man that comes into the world, or no? if not, who is it that is not enlightned, and what shall be his Condemnation, or his guide? and was that light, John came to witness, Iohn 1. 9. a naturall light, or the light of Christ? And was John an Ido∣later, in preaching that light, that through him all might beleive in it? whether the Saints did quake and tremble as the Scripture speaks, or some other thing? whether any who have not the infallible Spirit can judge of any thing of God aright? or, hath any such, any dispensation of the Spirit of truth? is perfection a thing to be beleived, and preached, in the Gospel yea or no? must not all religions whatsoever change (or do worse) who have not an infallible Spirit, and foundation? is fasting a sin under the Gospel, if God so command? Is the light of Christ legall bondage, or doth it lead, from the Spirit to be made perfect in the flesh, or doth any o∣ther thing discover the mysterious actings of Satan, but the infallible Spirit in the light of Christ? Here being the summe of thy queries, give thy an∣swer in truth and plaineness, thereto, and thou may discover thy foundation, more plaine, to the simple, that yet see thee not; but who are in the light, needs no far∣ther discovery, then what already is. THE END.
