P1451C 43078116 151638
Mr. PEPYS To the President and Governours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL upon the Present State of the said HOSPITAL. To the Honour'd Sir John Moor, Kt. and President, and the rest of my Honour'd Friends, the Gover∣nours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL. York-Buildings. Monday, Novem. 21. 1698. Gentlemen, IN pursuance of a Resolution of his Lordship the present Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at their last Sitting (our Worthy President Sir John Moore present) in approval of a Proposition of mine on that behalf: I inclose You Copys of two Papers of mine lately wrote, and for their readier Ʋse prepar'd as these are, and directed to the several Members of that Court; relating to what has pass'd between the late Lord Mayor, the said Court, and My self, upon the present State of this Hospital. And this I do; as well for your Information in all my Proceedings in this Matter, and satisfaction in the Regard shewn therein to the Honour, no less than Service of this House (notwithstanding what has been so injuriously averr'd in it to the contrary) as for inlight'ning at once your whole Body, in the Truth, and Moment of the Particulars in present Debate concerning it. In order whereto, and for that the Court of Aldermen have not yet thought fit to allow of my repeated Suit to Them, for their disburthen∣ing me of the Charge I still lie under from them, as your Fellow-Ser∣vant. I do (as such) tender it as my earnest and humble Advice to you, that these Papers may not, like others of mine of equal Import, be ta∣ken-up, and the knowledge of them suppress'd, to the (I fear) irrepa∣rable Wrong of this House: But, if it may stand with your good liking, communicated to a General Court
specially call'd on that behalf. For  as much as, that being done, I shall not doubt a much happier Issue of your Deliberations thereon, than can attend any longer want of it: Besides the preventing what I should otherwise be most unwillingly driven to, of supplying the ineffectuallness of these Papers thus address'd to You in a Body, by a several One to be transmitted to every Member of it. Which I cannot but think my Duty to see done; while standing all of us equally interested in the knowing, and accountable for the due im∣proving thereof, to the Benefit of the Poor, and satisfaction of Those we stand intrusted-by for Them. Which praying your taking in good part from me, as the last Occasion, I hope, ever to have of asking it on these Terms; I do with most sin∣cere Respect remain, Honour'd Gentlemen, Your faithful and obedient Servant, S. Pepys. At a General Court holden in Christs-Hospital. the 21th. day of Novem. 1698. UPon reading a Letter with some printed Papers from Samuel Pepys, Esq; which were all inclosed in a Cover, and directed to the President, and Governours of this Hospital, assembled in Court this 21th of November 1698. It was by this Court ordered, that a General Court shall be summoned to meet on Friday next in the Afternoon, par∣ticularly for consideration of these Papers; And Major Aungier is desir∣ed to attend Mr. Pepys, and acquaint him with the meeting of the Court next Friday. and request the favour of his presence, and to let him know, that if he doth not think that a convenient Day, than to desire him to appoint some other short Day, as may best suit with his occasions; and come provided with the particulars of his charge against this Hospital. William Parrey.
To the President and Governours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL assem∣bled in Court, this 25th. of November 1698. York-Buildings, Fryday, Novemb. 25th. 1698. Gentlemen, I Truly meant what I said, when in Apology for the trouble of mine of the 21th. instant, I bespoke your Pardon; as for the Last I then thought my self ever likely to have occasion of asking it from you on that Subject. But your Commands of the same Date, since brought me by one of your own Number, notifying your Concurrence with me, in assign∣ing this day for holding a special Court upon the Papers I then present∣ed you with; require my appearing to you once more, not with an Ap∣proval only, but with my most serious Thanks for what you have there∣in done; in confidence of its having the good Effects I then bespoke to this unhappy House from it. But having said this; there are two Particulars you at the same time demand of me, which for the sake of such Gentlemen (and those only) as the Extraordinaryness of the Summons may possibly draw hi∣ther, beyond what the common Businesses of the House either are, or can reasonably expect to be attended by; you have made it ne∣cessary for me, in right both to them and my self, to give you a more particular Return to, viz. your bespeaking my Personal Attendance at Your present Meeting, and the bringing with me the Particulars of my Charge against this Hospital. As to the Former whereof; it might possibly be deemed too much for me, here to anticipate the Satisfaction I have largely provided for these very Gentlemen on this Head, out of Your own Books, in that Report of mine, which has lain from more than eight Months since, in the Hands of Your late Lord Mayor, and is now remaining with his honourable Successor in the Court of Aldermen.
From a Committee of whom, having lately had  the Honour of a double Visit, upon the Subject thereof; I assure my self of your soon receiving from that Court, full Satisfaction in the Truth of what I here assert. In the mean time nevertheless, I shall crave leave to observe to these Gentlemen, that the Evils being all now actually falling on Us, which I so long ago foretold, and most painfully labour'd to prevent; None, I presume, will wonder, if I forbear unnecessarily to bring my self within the Reach of a Ruin, I then in Writing advised you of the Reasons of my Withdrawing from; but will (may I pre-judge of any thing) see occasion, sooner to lament their own, than censure my Proceeding herein. Especially, when in the Publick Inquisitions which this Mat∣ter must inevitably draw on Us, they shall find themselves, from the very Register of their Attendances, made accountable for the Obliquities of our Courts and Committees, even in those very Transactions, where∣in themselves possibly were wholly passive, if not open Opposers: And this also most to be apprehended, from the very Men they were so over∣born by, therein. For such was my Observation in my own Case, in more than a few Instances (still to be recurr'd to) before, for Self-security, I was forced to let fall the Personal Duty I had for seven Years had the ho∣nour of paying to this House; and not (I thank God) without some Marks still extant of the Fruits of it. But for the Other, relating to the Particulars you ask-for, of my Charge against this Hospital. I do not know, that in any thing I have hitherto said or done in this Cause, I have so demeaned my self; as to deserve being treated as your Accuser. Forasmuch, as had that been in my Eye, I should not have chosen either this Stile or this Place for the exeeuting it in. But if there be any of our Number, whose Managements of their Trusts have been such, as will not endure a plain and impartial State of our Condition to be laid either before the House it self, or those to whom it stands immediately accountable for it (and that is all I have hitherto pretended to) without giving it the envious Brand of a Charge against them. I must not then disown my being indeed their Accuser: But in lieu of the former Difficulty, declare my self yet so much the more sur∣prised, how they should come now to own the want of a Charge from me, whose every Paper, from the day of my Withdrawing from them to this, has been little other. A Truth that will but too soon become necessary to be shewn them. But forasmuch as I have reason to believe this Demand to be owing only to the Ʋneasinesses it has been my Misfortune to occasion somewhere, by my late Enquiries into these Managements, and from my Endeavours to apprise this Court of the true Effects thereof, upon the miserable In∣fants we stand here accountable to Almighty God for. I shall take leave to put them in mind, of what was (at their own instance) laid before them from me on this Subject, now near twelve Months since. Where∣of, least it may have been the Fate of That also, to miss your View, as it has been Another's of a later Date: I am prepared for supplying you with such a Copy of it, as these Gentlemen will least question the Truth of, when they find it transcribed all with the Treasurer's own Hand,
and attested by the Clerks of most present Credit with them, Mr. Reeve, Mr. Plumb, and Mr. Yeo. And if this Paper, with what it contains of the present State of this House, must be taken for a Charge against them; I am not surprised at their Disquiet under it: As knowing how much I should my self be grieved, to have that asserted to me of any One other Foundation of Charity in England, which is there said by me of this; with∣out having to this Hour received from them one Word of Exception to it, tho invited thereto, with an offer on my part, of exposing to them, from their own Books and Registers, the Grounds of every Article in it. And if this be the Case in this Instance; how much less will there ap∣pear of Reason for their calling on me for the Particulars of a Charge, when I shall yet refer them to my foremention'd Report (whereof this is but the Contents of one Part onely) which was by me lodg'd with Sir Humphry Edwin your late Lord Mayor, and directed to you so many Months since, with his then Undertaking for its speedy Delivery and publick Enquiry into; and yet but now newly discovered, and taken in∣to the Custody of his honourable Successor and the Court of Aldermen; for the Good, I hope, (as late as it is) of those for whose sake I provided it? In order to which, having thus said what I think needful and my Duty to do, in Return to this your Order; I shall (as One not yet free from my Obligation to this Place) take the liberty of giving it you as my most humble Advice, That this Court would (in the most satisfactory manner it may) apply it self to the Court of Aldermen for the Original or Duplicate of that Report. As that without which (in the Hands you at present are) I see not how possibly you will ever arrive at a true Knowledge of the wretchedness of your Condition, even in the single Point of your Revenue; which is the sole Subject of it. Besides what I have elsewhere noted, relating to the Moral Part: To which (at least in the Reproachfulness of it) you will, I fear, find that to bear no other Proportion, than the Deficiency of Light at a Gloomy Noon, do's to that of the darkest Midnight. Nor can I permit my self to let pass unobserved to you on this occa∣sion, what I have lately understood, touching the Difference now newly raised between the Court of Aldermen and this House, upon the General Point of Subordinacy, and particularly in that of Accompting. Concerning the former of which; let me beg you, as One whose Searches, in this your Service, have made him more than ordinarily con∣versant in the History of your Hospital; not to be misled to an Opinion contradictory to the Tenor of your own Books, and the Practice of your Predecessors, through all the Marks of Subiection incident to such a Re∣lation. And this from the very first day of our Institution; confirm'd by our having at this hour no other Title to the Trust we our selves are now exercising in this Place, than our Election and Appointment thereto from that Court. And for the latter, touchiug our Accompting to them; I beseech You to consider, Who it is, we would be thought to own Our selves accoun∣table to, if not to those we are entrusted by? Or, Would we give the World ground to think; that while we stand answerable for our being able
to convince all Gainsayers in the Matters of our Faith; and answer every Demand touching the Reason of our Hope; we would be exempt from an Accountableness to any body, for our Managements of Charity, that's Greater than Either of them? True it is; That for the Difficulty made by Your Treasurer and his Accountant in their Compliance with the late Orders of that Court, for their Signing and remitting thither under their Hands, the Accounts for∣merly sent them unsigned: There may be more Reason for it, than either Your selves are permitted to know, or that Court can yet conceive; as be∣ing (I affirm to You) in no wise to be justified, when Signed. But as their Demand herein seems no otherwise restrained to these Accounts, than as they came to them Ʋnattested; nor Our selves to be thought, at this time of day, unprovided for rendring them full Satisfaction in this Par∣ticular, after little less than two Years Notice given your Auditors, by the Treasurers Resignation of his Office, of a Thorough-State necessari∣ly to be adjusted of his Accounts, in order to Your Election of a Suc∣cessor: Towards which nevertheless, I hear not of One Stroke yet struck in November 1698, for so much as the Accompt of the Year 1697. So must that Gentleman be very little acquainted with the Practice of this House▪ who knows not how much it has in all Ages, not only been subject to the Demands of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen in this Particular; but have Themselves made use of it in their Distresses, as their surest and indeed only Resort for their Supplys; I mean by their Applications to that Court, with their Accounts shewing the Reasons of those Distresses. Besides that it is not only They, from whom alone (as before) we derive these our Trusts; but They also, who stand accountable to the Body Corporate of the City, as That also doth by solemn Covenants to the King, for our well-discharging the same. Be pleased then to think of putting a speedy End to this Dispute, that must otherwise prove distructive of the very Foundation we are concern∣ed for. Nor let what is here offer'd You, lose any of its Force, for the sake of him that offers it. As being One, too well acquainted with other Sub∣jects, more worthy his sacrificing so much of the little Residue of his Time and private Study to, than this before us: Were it not, that he would be glad, to convert some part of the Leasure God Almighty has been pleas∣ed to bless the Evening of his Life with, to a Good so publickly meritori∣ous, as he takes This to be: and is therefore grieved to find Marks of Hard∣ship placed by you upon those of your Servants, who can but be suspected of having given any Assistance towards it; and that most of all on him, from whom of the whole number of your Clerks I have received the least (as you may shortly have occasion to see) though from None of them more, than by their Duty and special Order of Court they were obliged to; nor yet All that when put together, near so much in the moment of it, as from the Treasurer himself and his Accountant, now lying by me under their Hands. But when the Management of Publick Charities shall become a Busi∣ness of Mystery; it will be time for Good men to think of being their own Almoners. And I pray God, it prove not our
Misfortune, to set the  first Copy towards it; there seeming nothing left within my Vein (should this my last Attempt with both Bodies, the Court of Aldermen I mean, and This, together fail) but a Royal Visitation to prevent it. With which; I do with the deepest Respect take my final leave of this sort of Intercourse between you and me on this Occasion; remain∣ing, Honour'd Gentlemen, Your most faithful and obedient Servant, S. Pepys. A COPY of Mr. PEPYS's fore∣mentioned Representation sent to CHRIST-HOSPITAL near 12. Months since. To the Honour'd Sir John Moor, Kt. and President, and the rest of my Honour'd Friends, the Gover∣nours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL, assembled in Court this 17. of Decem. 1697. York-Buildings Decem. 17th, 1697. Gentlemen, I Have receiv'd the Notice order'd me from your last Court of the 10th. instant, touching the Respit then put to your Election of a new Treasurer, upon the Want, (as it would seem) of my expected Re∣port of the State of your House. In answer whereto, and that the Consequences (if any) of that De∣lay, may not rest upon this suppos'd Failure of mine; be pleas'd to be re∣minded of your being expresly advertis'd of the readiness of that Report, by a Worthy Member of your Body, at a very full Court, upon the 28th. of September last, now near three Months since; without the least inti∣mation
given me, either then or since, of your desiring it from me, but rather the contrary, to this day. Nor durst I, unask'd, take upon me the exposing of it; nor shall even now, of more than may be useful to the special Purpose for which you now demand it, relating to the Treasurer. And I pray God, the bringing even this, all at once, to a Publick Court, may be follow'd with no inconvenience. But You have requir'd it, and I obey; praying You to accept of what I have here with all respect to offer You thereon, in these few and succinct Propositions. 1st.—That by the first General Audit, after your present Trea∣surer's Accession to his Office in 1683. (for I think it enough on my part, and no more than so on yours, that I go so far back in my Retrospecti∣on) he became charged with a Ballauce in Cash of 3300 l. 2ly.—That upon a strict Collating of the Nett Receipts of each Year, from that time to the Close of the Year 1696, or according to the peculiar Stile of this House, to Midsummer 1697. I find to have been Re∣ceived and Expended of the Stock of the Poor within this House (that Bal∣lance included) above 175000 l. 3ly.—That neither, of this Sum, nor of any Part of it, nor of the State of your Revenue in general; has there ever been any one Repre∣sentation made to, or Cognizance had of it by the Lord Mayor and Body Corporate of the City (the Only Governors of the Hospital-Revenues) though peculiarly Charg'd with an Accountableness for our Manage∣ments of the same, to the best Benefit of the Poor; But so much the con∣trary, that I find not one Account thereof to have been ever reported even to Your selves, from your Committee of Auditors; much less con∣troll'd, approv'd, and confirm'd by You in Court (as all Acts of Com∣mittees, especially in Fundamentals like this, ought to be) to this day. 4ly.—That it doth not appear to me, either from your Books, or my best informations from your Clerks and Accomptants, that any Share of the Controlling and Auditing-Part of your said Accounts, is regularly Executed, by a Quorum of that Committee duely summon'd thereto, saving the last Act of it only, I mean, the Signing of it de bene esse, after being ingross'd. Which (and that alone) appears indeed to have a solemn Day and Entertainment assign'd for it, at the Charge of the Hospital. 5ly.—That in consequence of this, and of the general Order of those your Accounts, I have not found any one Year's so digested, as that by it alone, a sincere and strict Enquirer could be either fully or truly ap∣prised of the General State of the House's Revenue; or so, as to be a∣ble, though possibly true, to satisfy himself in its being so. 6ly.—That as one Evidence only of this last Truth; You may be pleas'd with very little difficulty, to inform Your Selves, that in as ill a Condition as this House is on all hands known to be; there is not any one Year (as far as my strictest inspections can enlighten me) wherein Your General Account thereof so audited, has not declared You Masters both of a Remain of Cash and Ballance in Stock, frequently to above 10. sometimes 11. and 12. and one Year with another to above 8000 l. (all Debts provided for) from the very first Entrance of this Gentleman up∣on his Treasurership, to this Day.
7ly.—That notwithstanding the 175000l. received as before; with the continu'd Representations of our being always thus amply in Stock; We have at this day, not only Complaints hourly shower'd on Us, as well of our Wants at Home, as the Distresses of our Nurses and Children Abroad; but (as far as your own Books may in any wise be rely'd-on) stand indebted at this very hour, to the Wills of our Dead, and Appoint∣ments of our Living Benefactors, and to others our Creditors (beyond all We have in View towards discharging the same) to the Value, with the Interest upon both, of above 35000l. 8ly.—That as surprising as this may appear at its first Opening to this Court; I am well convinc'd, that it will not do so, to any who shall ap∣ply themselves with the same Attention I have done, to the noting and considering all those unnecessary, unprecedented, wasteful and Arbitrary Me∣thods, to be found in the Management of Our Expences, wholly inconsi∣stent both with the Orders and Ends of our Pious Benefactors. 9ly.—That of this Debt of 35000 l. there rests no less than 19500 l. specially owing to the Royal Foundation; and of that, above 1300 l. unlay'd-out, of the Sums annually received by Us of the King's Bounty out of the Exchequer, for putting forth his Children to the Seas; notwithstanding what you were the last Year misled, to the asserting and imposing on the Lords of the Treasury upon that Subject, to the contrary. And this; without any one End of the whole Institution an∣swer'd, or likely to be, under our present Managements; Or any one Year lately pass'd, wherein our Printed Reports thereof will bear Examina∣tion; any more than the present Year is likely to produce One Child of its whole Number, either duely Sent Abroad, or qualified for it as he ought to be; While the Season too is so near at hand, when Our Performances there∣in should intitle Us to another Year's Payment. 10ly.—Lastly, That besides this Debt of 35000 l. thus lying on Us; We labour under a further Annual Charge amounting (by the Medium of Our last Seven Years Expences) to above 14600 l. per. Ann. And this; without Ought in present View, towards either Clearing the One, or Supporting the Other, but a Revenue We our selves publish'd but at Easter last in Print, to be little more than a Moiety of our Necessary and Ʋnavoidable Charge. Which deing so; and for the better applying the same to the Oceasion for which you now call for it; it remains only, that I subjoyn thereto these Three Short Reflections. 1st.—That before the Address, (which I presume) will be of Course on this Occasion made, to the Lord Mayor and City, for their Concurrence to the Discharge of the present, and Admission of another Treasurer; it seems indispenceable on our Parts, that they be throughly apprised of the contents of this Paper; in order to their considering, what may be expedient to be first done for their own needful Security there∣in. And this the rather; for that, whatever they may think fit to do with respect to any other Article of ir; I hold my self bound to tell you, that the Interest which my self in particular bear, in all that concerns the Mathematick Foundation (with regard no less to the Glorious End of it, in the Advancement of the
Navigation of England, than my own  special Misfortune, in contributing what I did, to the unhappy Choice made by my Royal Masters its Founders, of the Place they lodg'd the Trust of it in) will oblige me, as a standing Piece of Duty to the Crown, to insist upon a strict Account to be given, of so unexampl'd a Miscariage, as that of this their Foundation, not yet 25. Year-old, yet every Penny of its Endowment already spent, and the Support of it thrown upon, and at this day wholly born, out of the Common Stock of of our otherwise sufficiently wretched Orphans, who have no relation to it. While at the same time, no single Instance is to be shewn, of the End of its Institution answer'd, within the whole time of our present Re∣trospection. 2ly.—That if in this Paper ought appears, whereto either the Trea∣surer, or any other Member of this Society, shall see reason to except; and exhibiting the same to this Court, shall have it communicated thence to me with their Approval; I shall most readily, from Your own Books and Registers, expose to you the Grounds of what I have asserted herein; as One, who am not conscious (though yet fallible) of any one single Prevarication from, or Aggravation of the Truth, in what I have here offer'd You. 3ly.—Finally, That as unhappy as by this my Draught of it, the State of your House must necessarily be thought to be, with respect to its Revenue, Charge and Debt. I cannot but in faithfulness thereto further tell you, that it is yet the very best Side of the Prospect I have to give You of its Condition, in the other Parts of my Report. And that there∣fore I shall not dare to trust either my self or this Court, with the im∣mediate Exposing of it, though Originally designed for You; as deeming it on many Considerations, more becoming me, and more behoofeful to the Service of the House and its Poor; that I rather deliver it into the Hands, and submit it to the Disposal of Those, who as standing primarily accountable for Our Managements to the King, are intitled to our aceount∣ing for the same first to Them: I mean, my Lord Mayor and the foremen∣tion'd Body of the City; from whom alone, or in their Failure from a Royal Visitation, the same (if ever) must receive its Remedy. I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble and faithful Servant, S. Pepys.
The Summons to the forementioned Court at Christ-Hospital. SIR, YOur Worship is earnestly desired to be present at a Court to be hol∣den in Christ-Hospital upon Friday next, being the 25th of this instant November, at 3 a Clock in the Afternoon precisely; for the due considering two Printed Papers lately presented by Mr. Pepys to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and to the Court held at this House the 21st instant, Ʋpon the present state of Christ-Hospital. William Parrey, Clerk. Christ-Hospital 24 Nov. 1698. To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Child Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen. [Accompanying Copies of the precedeing Papers.] York-Buildings, Tuesday, Dec. 6th. 1698. My Lord and Gentlemen, AS fully as I had determined against interrupting this Court or my∣self, with the Interchange of more Papers; I hold my self ac∣countable to you for the Issue of your late Allowance of my com∣municating those I last sent you, to the Gentlemen of Christ-Hospital. Which I did; to the procuring the Call of an Extraordinary Court, for the Consideration of the same. Duplicates of which Transaction, with a Copy of the Summons it self provided thereto, I think it for your Service to lay before you; together with the Issue of the Whole, which you may please to take as follows.—Viz. 1st.—The Number present at this Court of its near four Hun∣dred Governours was Fifty six. Which, tho short of what I have known attending the Choice of a Beadle, a Porter, or such on∣ly Occasion; was yet double the Appearance seen at Ordinary Courts. 2ly,—As full nevertheless as it was, no Part of the Work it was specially called for, was either done, or had any Entry made towards it: the Papers themselves, in the full three Hours of its sitting, not having had so much as a Reading-Time allowed them, nor any other assigned for the doing it.
3ly.—The Matter mainly handled therein, was that of their Treasurer's being required by this Court to Sign his Accounts, and present them back thereto, when Signed. In which I had the good Fortune of offering these Gentlemen, together with the forementioned Papers, some Thoughts of mine upon the Deference due to You, both from that and every other Hospital; so as to ob∣tain the Reversal of their former Resolution in opposing it. But not till by the length of the Contest, their Fifty six were reduc∣ed to Twenty nine; and not then neither, upon a Division, by any greater Majority than of Three. And this too in the Case of an Account▪ wherein not their own Orders any more than yours, have Mr. PEPYS, upon the State of Christ-Hospital. Paper III. been of force with either Accountant or Auditors, in more than two years, to produce any Compliance, or (for ought I can yet hear or see) any Preparation, Disposition, or even Capacity towards it. What rests there then for me to say, either to you, My Lord and Gentle∣men, or My-self in this Cause; more than the recommending it to you, as I most earnestly therefore do? Either instantly to exert the Authority thus asserted by me in your Right, and since submitted to my honour'd Friend Sir Robert Clayton, and your learned Council, with the Grounds of my doing so: to the end both you and I may have the Satisfaction of foreseeing some Effect of what we are now doing, towards the Remedying no less than Ascertaining the Evils we are in pursuit of, on behalf of our Orphans. Or leave me to the Method I have heretofore com∣municated by purpose to you of resorting to, by a Royal Visitation. Which from the Proof I lately gave you of it, in the Case of St. Ca∣tharines; We are well assured, both can and will make it self equally effectual, to them and Ʋs, in Both. I am My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most faithful and most obedient Servant, S. Pepys.
Mr. PEPYS To the President, and Governours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL upon the Present State of the said HOSPITAL. To the Honour'd Sir John Moor, Kt. and President, and the rest of my Honour'd Friends, the Gover∣nours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL. York-Buildings. January 25th. 1698 / 9. Gentlemen, LET not (I beg you) my Appearance here yet once more as I now do, be imputed to any Satisfaction I have in the uneasiness of this Court, whose Honourer I truly am; nor yet to the Want of where∣with otherwise to employ every Hour of my Life, more to my own Con∣tent; but to the Sincerity of that Concernment for the Prosperity of this House, which I shall always bear about me, while They at least who first called me to it (My Lord Mayor, I mean, and Court of Aldermen) shall think fit to suspend the Delivering me of the Share I yet hold, as their Servant, in the Charge of it. A Favour I have been long their Suitor for, and should thankfully acknowledge any Assistance from this Court towards it. Not that it is my Purpose to trouble You with ought I have at any time already laid before You: But what alone You have Your selves been pleased to administer fresh Subject to me for, since the Date of my last. And particularly, 1st.—In the Ʋnconcernedness wherewith this Court is still pleas'd (after all I have been able to inculcate concerning it) to over-look the making-up of your Publick States and Lists of the Children of the Royal Foundation, annually requir'd from You by the King, and ex∣pressly calculated for the Service of the
Crown. Whereof not One has  now for some Years past, been composed with the Integrity becoming the Dispensers of so Sacred and Princely a Charity. Nor of them all; any One so little justifyable, as that which was last deliver'd as Your New-Years-Gift into the King's Own Hand by Your Treasurer's, in the Name not only of the President and Body of us the Governours of this Hospital, but of the Lord Mayor also of this City, the First Trustee of the Crown for that Foundation. Which how far his Lordship or this Court shall think fit to sit-down∣with, I ask not; but hold it my Duty to make (as I hereby do) my own most solemn Protest against it; as against a Paper, neither sincere, nor true; but (as such) most injurious to the Honour both of Hospital and City. 2ly.—In your arraigning the Credit of your own Dealings (beyond all that could be offer'd to it from without Doors) in the Publick Review lately had by Your Order, of that One Chapter of Your Treasurer's Accompt which specially relates to that Foundation. An Accompt, that after a Demand of more than two Years standing, and as long a Preparation, has been once actually laid (as from this House) before the Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen; with Copies of it gone abroad, and one of them now in my Hand. And this Review executed, not by the Body of Your Auditors, nor yet of those of them whose Hands lie originally at Stake for the Truth of it; But by a Junto of the Treasurer's single Appoint∣ment: of whom the Greater Part such, as appear not to have assisted at any One Audit, within the whole Time of his Treasurership; nor now dispos'd (for ought I hear) to assert under their Hands the Truth of what they have been so doing, and are this day design'd to give You their Report of. A Proceeding most hazardous, if not of certain injury to the Honour of this Place; by adding to the Difficulty of justifying this Double Accompt, even where they agree; the yet greater of reconciling them, in what they differ. Which being the Case; the most effectual Proof I can hope to give You of my Solicitousness for the Credit of this Court, against the Enqui∣ries of a yet Higher Form to be expected into this and every other Arti∣cle of your Treasurer's Accompts; where not his Hand only (as now) but his Oath also and his Accomptant's will be held little enough to gain them Admission: is the directing you to the Worthy Members of this Body, whose singular Applications to, and long Inspection into the Business of your Compting-House, do especially intitle them to the Charge of seeing Right done both to Themselves, to you, and to the Poor therein,-viz. Sir Mat. Andrews. Sir Will. Russel. Mr. Stroud. Sir Edm. Turner. Mr. Lockington. Mr. Foster. Who having, among them, been at the Audit of, and warranted by their Signing, every Accompt (from first to last) of the present Treasurer; have therein done more than any like Number, or even the whole re∣maining Ninety of your Committee of Auditors. Nor, for the same reason, ought I to neglect the noting to you the no less Worthy Gentlemen, to whose eight Months Labour, and special Influence, signaliz'd at your late Select Committee for the State
of your House, You stand most indebted; and for the advantageous Re∣port they are pleas'd at this very day to entertain the World with, of it—viz. Mr. Midgley. Mr. St-Amand. Doctor Carr. Mr. Lane. Mr. Boddington. Mr. Mallory. Upon whom also I do myself chiefly rely, for the Convictions promis'd me, of the Errors of my own less grateful Computations touching the same: When (by the Delivery of this Accompt of Yours to the Court of Aldermen) You shall become possess'd of that Report of mine lying with them, by which you will be admitted to such a View of our Wretchedness, as was never yet expos'd to, nor is (I fear) ever likely to be otherwise come-at, by this Court. On which Score, and that no Time may be lost in your Arrival there∣at; let me once more beg Your hastening the Removal of the Impediment given thereto, by your Refusal of this Accompt to that Court: In con∣tradiction to the most mature Resolution taken by One of your own, summon'd in the most solemn Manner, and on the most solemn Occasion; that the Business or Trust of this House is capable of; and owing on∣ly to the Presumption of a Private One, not yet confirm'd by any other; and so rendring the whole Transaction of this Committee entirely Ex∣tra-judicial; and as such, by a Worthy Member of this Body most just∣ly and publickly protested-against. Besides; that till the matter of our Revenue (the sole Subject of that Report) receive a Decision; it seems too soon to proceed to what I have yet behind, upon the so-often-mention'd Article of the Moral State of this Hospital: As thinking it of little Ʋse, and less Satisfaction, to be offering more Matter for Grief and Reproach from the Pollution of its Manners; till better assur'd of wherewith to support them, when (by being better'd) they shall be brought to deserve it. Which no Man (I fear) will think they now do▪ that is privy (as I am) to the Ʋniversal Looseness of them, both in Kind and Degree, beyond what is almost conceivable from a Nursery consecrated to Ʋses so pious, and to the Benefit of Objects so little to be suspected susceptible of the very thoughts of them. A Truth too extensive to be here enter'd-on, even were it now a Time for it. Let it only suffice, as an Instance of what I shall then have but too long and ungrateful a deduction to give you of; that I recommend to your present Enquiry, the prostituted Ʋse made of the Publick Access allow'd to your Children's Devotions in the Hall and the adjacent Rooms on Sun∣day-Evenings; and particularly the Riot committed by their lewd Vi∣siters in the Girls Ward, but on Sunday last. I say, the Girls Ward; where (as blameable as I take the Whole of our present Dis∣cipline to be) nothing appears more abandon'd, than that Order and Mo∣desty which, till now, has been ever held Sacred in that Place; what∣ever might hap'ly be found less justifyable elsewhere. And This; notwithstanding the Infamy laid (but few Evenings before) at your own Door, by a Coach conducted by the Mob, charg'd with two of your Mathematical Boys, distinguish'd by the Badge of their
Royal  Founder, taken-up at Billins-gate, brought thro' the City, deliver'd to you (as before) Dead-Drunk, and by their Fellows discharg'd (insensible) into their Ward. Their Ward I say; wherein, as in the former, Excesses of the same Kind, though not in the same Measure, are (God knows) but too familiar: And particularly with Him of these Two, who being now Head of the School, and Leader in this Fact, is One, who after having en∣joy'd for near nine Years together, the Benefit of this House's Charity, and spent twice the Time originally establish'd for his Stay in that School; was but lately rejected at the Trinity-House, as not yet qualify'd for the End of his so chargeable Education. And who being also arriv'd to the full Age limited for it by the King; it seems worthy your Considering, what it is you have now to expect from One, whom Debauchery has car∣ried out of the reach of Command, before either his Learning or your Dis∣cipline has fitted him, for knowing how to Obey. Let me only, on this Occasion, take leave to lament a little more nearly, the unhappy Conduct of this House: By which it seems at this day brought under the greatest Weight of Reproach, from that alone, which was Originally calculated for, and accordingly received, as its greatest Ho∣nour and the largest Instance of Royal Beneficence, that was ever at once confer'd on a House of Charity: I mean, this Mathematick Foundati∣on. The Thoughts of which compel me so far at least to resume the menti∣on of the Account relating to it; as once again to recommend it to this Court, that no more Imposures on his Majesty be adventur'd-on, by Appli∣cations to his Treasury for further Payments on that Score; till We shall have first discharg'd our selves of the Debt I so long since noted to You thereon, without ought ever yet return'd me in Solution of it. 3ly.—In the little Regard had, after near two Years pass'd since the Treasurer's Resignation of his Office and Your accepting it, to the for∣warding the Adjustments of his Accounts necessary to the Execution of it: We being now entring into 1699, without any Audit closed, much less engross'd and sign'd-to for the Year 1697. Besides that (by all I can yet learn of what is done towards it) Your Receipts for that Year have exceeded those of the Year preceding; as a∣mounting to full 12000 l.: Without a Farthing of it yet apply'd to the les∣sening either Your 13000 l. Debt to Benefactors for Purchases, or the 20000 l. I make You accountable-for to the King on his Foundation. Nor yet a∣bove 200 l. Discharg'd of the 8400 l. lately owing for Principal Money taken-up at Interest; nor more than 100. and odd Pounds given-in for your Remainder in Cash. While at the same time I have it to observe to you; that in consequence of the Importunities you have heretofore suffer'd from me, for the discontinuing your so frequent and almost unlimited Ad∣missions of Children (as the only certain Expedient I could then, or can yet propose for rescuing Us from Ruin) their Number is from 1030. lower'd to 430; and consequently, your Charge diminish'd (through the suc∣cessive Abatements of about 120 Yearly, between Easter 1694. and that now approaching 1699) by 600. Children: And the Savings there∣from (of what, had the
contrary Practice continu'd, your Expence must have amounted to) fallen little short of 15000 l; and the Condition also of your Purse, some way or other, been as much better'd. Whereas, if what has been above-inform'd me be true (which God forbid, and yet I dare not disbelieve) This also is gone; and the Hospital rests in the same Degree of Distress it was in, when thought nearest being undone. And this too; without One Penny of our Charge retrench'd, either in the Number or Expence of our Officers, from what it was when the Number of our Children was more by Three Fifths than they now are: But so much the Contrary, as to have the Charge of Officers said to be now Greater, by several Hundreds of Pounds, under our present 430 Children; than it was in the Years 1660 and 1661 with above 1100. For God▪s sake therefore, Gentlemen, let us from these Effects be incit∣ed, instantly and closely to Consider in what Hands the Treasure and Stock of our Poor now lye. Hands, that (in one Word) need no other Evidence of their Ʋnsitness for the Trust; than the Publick Re∣luctancy they are not asham'd to shew, to every thing that but Looks like bringing them to an Account. Besides the Consideration, of how much more to be Lamented any Miscarriage would be, and less to be Excus'd, that should attend the Neglect of it, in case of any unexpected Change in the Person of our Treasurer; whose known Age will alone justify my Apprehension of it, even without the Help of that Declaration which Himself two Tears since thought fit spontaneously to make in open Court, of his Disability (even then) both in Body and Mind, for longer executing his Office; and therefore resigning it had it accepted of by you. 4thly,—In the Liberty taken by some Gentlemen, not of the low∣est Name in the Management of this House; of arraigning in Common Conversation as well as singly to my self, these Enquirys of mine on behalf of our Orphans; as tending at least (if not designed) to the wresting the Government of it out of their Hands, who valuing themselves upon the Title of Church-of-England-Men, seem impa∣tient under the Apprehension of being supplanted in it by the Fana∣ticks. A Thought (God knows) of too little Weight with me, for Fither's sake, to trouble my Head with: As well knowing, how lit∣tle the Felicity of Mankind has at any time been owing to Nominal Distinctions in Religion; and no less remembring, how little the Bishop of Jerusalem, St. James, could be thought ignorant of that best of Names (of Christian, I mean) when to ascertain the Religion intended by him under his Epithetes of Pure and Undefiled, he waved the Ʋse of either that or any other; and rather chose to distinguish it, by the Moral Lessons, of Visiting the Fatherless and the Widow in their Afflictions, and living unspotted of the World: Lessons read to Mankind, long before the Name of Christian or of its Holy Founder was ever heard of therein. In pursuance of which; If to subject our Orphans to all the Consequences of a Mispent Revenue; if to add to the Affliction of their Widow-Mothers, the sorrowful Effects too often seen in
them of a  corrupted Education; if the Disappointments arising from both, to the religious Purposes of their pious and bountiful Benefactors, be in the Sense of these Gentlemens Church the fulfilling of that Description; Much Good may do them with their Churchmenships; and may I be their Cast-away. 5thly.—Lastly, In the Proof so lately given me, of the little to be hoped-for of Remedy to these Evils, from what I must acknow∣ledge my having lodged my last Relyance-on, towards it: namely, The getting them fairly laid before a General-Court. Forasmuch as from the Ineffectualness of all my Endeavours on that behalf, in the Solemnity of the Summons provided for that held the 25th of November last; I find the Predominancy of those whose Business it is to obstruct it, such; as to have been able to prevent the very Reading of the Papers it was alone called to the Hearing of; and con∣sequently, to send them home as little apprised of the Import thereof to the Weal of the House, as they were at their coming thither. From which so fresh Confirmation of a Truth I had but too often be∣fore both experimented and complain'd of; and from the further Pra∣ctices occurring to me on this occasion, of intercepting, suppressing, and otherwise indirect disposing of Papers not thought for some Private Turns fitt to be admitted to Publick View: I think it high Time for me, to lay∣down the Tenderness wherewith I have hitherto govern'd my self, in the exposing of what I have already said, and may hereafter have further to say hereon; proceeding (as I lately told You, I should) to the communi∣cating the same without Restriction to the Gentlemen of this House, in the like Open method I have (with good Acceptance) been for some time using towards the Honourable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen our immediate Superiors, on the same Subject. I am with great respect, Gentlemen, Your most faithful and most humble Servant, S. Pepys.
Mr. PEPYS, upon the State of Christ-Hospital. Paper IV.
Mr. PEPYS To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Child, Kt. Lord Mayor, and to the Court of Aldermen, up∣on the Present State of Christ-Hospital. York-Buildings, March 7th. 1698 / 9. My Lord and Gentlemen, THAT nothing may rest uncommunicated to this Court, of what goes from me to that of Christ-Hospital; any more than, by your Allowance, I with-hold from Them, ought of what I offer You: I here tender you a Copy of a Letter of mine thither, of the 25. of January. The Contents of which bearing my Farewel to Them, as with all respect my purpose is in this to You; I cannot but recommend the Perusal there∣of to this Court; as carrying with them such a Representation of the pe∣rishing State of that House, in some fresh Particulars essential to the Well∣being of it, as render it a thing little less than hopeless for me (by ordinary Means, at least) any longer to think of saving it: After find∣ing my self put to above seven Months Labour, in compassing only its Treasurer's Signing that one Article of his Account, which you had before had from him Ʋnsign'd; and more than ten, in finding Passage only, through this Court thither, to my late Report of the State of the same. And What it is that may be look't-for from it, even now it is there, with a Committee of few less than forty, and of them the Majority such, as will find little Work for them in it, but Self-Arraignment; I submit to your Lordship and this Court.
Especially, when you shall be pleas'd to reflect upon the present Circumstances of that House's Government; viz. ƲNDER the Guidance of a President, equal indeed to the wor∣thiest of his Predecessors, both in his general Virtues, and special Munificence to that Place. But One, whose Piety has out-liv'd his Strength for being otherwise personally aidful to it, in any of the Weightier Duties of that Charge. ƲNDER a Treasurer, who (besides what you have elsewhere before you concerning him) was also pleas d to declare himself un∣able both in Mind and Body, for the longer Execution of his Office; and therefore made his formal Resignation of it, and had it as formally accepted-of from him in Court there, above two years since. ƲNDER the Direction of Gentlemen acting indeed as Gover∣nours, and to whom as such I have for more than 23. years had the Honour of reckoning my self a Fellow-servant; but are said to stand reported to You at this day by your Learned Council, not to be such, nor capable of being so, without (what they have never yet had) the Confirmation of this Court. And lastly, ƲNDER an Administration also on the part of your Lordship and your Honoured Brethren, so Gentle; as to have suffer'd your Orders thither, even in Points the most impor∣tant, to lye 7. Months together wholly neglected, and your Au∣thority as openly renounc'd; without having yet thought fit to have ought done (within my Notice at least) in Assertion of it. A Reflection, My Lord, as hard to be accounted-for, as in it self Grievous.. Forasmuch as, If after so uninterrupted a Jurisdiction, as has been al∣ways exercis'd by this Court, and with a Submission as constantly paid thereto from these Hospitals; If after so long a Succession of Gifts and Bequests to them, and those to great Values, in reliance upon the Credit and Authority of this Court alone for their Security; If after so establish'd a Veneration acquir'd to it, as Guardians of these Foundations, and par∣ticularly as the Moral Fathers of the Orphans of this House, when in your Easter and other Solemnities, They, as Your Children, bear no small part in the Honour of your Processions; And lastly, If after what in my particular I have been endeavouring herein for Your Service, and for the Service of the Poor; this Court shall appear to have been all this while thus credited and thus obey'd, without Authority at this day, under the greatest of their Miscarriages, to visit and reform Them; for so also your Learned Council are said to have determin'd. What must be thought of this mistake? And particularly, How will the Pious Credulity of our Princely Founders and past Benefactors be to be lamented; and what more to be either hop'd or wish'd-for of Them, on these Terms, in time to come? What must the Apprehensions now be of Those, whose Subsistence rests upon the Authority only of this Court, for the Payments
that House stands charg'd with to their Ʋse, out of the larger Benevolences of their Charitable Auncestors? Or Theirs; whose Debts of more modern Date, lye unpaid (ma∣ny Thousand Pounds deep) by that Hospital at Interest, upon no other Security? What is there to be rely'd-on of Fruit from the Retrospections said to be now on foot there, or those lying before your Lordship and this Court, from my Report? Or in a Word; What to be hop'd-for either of Satisfaction for so much of our Poor's Stock and Benefactor's Bounties as has al∣ready miscarry'd; or of better Provision in time to come, for securing the Remainder? What, I say my Lord, must the Result of all this be, and how to be answerd-for; should this Court be so unhappy, as knowingly to per∣mit such a Foundation and its Revenue to rest one day longer, in Hands no otherwise qualify'd-for, nor better intitled to the Trust of it? While by a Resolution of its own, not yet 16. Months old, you have been pleas'd to declare your selves standing Governours of the same, and (as such) required your being (as anciently) summon'd to every of its Courts, and accordingly have ever since been so, and now are: To the entitling Your selves (I fear) to a nearer Concernment in the Fate of it, than may have been yet sufficiently reflected on; and possibly, to an Accountableness with Them, for the good or bad Events of their Managements there. A Consideration I am the more willingly your present Remembrancer in, from the fresh Endeavours said to be now on foot there, for resuming their Old Liberty of taking-in Children, while unprovided of a Bit of Bread for those they now have, otherwise than by running into new Debt, or length'ning their Score of Interest upon the Old; Besides sacrificing the Innocence of so many fresh Infants, to the Dissoluteness of Manners now reigning, among those they are to be there mixed-with. The Evil of whose Contagion, and Pressure of which Debt, I take to be no otherwise removable, than by a total Stop to be for some time put, to the Occasions of Both. An Expedient, that I well know will at the first hearing be thought as Impracticable, as in other Respects Extraordinary. But the Case is Extraordinary too; and consequently, to restrain its Remedy to Ordinary Methods only, is little other, than to leave it Remedy-less. Which I cannot think any Gentleman, who hath the Ho∣nour and Trust of a Governour there, will contentedly sit-down with, while furnish'd with any thing to offer towards the Saving it, as (for want of better) I do this: And yet with an Opinion so far from deeming it Impracticable, as to reckon it a Work neither of Length nor Difficulty; if, in Atonement for that Misconduct of ours, by which, from the Prosperity this House was in while under the Care but of 16. Governours with 500. Children, it has been brought into the Condition it now lies with 400. Governours (little more
or less) and  but 400. Children; if (I say) in Atonement for that Misconduct, we would improve the Opportunity of this nearness in our Numbers, to the asing the House at once of the Whole, by every Governour's taking to himself One: Thereby leaving the Income of it entireiy free to the Discharge of its Debts, doing Right to its Founders and Benefactors, and that being done, to the setting-out afresh, with a Revenue clear'd, its Discipline reform'd, and Provision made for its future better Conduct through the Whole. And this I lay with all Deference before your Lordship and this Court, as that without which, or some other Aequi∣valent, I must avow my Despair of ever seeing this unhappy House in the State it ought to be; and therefore would be glad, with your Concurrence and the Concurrence of the Gentlemen of that Body, to be doing my part, either in this or any other Effectual Proposition, towards it. I am well aware, My Lord, of the Censure this Fervor of mine may expose me to, as One overpressing in a Cause, wherein Others nei∣ther less interested nor less discerning than my self, are pleas'd to shew so little of the Dissatisfaction I do; and without any surprise on my side at it, as well remembring how little different my own Sentiments were of it, while my Knowledge thereof (like theirs) had no other Direction, than the Information of Others. Whereas no sooner was I engaged in the closer and more deliberate Enquiries apply'd thereto of my own, but that Indifference of mine was awaken'd to the Degree of Concernment I now profess; and which, on like Conviction, would be no less in any other, whose Morals (like mine) know no middle, in matters of Trust at least, between scrupulously Just, and down-right the Contrary. Or to speak more plainly; between mixing my own Hand in the Ruin of this Religious House, and sitting silently within View of its being brought-about, by the Vanitie, Supineness, Prodigality, or Self-interest of Others. Indulge me therefore, My Lord, the Liberty of this One only closing Note to Your Lordship upon this Subject. Namely, That as the Direction of the Hospitals, has in all times hitherto been undeniably exercised by your Honourable Predecessors, in this Place; and as un∣interruptedly submitted-to. So is it no less evident, that however an Occasion has now (after sevenscore years Practice) been administred to the questioning it; Your said Predecessors, (the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London) upon Covenants first by Them entered-into with K. Edward VI. for the good Government of Them, were by his special Charter of Incorporation as Governours thereof, furnished with all the Powers requisite to the enabling them to make-good those Covenants. In consideration of which, and in Duty to Your Lordship, to the City, to this Court, and to the Poor, I cannot (as a Servant to all) but most earnestly pray; that this Matter may without delay, be laid for Remedy before that Body Corporate, where-ever it now rests; in order to the preventing, if possible, any unnecessary recourse to Methods Extraordinary, for what should be thought attainable by
Ordinary. Espe∣cially  while, Sitting a Parliament, with so many of your own Number, and of the Hospital's, Members therein, and with a Bill already (I take it) before Them, relating to Charitable Uses▪ no reasonable Supple∣ment ought to be doubted from it, to that Ordinary Power: If any such can be judg'd wanting, after so illustrious a Proof, as I have sometime since given you, of the issue of his Lordship, the present Lord Chancellors Proceeding in the late Memorable Case of St. Katharines A Proceeding I cannot but remind you of; as well as of the Check put but few years be∣fore at the Great Seal, to a Visitation then offered-at, in a Method less regular, in the Case of St. Thomas's. To conclude, My Lord, this Calamity of ours in our Hospital-con∣cernment is a Spot not to be cover'd in our Feasts of Charity, once the Glory of this City. And a Spot not at the worst neither, but daily spreading, and daily deepening too, through every part of it. Witness its Appearance (where least to have been lookt-for) in the very last act of our Treasurer's signing this Account; as giving you therein, his own Hand in Evidence against the Truth of what you had had before from his Ʋnsign'd▪ and in which, as in all other its former Editions, to my self, to the Hospital, and from thence to the Lords of the Treasury, there had been suppress'd in the single Article of Sea Wages, a Sum no less than 1400 l. besides others of greater Moment yet behind. And this too, notwithstanding repeated Cautions to them concerning it; and particularly in my last, whereof this brings you a Copy. And since which (as fresh at it is) they have nevertheless adventur'd to ask, and actually received more than 700 l. upon that very Head on which the Treasurer has so lately own'd his having twice that Sum of the King's in his Hand, yet to be accounted-for. Be pleased therefore to think of some speedy Prevention to the Growth of this our Reproach. And towards it, permit me only to say; That as uneasy as the Ʋndertaking may appear to 'others; I see no Cause of apprehending any thing of more difficulty needful towards it (whether as to the due animadverting upon what is past, or better pro∣viding for what is to come) than a Right Choice of a very few Hands to be assign'd thereto, supported with an Authority suited to the Work, and Powers requisite to the rendring their Labours and Determinations there∣in Effectual. Which being adjusted, and that only; I should with great assu∣rance of success, both readily and gladly pay the utmost of my personal Service to the Gentlemen so commission'd; as well in detecting the Errors of my own Calculations (and which for the Poor's sake I could wish more, than I dare yet hope them to be) as suggesting and applying adequate Remedies, to what those Gentlemen in their happyer Enquirys may find truly needing the same. But if after all (which God avert) it should be our Infelicity, even with the aid of that Charter, not to have wherewith of our own to help our selves herein. The Cause nevertheless is too sacred, both in it self, and as it is the King's, to be permitted to
sink, while within  the support I have so often mention'd, of his Own Soveraign Visi∣tation; And more particularly in what relares to Himself within our Care in the Mathematical Foundation; by translating it, from the Hands in which it now languishes, to those he is pleased to intrust with that of his Own later Erection, to the same Royal Purpose in the Advancement of Navigation, within his Own Palace and Inspection at Greenwich. I am in most respectful manner, My Lord and Gentlemen, Your ever most faithful and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.
upon the State of Christ-Hospital. Paper V.
Mr. PEPYS To the President, and Governours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL, upon the Present State of the said HOSPITAL. To the Honour'd Sir John Moor, Kt. and President, and the rest of my Honour'd Friends, the Gover∣nours of CHRIST-HOSPITAL. York-Buildings, March 30th. 1699. Gentlemen, YOUR Resolution of the 22th instant, importing your Ele∣ction of me to the Treasurership of this Hospital, was delivered me by the worthy Gentlemen appointed there∣to, with a degree of Respect as obliging on their part, as the Mes∣sage it self was on Yours; and both surprising. Surprising I say; but without ought of what (I find) was in too much Tenderness apprehended from me by some of this Body concern∣ing it; as being One, who think nothing below the Character of any Man to execute, in a Service of Charity: And who therefore in my late Searches into the Condition of this House, descended to Of∣fices much beneath any thing that can occur in what you are now calling me to. I therefore do most thankfully own the Proof you herein tender me of the Continuance of your Esteem, after the unwelcome Free∣dom I have for some time been unavoidably exercising towards you, upon the Unhappy Subject of your present State; in which Your selves are now pleased to give me this Testimony of your acquiescence: and in the Redress whereof, this Court shall never want any thing within my power improvable thereto. But whether in the method you now propose, is what I have made it my business for some days to
consider; without being able to bring  my self to any other Determination in it, Than that the giving you any conclusive Answer (whether of Acceptance or Refusal) before this Resolution of yours shall have passed the Censure of another Court, is a no less Exposing of Myself, than Imposing on You, (as in a very late Case) under the Ʋncertain Issue of a subsequent Court; and when that is over, of the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder∣men also: As that without which, by the known Constitution of all our Hospitals, no Election of a Treasurer is valid. A Consideration of more than common Weight at this time; from the Question under which the Authority of that Court now lies with this; without Ought I can hear-of yet done on their side, in its Assertion. Which while in doing, and for Your clearer Guidance in Your second Debates on this matter at the next Court, I think it becom∣ing me, in faithfulness both to You and Myself, to lay before You the few following Considerations. 1st.—That I am no Freeman; and consequently, according to the Original Book of Ordinances by which alone (without entring in∣to the Reason of it) this Court and that of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen are at liberty to Act herein; I neither am capable of be∣ing Your Treasurer, nor You nor They, apart or together, in a Ca∣pacity of making me so. Nor is there, I believe, any one Instance to be shewn me, of a Treasurer not a Freeman: And should therefore most unwillingly subject Myself to Question, for meddling unwarrantably with a Revenue so Sacred as that of the Poor's; or be an Occasion of Your adventuring upon that in my Case, which was never yet done in any, nor can now justifiably be in this. 2dly.—That the Office and Work of Your Treasurer ought not to be estimated by what we have seen of it in its Execution for some Years past; but by the Condition the House is reduced to, from its being executed no otherwise. As being an Office, that calls at once for Qualifications, such and so many, as rarely meet in the same Person: Such are (besides that of an approved Integrity) Vigour of Mind, Steadiness of Health, Entire Leasure, Vninterestedness, Zeal for and Tenderness towards the Poor, General Experience, and par∣ticular Practice in the Business of Accounts, a Genius fitted for Com∣mand joyn'd with Temper, a Thorough-Insight into the Laws and Ends of our Constitution, and a Capacity of Controlling every of our Officers and Masters in the Execution of their Dutys, with a constancy of Attendance and Application (in his own Person, and not by Others) to the Performance of his own. A Task both in Bulk and Weight, too much for my Age and known Infirmities; Besides the Disabilitys I am alone Conscious to my self of, for it. And though what I have here to add, might not possibly be reckon'd of Moment enough alone in this Debate: yet in Conjunction with what is already said, I know not how without Injury to my self to omit the observing; that I can with no Satisfaction think of accepting of a Charge, which my self must be own'd to have had the greatest Hand in the rendring Vacant.
3ly.—That suitable to my Advice to you elsewhere on this Subject, I do not see with what Safety this Court can proceed to the giving a final Discharge to its late Treasurer, nor how it should expect his being Succeeded by any Person of Sincerity or Substance, till a State shall be first Adjusted of all your Accounts, Revenues, Charges and Debts, to your Own and Their Satisfaction; and that also laid before, and acqui∣esced-in by the Court of Aldermen. Besides the Review and fresh Esta∣blishment fit to be first had of the Work and Instructions of that Officer, before the Admission of a New. As foreseeing little Fruit from any Change of Hands (be it what it will) where those Hands shall be obliged by no other Rules nor Restrictions, than those we owe our present Di∣stresses to. For the more Successful Dispatch of which, as well on the part of your said Treasurer as Your selves; I submit it to You, whether it may not be advisable, that the Current Work of this Office be for the Present lodg'd with a small Commmittee of Your own Number, properly chosen; till by the Adjustment of these Matters, You shall be in a Condition of restoring it to its Ordinary Methods. 4ly.—Lastly, That no Degree of Industry, Experience, or other the Vertues (before requir'd) in a Treasurer, can alone be thought Sufficient at this Juncture (where our Whole Constitution lies at once out of Order) to compass its Reformation, without equal Aid from a no less vigorous and persevering, however otherwise meritorious a President. One, I mean, whose thorough-knowledge in the Design, Powers, Limitations, and Orders of this Pious Foundation, and the Rules of their Execution, is able both to preserve himself from being either discouraged or imposed∣on, and by his Authority, Zeal and Vigilance, to prevent those Practices which, from the want hereof, the Generality of this House has been so long misled by, to its Vndoing. A Reflection, that in one word, would alone suffice (lay there nothing else in my way) to deter me from the Ʋndertaking You invite me to, under the Circumstances we at present la∣bour in this Particular. Which having said, and the Reasons of it thus opened; it remains only for me to beg, that my declining Your present Offer may not be taken for a Declension in any part of my Concernment for the Prosperity of this House. Forasmuch as no Consideration shall ever discourage or di∣vert me from the pursuit of it; till by some Means, Ordinary or Extra∣ordinary (though much rather the former) I see it restored to the State wherein all Good men wish it. In view whereof, give me leave with great Satisfaction once more to assure You, that (without any such Obligation as this of your Trea∣surership) neither You nor Your helpless Orphans shall ever want the best Effects of my Personal Attendance and Service, from the Moment that, by Your thorough-Applications, and those of the Court of Alder∣men towards it, I shall have any Grounds to hope, that such my Atten∣dance and Service, may be followed with any Success, to the Recovery of the lost Honour of this House, by its Return to that
Religious Strictness  which once distinguish'd it from all others, in its Compliances with the holy and charitable Ends provided for by its Munificent Founders and Benefactors, I am Gentlemen, Your most humble and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.
upon the State of Christ-Hospital. Paper VI.
