P3360 E1638_2 99867959 170190
A famous City turned INTO STONE. OR, A Fearfull example for England To take warning by: In which is contained all the full and whole Description of a famous City in Barbary, that was for their Re∣bellion against God (in the twinkling of an eye) both Men. Women, and Children, with all the Cattle, Houses, and materials therein turned into Stone. The manner how shall in this little Booke be faithfully and truely Related according to very good Authors, which have since this great and miraculous wonder happened, been at the place where it was done, and have seene (with much Teror) those thïngs which shall be presantly spoken of. Writen by Laurence Price. London, Printed for Tho. Vere at the An∣gell without Newgate. 1657.
A famous City turned INTO STONE. Entered according to Order. Angrogra depiction of a city overlooked by Calvary and threatened by a heavenly sword and thunderbolt two men and a woman lament
A famous City turned INTO STONE. THat God is angry with the World for Sin, may appeare by this following wonder; the like whereof was never known since the Worlds first Creation: in the fruitfull and florishing Kingdom of Tri∣pilo in Barbary, fome fourscore miles up in the Land, there was not long since a famous Citty called Angrogra, at which Citty in former times before the Wars grew so hot betwéen England and Spain, our English Merchants had great com∣merce, and made Traffick with the in∣habiters thereof.
This Citty was senced about with ma∣ny lofty bull-works, & wals, with eight great Gates made of Cedar, and Cy∣prus wood; the Citty it selfe was of se∣ven miles compasse round by just ac∣count and measure: within the which were six and fifty faire and goodly Pa∣rish Churches, most richly adorned with Gold & Silver, having their locks and keys for the most part of them made of pure Gold, the reason why? was be∣cause that Gold in that parts is more plentifull then Iron or Stéel, and there is a mighty great Golden Mine some seven or eight miles from the Citty in which many labouring Men are work∣ing and digging for the ore continually, and according as Men dig for the ore, and mettell of Iron, Coles, Tinn, or Lead here in England, so fast do they dig and get Gold and Silver in some parts of Barbary, and the Barbary Gold is accounted to be the finest and pu∣rest Gold in all the World: and now to goe forward in my discourse concerning the Citty, I will endeavor my selfe to be as spéedy as I may. The fornamed Citty had many stately Buildings and
Territors therein, and abundance of pleasant stréets facing every way, with severall Market places belonging there unto, in the midst thereof there was a stately Burs or Exchange, where all manner of rich Merchants and others daily frequented about their Worldly affairs, there were likewise thrée gal∣lant Theators, or Play-houses, which were aloud every day in the wéek so of∣ten as they thought good to use their vaine glorious excercises. Moreover there were great plenty of wealthy Shops, and rich Merchants Houses, in all the chiefest stréets of the Citty? and to be briefe there was never a Citty of that bigness in all Africa that had more abundance of People in it then was in the Citty of Angrogra, nor never were People given to more pleasure, then were the People of that Citty at that very same timé when their destruction came upon them: some were buying and selling in the Markets for profūt, some were Feasting and merry making a∣mongst their Friends and acquaintance: some were vauting and dancing in dan∣cing Schooles, some were acting their
parts in the Play-houses, whilst others were drinking and swaggering in Ale∣houses. But in as short space as Lot's Wife was turned into a Pillar of Salt Gen. 23. v. 14. was this stately Citty turned also into stone, and so it is like to continue to the end of the World; and as for the People that were therein they were all transformed into stone e∣very Man, every Woman, and every Child, the manner how is as followeth. HEre is a briefe and true relation of the admirable alteration of the famous Citty of Angrogra according to the Letters that were sent into England this present yeare 1656. which Letters were sent by them that were eye wit∣nesses, as namely the potent Dake of Florence; the Bassa or Prince of the Countrey, and two of our English Mer∣chants that by reason of Tempestious weather at Sea, was driven to an An∣chor nere unto the shore of Barbary, who hearing of this strange miraculous wonder, some of our English Seamen having admittance, travel'd up into the heart of the Land, and did behold this
sad and unexpected admiration, and lastly one that is very well known to be a faithfull Friend to his Native Countrey, Sir Kellum Digby by name. a worthy English Knight, who having received intelligence from the Prince of Barbary, and the Duke of Florence, sent it into England to have it put in Print, that we may take warning by their destruction: the Men that were at that time in the Citty walking up and down the stréets about their Businesse, were imediately turned into stone, so were the rich Aldermen and Merchants with chaines of Gold about their necks, and all the Gorgerus, Gownes, and A∣parrell that they did weare, were like∣wise turned into stone; they also that were in their Houses were served in the selfe same kind: a great company of the chiefest young Men and Maids were assimbled together in a large and spaci∣ous Hall, to solemnize a wedding, with Musick and dancing, & much merriment, were in the twinkling of an Eye both Bridegroome and Bride, Neighbours and Strangers, every, living body and dead Creatures all turned into stone:
yet are every Man and every Woman standing still in the same posture and shape as they were in when they were alive; them that were dancing and ca∣poring after the Musick, and they that stood still were all strucken dead & turn∣ed into stone, standing still in the place where they were before: they that were eating and drinking, sitting at their Ta∣bles or in other places, both them and their Victuals, Flesh and Fish, Bread and Wine, and the Vessels that held it was Metamorphosed, and turned in∣to stone; Women that had their little Infants sucking at their tender Breasts were in the very same Forme and por∣traiture, whether standing or sitting, all turned into stone. A company of Men to the number of sixtéen, that were digging in a plot of Ground, intending to make a Vineyard therof, were like the rest all turned into stone, standing stooping towards the Ground with their Sho∣vels in their hands: All the People that were at the Theators and severall Play-houses, as well the Actors as the Spectators were every Creature turn∣ed into stone: and to be briefe the Mul∣titude of People rich and poore, old and
young all spéed a like, there was not so much as one Man that escaped alive out of the Citty, to tell what was become of the rest: and thus was all humane and unhumane Creatures that lived in the Citty struck dead at an instant, & turn∣ed into stone; the covetous Man had no time to repent of his Sins, nor had the Drunkard the space to aske God for∣givenésse: furthermore all the Horses, Oxen, Shéepe, and Cattell, and feathe∣red fowls, as Cocks, Hens, Géese, and Turkeys, Trées, wood, Timber, Gold, Silver, Brass, and all other sorts of Minerals, and Mettals, became to be stone, which may stand for a monument, and be known for a wonder from one Generation to another, so long as the Sun and Moone gives light, and the Earth and the firmament doth indure? and I am verily perswaded, and so are many thousands more beside, that these Signes, & these Tokens, and these won∣ders, the pleasure of the Lord was to send upon them that have little or no relation to the holy Gospell of the Lord Iesus Christ, because we that are ac∣counted for Christians may consider
with our selves, and learn to beare a better conscience both to God and Man; and this is my desire that all sorts of People that would willingly be called by the name of Christians, may shew themselves to walke like Christians, & with spéed every on to amend their sin∣full lives, for fear that the Lord in his anger should lay the like, or as bad a punishment upon our Sinfull Nation; which God in his Mercy grant may ne∣ver come to passe. HEre followeth directions drawn both from the Scriptures, and from humane reason, whereby to advise all Sinners in time to fly unto the Lord for Mercy, and so to prevent Gods hea∣vy Iudgments before it come upon us. Adam when he had lived but a little while in the Garden of Eden (which is called Paradise) for his disobedience and breaking of Gods Commandement was driven out, and quite excluded for his rebellion. Gen. 3.14. The great and generall deluge, and drowning of the World, which is called Noahs flood was for provoking God to anger, in so much
that God repented himselfe that ever he made Man. Gen. 6. v. 6. and when the Lord rained downe Fire & Btim∣stone upon Sodom and Gomorah, it was done for the wickednesse of the People. Gen. 19.24. The curse of the Lord sell upon Egypt whereby their Land became unfruitfull, the Caterpillars devoured their Herbs, their rivers of water were turned into Blood, and Frogs, Lice, and Grashopers brought the People to ruine Exod. 8.2. all which was brought to passe for their ungratefulnesse towards God. The Chileren of Israel for murmu∣ring against God, and his Prophet Mo∣ses, were bitten and stung to death with fiery Serpents. Numb. 25.6. And the destruction of Jerusalem was because they harkened not to the voice of the Lord, but Stoned and Murdered the Prophets when they were sent unto them. Mat. 23.37. Corath, Dathan, and Abiram: ware swallowed up alive into the Earth, for their blaspemous Sinus; and the prodigall Son was faine to féed upon the empty husks, long of his abo∣minable Pride, and voluptuous living. Luke. 1516. Judas Jscariot had never
have come to have hanged himselfe, if it had not béen for his false dissimulati∣on and trechery. Nor had the glutton Dives béen tormented in the flames of Hell, if it had not béen for his covetovs∣nesse, and despising of the Poore. Luke. 16.20. A many more such sad & strange examples, may be proved by the Scrip∣tures, which is the word of the living God, to shew to the World wherefore God made us, and what in duty we are bound to doe: and now let us once more thinke upon the famous Citty which was turned into stone; their punish∣ment was more then ours; our Sinns are greater then theirs: for had they had so many good and Godly Ministers in that Citty, and Countrey, that are both able and willing to preach and to teach them the word of the living God, as praised be the name of the Lord, we have here in England, no doubt but they would have repented them of their sins before that heavy vengeanc of the Lord lighted upon them. And now let every Man and Woman in England and else where turn from their wicked ways and amend their sinfull lives, and as the
Loord hath béen more mercifull to our sinfull Nation then unto others, let us endeavour our selves to be more thank∣full unto his Holy name, for the great and manifold Blessings which our good God have bestowed upon us; and let us henceforth lay a part all pride of heart, and covetousnesse of mind, all hy∣pocrisy, dissimulation, all vaine glorious and blasphemous opinions, all hatred, malice, spight, and envy, all cursing and swearing, sedition, and mischeif making, all conspiracy and trechery one towards another; and to love and obey the com∣mandements of the Lord above all Earthly pleasure, and to kéepe a good conscience, and doe unto all Men as we would have them to do unto us: and withall to pray unto the Lord to take a∣way from us our stony hearts? and give us hearts of flesh, and then if our fine were as red as Scarlet the Lord will make them as white as Snow, and though they were like Purple they shall he made as white as Wooll. Esay. 1. v. 18. And to conclude in a word we were better all to repent with Ninivy, then to
be burnt with Sodom, and take warning and learn by the fall of others, to lead our lives in the time to come in a better manner then here to fore we have done: which that we may, let us every one with dilligence call upon God early and late, at our up rising, and lying downe, at our going forth and our comming in, that he will be our defender and kéeper all the days of our lives, and that for the sake of Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. FINIS.
