P3925 E526_37 99863332 115525
Mr. Prinns Charge Against the KING, SHEWING That the Kings Design, Purpose, and Resolu∣tion, his Endeavours, Practice, and Conversation, have alwayes been en∣gaged, byassed, and tended to settle, establish, confirm, Popery, Tyran∣ny, and Slavery, in, among, over his Dominions, Subjects, People, and in order to that Design, end, and purpose, he writ to the Pope of Rome (stiling him HIS MOST HOLY FATHER, CATHOLIQVE MAJESTY, THRISE HONOURED LORD & FATHER) engaging himself to the said Pope, to endeavour to settle the Popish Religion only in his Dominions; And since his coming to the Crown, hath extented extraordinary favours upon, and protecti-on of notorious Papists, Priests & Jesuits, against all prosecution of Lawes enacted against them; notwith-standing all his Protestations to the contrary, hath raised up a most hor∣rid, unnatural, and bloudy Warre, arming his Roman Catho∣lique Subjects to Massacre, Plunder, Torture, Imprison, Ruine, his loyall, faithfull pious Protestant Subjects to burn, sack, and spoile their Cities, Towns and Villages, Collected from the bookes written. By William Prinne of Lincolns Inne, Esquire. BEING But a very small tast from that main Ocean of that which he hath writ∣ten concerning the King, and his ill beheaviour, since his coming to the Crown; As also with references unto clear, satisfactory, convincing Answers unto severall objections, concerning resisting, censuring, suspen∣ding, depriving Kings for their Tyranny, yea capitally pro∣ceeding against them, By the said Author. London, Printed in the Year 1648
Severall Objections concerning the lawfulnesse of opposing, resisting, censuring, suspen∣ding, depriving, and (in some cases) capitally pro∣ceeding against Emperours, Kings, and Princes, for their oppression, tyrannie, cruelty, cleerely, fully, lear∣nedly, and sufficiently answered, by the foresaid Author, Mr. WILLIAM PRINNE. WHich Objections are taken,Vide the 3d. part of the So∣veraigue power of Parlia∣ments & kingdoms Page 83. 1. Out of the Old Te∣stament. 2. Out of the New Testament. 3. From Reason. 4. From the Example of Primitive Chri∣stians. 1. From the Scriptures of the Old Testament. Object. 1. Numb. 16. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for their insurrection, of that very divine Authority which God himselfe had delegated to Moses and Aaron, without any inju∣rie and injustice at all once offered to them, or any assault of them,ibid. &c, Answered, Page 84. Object. 2. Exod. 22. 28. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the People. Eccle. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, &c. Prov. 17. 26 It is not good to strike Prines,ibid. &c. Answered, Page 84. Object. 3. Deut. 32 35. Vengeance is mine, &c. Answered, Page 85. Object. 4. Eccl. 8. 2, 3, 4. I counsell thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God; be not hasty to go out of his sight; stand not in an evill thing, for he doth whatsoever pleaseth him: where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what doest thou? Answered,ibid. Page 85 86. Object. 5. Psal. 105 14. 15. Touch not mine Annoited, an∣swered, pag. 89. 90. 91. 92, 93. Object. 6. 1 Sam, 24, 6. 10. Davids words concerning Saul; The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master the Lords Annoynteed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Lords annoynted; I will not put forth my hand against
him, for he is the Lords annoynted. And so of David to Abishai, 1 Sam. 26, 9. 11. 23, And David said to Abishai, destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords an∣noynted, and be guiltlesse? The Lord forbid, that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords annoynted; the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth my hand against the Lords annointed; how wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand against the Lords annoynted: thy blood shall be upon thy head, for thy mouth hath testified that thou hast slaine the Lords annoynted: answered very lear∣nedly and divinely, pag. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97.ibid. Object, 7: 1 Sam. 8. 11. Samuel tels the People how they should be oppressed under Kings, yet all that violence and in∣justice that should be done unto them, is no just cause of resi∣stance, for they have no remedy left them but crying unto the Lord: answered pag. 98.ibid. Objest. 8. This was Doctor Ferns, Sect, 2. 3, None of the Prophets in the old Testament, reprehending the Kings of Isra∣el and Iudah, for their grosse Idolatry, cruelty, oppression, did call upon the Elders of the people for the duty of resistance, nei∣ther doe we find the people resisting, or taking up Armes a∣gainst any of their Kings, no not against Ahab or Manasseh, up∣on any of these grounds, Ergo, Resistance is unlawfull: answe∣red, page 99. 100. 101. 102.ibid. Ob. 9. Out of the New Testament, Rom. 13. 1, 2. Let every soule be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God: whosoe∣ver therfore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, &c. with Doctor Fernes enforcement of this Text from the Con∣text answered very strongly, Page 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. 111. and that passage of Tertullian much insisted upon, Colimus ergo & imperatorem sic, quomodo & nobis licet, & ipsi expedit, ut hominem a DEO SECUNDUM, & quicquid est a Deo consecutum, SOLO DEO MINOREM hoc & ipse volet, sic enim OMNIBUS MAJOR EST, DUM SOLO VERO DEO MINOR EST,ibid. sic & ipsis diis major est, dum & ipsi in po∣testate sum ejus, answered, page 11. 12, &c.
Again, From Dr. Ferne, That the efficient cause of Royall & Monar∣chicall power is only from God, not the people; that Kings receive no Regall authority or power from the people, but from God alone; that the power of Kings is not a humane, but a divine power, of which God onely is the efficient cause; that the people doe not make the King, but God properly and absolutly; this power, right and au∣thority he hath from God; that the King hath no dominion and po∣er from his Subjects by way of trust, but from God, from whom he hath his kingdome and power, so that by Idolatry and oppression, he breaks not the trust reposed in him by his Subjects, because the people have committed nothing to his charge, but God onely; proof whereof see, Prov. 8. 15. By me Kings reigne. Dan. 2. 21. God removeth Kings, and setteth up Kings. Dan. 4. 17, 25. The most high ruleth in the Kingdome of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men. Hosea 13. 11. 1 Sam. 10. 1. Jer. 27. 5, 6, 7. Isai. 45. 1 2. and other Texts answered with very great paine, good distinctions, and cleare satisfaction, pag. 115. to 128.ibid. Object. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. 16. Submit your selves to every or∣dinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Su∣preame, &c. answered, pag. 128. 129. 130. 131. Thus for the answers of Scriptures from the Old Testament and from the New. The next are objections from Reason. Object. 11. As first, Kings are the Fathers, Heads, Lords, Shep∣herds of the Common-wealth, therfore the sonnes, members, vassals, sooks, must not rsist them, answered, pag. 131. 132. Object. 12. The invasions and oppressions of evill Kings and Ty∣rants are afflictions and punishments inflicted on us by God, there∣fore we ought patiently to submit, and not forcibly to resist, an∣swered, pag 133. Objct. 13. Saints forcible resistance of Tyrants begets civil wars, great disorders and many mischiefes in the state, ergo, it is unlawfull and inconvenient, answered, pag. 134. The last, and grand Objction is the testimony of Fathers, as First, that speech of Saint Ambrose, lib. 5. orat. in Auxentium, Co∣actus rapugnare non audeo, dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere, adversus arma, milites Gothos lachrymae meae arma sunt, talia enim sunt munimenta Sacerdotum, ALITER NEC, DEBEO, NEC POSSUM RESISTERE, answered, pag. 135. 136.ibid.
The second is that of Nazianzen, Oratio 2. in Julianum, answered, pag. 137. 138.ibid. The third, that of Bernard, Epist. 121. to King Lewis of France, answered, pag 138. 139. The fourth authority, was the Example of Prrimitive Christians, who submitted themselves willingly to their persecuting Gover∣nours, without resistance in word or deed, answered, pa. 140. 142. 143. After all which he concludes the said third Part Of the Soveraign power of Parlioments and Kingdomes, &c. with personall, naturall, and publike authorities, proving the same, which Mr. Prinne had main∣tained in the said Book from Page 143. to the end thereof. If any man desires more satisfaction of this nature and subject, he may be very richly and plentifully furnished herewith from severall other Books and labours of the said author, Mr. William Prin, who hath more engaged and endeered his Countrey unto him, by dete∣cting the King and his ill Government, clearing the scruples, an∣swering of questions, touching the lawfulnesse of opposing and re∣sisting Kings and Rulers in their tyranny and cruelty, then any Law∣er, Divine, Gentleman, or other, in the whole Kingdome besides, as his foure large and learned Books, concerning the Soveraigne Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes, Romes Master-peece, The Popish Royall Favouite, and other of his Writings doe witnesse. Popish Royall Favorite page 40.1. That the present King Charles (King of England, Scotland, &c.) when he was Prince of Wales, did maintain correspondency with the then Pope of Rome, by letters wherein, he stiled him the most holy Father, chatholick Majesty, thrice honoured Lord and Father, professing that he did not esteem it a greater honour to be discended from great Princes, then to imitate them in their great piety, having exposed their Estates & lives, for the exaltation of the holy Cheir, estee∣ming the protestant Religion, but a novelty & faction, engaging him∣self by promise to the Pope, that he would imploy himself for the time to come to have but one Religion, viz. the Roman Catholique, & that he would spare nothing that he had in the world, but that he was resolved to suffer all manner of discommodities, even to the ha∣zarding of his Estate and life, for a thing so pleasing unto God, as the advancement of the Romish Religion.Popish Royall Favorite pag. 50. 2. That the said King hath taken two solemn Oaths upon both his Treaties of Marriage with Spain and France, to protect and main∣tain
to the utmost throughout his Dominions, the Romish Catho∣lique Church and Religion; yea, to suspend and abrogate all Lawes against them, and is thereby deeply engaged by vertue of these Oaths, to protect favour and defend the same,ibid. p. 50 and in Conscience of these Oaths and Articles (consented unto in the said matches) he holds himself bound (what ever his outward Protestations and pretences be) to side with the Roman Catholique Subjects, both in England, Ireland, and Scotland, and arme them against his Protestant Subjects and Parliaments in all the 3. Kingdoms, of purpose to make good these his Oaths and Articles. ibid. p. 413. That the said present King Charles, since his coming to the Crown (in prosecution of the aforesaid engagements to the Pope & Church of Rome) hath raised most bloody and unnaturall Warre a∣gainst the Protestant cause and party in his Dominions, in which he hath sustained many incommodities, hazarded both his Estate, Life, and Realms for the reducing all his Subjects to one Religion, viz. the Roman Catholique, and upon this ground he hath issued out Pro∣clamations, Declarations, Remonstrances against the Scots;ibid. p. 51 the former, and present Parliament, proclaimed them Traytors, Rebells, no Par∣liament, a faction, he brake up all former Parliaments since his Raign, by discontinuance, and endeavoured to dissolve this Parliament, by the sword of Papists and Athiests, against the very Act of Parlia∣ment assented unto by himself,ibid. and the aforesaid engagements of the King to the Pope, &c. are the reall ground of the late horrid Irish Conspiracy, Massacre, Rebellion, pacification, toleration, and the said Kings connivance at, if not approbation of these horrid bloody ex∣ecrable practices, as also the extraordinary favour lately indulged to these carsed barborous Rebells by the King, and his most gracious entertainment of them, not only into his royall favour, but Court, Army, and Realm of England, as his securest Guard. ibid. pag. 58. 57.4. The said King did permit the Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, du∣ring the Scottish troubles (a little before the begining of this Parlia∣ment) to call a Parliament and generall Councel of state among themselves, even in London; wherein the Popes own Nuncio sate president, in which Parliament the chief papists out of all parts of England and Wales assembled, made severall Lawes and Ordinances for imposing taxes, and raising monies upon all Roman Catholiques for maintenance of the Scottish Warres, which were seconded with
the Queenes own letters and instructions to the Catholiques, reci∣ting what great liberties and favours her Highnesse had procured for them from his Majesty, exciting them to a liberall contribution to∣wards those Warres, and this popish Parliament was permitted without interruption, when the Protestants and Kingdom might hold none at all, or, at least, are presently dissolved in discontents, and the Popes own Nuncio sit Lord President to rule the rost, which Par∣liament was thus openly tolerated to be held to make and main∣tain a Warre against the religious Protestant Subjects, EVEN WITH THE KINGS OWN ACTUALL CONSENT. Epistle to the Rea∣der before the popish Royall favourit.5. That the said King (dissembling with God and men, opposing Papists in words, yet cherishing and protecting them (all he may) in deedes, exhibited many royall orders, xpresses, letters of grace, protection unto popish Recusants, seminary Priests, during all his raign, to stay all manner of proceedings and executions of the Law against them, contrary to the Judges and Justices Oaths, and since this, unhappy civill Warre, the Papists both in England and in Ireland, have been armed against the Parliament by the said Kings Cōmission, yea put into places of great Command & trust, admitted free access to his Camp, & Court, where they have bin in favours, and preserved from all violence, injury, &c. notwithstanding his many printed Declarations, Proclamations, Protestations, Vowes against Popery and Papists, to blind and delude the over credulous vulgar; and notwithstanding his brave, real, royal, defence of the Protestant Religion so often promised, the best and most zealous Protestants, Ministers, people, both in England and Ireland, have bin every where most cruelly massacred, plundered, tortured, imprisoned, ruined by the blood-thirsty Popish Cavaliers, many of their Houses and almost whole Towns, fired, sackt by his speciall Commission.Romes Master∣peece, p. 31. 6. That the said King did admit Can, the Popes legate, and that un∣der the very name, notion, and Authority of the Popes Legate, into familiar accesse to, and conference with him, by all Arts, Policier, and Arguments, to pervert and draw him with his 3. Kingdoms, to a new subjection to the see of Rome, as Cardinall Pool, the Popes Le∣gate, extant in England before this in Queen Maries Raign, reconci∣led her and the Realm to Rome, to their intolerable prejudice, an act so inconsistant to the Lawes of this Realm, with the Kings ancient and late Remonstrances, Oaths, Protestations to maintain the Pro∣testant
Religion; as may ever amaze the World, which ever looks more at real actions, then verball Protestations. Roomes Master∣peece. p. 337. That the King (after Endimian Porter, had gained the Custo∣dy of the great Seal of England) did issue out divers Proclamations under the great Seal, proclaiming the Parliament Traytors and Re∣bells, yea, did grant Commissions to Irish and English Papists, con∣trary to his former Proclamations, to raise Popish forces both at home and in forraign parts for his defence, as his trustiest and most loyall Subjects, and did send letters and Commissions of favour to the Irish Rebells, and hinder all supply from hence to the Protestant party there. Popish Royall Favou∣rite. 35.8. That the said King (after the bloody Irish Rebells had de∣stroyed the precious lives of above a hundred and forty Thousand Protestans in Ireland, and were like to be overcome by the Parlia∣ments Forces (sent from hence and from Scotland to relieve the Pro∣tstant party) condescended to Articles of pacification with these Rebells, contrary to an Act of Parliament, and both Houses consents, wherein the said wicked Rebells are declared his Majesties good Catholick Subjects, and no Rebells at all. ibid.9. That the said King did send for many thousands of the said Rebells into England to massacre the Protestant English here, and fight against the Parliament, as they did in Ireland heretofore. Whereas it flyes up and down in the mouths of the over-credulous vulgar that Mr. Wil. Prinne (since his admission into the Honoura∣ble House of Commons) hath most petulently exclaimed against the Armies late Remonstrance; wherein they desire Justice may be done against the King (as the grand Delinquent of the Kingdom,) & furiously envighed against the same, as if he was newly become the Kings Advocate: these therefore are to stop the current of such reports, and to desire that men may deffen their eares thereunto, con∣sidering that not only their tender care of the priviledges of Parl. (requiring no notice to be taken of any mans Speech within these walles) but also their respects and love unto Mr Prinns (that hath written so much of the peoples and Kingdoms interest and power to call their Kings and Governours to accompt for their unjust wicked and tyrannicall Government) doth require the same, for if occasion be offered the present proceedings of the Army in requiring justice to be done upon the King, and all other Delinquents, as those that lately fomented. second War, invited the Scots into this King∣dome to that end &c. shall be clearly, fully, convincingly, asserted, ar∣gud, and maintained from the severall labours, pains, and writings of the said Anthem, M. William Prinne. FINIS.
