P4015 669.f.21[42] 99863290 115482
The New Cheaters forgeries, detected, disclaimed; By Will. Prynne Esq; a Bencher of Lincolns Inne. WHereas not only one Walker, Bates, and others heretofore, for their own privat lucre, have printed sundry illiterate Pamphlets in my name, to cheat the People, but likewise one Chapman in Popes-head alley (as I am credibly inform∣ed by those who will prove it) on the 30. of this instant May hath printed and dispersed a paper, intituled, [A Sheet, Or if you will, a Winding Sheet for the good Old Cause: By W. P. Philopolites.] Prefixing the Letters of my name before it, as penned by me, and on this 31. of May, hath printed and published another Sheet, stiled [Mola Asinaria: Or, The Ʋnreasonable and Ʋnsupportable Burthen now press'd upon the shoulders of this groaning Nation, &c.] BY WILLIAM PRYNNE, Bencher of Lincolns Inne. Printing my name thus at large not only in the Title, but in the Contexture it self, insinuating it to be penned by me, on purpose to cheat the people of their monies; and make me the Father of these BASTARDS, (through the Statio∣ners Knavery) which the true Fathers need not be ashamed to own publickly by name, being Ingenuous well-penned Pieces. To prevent all future Frauds of this nature (especially in Pamphlets declaiming against Publike Cheats,) I held it my duty openly to detect and disclaim these two, in print before all the world; having no hand at all in the conception, generation, or production of either of these Pamphlets directly or indirectly, whose Compilers are alto∣gether unknown to me. And I shall desire all Stationers, Printers hence∣forth to take notice; that their thrusting out Books in other mens names to pick peoples purses, is a Counterfeiting of Letters in other mens names falsly and deceitfully to get mony from other persons, within the Stat. of 33H 8. c. 1. punishable by Imprisonment, Pillory, and all other corporal pains, except death: Which Law I intend to prosecute against them, if they shall henceforth abuse me, and the people in this kinde. As for the scurrillous rayling, nameless, empty abusive Printed Libels and Papers formerly and lately published against me; I look upon them onely with contempt, as the braying of illiterate Asses, who can neither contradict nor refute my writings for the publike good and safety: and value them no more, than the barking of mangie Doggs against the Moonshine: having treasured up this Soveraign Antidote of my Saviours own composition, in my breast many years since, against the venom of all false viperous tongues or pens, Luke 6. 22, 23. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and seperate you from their com∣pany, and cast out your name as evil, for the Sonne of mans sake: Rejoyce and leap for joy, for great is your reward in heaven, for so did your Fathers unto the Pro∣phets. A wise Heathen could say, Regium est male audire cum bene feceris; much more a magnanimous Christian. The best refutation of Raylings, is Contempt; Spreta exolescunt. In testimony of the premises, I thought necessary to subscribe and publish them under my own hand and name. From my Chamber at Lincolns Inne 31 May 1659. WILLIAM PRYNNE. LONDON,Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Brittain, 1659.
