R1042 E1055_18 99863355 169001
A RENUNTIATION AND Declaration OF THE MINISTERS OF Congregational Churches AND PUBLICK PREACHERS Of the same JUDGMENT, Living in, and about The CITY of LONDON: Against the late Horrid INSURRECTION and REBELLION Acted in the said CITY. LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Book-sellers, at the Sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, neer the Royal Exchange. 1661.
A RENƲNTIATION and DECLARATION of the Ministers of Congregational Churches and Publick Preachers of the same Judgment, livingin, and about the City of LONDON; against the late Horrid Insurrection and Rebellion Acted in the said City. THere hath been of late, a Rebellion, so Impious, and Prodigiously da∣ring, Acted upon so open and great a Stage, as this Famous and Populous City; and before the Sun of Gospel light shining round about us: as that the Noise thereof cannot but make its own report, not only throughout all Christendom, but even to the Ends of the Earth; and fill the most Bar∣barous and Inhumane of Nations that shall hear of it, with astonishment to the highest Scandal of Christian Religion; Yea, and let down
the hateful Memory thereof to all Ages to come; As that which perhaps cannot be Pa∣ralelled, except by those at Munster of the same principle in the former Age. And this Grand iniquity having, through the Artifice of Satan, been falsely and most uncha∣ritably charged on those (at least as the fa∣vorers of it) whom some will needs stile the Independent Party. We, therefore hold our selves Necessita∣ted to make this true, and sincere Renuntiation of, and Protestation against so horrid a Fact, and Principle they were Acted by, as both highly Derogatory to Christ and most Pernitious to his Saints. To Christ, In that his Kingdom, the Coming of which is by Him so closely annexed to the Hallowing of Gods Name, is on the contrary perverted to the greatest Dishonor to him, and the Prophaning of his Name; and a perfect Con∣tradiction to all those Principles, which he left behind him. And that divine and Hea∣venly seed (the Image of Christ) laid by God in the Souls of all his Children, the eminent
fruits whereof are lowliness of Heart, Self∣denial, Peaceableness, with the like, is hereby turned into a Root of such Bitterness, and unto so swollen a Self-Assuming, As under the Title of Saints, as such; and in the Name of Jesus Christ, to take to themselves, the Titles of all the Kingdoms of the World, and in the Face of the full exercise of the Dominion thereof, to Pronounce the Titles of all Earth∣ly Potentates, actually, and absolutely void; Whom from the Apostles times, and at this day, he hath continued, as his own Ordinance; and unto whom, he hath commanded Saints, as Saints, and by so much the more because Saints, for Conscience sake, to be Subject. And who, we are sure, according to the Ordination of God shall continue TO the Destruction of the true Babylon;Rev. 17. And yet to make all the Reformed Churches to be Spiritual Babilon, and all Governments of the World to be Civil Babilon, and all alike from hence forth to be de∣stroy'd. And to turn Meetings for Religious Worship (which ought only to Assemble in the Name of Christ, (and as to such ends only have
the promise of his presence) into Consul∣tations and Designments for the diustrbance and destruction of those States which yet by Christ do Reign; and under whose Indul∣gence and Protection they live. And then to render Faith (by which Believers overcome the World) and absolute Folly (which this hath done) yea and a daring Madness, Ma∣nifest to all Men. And, For Vain and Sorry Man, or any company of the Sons of Men, To rise up and Design∣edly to say within themselves, we will go to such and such a City, and from such or such a time erect a new Throne for Jesus Christ the Son of God, from thence to Reign over all the world; And then to think to invite him from Heaven, and in the Clouds to bring him to the Ancient of daies,Dan. 7. and so to give him possession of that Kingdom. All which are the sole soveraign Preroga∣tives of God the Father to give; (Thine is the Kingdom) and of Christ the Son,Rev. 11. to take to himself that great Power and Reign. And again to under take that, which can be no other then the Immediate Act and Work of
Christ himself, to Create new Heavens and new Earth, and to fill the world, with Righ∣teousness. (which I create saith the Lord) And must needs be judged a far greater work then the first creating of the old World, and never to be set up by outward Vio∣lence. To make all this a Cause, And the cause of Reli∣gion, by the power of force and Blood, thus to obtain a worldly Dominion and Power over all means Estates and Lives: What an high Pre∣sumption is all this, and Derogation to the Glory of Christ? Nor can there be any principle more Per∣nitious to the Saints themselves dispersed throughout the Nations of the World. Seeing the Wrath of Princes, and Governors in all Dominions might, thereby, be en∣flamed, and Their Sword whetted against them. And it ingageth also these men them∣selves, or any others, with whom this wic∣ked perswasion shal prevail, to Destroy the whol Body of Saints, and others Promiscu∣ously, as enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, if not of this Opinion. As if that
Jesus Christ who is Lord over all, and Rich unto all, having so long expected the accomplish∣ment of His Kingdom, were so impati∣ently desirous of a Kingdom of Saints to be set up in the World, that to advance it, though but in a few, he regarded not the thousands of thousands of the People of God that are in the World, and who in their Consciences stand ingaged to oppose it. Neither is this Protestation now made against such principles and proceedings, other, in the Tendency and Drift thereof, then what some years since, such of us, as had opportunity thereunto, did, by letters, declare unto divers in this Kingdom, whose principles then were comparatively modest; for which we have ever since been openly reproached personally by Name in writings and otherwise: as is well known. And again, in a Meeting, at the Savoy, above two years since, of Persons sent from one hundred and twenty Churches of our way, in the Confession of Faith, there, by them agreed upon, It was, as concerning Magistrates in the general, Unanimously declared as fol∣loweth.
Chap. 24. Of the Civil Magistrate. I GOD the supream Lord and King of all the World, hath ordained civil Magistrates to be under him, over the people for his own glory and the publick good: And to this end hath armed them with the power of the Sword, for the Defence and Incouragement of them that do good; and for the punishment of evil-doers. II It is lawful for Christians to accept and exe∣cute the Office of a Magistrate, when called there∣unto: in the management whereof, as they ought especially to maintain Justice and Peace, according to the wholsome Laws of each Common-wealth; so, for that end they may lawfully, now, under the New Testament wage war upon just and necessary occa∣sion. III. Although the Magistrate is bound to in∣courage, promote, and protect the professors and profession of the Gospel, and to manage and order civil administrations in a due subserviency to the interest of Christ in the world, and to that end, to take care that men of corrupt minds and conversations do not licentiously publish and divulge Blasphemy and Errors, in their own Nature, subverting the Faith, and inevitably destroying the souls of them
that receive them; Yet in such differences about the Doctrines of the Gospel, or waies of the worship of God is may befal men exercising a good conscience, mani∣festing it in their conversation, and holding the foun∣dation, not disturbing others in their waies, or wor∣ship, that differ from them; there is no warrant for the Magistrate under the Gospel to abridge them of their liberty. IV. It is the duty of people to pray for Magi∣strates, to honor their persons, to pay them Tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful commands, and to be subject to their Authority for conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in Religion, doth not make void the Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free the people from their obedience to him: from which Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted, much less hath the Pope any power, or jurisdiction over them in their dominions, or over any of their people, and least of all, to deprive them of their dominions, or lives, if he shall judge them to be Haereticks, or upon any other pretence whatsoever. And accordingly we cease not to pour out hearty Prayers for all sorts of Blessings spiritual and temporal upon the Person and Government of his Majesty both in our Congregations, Families
and Retirements, and through Gods Grace, according to our Duties shall continue so to do, our selves, and to perswade others there∣unto; and to live quietly and peaceably in all Godli∣ness and Honesty To conclude all, We have a far greater and sadder occasion to utter of these late attempts, and Resolutions, what Jacob did of that fatal Execution, by Simeon and Levi, upon a whol City (the order of the words being only inverted.)Gen. 49. The Instruments of cruelty are in their Habitations (which ver. 6. is termed Assembly) Cursed be their Anger, for it was feirce, and their Wrath, for it was cruel. And we each one say, O my Soul come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united; but let God divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel. Joseph Caryll. George Griffiths. Richard Kentish. Robert Bragg. Ralph Venning. John Oxenbridg. Philip Nye. John Roe. Thomas VVeld. Samuel Slater. George Cockayne. Thomas Goodwin. Thomas Brooks. Carn. Helm. John Hodges. John Bachiler. Seth VVood. VViliam Greenhill. Mathew Barker. Thomas Malory. John Loder. John Yates. Th. Owen. Nathaniel Mather. VVilliam Stoughton. January, 1660. FINIS.
