R537A 36273464 150198
REASONS Humbly Offered for Encouraging his MAJESTIES Na∣tural Born Subjects, to Export the Woollen Manufa∣ctures of this Realm to GERMANY. THE Securing and Promoting of the Trade of Exporting the Woollen Manu∣factures to Germany, so as may be most Beneficial for the Nation, is a Matter of such Importance, that it is hoped it may not be unworthy the Consideration of the Honourable House of Commons, to whom it is Humbly Represented. That the Supporting the Ancient Company of Merchant-Adventurers of England in the said Trade, will be the most Effectual Means to Conduce thereunto. For this Company having First Introduced the Woollen Manufactures into this Kingdom, and been the sole Exporters thereof, the same did Flourish, under their Government and Conduct, in a Regulated Way of Trade, for above Two Hundred and Fifty Years, until Foreigners, in the Reign of King CHARLES the II. were indulged, and admitted to become Principals in Exporting thereof; since which, few or no English are concerned as Principals in the Trade for Holland, but only employed as Factors for the Dutch. Where∣by the Woollen Manufactures have been Falsified and Debased, the Clothiers Marks altered and English Merchants Seals counterfeited. That Foreigners, as soon as they can be Accommodated, Prefer their own Natives, to be their Factors, who, most of them, live obscurely, and bear no Charge to the Government. That the Clothiers have had Great Losses by the Foreigners becoming insolvent to a very considerable Summe. That the laying open the said Trade about the beginning of the Reign of His present MAJESTY, and the late Queen of blessed Memory, hath not had its designed Effect, as is evident by the general Complaint of the Clothiers. That by the Preserving and Supporting of this Company in their Trade to Germany, the following Benefits will accrue, viz. The Merchants Profit will be Secured to the Nation, which will otherwise go to Foreigners. The Younger Sons of the Gentry may be Employed in this Trade abroad, whereas now the Sons and Servants of Foreigners are, and will be Employed here. The Reputation of the Woollen Manufacture will be kept up, and the Goods not suf∣fered to be Debased, or go out altogether Unmanufactured, whereby a very great Num∣ber of Handicrafts Men have of late been Impoverished. The Market abroad will be plentifully furnished with great Quantities and choice of Goods, as was formerly done. Whereas by the laying open that Trade, English Men have been discouraged from keeping their Magazines abroad so fully stored, whereby the Mar∣ket hath not been sufficiently supplied. The Company's Priviledges at Hamburgh, which are very Honourable as well as Advan∣tageous to the Nation, will be thereby preserved, which if once lost, will be irrecove∣rable. The Customs at Hamburgh, Inwards and Outwards, will, by the Stipulations made with that City, be prevented from being Raised, wherein the Members of this Company have greater Priviledge, and pay much Less then their own Burgers; but if the Company is not Supported, there is no doubt, but in a little time, the Customs there on English Commodi∣ties will be advanced, and consequently the Consumption thereof will be lessened. The English Navigation to those Parts will be Restored. Whereas of late few or no English Ships have been Employed. Foreigners will be Prevented from becoming the sole Masters of this Trade, and having the absolute Command of our Markets, which can never be for the Interest of England. And many other Advantages will Accrue to the Nation thereby. There can be no Restraint of Trade, or Want of Buyers, by passing the Bill now de∣pending, since thereby all his Majesties Natural Born Subjects will be intituled to the Free∣dom of this Society, for as small a Fine as the Honourable House of Commons shall think fit; and every Member, so coming in, may Buy and Sell as much as he pleases, every one Tra∣ding for his own Account. And many Eminent Merchants have declared their Resolutions of coming into the Company when it shall be Established; and the present Members there∣of have very considerable Stocks ready to be imployed in this Trade, when the Bill is passed. Wherefore, It is Humbly Hoped, that the said Company may be Supported in their Trade directly to Germany. And that a Foreign Interest may not be preferr'd in Opposition to the True Interest of England.
