S1308 669.f.26[56] 99869668 163938
CR DIEV ET MON DROIT. HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms PROCLAMATION Against all Meetings of Quakers, Anabaptists, &c. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits, Heraulds, Pursevants and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs, In that part specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by several Laws and Acts of Our Parli∣ament, especially by the one hundred and thirty one of the Eight Parliament of King James the Sixth. Our Grandfather of blessed memory (and renewed and ratified by Vs, with advice of Our Estates of Parliament, presently conveened) It is statuted and ordained, That none of Our Subjects, of whatsoever qua∣lity, state or function, Conveen or Assemble themselves, for holding Councils, Conventions or Assemblies (except in the ordinary iudgements) without Our Warrand, or express Licence, had and obtained thereto, under the pain made against such as unlawfully convocate Our Lieges: And that notwithstanding thereof, there be divers persons under the name of Quakers, Anabaptists, and Fifth-monarchy-men, avowed Enemies to Our lawful Authority and Government, whoupon specious and religious pretences, at unlawful times and places, keep frequent Meetings and Conventicles toge∣ther: And We, and Our Estates of Parliament, considering what hath been the cruel Tenets, and bloody Practises of such in former times, and what Insurrections and Murthers have been committed by them in Our Kingdome of England, within these few dayes, and of what bad consequence their Meetings may prove at this time. Our will is herefore, and We charge you and straitly commands: That incontinent thir Our Letters seen, ye passe, and in Our Name and Autho∣rity, inhibit and discharge all Meetings and Conventions of the persons foresaid, upon whatsoever colour or pretext the same may be, under the pains contained in Our Acts of Parliament, made against unlawful Convocations of Our Lieges: And for the better preventing of such unlawful Meetings, and of any prejudice may ensue thereby, We do hereby command all Magistrates of Our Burghs, Sheriffs, Constables, Iustices of the Peace and other Our publick Ministers, To make exact search from time to time, in all places where any such Meeting hath been, shall, or may be suspected; and to apprehend every such person, who shall keep, or frequent these Meetings, and to commit them to the next Prison, therein to remain till further order be taken with them, by such as shall have Our Authority for that effect; and ordains you to make publication hereof at the Mercat Cross of Our Royal Burroughs, where-through none pretend ignorance thereof, As ye will answer to Vs thereupon: The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full power, by thir Our Letters, &c. Given at Edinburgh the 22. day of January, 1661. and of Our Reign the Twelfth Year. A. PRIMEROSE, Cls. Reg.
