W11 E892_1 R204157 99863843 168414
A PERSPICUOUS COMPENDIUM OF SEVERAL Irregularities and Abuses IN The Present Practice OF THE Common Laws OF ENGLAND. WITH Several Queries and Proposals thereupon for Regulation of Laws, without the help of the Legi∣slative Power, or new Law made. By D.W. of the Middle. Temple, Barrister. LONDON, Printed by T. Lock for Hen. Flesher, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the thrre Cups in Pauls Church∣yard, 1656.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Collonel William Sydenham, Captain Governor of the Isle of Wight, one of the Lords Commissioners of his Highness Treasury, and one of his Highness most Honorable Privy Counsel, and an Honorable Member of the present Parliament. Right Honorable, THe serious considerati∣on of that old Rule in Cicero, Non nobis nati sumus, sed partim pro patria, partim pro A∣micis, prompts my de∣fires to publike good, and summons me un∣der your honourable Protection to expose to View this small Epi∣tome or perspicuous Compendium of Irregularities in the present practice of the Laws of England, which are rudely and briefly propounded as an Essay to which men of greater Abilities and Experience, may facilely adde that which may make the Laws of England, What the Law is. under which (notwithstanding the Abuses interlo∣ped) this Nation hath flourished in peace and hap∣piness
so many ages, the most honorable and happy Nation under Heaven. Lex est commu∣ne praeceptum, virorum pru∣dentium consul∣tum, &c. Bract. lib. 1. f. 2. Lex est radius Divini Lumini, & Recta Ratio summi Iovis. Cicero in lib. de legibus. Summa Ratio Cook Inst. part. 1. The Law it self in its purity is nothing less then the Perfection of Reason (Responsa pru∣dentium) and consonant to the Law of God, grounded upon long experience, and so brought to perfection; per varies casus artem experientia fecit, and as Glanvile and Britton agree, Experience and many trials of what was best for the common good, did make the Common Law. The Laws of England now consist of three parts; 1. The Common Law, 2. Customary Law, and that diverse. 3. Statute Law, or Parliamentary Law; the scope of all (as Bracton saith) ut sopiantur Jurgia; & vitia propulsentur, & ut in regno conservetur Pax & Ju∣stitia. The most principal Precepts of the Law of God and of Nature, are Maxims and Topicks of the Laws of England; I shall touch but a few: 1. Deum Venerari. 2. Honeste vivere. 3. Patriae, Magistratibus & Paren∣tibus obedire. 4. Alteri ne facias quod tibi non vis fieri. 5. Tollere nocentes emdio propter servandum publicam salutem. 6. Suum cui{que} tribuere. 7. Proprietates possessio∣nes rerum & usum distinguere. And for the Rules of certainty, which makes every Science more honorable, the neerer to perfection; No humane learning subjected to argument hath more infallibilities in its Rules, more Vide Glanvil, Britton, Cook, Lord Ch. Just. St. Iohns Speech in Parl. agree it. coherence in its Mem∣brana, or more Harmonical Reason within its self, & is so Connatural and essential to the Genius and innate dispo∣sition of this Nation (being formed silk-worm like) as no other Law can possibly regulate it. En populus sa∣piens, & intelligens magna! Deut. 4.
This sacred Law is our best birth-right, Sir Iohn Davis Reports, and Finch Law. Cooks Preface to Part 5. Rep. a Rich Lega∣cy to every English man, an invaluable jewel descend∣ent from the bowels of Antiquity, bequeathed us by our Ancestors, and hath still been so entertained and em∣braced. Some Writers affirm that our Laws had their Progeny from William the Conqueror and some before him, from Alured, Alfred, Canatus and Edward the Confessor: True it is, those were the Promulgators of several good Laws for the present Government of the people, introduced part of their Languages, & made some substantial alterations in Fundamentals (but more in Formulis Juris) as Insignia of their Conquests; but certainly our Law in its primitive institution is be∣yond the Envy of time or the Pen of man to assert, un∣less deduced from Moses the first Law-giver; but I shall decline this controversie, my age and time may ex∣cuse me; onely give me leave to assume the person of our Common Law, and as Cicero in Lib. de Legibus derives the Roman Laws from the great God Jupiter, to say (as one who writ an Encomion of her Praises) When the Laws of God and Reason first came in, then came I in. The Law is the Palladium of security, peace, Author Iustitiae est Deus secun∣dum quod justi∣tia est in Crea∣tore, Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 3. plenty and opulency, and they the fountain of sublunary feli∣city, the Rule of Justice; she's the Queen of all Mo∣ral Vertues, and Soul of the Common-wealth; with∣out her silver-glyding streams, who knows how to Rule? or the people to obey? If her splendent Rayes be once eclipsed, we may mournfully condole with the Poet, and say, Terras Astraea reliquit. Without her support where are our Heroes and Nobles Honors? our common Subjects and free∣born
English Liberties? Without her protection the Rich man cannot be exempted from spoil, nor the innocent Doves from oppression; neither Religious nor Moral, Vertuous or Vicious can enjoy his life or any thing to him dear or delightful; not the Usurer his Bags or Obligations, nor the Sensualist his pleasures but under her shade; without this Law and the due administration of Justice, there can be no commerce or Conversation amongst men, neither the Merchant can pass the Seas, nor the traveller the land, the Sol∣dier be assured his acquired Possessions though with blood, nor transmit them to posterity, were not the Law his Sanctuary. That Government which is hinged upon her Mar∣ble Pillars is only happy; this Fortress protects the Widdow, the Fatherlesse, the Orphan, the Stranger, Religion, and Religion her: In a word, Major haere∣ditas venit unicui{que} nostrum à jure & Legibus quam à parentibus. Bracton in lib. 1 stiles the Laws of England the Judgments of the just. Levellers first sprung up in the Pontificate of Gregory the 7th the Vice-God of Rome, & were then great disturbers of the Govern∣ment, vid. Coun∣cil of Trent. Erroris & falsi∣tatis ea est natu∣ra ut nemine re∣pugnante sensim per se ditabantur & evanescant, Cook 5 cap. Though this Law be so ancient, so just, so honora∣ble, so certain, & the Government thereby so absolute necessary, as without it all would return into a Cha∣os of confusion, yet it hath some Enemies whose ha∣tred is as ancient as their Names, as beings, as the dregs of the basest of the people, neither considerable for number nor worth, but of restless spirits, willing to imbroyle every where, dissatisfied with any form of Government, with any Laws, delight only in Novelties, pleased all in chan∣ges, affected with no tenure but Gavel-kinde, yet bring many plausible and flashie Arguments (not worth confutation) to maintain their erroneous principle, not in the least convincing to any solid Rationalist,
but are like yong sophisters, who are wont to rail, and by that means to keep themselves from a Non-plus when they are not able to answer the Arguments for∣ced against them. We are all Judges of our own inconstancy, and have had sad experiences in our dayes, how often we disagree with our selves; what Repugnancies within us; how hurried and disprincipled with any thing that is new, and seldome without repentance, though of∣ten too late: Every one becomes his own Phaëton: passion and affection so disorders and deprives Rea∣son, that they rather seem Chimera's then Men; sure∣ly then it's safer to trust laws then men. I cannot but conceive that he who would shake off the laws, will hardly be obliged by conscience. I shall not proceed further to vindicate the Com∣mon Law, or add to her Encomions, its Mysteries are not now lock'd up in Hierogliphicks in Saxon and Nor∣man language, most of it by the prudence of our Grandees displayed significantly in our Native lan∣guage, & is sufficiently able to plead for it self (if per∣mitted.) I need not mention the wisdom and care our Parliaments in all ages have had to preserve its honor and innocencie; nor the indefatigable pains and vigi∣lant care taken for its due preservation and reformati∣on by his imperial Highness the Lord Protector, from whose Fountain of Justice all streams are conveyed to the subject, like the Sun who spreads light and ver∣tue to all the creatures. If I should endeavor to minde your Lordship the reverend Estimation Acts of Justice have always had, how preserved to posterity in his Highness treasury as royal Jewels, & stil reputed no small part of Princely
treasure, I must exceed the limits of an Epistle; the porch would be bigger then the house; and therefore must conclude, but yet cannot without ingratitude forget your Lordships care and vigilancie on all occa∣sions of the publike good and welfare of the Com∣monwealth, and therein of your own Countrey; how highly is that person to be honored whose true merits hath advanced him to transcendent places of honor? the greatest honor is due to the greatest Vertues; your prudence and abilities in Councels, your valour and magnanimity in the Field, and that which crowns all, your piety and zeal for the Gospels honor, hath just∣ly instamped an Honorarium on your person, with an augmentation to your posterity; I humbly beg your honors pardon for my prolixity in detaining you from the publique, & beseech your patronage for this small Treatise being the first Fruits of my labor, and there∣fore in duty a proper Oblation to your Lordship, which being cherished by your favor, may find recep∣tion from others, and be some wayes useful in this Juncture of Affairs, to the great & honorable Senate in the present great VVork of Reformation; which is the hearty desires of him that is ambitious of nothing more then to be his Highness and your Honors in the service of the Common-wealth Most faithful devoted humble Servant D.W. From my Chamber in the Mid∣dle Temple, Nov. 3. 2656.
A COMPENDIUM OF Abuses in the practice of the COMMON LAWS OF ENGLAND. IT is to be admired how the Lawes of England under which England hath flouri∣shed so many ages, the main∣tenance whereof hath cost so much blood, and which have been confirmed by so many successive Parliaments with a peremptory Nolimus mutare should in this Age and Juncture of time and Affairs, fall into so great Reproach as they lie under. In searching into the Causes I conceive although the Spirit of levelling, and the desire men have to live as
they list, without any restraint by the Laws of God or men, may have a great influence into that deep di∣staste that is cast upon them; yet it must be some o∣ther cause that moves men of consciencious and sober mindes to take offence thereat. And therefore it is very considerable whether something be not crept into the practice of the laws of England by the corruption of men, which was not in the Original Foundation thereof; which may just∣ly provoke God to lay the Practicers low, and their Profession open to reproach and contempt. And if the Foundation of Actions in any Court be laid in a lye, Foundations of Actions laid in alye. or if the proceedings thereupon be manifestly false and feigned, how can any man expect a Blessing from God therein? And how can any man with comfort be an Instrument in such a Suit? For instance in the Court of Common-Pleas, so called, Common Pleas. in respect of the Common-Pleas there holden, which anciently consisted most in real Actions, Practice of the Court. and is styled by my Lord Cook the Lock and Key of the Com∣mon Law. No Action can be ordinarily, but by Origi∣nal Writ of the Chancery, which is in the nature of a Summons, and directed to the Sheriff, whereby the Defendant should have notice of the Action and particular cause thereof; and this must bear date 15. dayes before any other Process can issue: And if the Sheriff return a Nihil, then a Capias, & Alias & Plures are to be awarded each to bear Date 15. dayes after the other; and if the Sheriff upon each of these return a Non est inventus, then to proceed to outlawry, that so his Estate may be seised to cause appearance to the action, and to prove all these necessary. Upon a
Writ of Error all these are returned as if they were directly awarded, returned and filed; and if any be wanting or misreturned, the Plaintiff is overthrown in his Suit. Yet to elude this just Court, the Plaintiffs Attor∣ney takes out a Capias, Alias, Plures and Exigent, and proceeds either to get the Defendant arrested, or else outlawed; and at the return of the Process takes out an original Writ, which he returns himself in the Sheriffs Name; and also returns the Capias, Alias and Plures in his Chamber or elsewhere in the Sheriffes name, whereas the Sheriff nor his Deputy never heard of them, and then files them as if duly awarded and returned. By which means, 1. Abuses. The great Seal of England is abused and an∣tidated. 2. The Courts of Judicature (where proceedings should be all in Truth, Righteousness and Judge∣ment) abused. 3. The Sheriffs (who are sworn Officers and lie under an Oath, duely to execute and return the Process of Law) are injured and endangered by false Returns in their Names. 4. And lastly: The Defendant much wronged, and the Plaintiffs neither disburthened in Charge nor ex∣pedited in their suits, but all done for the Attorneys, Clerks and Soliciters gains. The Upper-Bench (which may proceed by way of Original Writ out of the Chancery, Upper Bench proceedings. as doth the Common-Pleas) have a shorter way. An Attorney takes out a Bill of Middlesex, and by colour of this may arrest any man in Middlesex upon an action of
Trespass; and then declare at Term (upon a pretence that the Defendant is in custody of the Marshal) upon any action whatsoever; and if he be not arrest∣ed in the Bill of Middlesex, but is to be found in a for∣raigne county, then that is a ground to take out a Lati∣tat upon pretence that the Sheriff of Middlesex re∣turns that the Defendant lurks and hides himself in the county of York, &c. In order to the regulation of the Laws it is humbly submitted to consideration. Proposals for Regulation. Questions pre∣mised. Cook in his Pre∣face to the 8. Part Rep. saith it is conveni∣ent for the Common-wealth that there be an and of Suits & controversies. 1. Whether it be for the interest of the Common-wealth to encourage suits in the Courts of Law or E∣quity, which is the rather propounded in regard it appeareth that two parts in three, if not more, of the multitudes of suits began in these Courts are either false & groundless, or else so frivilous & trivial that it is the shame of the Law that the Courts of Justice (the glory of a Nation) should be troubled with them. 2. Whether it be for the Honor and Majesty of the courts of Justice and Judgement, that any Basis of Law or foundation of suits should be laid in a lye or false pretence. 3. Whether it be fit or soundly rational that it should be in the power of any man to molest another in a court of Justice in any cause wherein provision is not made for full recompence to the Defendant in case the suit appear vexatious and unjust. 4. Whether the reducing the courts of Judicature to their primary institution (these things premised)
and tying the practicers to the Original Rules might not go very far in the regulation of the Law. Practice of Courts. The main Bulk of actions at this day at the com∣mon Law are debt, trespass, trespass upon the case, upon promise; trover, and conversion, and slander; these are called common pleas, & originally cryable onely in the court of common pleas, by Original Writ out of the chancery, which is in nature of a Summons, and by Law ought to precede any Capias (though seldom practiced) or other process out of the court of common pleas; but yet the court of the Upper-Bench, and also the chancery have had a con∣current power with the common pleas to hold pleas of the like causes in particular cases: the said Origi∣nal in chancery expresses the particular cause of acti∣on that the Plaintiff had against the Defendant; Original in Chancery. and if it did appeare that the Debt or Damage were above 40. l. then a Fine was payable to the crown upon the taking out of that Writ, and the said Ori∣ginal VVrit was directed to the Sheriff of the county where the Defendant lived, commanding the sheriff that if the Plaintiff did give him security to prose∣cute the said suit, Summons. then the sheriff should summon the Defendant by good summons to appear in the court of common pleas at a day appointed by the said writ (which must be 15. Test of the Writ. dayes after the Test) to answer the said suit: this writ ought to be delivered to the said sherif, who ought to make a return thereof be fore any Capias ought to be awarded out of the common pleas, and so no arrest could be made of the body of the Defendant without those preceeding circumstances: Upper-Bench practice. whereas in the practice of the upper Bench there was no more required but the taking out
of a Latitat grounded upon a false suggestion (a lye upon Record) that upon a return of a Bill of Mid∣dlesex awarded against the same Defendant, Substance of the Writ of Lat. that the Defendant did lurk and hide himself in that county into which the Latitat was awarded, and thereupon commanding the Sheriff to take the body of the Defendant to answer to the Plaintiff in a Plea of a trespass, where∣upon the Defendant might instantly be arrested without any notice formerly given him of any cause of action, and at the return of the VVrit the plaintif may declare against him, either for a trespass, or for a Debt of 1000. l. or any other the actions before mentioned; and upon pretence that the Defendant is in the custody of the Marshal, he was lyable to answer to all other Actions, whereupon any declara∣tion should be filed against him in that court in the same term of his appearance; and all this without any Fine to be paid to the crown until the issue joyned. The Officers, The contri∣vance of the common pleas to prevent the greatness of practice in the Upper Bench. Practicers and Attorneys of the common Pleas finding the great advantage the Upper-Bench had of them in the hastie prosecution of the causes, and that thereby the most part of the Grise was gone from their Mill, they also cast about how they might elude the ancient and legal course of that court; and instead of taking out an Original 15. days before the Capias, & giving good security to prosecute the suit, and instead of giving summons or notice to the defendant of such action against him by the space of 15. dayes before the Capias, they would take out a Capias to arrest the defendant Immediately and it may be Alias and Plures, and then at the begin∣ing of the next term after arrest, they would file
an original: and lately also upon pretence that they were too straightly bound up by laying the true cause of action in the Original they grown of late, to file an Original in a trespass of Clausum fregit, & afterwards declare upon the right cause of action, and then file a new Original accordingly; and by these means, and by the practice of both these Courts; the ancient and good intention of the Law, To be remedy∣ed without Le∣gislative power or new Law. That no man should be sued at Law without notice before hand what action would be brought against him is abused: All which may well be remedied by the Judges, without any help of the Legislative Power or new Lavv made. The present practice in the common Pleas hath these irregularities: Irregularities in the Com∣mon Pleas. 1. The Original under the great Seal is antidated, being sealed in October, and dated in May or June before. 2. The Sheriff is pretended to return either that he hath summoned the defendant by good summons, and namely John Doe, and Richard Roe; or else that perhaps the Defendant being of 1000. l. land per ann. either Nihil habet, or Non est inventus, and the Sherifs hand set to it, where in truth the Writ was never brought to him or any of his Officers, nor did they ever hear of it. 3. The Capias is awarde before the Original, Form of pro∣ceedings. and for the most part into some forreigne county, and then returned in the Name of the Sherif, who never heard of it; and so the Alias, and the Plures, and then the Exigent and all into counties where the De∣fendant never hears of them, and to salve it a Pro∣clamation
awarded into the county where the defen∣dant lives; and all these returned to be duely executed when never a one of them is ever proclaimed, or any notice given to the defendant till hee be returned outlawed. And all this done by false returns and pretences, which is humbly conceived to be dishono∣rable to the Law, and unfit to be practised by Chri∣stians, who ought (especially in matters of Judica∣ture) to do all in truth, righteousness and Judge∣ment. The present irregularities in the proceeding of the Upper Bench are briefly touched before, Upper Bench Abuses. whereby it appears the foundation is laid on false sugge∣stions and pretences, which it is questionable how any blessing can be expected on such a Foundation. For remedy of all which; Remedies pro∣posed. VVhy should not this Rule be set to all Courts, that no processe of arrest should issue till summons awarded and endeavoured to be executed (as it is in Chancery by Subpoena) and so the useless VVrits of Alias & Plures which stands the subject in thousands of pounds annually (if not the Capias and Exigent too) be wholly taken away. It will be objected, that if men have summons before, they will hide themselves, or go out of the land before arrest. To which it is answered, 1. There are few in danger of arrests but know their danger without a summons. 2. 'Tis possible some inconveniences may be this way, but not comparable to the inconveniences that come by the malicious arresting men oftentimes to their ruin, without any notice beforegiven. 3. But if in truth any real danger should be of going over seas, the law
hath provided a Ne exeat Regnum, which upon oath of a just debt and real fear of withdrawing may be granted caution being taken, to satisfie the defendants damage if he be wrongfully stopped. 2. It is an abuse that Writs are close and not Pattents, vide Mirror, cap. 59. VVhy should not every processe bear teste the very day on which it is sealed, and to be open to pre∣vent mistakes which are often the dangerous delay, if not loss of many suits in the countreys. 3. VVhy should any but the Sherif return the writs directed to him, and to avoid untrue returns, to be lyable to answer every false Return by pecuniary punishment, as well to his Highness whose Justice is thereby abused and delayed, as to the party agrieved and damnified. As for the Chancery it's well provided already that no Subpoena shall issue till a Bill filed. Chancery. 1. But first, Remedies proposed. why should any man draw me to an∣swer there upon my Oath to what he knows to be falsly suggested: and why should not the Plaintif be tyed to swear the contents of his bill to be true, as well as the defendant swears to the contents of his answer: and why should so many suggestions and multitudes of known falsities be inserted in Chance∣ry Bills. This would prevent the greatest part of Chancery suits, and the prolixity and tediousness of the rest. 2. VVhy should any suit be there for moneys due upon specialty, the Common Law being the proper place to try them? this course being there taken, that whereas now at Law upon a bond the Jury finde the debt & damages & costs, they might find the debt not as now they do, the whole forfeiture of the bond, but the true debt now remaining justly due, and for da∣mages
what the Plaintiff is justly damnified by non∣payment thereof, and the true costs expended in the cause, and then proved upon oath. As for Bills of discoveries of fraud, why should the Plaintif suggest any thing which he dares not swear that he believes, or hath just cause to suspect to be as is alledged. To all these may be added a few Queries, some of which are summarily hinted already. 1. Queries added. Whether we may not justly conclude, that all the reproach and contempt that is fallen upon the Laws of this Nation, ariseth from this ground, that there are so many falshoods and pretences in the whole processe of the suits? 2. VVether it be not to be lamented, that men should dare to affirm that to the face of a Judge up∣on the bench (a God upon earth) which he dares not affirm to the God of Heaven. 3. VVhy should any Process issue out of any Court at Common Law until the Plaintif have made Oath in that Court, that he hath just cause of such Action in that case, viz. that the debt or duty in de∣mand is justy due to him, or that he is justly damni∣fied to such a value in that case, and why? 4. VVhy should any original Process issue out of any Court of Common Law, but that therein the par∣ticular debt or other cause of the Action be expres∣sed in the writ?
5. Why should any person, appearing upon any such writ, be compelled to answer to any other action then that so contained in the writ, and not to that un∣til Recognizance (as in Chancery) entred with good sureties to pay full damages and costs to the party un∣justly grieved. 6. Nulli vendemus nulli negamus aut differrimus justitiam Mag na Charta. VVhy should not all superfluous and unjust de∣lays in suits be cut off or lopped close (in this time of Reformation) and all feigned delatorie curious plea∣dings, the admittance whereof of late times hath been a great cause why real actions, special writs of assise (Originals of highest esteem in our antient Common Law) have not been so frequently practised in England, as they have been? 7. Cook Preface to part 8. Rep. Ejectione firme. Why should such multitudes of suits in perso∣nal actions, especially wherein the reallity of free∣hold and inheritance are now tryable by writ of eje∣ctione firme to the intollerable charge and endless vex∣ation of the people, be countenanced or permit∣ted? The too frequent use of this course occasions such multiplicity of suits as we see daily in one and the same cause to the unjust slander of the common Law, Reasons and inconvenien∣ces. and intollerable hinderance of the people, wherein there are (by this new way, which is no other then an innovation or device of late Practice) divers verdicts of the on side, and divers on the other, & yet the Plain∣tif nor Defendant can come to no finalend, nor hold the possession in quiet, though it be oftentimes tried & adjudged for either party, through the litigiousness of the parties, or imprudence sometimes of Juries,
and the encouragement of the Attorneys or Solici∣tors on either side. Proposals for remedy. Writs of Assise & real Actions restored. This might be much remedied if the good old use of Writs of Assise and real Actions were restored to their antient course and practise, there would not then be above two tryals, or three at the most; and after one Recovery the Possession resteth quiet. But yet it may be objected, that the restoring of this ancient course in the Common Law by writs of Assise, and real actions tends to delay, and takes up more time then the present course in practice ad∣mits. To which it is answered, Real actions for Free∣hold and Inheritance being of a higher and worthi∣er nature, and standing upon greater variety of titles and differences in the law, then personal (as the weight of the cause requireth: do challenge longer time in the proceedings then personal, but yet are not over long, nor without iust cause (in deliberations (saith Fortescue, cap. 53.) Judgements grow to ripeness, but in over hasty process never) and the demandant shall come to a timely final end by these real actions which he shall never do in personals, for the tryal of Free-hold and Inheritance, Cook Reports 8 and indeed, few or no per∣sonal actions of this nature, as hath been observed by my Lord Cook, or to be found in the Reports of Edward the third, and were not much in use till of late yeers. I could wish care were taken to prevent those Le∣gions of actions of the case for words, Actions for slander com∣plained of. vulgarly cal∣led Actions for Slander, but rather Actions of Malice; his Highness Ordinance of 29. Iune, 1654. against Challenges, Duels and Provocations thereunto, well provides remedy, but yet not sufficient to restrain the
swarms of suits occasioned by contentious spirits, such actions were rare heretofore, Allowed only for words of eminent slan∣der and great importance. and such onely were brought as were for words of eminent slander, and of great importance; for calling a one Traitor, Felon and Robber, or the like. In our books none appears to be brought for scandalous words before Edward the thirds time, and then not above one in 50. yeers of his reigne: but three in 22. yeers of Ed∣ward the fourth: and not one of this nature in the 21. yeers of H. the seventh: but five actions for slandr brought in 30. yeers of H. the eighth; but now at least two parts of all our Reports are stuffed with them. They began in the Queens time, A Proposal. & in these our times are beyond number, Its conceived for the interest of the Nation, that the malice of men should be with∣stood; therefore though the tongues of men are set on fire, why should the Law blow the coles. For remedy hereof it is proposed, 1. That words onely of brangle, heat and choller, Remed. might not be as much as mentioned in the high & ho∣norable Courts of Justice, being a great dishonor to the law and the professors thereof, tending much to the disturbance of the publike peace, and as one saith, seems utterly unlawful amongst christians; but yet I am not against all actions forwords neither, where life, livelyhood or reputation, in its principal accep∣tation, is endangered; but therein full compensation should be enjoyned. 2. If such words should be thought fit to be con∣tinued actionable; why should Juries give such high
damages? Let them on such actions respect more their oaths, & the good of their own consciences, then they have used to do, and no more give damages, without fear or wit, most according to the reputation of the Plaintiff, too often to the utter undoing of the defendant, when in truth the plaintif was not two pence really damnified by such words. 3. VVhy should not the plaintif therefore be put to prove his real or actual damnification, & to make that appear upon Oath, and the Jury be directed to fine no more, nor the plaintif to recover no more. It is humbly conceived worthy the considerations of the supreme authority of the Nation. Indictments quashed com∣plained of. How many Indictments removed by Certiori, or writs of Error into the Upper bench, or every term quashed for Error, found in the indictment through the ignorance or negligence of the Clarks of the peace or their Deputies in every county, to the great pervertion and dishonor of Justice, and no mean encouragement of offenders. 2. Actions real and personal, & verdict for fault in issue or Record, or matter of form or other erro∣neous procee∣dings stayed or reversed. How many actions real and persononal within one yeer, are with no little expence of time, money and hazard of Estate, nay health, if not life it self prosecuted, and at length when come even to the Ha∣ven of Repose, when the Plaintif hopes for the Harvest of all his care and charge, cast away or made fruitless by the ignorance or dishonesty of the Attor∣ney or Clerk in the cause, verdict being for some fault in the issue or Record, want of form, or some other erroneous procedings qualified, or Judgement stayed or reversed, and to all invalled.
To prevent this dishonor to the Nation, Remedies pro∣posed. this detri∣ment to the people, and great discouragement to Ju∣stice, it is humbly proposed; 1. Why should not the numberless number of At∣torneys, Soliciters and Clerks be reduced, and those onely that are knownly honest, able and experienced be admitted to practice, and of them but a certain number. 2. Why should not the reverend Iudges of the Upper-bench be impowred upon quashing any such Indictment to impose a high Fine upon (if not dis∣place) such Clerk of the peace, or other Officer that framed the said Indictment, at the same time such Indictment is quashed, and care be taken for speedy answering thereof duly to his Highness Treasury, without any Appeal or Mitigation. 3. Why should not the Attorney, Solicitor or Clerk respectively, who hath the management of the cause, so destroyed by his, or their negligence, igno∣rance or dishonesty, be lyable to a pecuniary punish∣ment to the party proportionable to his loss and da∣mage thereby, and that to be set by the Court at th∣same time such Verdict or Judgment shall be quashe¦ed or reversed, & to be speedily levyed, without sor∣cing the party injured thereby to his action on the case, which though the Law allows, is seldom adven¦tured on, or practised against men of that profession, and also to stand committed for the abuse and disho∣nor to the Court.
Why should Prisoners, Complaints a∣gainst Fees & charges paid by Prisoners. or others for them, pay any thing for ther Entries in Goals and Prisons, or for their coming in, or discharge at Sessions, this is a great dis∣honor to Justice, an oppression to the poor, and an an∣tient abuse of the Common Law, and complained of in the Mirror, 231. It is a received Rule, Cook lib. 4. An abuse in acts of Parliament complained of. That Laws cannot be Just unless certain; that is (saith the Lord Cook) the best Law that leaves least to the Arbitrariness of the Iudge; this is con∣ceived to be the unhappiness in penning some late Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, and Commissions for transactions of Publike Affairs, in which liberty is too much given to do according to Equitie; if this be con∣tinued (saith one) we shall have nothing but Equity left; this aequam & bonum is said to be in plain terms nothing else but an absolute and arbitrary power to judge and interpret according to every mans conscience, which is too frequent as different as their Opinions, the most of men concurring in nothing less then certain∣ty, quot homines, tot sententiae. This made the Savoni∣ans (finding therein no Justice, and groaning under the burthen) petition their King (whose Magistrates were substituted to give Judgement according to E∣quity) that their Magistrates might no more give Judgement according to Equity. The great Enormi∣ties and horrid Exactions upon the people by Empson and Dudley, may not without reason be imputed to the Statute of H. 11 H. 7. cap. 3. the 7th. Authorising them to hear of∣fences committed against penal Statutes according to dis∣cretion (not according to the Lawes and Customes of England) whereupon the Lord Cook caveats Parlia∣ments to be sure to leave all causes measured by the golden and streight metwand of the Law, Cook 4. part Iust. 41. and not by the incertain and crooked cord of discretion.
Its a great Complaint, Proposals for restoring the antient course of proclaim∣ing acts & or∣dinances of Parliament. or rather an Excuse taken up by offenders, and such as feel the execution of penal Laws, that they did not know the Fact committed by them to be an offence against Law; that they never heard of any such Act of Parliament, Ordinance or Law upon which they are convicted or questioned, if they had, they should have been more careful, and avoided the transgression. Now to leave such without excuse, and prevent others that through ignorance, or otherwise fall un∣der the stroke of such Law (preventing Justice being conceived the best) its proposed that the antient course of proclaiming Acts of Parliament by the Sheriffe of each County may be evinced. Antiently at every Parliament the Acts that passed were to be transcribed in Parchment, Cook 4. p. Inst. f. 26. and by Writs directed to the respective Sheriffs, and commandment given them, that all the said Statutes shall be proclaimed, and be firm∣ly observed and kept; and be proclaimed at County Courts, and transcripts made for any to read, and take Copies of them. Some object, that this course was frequently used onely before printing, which was first in Germany in an∣no 1441. & here in H. the 6. time; but certainly the use of proclaiming acts was long before that time, as appears in the Mirror. Others object, that the Parliament being the Repre∣sentee of the people, the whole Nation is by their act bound (as a man by the act of his Trustee) and there∣fore why should Proclamation be made in the Coun∣ty, every man being obliged to take notice of that which is done in Parliament. 'Tis true, as soon as Parliaments have made any thing, the Law intends that every per∣son
hath notice thereof, for that they represent the bo∣dy of the whole Nation; yet the old use of proclaiming Acts and Ordinances is conceived very fit and requisite to be restored, to the end the subject may have ex∣press notice thereof; and that no particular person rich or poor, Cook 4. p. Inst. may be overtaken by an intendment of Law, too often to his undoing. I shall adde no more to this rude discourse, which is onely the Results of my private thoughts and ex∣periences; this subiect being since undertaken (though unknown to me) by a reverend Sage of our Law, learned Mr. Serjeant Sheppard, whose labors are very great in its reformation; only license me to conclude with my Lord Cooks Opinion, That no humane Law within the circuit of the whole world, by infinite de∣grees is so apt and profitable for the honor, peace & prosperous Government of this Common-wealth, as these antient and excellent Laws of England be; some such Exuberancies being lopped off, and some other parts now buryed in Oblivion taken away, fit to be regulated in this blessed flourishing spring of His Highness Justice. FINIS.
