Y4 E647_4 99867716 165996
A DECLARATION And full Narrative of the proceedings of Admirall Vantrump VVith the Dutch Fleet at Sea; his entring of Cales Bay: And the manner of the taking of ninety saile of the Hollanders ships by the Eng∣lish: with the proceedings of the French Fleet therupon. Also a Message to the English Consull at the city of Venice, and Vantrumps Letter to the Princes of Italy. Likewise, the Jesuits proceedings of the City of GENOA and a Sermon preached, touching the Heriticks of ENGLAND, as they are pleased to call us. With other particulars of great concernment, in relation thereunto. LONDON, Printed for I. Clowes Anno Dom. 1651.
Strange Nevvs from Genoa 27 October 1651. WE have little news, save that the Hollan∣ders who will with their Admirall Trump be 45. saile of men of War, suddenly will randezvouz in Cales Bay, for what designe this winter we know not well: He hath writ severall Letters to the Princes of Italy, declaring that the quarrel is not against any of them, but the French for their pyrating; Now the French will at most be but ten men of War abroad this winter, whereof as yet are but three, whereby the fleet cannot be immediately for them. Some Letters from London of this last week speak of the Dutch Agents or residcnts sudden retirement from London without taking leave, also that the English have seized on neare 90. saile of their ships, whereby its thought a War (for those and other respects) may happen between the two states.
Captaine Penne we understand is gone for the Straights mouth with his squdron to catch the New-found Land: Baccaleau french men that furnish Marsellis and many o∣ther places of France with their Winter and Lent provisi∣on; its thought the taking of them may make a mutiny in France against those that of their Nation first set out ship∣ping against the English, we shall heare the effect. To this Town came lately a Jesuit extraordinary from his Hollinei (for sooth) with speciall order to pardon the sins of those upon confession, though they have been 20. years 25. yeares without confessing, so full of clemency and grace is the Pope, this man preaches heare 2 or 3 times a day, and makes people run mad after him, admiring his sanctity and zeale: The Pulpits here usually are long, so that two or three persons may be in one of them at one and the same time, and because this man would shew his learning, and how sound their Religion i, he hath a fellow that now and then comes up into the Pulpit to him during the preachment, and at his Q. falls to disputing with him concerning some of their tenents as seeming to oppose them, but at length being silenced and consuted by the Jesu∣ite, their composed argument ceaseth, 'and down goes my fellow again; so that they that have been there to heare them, tell us of great sport and recreation they afford to the people. His chief drift is at two things. 1. To convert the He∣reticks as he calls us, next to stir up the people to part with their monyes in exchange of Prayers and Masses for their Grandfathers and friends departed, and this he doth by speciall authority from the Pope, the collection of monyes so gathred being for the Church. And (sayes he) beleeve not these ranck and stinking Hereticks that say, there is no Purgatory (spisting at them as he is speaking)
for Christ sayes, there is 2 purgatory, the primitive Church also confirmes it, as the Popes, Cardinalls, and Councells likewise doe, but Calvin forsooth, he like an impudent fellow tells you 'tis all lyes, all forgeries, all stories we tell you. He, (sayes he) is one of the three Pillars of their Church: Luther and Queene Elizabeth being the others. This Toun I look upon (sayes he) as a great place for Heresie, Oh that I could but have one os them to dispute with me here before you all, that I might shamefully lay him on his back. We see (saith he) what their sweet Religion hath brought them to in England: I have been told but very lately by some English Gentlemen come from thence, that they have one Sect called the Adamites still amongst them, and declared their nakednesse, and manners, rendring that Religion most hidious to this people, who think we are all of one minde. Taking occasion to speak of Mary Magdalens Conversion, he said she was not so highly guilty of incontinency as the world talks of, for she never had to do with a man but 3 or 4 times, the manner thus. She being a great Queen saith be, young and handsome, she fell in love with her Secretary (alas youth is apt that way you know) and so ly that means he lay with her 3 times Now this Secretary not being able to containe so great a happi∣nesse, tells an intimate friend of his how that he was made for e ver by his Mistresses (the Queens) affection: & what had passed Ay saith the other, you must procure me the like favour of the Queen, or else I am resolved to divulge thi. I hope not so saith the Secretary: Its neither more nor lesse than I tell you of saith the other. Hereupon the Secretary goes to the Queen a most sad man, declares to her how that the felicity of her love was so insupportabl that he had revealed it to a confident friend of his, but that he had deceived him, for he declared to re∣veale the businesse unlesse she admit him to the like happi∣nesse. The Queen here upon knew not what to say, poore woman, being put to such a plunge, but at length to save
her honour chose to lay with him; and this is all that people make such a stir for sooth quoth he, concerning this Queen, Mary Magdalen. This wretch was so blasphemously impudent as to assert in his Sermons, that a Priest was in some respects more then God himself, for that God could not make a man without a mans help, for its man and God that makes a man,) but sayes he a priest speaks but a few words and he makes a God Ipso facto. Urging people to meritori∣ous works by way of contribution of monyes to get their deceased friends out of Purgatory, which he vehemently insisted on (as indeed it brings them most monies in) he re∣lated a story of a certaine Godly prince, that had so much pity on the poore soules in purgatory that he allowed 30. Masses a day to be said for them a while after, something like a Spirit came in the night into his Chamber, and frighted him grievously, hereupon he calls for help to his severall Servants, Anthony, Richard, William, Ralph, come all of you hither presently, they awakned at his loud cry presently came into his Chamber, the Prince bad them light a Candle and seek diligently for a Spirit that walked too and againe, they after long search about all the house could see nothing, whereupon they were bid to go to 'bed againe. The next night 'twas wors then before, for the Spirit (saith he) heaved up the bed from under him, that the Prince was againe put to it to call out for his servants to drive this troublesome spirit out of doores, but all in vaine, for they could not find him. The third night (good lack) was not tollerable, the spirit so runted it in the said Chamber, that Gregory and Cud∣bert, and all must rise once more to unkennell the spright, but still none could be found. The Prince saith he, thus outragious perplexed, and en∣compassed with grief and melancholy, musing (the next
day) what might be the cause that he must be a meer game for Goblins more then another man, especially since he had commiserated the poore mortalls in Purgatory, and was full of other good works: At last striking his naked fist upon the table by which he sate, after he had re∣collected his thoughts call me hither (saith he) my Stew∣ard forthwith: the Steward appearing, and the Prince looking wishly upon him, saith he hast thou paid for the 30 Masses a day as I bad thee, which I feare me is the cause I am thus haunted a nights, the Steward being struck as it were dumb of astonishment and shame, intending to poc∣ket up the money himself, immediatly confessed the guilt, Oh thou rascall thou Hedge-hogg that thou art quoth the Prince, goe, the first thing thou doest and pay for 100. Masses a day that I be no more thus plagued with Devils when I should sleep a nights. These his commands being accordingly performed, the Prince never heard of any more Goblins after, but (saith he) slept as well as any one of us. Thus farr; for matter of their preaching I shall now con∣clude with a story latety acted in this place. Their courteousnesse being taken notice of both by their friends as well as well as their foes, occationed this follow∣ing stratagem; Halfe a dozen schollers falling in company with one of the Jesuits Pupils in their discourse upbraided their Fathers with uncharitablenesse to the Poore: saying saying that if a poor neighbour lying sick should send for them at any convenient of night for their assistane and comfort they would sarse stir from their chambers whereas, let them have the least invitation from a rich body and they are ready at all times of the night the pupils took their Masters part saying it was otherwise with them. Hereupon the schollers resolving to try onclutions see some instruments at work to goe to the Colledge prsently after 9. a clock one night who knocking at doore acquain∣ted
the porter they were sent from such a poore man 'dwelling not far of, who being as it was thought deadly sick, did much desire the presence of such and such Fathers to comfort him and pray with him This being carried up to them, they sent to them answer that it was not a fitting time of night to require that at their hands, and that be∣sides some of them were preparing to preach next day. Some few nights after, they sent againe very late being after mid∣night, and knockt up a Porter, acquainting him that such a rich Mer∣chant by name, dwelling at a great distance from that Colledge: being very dangerously sick had sent to them, desiring earnestly that they would come away as well to confess him, as also to help him to order his last will Testament, and that 'twas conceived he had not many hours to live: The porter bad the messengers tarry, and that he would go call them up: who accordingly half ready came down to them on, saying they were sory to heare of the sad condition of that worthy pious Gentleman, whom they had so lately seen at Church; and that they would soon be ready to give him their best assistance. Where∣upon one of the Messengers desired to run home before, pretending to acquaint the sick party of their intended comming, and left the other to serve them as a guide. He that was gone before gave notice to his comrades who were ready in ambuscado, waiting the comming of our holy Fathers, And taking their opportunity, they very hand∣somely set on them with good Cudgels, belabouring them to some tune and so left them sprauling on the pavement for helfe dead: none of the Inhabitants daring to appeare for their assistance, it beieg very dangerous in most Cities of Italy to open door after midnight, by reason of many insolences The next day complaints were made to the Magi∣strate of such high indignities acted on these eminent Religious persons desiring that inqussition might be made to find out the authors there∣of. Now at the same time there were libells stuck up in many chiefe publick places of the City, declaring the whole ground work and car∣riage of the businesse; which being produced and read before as well of the Magistrate as the Iesuits, they were faine to retire with their blowes on their backs, to the perpetuall shame of them and their socie∣ty. Thus with my most affectionate Respects to all our friends, I ksse your hands and remaine Your obliged friend and servant R. Y. Pray excuse my hast and brevity at this time your last Letter was four dayes older than the others, but was never the simpler for that you'l say. FINIS,
