21452 S123177 44920415 173861
THE HISTORIE of Frier RVSH: how he came to a house of Religion to seeke seruice, and being entertained by the Priour, was first made vnder Cooke. Being full of pleasant mirth and delight for young people. Imprinted at London by Edw. All-de, & are to be solde by Francis Groue dwelling on Snow hill. 1626.
¶ A pleasant History, how a Deuill (named Rush) came to a Religious house, to seeke a seruice. THere was sometime beyond the Sea, edified and founded a certaine house and Cloister of Religious men, which house was founded at a great Forrests side, for to maintaine the seruice of al∣mighty God, and daily to pray for their benefactors and founders, and for the saluation of their owne soules: which place by reason of their founders and well disposed people (which gaue vnto it largely of their goods and possessions) in∣creased in riches, and euery man had gold and siluer at their will and also of meate and drinke they had great plenty: in so much that they were so well at ease and had so much, that they wist not what to doe they were so full of wantonnesse, where∣by the seruice of almighty GOD was not well maintained among them: for oftentimes they said neither Mattins nor Euensong: and through their great negligence they forgat cleane the charge that they were bound to when they entred into their Religion, and they liued more like beasts without reason, then like men of good and holy conuersation: for they haunted harlots and liued viciously, and the goods that was giuen them by good and well disposed people, they spent in vn∣thriftinesse and ribauldry. And when the great Princes of Deuils which are the Patrones of all vices vnderstood of the great misrule and vile liuing of these Religious men: consul∣ted to kéepe them still in that state, and worse if it might be. And these be the names of the Deuils.
Belphegor who was Prince of Gluttony, Asmodeus Prince of lechery, And Belzebub Prince of enuie, with many other Diuels assembled together, which reioyced for the misorder of these Religeous men. And as they were all assembled toge∣ther with one accord, they chose a Diuell to goe and dwell among these Religious men, for to maintaine them the lon∣ger in their vngratious liuing, which Diuell was put in ray∣ment like an earthly creature & went to the Religeous house, and there hée stood at the gate a certaine space all alone with an heauie countenance. Then within a while after the Priour came vnto the gate and espied Rush the yong man standing there all alone. Anon he said vnto him, what dost thou here, and what wouldest thou haue? The yong man with great reuerence answered and said: Sir, I am a poore yong man, and am out of seruice, and faine would haue a master. And Sir if it please you to haue me, I shall doe you diligent seruice, and shall doe so well that you and all your brethren and couent shall be glad of me, for I shall kéepe so well your secrets, that I trust to obtaine at all times your good loue and fauour, and all theirs also. And when the Priour had heard his words, he was mooued with pittie, and said: Goe into the Kitchin to the Cooke, and shew him that I haue sent thée thither, and bid him shew thée what thou shalt doe: for thou shalt be with him a certaine sea∣son, till that some other better thing fall. Then the yong man made his reuerence to the Priour, and thanked him, and foorth he went to the Kitchin, where hée found the master Cooke. Anon he made reuerence vnto him, and said: Sir, my Maister the Priour hath sent me hither vnto you, and he commaundeth you to shew me what I shall doe, for I must be here and helpe you. The maister Cooke answered and said, you be welcome. And anon he set him to such businesse as he had to doe. And thus the Diuell became vnder-Cooke in the place that he was assigned vnto, by the Prince of Diuels. And then he said (laughing to himselfe) as followeth.
These being the words of the Deuill. I am right glad that my purpose is come so well to passe, for now all mine intent is fulfilled, and I doubt not but all shall be ours: for I shall make such debate and strife among the Friers, that they shall neuer be at concord and peace. And I shall make them good staues wherewith the one shall beate well the other: and often times they shal lye together by the eares, in so much that there was neuer séen nor heard tell of such a rumour and discord in no Cloister in the world. And I shall vse my selfe so, that I shall be in great loue and fauour among them. Then within foure or fiue daies after, it fortuned that the Priour came into the Kitchin, and there he found the young man, to whom he said, where wast thou borne, and what is thy name? The young man answered and said, Sir, I was borne very farre hence, and Rush is my name. Then said the Priour vnto him, Rush canst thou couple Hounds together? Yea Sir (said Rush) that I can doe right well, and more then that, for I can couple men and women together, which is a more mastrie, and also Sir (if néede be) I can conuay a faire woman into your chamber, and conuay her home againe in the morning so secretly, that no man shall spy it. And also I shall kéepe your counsaile so secretly, that it shall neuer be knowne. And when the Priour heard Rush speake so hée was right glad of him, and said: Rush, if thou canst doe as thou hast said, I shall reward thée well for thy labour, and thou shalt be my most welbeloued seruant: wherefore make an end
of thy businesse, for soone, thou shalt goe a little way on a mes∣sage for me, and so he departed and went to supper. And when euery man had supped, and Rush had done all his businesse in the Kitchin, he came vnto his Maister the Priour, and said, Sir, what is your will with me? the Priour answered, and said: heere a little beside dwelleth a faire gentlewoman, the which I loue very well, but I dare not discouer my minde vn∣to her my selfe: and if thou canst finde the meanes to bring her secretly vnto me, I shall reward thée right well for thy la∣bour and paine. And when Rush had heard the words of his Maister, and knew all his minde, he answered and said, Sir, be of good chéere, and let me alone with the matter: for I shall goe vnto the gentlewomans house, and I shall say your message so well, that this night she shall come to you: and so departed Rush from his Maister, and went straight vnto this Gentlewomans house. And when he was thither come, hée found the Gentlewoman sitting all alone. And when Rush was espied of her, he made vnto her great courtesie, and with many reuerences these words he said. How a Diuell named Rush came vnto a Gentlewomans house and how he brought her priuily vnto his Masters chamber. REst you merry faire Mistresse, the most fairest creature in theworld: My Maister greeteth you by me, desiring you to come and speake with him. Then said the Gentlewo∣man to Rush, who is your Maister, and what is his will with me? faire Mistresse, said Rush, I will shew you, my Maister is the Priour in a house of Religion here beside, and hée loueth you so well, that except you come vnto him this night, I know he will be dead for sorrow. Here followeth the answere of the Gentlewoman. ANd when the Gentlewoman had heard the words of Rush, shée answered and said, Faire Sir, it were great
pittie that the Gentleman should die for my sake, and rather then he should so doe for me, I will come to him, and shew him all the courtesie that I can. Rush was very glad of those com∣fortable words, and thought that his enterprise was well brought to passe, and he said vnto her: Faire Mistresse, may it please you to take the labour and goe with me, and I shall bring you to my Ma∣ster, and as I sup∣pose, hée will make you good cheare, and Gold and Siluer you shall lacke none, for hee hath great plenty thereof. Then saide the Gentlewoman, Sir, & pray you let vs depart hence: for as I suppose the Gentleman looketh long for vs. So foorth they went both toge∣ther, till they came to the Priours Cham∣ber; And when the Priour sawe that she was come, he was the gladest man in the world, and thanked Rush much for his labour and paine: And so the Priour re∣ceiued her into his chamber, and there he made her good chéere, and they had good meat and wine great plenty. And when they had well refreshed themselues, Rush departed and went to the Kitchin, and left the Priour and the Gentlewoman alone, and there she saued the Priours life. And when Rush was in the Kitchin, hee said vnto himselfe: I am right glad that I haue brought thi matter so well to passe, and I doubt not but they will agrée well enough together, for they be both of one accord. And when the other Friers perceiued that
Rush was such a priuie follow, and so well could kéepe coun∣saile: they desired him to helpe them also, and so he did: for he brought to euery man, the woman that they most desired, whereof they had great meruaile. But they were so blinded with ignorance, that they neuer perceiued that he was a very Deuill, but euery man had him in loue and fauour. How Frier Rush threw the maister Cooke into a kettell of water seething vpon the fire, wherein he died. IT befell vpon a day that Rush went forth to sport him, and it was very late ere he came home againe, and the maister Cooke was very angry with him that hee was so long absent. And as soone as Rush was entred into the Kitchin: the Cooke began to chide, and said vnto him, thou horson knaue where hast thou béene so long? and with a great staffe hee laid vpon Rush and beat him sore. And when Rush saw that the Cooke was angry, and so farre out of reason, and that he had beaten him sore: anon he began to waxe very angry with the maister Cooke, and said vnto him: thou horson villaine, why hast thou beaten me thus: I will be reuenged on thée? and suddainly he
caught him in his armes, and threw him into a great kettell which was full of water séething vpon the fire, and said, lye thou there in the Diuels name, for now thou shalt neither fight nor chide no more with me: and so Rush slew the maister Cooke. Then when he had so done, hée departed out of the Kitchin, and went to the next Towne to fetch the faire wo∣man againe for his Maister: and in his absence certaine of the Friers came into the Kitchin to speake with Rush, but they found no body stirring therein, and some of them went to stand by the fires side, to tarrie till Rush came in, for they thought he would not tarie long: And as they stood talking together by the fires side, they spied a man in the Kettell séeth∣ing vpon the fire. And anon they perceiued that it was the maister Cooke, whereof they were greatly abashed. And with that (crying out) they went vnto the Priour and shewed him that the maister Cooke had drowned himselfe in a Kettell séething vpon the fire in the Kitchin: for which tydings the Priour was right sorrie. And in the meane season Rush came home, and had conueyed the woman into his Maisters cham∣ber. And anon the Friers shewed Rush of the great misfor∣tune that was fallen on the Maister Cooke in the Kitchin, and he made as he had béene sorrie therefore, and had knowne no∣thing thereof, and he was in such great loue & fauour with the Priour and all the Firers, that they mistrusted him nothing for that déede, and so there was no more mention of the Mai∣ster Cooke. Then the Priour commanded that Rush should be made Cooke, and all the Couent was right glad of that, and so he was himselfe also, for he thought his enterprises came well to passe after his minde, and as he would haue it. Thus Rush became Maister Cooke in the Kitchin, and dressed their meate merueilous well: for in the Lent, and in the Aduent, both Fridayes and also other dayes, he put Bacon into their pottage pot, which made the pottage to sauour very well, and he dressed their meate so diliciously, that the Priour and all the Friers had great meruaile that he did it so well: in so much
that they said he did much better then their other Maister Cooke did, and that he was a more cunninger man in his occu∣pation, and could doe much better in his office. Thus Rush continued in that office the space of seauen yeares, and did right well, and euery man had him in loue and fauour. Then it fortuned vpon a day the Priour and his brethren were as∣sembled together in a generall counsaile, and as they stood talk∣ing together, the Priour remembred Rush, and anon he said vnto his brethren: Friends we haue here Rush which is our maister Cooke in our Kitchin, and he is an old seruant, and much diligent and true seruice he hath done to vs, and he hath continued among vs longer then any seruant that euer wee had: wherefore me thinke it reason, that hée were promoted into some other office, and made a brother among vs. Then all the whole couent with one voyce said they were content it should so be. So the Priour sent for Rush, and when he was come before him and all his brethren, the Priour said, Rush it is so, thou hast béene here a long season, and we haue found thée hitherto a true and diligent seruant, wherefore we will that thou be promoted, and take vpon thée an habite as we haue, and become a brother among vs. Rush answered and said: my Maisters I thanke you all, and then the Priour gaue Rush an habite, and put it on his backe, and so Rush became a bro∣ther in the place, neuerthelesse he kept his office still. How Frier Rush made Truncheons for the Friers to fight withall. VVHen Rush had on the habite of a Frier, and was a brother in the place, he had more vacation dayes then he had before. And as a King or great Prince prepareth or∣dinances against their warres, in likewise did Frier Rush: for when all his businesse was done in the Kitchin, and that he had leysure, he went and sate in the Porch of the vtter gate, & there he was making of good bigge Truncheons of Oke. And
he made them with Hilts ouer the hand for slipping, of the which the other Friers had great meruaile, & demanded of him wherefore he made those Truncheons. Rush answered and said: Faire Sirs, I make them for this intent, that if there come any théeues hither for to rob vs, and to spoyle our place, yet shall we haue weapons to desend vs withall. And there∣fore I make them. And moreouer, when any néede shall be, come to me and euery man shall haue one, and they shall be ready at your commandement, and then the Friers thanked him and so departed. Then it fortuned vpon a day, that the Priour and Subpriour fell at discord, and were gréeuously an∣gry, the one with the other, and would haue fought together but onely for shame: neuerthelesse, the anger abode still in their hearts, and all was for an harlot: within a while after, the noyse spred abroad among the Friers, that the Priour and the Subpriour were fallen at discord, for the which they were angry in their mindes. And they that loued the Priour, tooke his part, and they loued the Subpriour, tooke his part, and so they murmured among themselues. Then they appointed in their mindes to reuenge their quarrells at one time or other, and so to make a more surer way in fulfilling their malicious mindes and angrey hearts, euery man after other went priuately to Frier Rush to lend them staues, in so much that there was not a Frier in the place but he had one, and they neuer went without their staues vnder their habite, and the one knew not that the other had any, they képt them so secretly. And when Frier Rush had deliuered all his staues, he was right glad in his heart, for he knew right well there should be a great fray among them, either one time or other. So it fortuned afterward, as it is a common custome among Religious people at an high feast, to keepe solemne seruice, and euery man to be at Mattens at midnight: and so vpon a good night, all the whole Couent assembled together in the Quier, and were ready to begin Mattens, they tarried for no∣thing but for the comming of the Priour. Then anon the
Priour came into the Quier, and sate him downe in his place, and as he looked about him, he espied that the Subpriour was there presant, and with that his heart began to grudge of the olde anger that was fallen betwéene them two: and he thought in his minde that he could neuer be reuenged in a better time, and sodainly he rose out of his place, and went to the Subpri∣our, and with his fist he gaue him a good buffet, and the Sub∣priour which was moued with the stroke, started vnto the Priour and gaue him another buffet, and with that they went freshly together by the eares, and when the other Friers saw that, euery man rose out of their places, and drew out their Truncheons, and together they went: who had béene there should haue séene good buffets giuen on both parties. And when Frier Rush saw that they were fighting together, anon he blew out all the Candles and Lamps that were burning in the Church, and left no manner of light therein whereby the one might sée the other: and when he had so done, he tooke his Truncheon in his hand, and went into the Quier among the thickest of the Friers the which were fighting freshly without ight, and there he laid so lustily about, that many of them he
felled to the ground, and left them lying there for dead, and when he had so done, he stole his way from them, and as hée went, he found standing in the portall of the Quier, a great olde Deske, and anon hée tooke the Deske betwene both his hands, and threw it ouer the portali into the Quier among all the Friers, and hurt many sore, in so much that some had an arme broken, and some a legge, and other some had their noses cleane pared from their faces, that the bloud ranne into their mouthes, and as for broken heads to the hard scalpe were no dainty, for euery man had one, there scaped none free a way, who had beene there, should haue had goodly pastime to see the Friers creepe about the Quier, and in steede of (Domine labia) they cried out alas and well away. Then when the fray was done, and all the noyse seased, Rush came in among them with a Candell in his hand, and made as if he had knowne nothing thereof, and said to them: Fie for shame Sirs, how fortuned this discord to fall among your selues? I see well now you regard not your henour, nor the good name of your place. All the people shall say ye be not honest, nor good Religi∣ous men, the which words I would be loath to heare, and I may not suffer our place so to fall in an euill name: where∣fore good Maisters, I require you to set your hearts at rest, and put the matter into my hands, and I shall so deale, that all shall be well, and you shal be good friends againe, and no words shall be spoken thereof, then euery man complained to him of their great hurt, and he made semblance as he had béene sorte therefore and then they that could goe, went vp to their Cels, and they that could not goe, did créepe vp as well as they could, and laid them downe in their beds, and there they lay till they were whole againe, and in the space of thrée wéekes and more God was euill serued, for in all that space they sung neither Mattins nor Euensong, nor neuer entred into the Church for it was suspended, and for shame they durst neuer let it be knowne. And when they were all whole, and euery man vpon his féete againe, and might goe about the house, they brought
againe their staues to Frier Rush, and thanked him much, and then Frier Rush said vnto them: Sirs when ye haue neede of them againe, ye shall finde them here ready at your comman∣dement, for which they gaue him thankes, and departed. When Frier Rush saw that they were gone and that he had all his staues againe, he laughed vnto himselfe and said: I am right ioyfull that mine enterprises be come so well to passe, for I haue done many mischeuous deeds since I came first, and yet I will doe more before I depart hence, for I shall cause them to be damned, and I shall bring their bodies and soules into the burning fire of hell, there to remaine world without end, and of me shall he spoken a thousand yeeres hereafter. How Frier Rush grymed the Waggon with Tarre, and what cheare he made in the Country. ANother time it fortuned that the Priour had a iourney to ride into the Country about a little businesse that hee had there to doe, and anon he called Rush his seruant vnto him and said, Rush goe thy way into the Court, and take with thee a dish full of greace, and greace well the wheeles and Axeltrees of the Waggon, and make all things ready against tomorrow in the morning, for I must ride forth to morrow betimes, then Rush departed from his Maister, and went about his businesse, and in steed of greace, he tooke a great vessell full of Tarre, and anointed the Waggon all ouer with it, both within and without, and especially in the place where the Priour should sit: and when he had done, returned to his Maisters chamber, then the Priour demanded of Rush, if he had done as he commanded him: yea Sir said Rush, ye may ride when please you, and so they went to their beds. Then on the morrow after, the Priour and Rush his seruant with his other company, rose vp very early in the morning for to ac∣complish their iourney, and forth they went vnto their Wag∣gon, and when the Priour was entred therein, hee perceiued
himselfe all to berayed and smeyred, and all his clothes were filed therewith: and then he said to Rush, thou lewd fellow, what hast thou done to this waggon that I am thus arayed therein? Rush answered and said: Sir, I haue done nothing but as you commanded me. That is not so said the Priour, for I commanded thée to take greace and greace but the whéeles and the Axeltrées, and thou hast taken Tarre and an∣nointed it all ouer, both within and without, Why hast thou done so? Sir said Rush, I vnderstoode you bad me doe so. And when the Priour sawe there was no other remedie, hée com∣manded his seruants to make ready another Waggon, and in the meane season, the Priour went into his Chamber, and put on another habite, and came againe and mounted into the Waggon and went their way, and along they rode, vntill they came to their iourneyes end. And when they were alighted at their lodging, the Priour called for his supper, and anon euary thing was made ready, and the good man of the house and the Priour sate doune to supper together, and made good chéere, and then the Priour called for wine of the best, and anon he had his commandement. And when the good man of the house and the Priour had supped, Rush and his fellowes sate
downe to the reuersion that their Maisters dad left, but they had no wine: wherefore Rush was very sad, and euer he mu∣sed by what policie he might get some wine. And anon he cal∣led the wife of the house and said: Mistresse, I pray you fill a pottle of wine for me and my fellowes, and so shee did: and when that was gone, they called for another: and then they called for the third, and so ended their supper. Then on the morrow when the Priour had done all his businesse, and was ready to returne home againe, he called for a reckoning. And anon, the good wife came in and gaue him a reckoning of all things, both horse meate and mans meate; and at last, shée reckoned thrée pottels of wine that Rush and his fellowes had. And when the Priour heard, that his seruants had drunke so much wine: Anon he began to waxe very angry, and asked her, who commanded her to fill in so much wine? the wife an∣swered and said: Sir, Rush your seruant commanded me to fill it in, and he said, that you should pay therefore. Then anon the Priour called for Rush, and said vnto him: Thou lewd Knaue, why hast thou drunke so much wine? Might no lesse then pottels serue thée and thy fellowes? Sir, said Rush, we haue not drunke so much, for your horses haue had two of the pottels: my horses, said the Priour, what should they doe with wine? Yes Sir, said Rush, your horses laboured sorer then we did, and were very weary, and they had nothing but Hay and Oates: wherefore, me thought it néedefull to giue them some good drinke in their course meate to comfort their hearts withall, and to cause them to be the lustier, and to haue the better courage to bring you homeward. And when the Priour had heard that answere of Rush, and saw there was no remedy but patience: paid for the wine, and all things that he had taken there, and so rode home in his Waggon, and Frier Rush neuer went foorth againe with his Maister.
How the Priour made Frier Rush Sexton among the Friers, and how he charged him to giue him knowledge how many Friers were absent from Mattins at midnight, and what they were. VVHen the Priour was come home, he made Frier Rush Sexton of the church, and his office was to ring the bell and to light the candles, and to call the Friers to Mattins at mid-night, and also the Prior commanded Rush & charged him, that he should take good heede that there were none of the Friers absent from mattins, and if there were, to giue him knowledge thereof, then saide Rush to his maister: Sir all your commandement shalbe fulfilled, and so they departed. And within thrée or foure nights after, Rush espied certaine of the Friers that were absent, and he marked them well, and on the morrow after he presented them to the Priour, and anon the Priour caused them to come before him, and gaue them a check, for their being absent; in a little time, Rush had presented them all, which caused the Priour to be greatly offended with them: when they perceiued that Rush had made such complaints against them, they had him in much disdaine, but they could not amend it: for he had them in such great feare, that neuer after they durst be absent, but well was hée that might be first in the Quier. When Rush perceiued the Friers had him in so great feare, he deuised to doe some mischeiuous thing among them; and vpon a night, a little before he should ring to mat∣tins, he went and brake downe the staires of the Dorter, and when he had so done, hée went and rung to mattins, and lighted the lamps & Candles in the Church, and went into the Dorter, and called vp the Friers, and so came and sate at the staires foote as he was wont to doe; he had sitten there but a while, but anon there came one, who thought no hurt but to goe soberly into the Quier as he was wont to doe, and when he came to the staiers downe he fell, and had a meruailous great
fall: then said Rush, thou art one. Presently there came another, and likewise downe he fell and had a sore fall, thou art two said Rush. Anon came the third Frier, which had a mightie great bellie, and was a grosse man, and he made great hast, for he fea∣red that he should haue béen last, & when he came to the staiers, downe he fell on his fellowes necks, and he was so great and so heauie, that almost he had mischiened his fellowes that lay vn∣der him: thou makest thrée said Rush. And with that there came seauen or eight together, and downe they fell all at once. Softly maisters for shame, said Rush, ye come to many at once, ye were not wont to be so hastie, but now I perceiue well ye would de∣ceiue me, and one would excuse the other, and therefore ye come so thick to blind me in my tale: How should I now giue account to the Prior of them that be absent? Surely I cannot tell, but
now I sée well, ye be too subtill for me, I would some other man had mine office: and made as though he had béene very angrie with them. Then the Fryers, such as could goe, though it were to their paines, rose vp againe, and limping and halting they went into the Quier, and they that fell first and lay vn∣der, were sore hurt and could not goe, and specially the Fryer with the great belly: yet neuerthelesse, they crept into the Quier, as well as they could. And when they were all assem∣bled together in the Quier, each of them complained to other of their great hurts, and so they began Mattins: who had béene there, should haue heard a heauy song and sad, for they were not merry in their hearts, their paines were so great. When Mattines were done, they that could goe, went vp againe into their lodgings, and they that could not goe, lay still in the Quier all night: On the morrow word was brought to the Prior of the great misfortune that was fallen among the Fry∣ers at midnight: for the which misfortune the Prior was greatly displeased and angry in his minde, and thought verily it was Rushes déede, for hee had done many euill turnes before. Then the Prior sent for Rush to come speake with him, and when he was come, the Prior said vnto Rush, how fell this mis∣fortune to night among the Fryers, that they be so sore hurt? Sir, said Rush, I shall shew you it is not vnknowne vnto you, that when you put me first into this office, ye commanded me to giue you knowledge when any of my brethren were absent from Mattines, and so haue I done diuers times, whereby many of them haue béene shent and chidden by you, and for that cause, they owe mee ill will, and faine would haue me out of this office, if they wist how. And for to accomplish their desire, and to cause you to be displeased with mée: I will shew you what they haue done this night. Sir, it is so, that when the time was come, I rung to Mattines and lighted candles, and made all things ready, and when I had so done, I went into the Dorter to euery mans Cell and called them vp, then I went and stood at the staire foot, for to tell them as they
came downe, as I was accustomed to doe, and to know who came to mattins, and who did not, and for spite that I should not reckon them, they came all on a cluster, and for hast the one thrust the other downe the staiers, and he that had the greatest belly, had the hardest fall; now if they hurt themselues, what might I doe with all? And when the Priour had heard the wordes of Rush, he wist not what to say, but for to voyde all tribulations and misfortunes that might fall in time to come, he put Rush out of his office, and set him in the Kitchin againe, and when he was there all alone, he laughed to himselfe and said: this enterprise is well brought to passe, and I haue made a good scuse thereof to the Priour, yet will I doe more ere I de∣part out of this place. How Rush went forth a sporting, and was late forth, and how in his way comming home, he found a Cowe, which Cowe he deuided into two parts, the one halfe hee tooke on his necke and caried it with him, and the other halfe he left still: and how soone he had made it ready for the Friers suppers. IT befell vpon a time that Rush when all his businesse was done in the Kitchin, he would goe forth into the Country to sport him, and to passe the time with good company: as hée walked on his way, his chaunce was to come into a village, which was two or thrée mile from the place where hee did dwell, and when he was entred into the village, hée looked round about him in euery corner to finde out some company to make merry withall: and at the last, espied an Alehouse▪ and in he entred, and there hee found good fellowes playing at Cardes, and drinking, and made cheare: then Rush made obeysance to them, and sate downe among them, and dranke with the players, and afterward he fell to play, and was as merrie as any man in the company: and so long he played and passed the time, that cleane hée had forgotten what he had to doe at home, and the day went fast away, and the night ap∣proached.
Anon Rush looked vp and perceiued that it was all most night, remembred himselfe that there was nothing rea∣die at home for the Priours supper and Couent, and it was al∣most supper time, wherefore he thought it was time to depart thence, so he payed for his drinke and tooke his leaue, and home∣ward he went, and in his way he found a fat Cowe grasing in the field, and sodainly he deuided her into two parts, and the one halfe he left lying there still and the other halfe he tooke on his necke and carried it home, and quickly hee made it ready; some he put in the pot, and some vpon the spit, and he made a great fire and set on the pot, and laid to the spit: and he made meruailous good pottage, and rosted the meate very well, and he made such spéede, that euery thing was ready by the houre accustomed to goe to supper, whereof the Priour and all the Friers had great meruaile, that he had made euery thing rea∣die so soone, and was so well done: for they knew that it was late ere he came home: for some of the Friers had béene in the Kitchin a little before, and saw neither Cooke nor fire, nor any thing prepared toward supper: wherefore they gaue great praise to Rush, and said, he was very quicke in his office.
How a Farmer of the Priors sought his Cowe, and how he was desolated by the way homeward, and was faine to lye in a hollow Tree: and of the vision that he had. THere was a poore Husbandman, dwelling there beside, which was a Farmer of the Priors: the which poore man had a Cowe abroad in the fields, that was accustomed euery night to come home at a certaine houre, and neuer failed. And at the last a mischaunce fell vnto her, for Frier Rush had slaine her as she stoode in the field, and so shee failed of her comming home at her houre as shee was woont to doe. And when the poore man sawe that his Cowe came not home: he thought in his minde it was not well with her, so foorth he went in an eue∣ning for to séeke his Cowe, and so long hee trauailed about in the fields, that at the last hée found the one halfe of the Cowe lying there: but the other halfe was cleane gone, and shee was so cleanely deuided in two parts, that hee imagi∣ned in his minde, that it was not posible to be done but by mans hands, for if any wilde beasts had done it they would haue spoyled the flesh: so hée returned homeward againe, and ere hee came at the halfe way, the night was so darke that he could not see which way hee went, and so hee went
out of his way, and house could hee finde none: and at the last he came to an hollow Trée wherein he sat him downe, thin∣king there to take his rest all night, and he had not sitten there but a whils: but anon there assembled a company of Deuils, and among them they had a great principall Master whose name was Lucifer, and hée was the first that spake: and the first that was called, was a Deuill named Belzebub, and with a loud voyce, he said vnto him: Belzebub what hast thou done for vs? Belzebub answered and said: Sir I haue caused de∣bate and strife to fall betwéene brother and brother, insomuch the one hath slaine the other: that is well done said the master Deuill, thou shalt be well rewarded for thy labour. Then foorth he called another Deuill, named Incubus, and deman∣ded of him what he had done? Sir said Incubus, I haue caused great debate and strife, to fall betweene two Lords, through the which they haue had great warres, and many men haue béene slaine: then said the master Deuill, thou art a true ser∣uant to vs, thou shalt be well rewarded for thy great labour and paine. Then said the great master vnto another Deuill, named Norpell, what hast thou done for vs? Sir said Norpell, I haue béene among players at the Dice and Cardes, and I haue caused them to sweare many great oathes, and the one to slea the other: and also I haue caused debate and strife to fall betwéene man and wife, and caused the wife to cut her hus∣bands throat: that was well done said the Master, thou shalt be well rewarded for thy labour. Then foorth came another Deuill named Downesnest, and said: Sir I haue caused two old women to fight so sore together, and to beate each other about the head, that their eyes flew out: that was well done said the master Deuill, with much thankes thou shalt be well rewarded for thy labour. Then foorth stepped Frier Rush freshly, and with a good courage, and said: Sir, I am in a Re∣ligious place, and I gouerne the Prior and his Couent as I will my selfe, and they haue me in great loue and fauour: for I doe them many great pleasures, and I haue brought them
faire wenches euery man one when they lust, and diuers times I haue caused debate and strife to fall among them, and I haue made them staues and caused them to fight stifly together, and to breake each others head, and their armes and legges, and yet will I doe more among them ere I depart out of the place, for I shall make so great debate and strife among them, that the one shall slay the other, and they shall come and dwell with vs in hell, and burne in perpetuall fire without end. Then said the maister Deuill to Rush: if thou haue done as thou hast said, thou hast done well thy part, and I pray thée be diligent thy selfe about thy businesse, and stirre them to sin, and specially to these thrée: that is to say, wrath, Gluttony, and Lechery, and briefely to make an end of thy enterprise, and slip it not: and when thou hast done, come home, and thou shalt be highly exalted and well rewarded for thy great labour and paine. When Rush had tolde his tale: the great maister De∣uill commanded euery Deuill to goe his way and doe the best he could, and thus they departed: some went one way and some another: and thus they were scattered abroad in the world, to finish and make an end of their enterprises that they had taken in hand. And when the poore husbandman which sate in the Tree, sawe that all the Deuils were departed and gone: he reioyced in his heart and was right glad thereof, for as long as they were there, hée was euer in great feare and dread, and he was afraid that they should haue séene him there, and euer he prayed vnto almighty God to be his guard, and saue him from that foule and euill fauoured company of Deuils, and to send him the light of the day that he were gone out of that place, for hée was weary that he aboade there so long, and oftentimes he looked vp, to sée if he could perceiue any light of the day whereby he might sée to depart thence, for till then he durst not once stirre out of that place, for he feared that they had béene there still. Then within a while after, the day began to appeare, and when hée perceiued that: anon he started vp and looked round about him abroade in the fields,
and when he perceiued that there was no body stirring, he than∣ked Almightie God that he was so preserued out of that great ieopardie, and so departed. How the Farmer which lay in the Tree, came vnto the Priour on the morowe after, and tolde him the wordes that he had heard, and the wordes of Frier Rush, and that hee was a very Deuill. AS soone as the day began to appear, the poore Farmer a∣rose out of the Trée, and tooke his way straight to the Priour, and he would neuer rest vnttil he had spoken with him, And when he was come to his presence, anon he said: Sir, this night hath fortuned vnto me a great aduenture: how so said the Priour? Sir, yester-night late in the Euening, I walked foorth into the Fieldes to seeke a Cow which I haue missed this foure or fiue dayes, and so long I wandred vp and downe, till at the last I found the one halfe of my Cow, but the other halfe was gone: And as I would haue returned home againe, I was benighted, so much, that I lost my way: Then I knewe not whether to goe, but spying a hollowe Tree, I sate me downe, thinking there to take my rest till the day appeared againe: and I had not sitten there but a small time, but instantly there was assembled together a great Company of Deuils, which made a most fearfull and terrible noyse whereof I was sore affraid. They had among them a great Maister named Lucifer, who called all the rest to make a recconing of all their seruice which they had done, since their departure out of Hell: There I heard many meruailous tales. At the last, foorth came Fryer Rush, then said the great Maister Lucifer vnto him, Rush, what hast thou done since thou departed out of Hell? And he answered▪ that he had ruled you, and all your Couent, and caused you to chide and sight, and were heart at vnitie among your selues: and he said he had caused you to liue viciously, and yet he said,
hee would doe more ere he departed out of this place, for he will cause you to kill one another, and then you should be damned in Hell, both body and soule. And so euery Deuill de∣parted, and went about their businesse. Wherefore take héed, for he is a very Deuil. And when the Prior had heard the words of the Farmer, he thanked him for his labour, and so they de∣parted, the Farmer went home to his house, but the Priour was meruellously abashed at the words of the Farmer, and went into his chamber and was much grieued in his heart that he had so lewdly misordered himselfe against his Lord God, and with great contrition hee kneeled downe vpon his knées, and asked Almighty God mercy, and forgiuenesse for the great and grieuous offences that he had commited and done against him, and that he had so vildly misused the other of his Reli∣gion. And when he had thus done, he departed out of his cham∣ber and went into the Cloister, and caused all his brethren to come together, and when they were all assembled, the Priour told them euery word as the husbandman had told him, and that Rush was a very Deuill, and no earthly creature; at the which they were sore astonished, and were rightly sorry in their hearts, that they had followed him so much in his minde, and done after his counsell, and were heauy in their hearts for their great and abhominable sinnes that they had commit∣ted and done, & with great contrition they knéeled downe vpon their knées, and desired Almighty God, for grace and pardon. Then the Priour caused euery man to fall to contemplation and prayer. Then foorth they went and did the Priours com∣mandement, and briefely made them ready, and went to prayer all at once. And when they were come to the middest of their seruice, the Priour departed out of the Church and went to the Kitchin, wherein hee found Rush who was there very busie: then the Priour commanded him to stand still, and by vertue of Almightie God and of all the company of Heauen, he coniured Rush into the likenesse of a Horse, and comman∣ded him to goe and stand at the gate in the same place that hee
stood in when he came thether first, and to stand there till ser∣uice was done: so foorth went Rush in the likenesse of a Horse, and stood at the gate as the Priour had commanded him. And when seruice was done, the Priour and his brethren went to the gate to sée what case Rush was in: and when they were come thether they found him standing in the likenes of a Horse. Then they demanded him to what intent he came into their place, and why he tarryed there so long? Sirs said Rush: I came hither to cause you to doe all mischiefe as is aforesaid, and yet I would haue done more ere I had gone hence: for I would haue caused you to slay one another, and to be damned both body and soule. And when they had heard the words of Rush, euery man held vp his hands and thanked Almighty God, that they had so well escaped that great misfortune. Then Rush desired the Priour licence to depart thence, and promised that he would neuer more come there, nor doe any man more hurt: vpon that condition the Priour gaue him leaue to depart. Thus Rush departed from that place, and the Fryers went to their Cloi∣ster,
and liued there solitarie and chaste euer after, and serued Almightie God better then euer they did before. The Lamentation that Rush made when he was departed out of the House of Religion. When Rush was banished out of the house of Religion, and was turned into the same likenesse that he was, Then he wandred abroad in the world with a very heauy heart, speaking these wordes, he said: Alas, alas, what shall I doe? I knowe not now whether to goe, for all my seauen yeares la∣bour is lost. And as he wandred about, by fortune he met with his Master Lucifer, but he would not haue seen him by his will: neuertheles his Master espied him quickly and said to him Rush what tydings with thee? Sir said Rush, I haue lost all my la∣bour that I haue gone about this vij. yeares. How so said Luci∣fer? Sir, I shall shewe you said Rush. The last time that we were assembled together, there was a poore man lay in an olde Trée hard beside vs, and he heard all that we said: and when we were departed, he arose and went vnto the Priour and she∣wed him all that we said, and especially the wordes that I had spoken, and so all my labour is lost, and I am banished that place. Well, said the Maister Deuill to Rush, thou shalt goe some other way, and looke if thou canst finde any thing to doe: Then Rush walked about in the Country, and long it was ere he could get any seruice: At last he fortuned to come vnto a hus∣bandmans house which lacked a seruant, where he was enter∣tayned but sore against the wifes consent, For this husband∣mans wife was a very faire woman, and she loued well the pa∣rish Priest, and he loued her aswell, insomuch that often times they made good Chéere and banketted together, and so continu∣ed and kept company together a long time. Their meeting was so priuye and so secret, that it was neuer known, and they were euer sure enough of the good man, for he was accustomed euery
morning to rise early and to goe farre into the Field, and be∣cause his wife would preuent his comming home to dinner, she would alwayes giue him his vittailes in a bag with hun, and a bottle full of drinke, to the intent that he should tarrie in the Fieldes from morning vntill night: she would not suffer him to keep a seruant, nor to haue any manner of help: for she was af∣fraid; that if they should haue a seruant, her secrets should be knowne: and the goodman also seared, that if he should take a seruant, that he would haue but little lust to tarry there: for the Deuill himselfe could not endure the chiding and brawling of that woman: by which meanes she kept her husband with∣out a seruant a long time: For she knew well, that as long as her husband was in the Field, the Priest and she might haue their meeting: but at length she was deceiued. How Rush came to a Husband-man (labouring in the Field) and desired to be entertayned into his seruice. RVsh trauailing vp and downe, came to a Husbandman who was labouring in the Field, being all alone, and spake these
words vnto him: Rest you merry sir, me thinkes you take great paines to worke so sore your selfe: will it please you to enter∣taine a seruant? I am a poore young man & am out of seruice, and I am very willing to serue you if you please: and I trust to doe you such seruice, as shall be to your good content: The husbandman answered him, and said; young man, I would gladly giue you entertainement, but my wife will ne∣uer be pleased with any seruant that shall come vnto my house: Sir, said Rush, let me alone, for I shall so worke the matter, that my Dame shall be well pleased with me: well said the hus∣bandman, tarry with me till I haue done my businesse, and thou shalt goe home with me: when he had finished his dayes worke, Rush went home with him, they were no sooner come into the house, but the wife espying Rush, she began to gloome and to looks maruellous angerly at him: which the goodman perceiuing, he said vnto her, Dame, I pray thée to be con∣tented, thou knowest well enough that I haue more labour to doe, then I am able to make an end of alone, and therefore I haue hired this young man to helpe me: when his wife heard these words, she was more angry then before, and began to brawls and scolde as if the Deuill had béene in her, and said vn∣to him: what a vengeance néedest thou to take a seruant? thou art able enough thy selfe to doe all the businesse that we haue to doe, and why should we take more charge vpon vs then wee are able to beare? but now I perceiue thou art giuen to lazi∣nesse, and hast little minde to worke thy selfe: when the good∣man heard her so highly displeased, he said, Dame, I pray thée be contented, the young man is honest, and he hath promised me to be a good seruant: yet for all these spéeches, she would not be pacified, but brawled still: when Rush perceiued her great impaciencie, he said vnto her: Dame I pray you be contented, and be not angry with me, for you shall haue no cause, my Master hath hyred me but for a while, vpon a tryall, and I trust in that tims, so to behaue my selfe, as to giue you both content: and when my time commeth out, if you like my
Seruice you shall haue it before any other whatsoeuer: if not, I will be very well content to depart. When the wife heard Rush speake so reasonably, shee pacified herselfe, and said no more: which caused the good man to be very glad, and so she set them to supper, and as they sate at meate, Rush demanded of his master▪ what he should doe the next day? his master answered, thou must rise early and goe to the field, and make an end of that which I was about this day; (which was a great dayes worke) so when they had supt they went to bed. Early in the morning Rush arose and went to the field, and wrought so lustily, that he had done his worke betimes: for when his master came to bring him his breakefast, all his worke was finished, whereat his master had great maruaile: then they sat downe to breakefast, which being ended they went home, and did such things as were there to be done: when his Dame saw that hee had so soone ended his businesse, she thought he was a profitable seruant, and said little but let him alone. In the euening Rush demanded of his Ma∣ster what hée should doe the next morning? his Master ap∣pointed him twice as much as hee did the day before, which Rush refused not, but got vp earely in the morning, and went to the field, and about his worke; so soone as his Master was ready, he tooke his mans breakefast and came to the field, thinking to helpe Rush: (but he was no sooner come from his house, but the Priest came to sée his wife, and presently shée made ready some good meate for them to be merry withall, and while it was a dressing, they sate sporting together, who had béene there should haue séene many louing touches. And when the good-man came into the field, he found that Rush had done all that which he appointed, whereof he had great mar∣uaile: then they sate downe to breakefast, and as they sate to∣gether, Rush beheld his Masters shoone, and perceiued that for fault of greasing they were very hard: Then said Rush to his Master, why are not your shooes better greased, I maruaile that you can goe in them, they be so hard? Haue
you no more at home? Yes said his Maister, I haue an other payre at home, lying vnder a great Chest in my Chamber: Then said Rush, I will goe home and grease them, that you may put them on this next morning: and then he walked home∣wards merrily, and sung by the way. And when he approached neere the house, he sang out very loude: with that, his Dame looked out at the windowe, and perceiued that it was her ser∣uant: She said vnto the Priest, alas, what shall we doe now? our seruant is come home, and my Husband will not tarry long after him, and with that she thrust the meat into the Ouen, and all things else that was on the Table. Where shall I hyde me said the Priest? Goe into the Chamber and creepe vnder the great Chest among the olde shooes and, I will couer you, and so he did: And when Rush was come into the house, his Dame
asked him why hee came home so soone? Rush answered and said: I haue done all my businesse, and my Master comman∣ded me to come home and to grease his shoone. Then hee went into the Chamber and looked vnder the Chest, and there hee found the Priest, and he tooke him by the heeles and drew him out, and said, thou horeson Priest, what doest thou here? With that, the Priest held vp his hands and cryed him mercy, and desired him to saue his honesty, and he would neuer more come there: And so Rush let him goe for that once. How Rush came home to make cleane the Stable, and how hee found the Priest vnder the Maunger couered with Straw. VVIthin a while after this foresaid Priest began to waxe warme, and thought once againe to aduenture him∣selfe and goe to the husbandmans house: When hee percei∣ued that the Goodman and Rush his Seruant was in the field a labouring, hee went with all spéede to the house, and when he was entered, the Wife said he was welcome, and made ready a good dish of meate and set it on the Table before the Priest, then she drew drinke and sate downe beside him: who had béene there should haue séene many wanton toyes betwéene them two, and they had not sitten there long, but anon Rush came singing homeward, and when she espyed him, shee was abashed and wist not what to doe, but thrust the meate into the Ouen as she did before. Then said the Priest where shall I hide me? come with me, said the wife into the Stable, and creepe vnder the Maunger, and I shall couer you with straw, and tarry there till hee be gone againe, and then she turned againe into the house where she found Rush her Seruant, and anon she demaunded of him why hee came home so soone? Rush answered, that hee had done all his businesse, and he was come to make cleane the Stable, and when the Wife heard that, she was sorrie in her heart, for she doubted that he would
finde the Priest againe. Then foorth went Rush into the Sta∣ble, and tooke a great Forke in his hand, and began to shake vp the Strawe: and when he came to the heape▪ that the Priest lay in, the which séemed to him to be very great, yet neuertheles with his Forke he tooke all vp at once, and caryed it out of the doore, and layde it on a great heape of Mucke that lay there, and with his forke he shaked the straw abroade, and when hee had shaken out a little, anon hee was aware of the Priests Gowne: then he said, what a Deuill art thou? and with his forke he turned the heape, and then hee perceiued that the Priest was come againe: then with his forke hee gaue him thrée or foure good dry stripes and said, whoreson Priest, what dost thou here? thou promised me the last day neuermore to come here, and now I see thou art a false Priest, but now I shall make an end of thee, and then shalt thou neuer deceiue me more. And when the Priest heard him say so, he fell vpon his
knées and held vp his hands, and prayed Rush to saue his ho∣nor once againe and he would neuer come there more, and if he did then to doe with him what he would. Thus Rush let the Priest goe the second time. How Rush came home and found the Priest in the Cheese-basket, and how he trayled him about the Towne. THen within a fortnight or thrée wéekes after, the Priest thought hée was long absent from the Husbandmans wife. And though it should cost him his life, yet would he god thether once againe: And on a day hee perceiuing the goodman was gone to the field, hee tooke his way vnto the house, and was so hasty, that assoone as he was entred into the house, hée caught the wife and would haue imbraced her, but she quick∣ly got from him againe, and went and prepared good cheare for him, as she was wont to doe: for they thought themselues sure enough for the time, but yet they were deceiued: For when the goodman was come to the field, Rush had done all his businesse, then they sat downe and brake their fast with Bread and Chéese, and as they sate eating, Rush spied a haire in the Chéese, and then he said to his Master, I trow my Dame would poyson vs, or else she washed not the Basket that the Chéese lyeth in, behold it is all full of haires, I will goe home and wash the basket and make it cleane: so leauing his Ma∣ster in the field and walking homeward, hee sung merrily all the way. And when he approached neare the house, the Wife knew his voyce and perceiued that he was comming. Then wringing her hands she said vnto the Priest, goe hyde you, or else you be but dead. Where shall I hide me said the Priest? Goe vp into the chamber and leape into the Basket that han∣geth out at the window, and I shall call you when he is gone againe. Then anon in came Rush, and she asked him why he came home so soone? then said Rush, I haue done all my busi∣nesse in the field, and my Master hath sent me home to wash
your Chéese basket, for it is full of haires, and so he went into the Chamber, and with his knife hee cut the rope that the bas∣ket hung by, and downe fell Priest and all into a great poole of water that was vnder the window: then went he into the sta∣ble for a Horse ond rode into the poole, and tooke the rope that hung at the basket, and tying it to the horses tayle, rode through the poule thrée or foure times. Then he rode through the Towne to cause the people to wonder at him, and so came home againe. And all this while he made as though he had knowne nothing, but looking behind him, espyed the Priest. Then hee alighted downe, and said vnto him: Thou shalt neuer more escape me, thy life is lost. With that, the Priest held vp his hands and said here is hundred péeces of gold, take them and let me goe. So Rush tooke the gold and let the Priest goe. And when his Master came home, he gaue him the halfe of his money, and bad him farewell, for be would goe sée the world.
How Rush became Seruant to a Gentleman, and how the Deuill was Coniured out of the body of the Gentlemans Daughter. VVHen Rush was departed from the husbandman, hee went abroad in the Countrey, to looke if he could finde any more aduentures: and so long he trauelled about, that at last he espyed a great Gentlemans place, vnto the which hee tooke his way. And when he was come thether, as chance was, he found the Gentleman walking vp and down before his gate. And when Rush▪ was approached neare vnto him, he put off his bonet and saluted him saying: Rest you merry good Gentle∣man, Welcome said he: Sir, said Rush, I am a poore young man and am out of seruice, and faine would I haue a good Ma∣ster. What Countryman art thou said the Gentleman & from whence commest thou? Sir, said Rush, I was borne farre hence and many a mile haue I gone to seeke a good seruice, but none can I find. What canst thou doe said the Gentleman, and what is thy name? Sir said Rush, I can doe any manner of thing that shall please you to set me vnto, & Rush is my name. Then said the Gentleman vnto him, Rush tarry here with me, and I will retaine thee vnto my seruice. When Rush heard the Gen∣tleman speake so, hee thanked him much and tarryed there. Then as the Gentleman and Rush went talking together, the Gentleman said vnto him, Rush thou hast trauelled farre, and gone through many strange Countries: canst thou shew me where to finde any man, can Coniure a spirit out of a womans body? Sir, said Rush, why aske you me that question? I shall shew thee, said the Gentleman, I haue a Daughter which is a faire young woman, but she is sore troubled in her minde, and as I suppose shee hath some Deuill within her body. Sir, said Rush, I pray you let me see her, and I trust speedily to finde re∣medy for her. Then the Gentleman brought Rush into the place and shewed him his Daughter. And when he saw her he knew what she had within her body: Anon he said vnto the Gentle∣tleman, sir, there is remedy enough for this. Well said the Gen∣tleman,
if thou canst finde me any that can helpe her thereof, I will reward him well for his labour, and thée also. Sir, I will shew you what is to be done, there is a place of Religion a for∣ty or fifty miles hence, whererein I was a seruant a long time, and the Priour is a cunning man in that science: and I doubt not, but if he were here euen now she should be holpen within this houre. When the Gentleman heard the words of Rush, he reioyced in his heart and was full glad of that good tydings. And on the morrow after, the Gentleman sent his seruant with his letters vnto that house of Religion, desiring the Priour to come and speake with him. When the Priour had read the Gentlemans letters, and knew for what cause he was sent for, he made him ready to ride with the messenger. Then forth they rode, and the next day they arriued at the Gentlemans place. When the Gentleman vnderstood that the Priour was come, he was glad and went to the gate, and with great reuerence he receiued the Priour, and brought him into his place. Then the Gentleman commanded his seruant to fill a cup of Wine, that the Priour and he might drinke together. And when they had drunke and refreshed themselues well, they walked foorth into a faire Garden, and then they commoned together of ma∣ny things, and when they had finished all their communica∣tions, the Gentleman said vnto the Priour: Sir, the cause that you be come hether is this. It is so, that I haue a young Gen∣tlewoman to my daughter, which is grieuously vexed and trou∣bled in her minde, and as I suppose she hath some wicked spi∣rit in her body, and sir, it was shewed me by a seruant of mine which was long seruant in your place, that you could helpe her. Sir, said the Priour what is his name? The Gentleman said his name is Rush. And when the Priour heard his name hee know him well enough, and said vnto the Gentleman, sir, cause the Gentlewoman to come before me, and I trust in Almightie God, shortly to finde a remedy for her, and when the Gentle∣man heard the Priour speake so, he was glad in his heart, and commanded in all hast to bring foorth his Daughter before the
Priour: and when she was come into his presence, he com∣manded her to kneele downe vpon her knees, and also he com∣manded her Father and her Mother, and all the company that were there present, in likewise to kneele vpon their knees, and pray vnto Almighty God for the young Gentlewoman. And then he himselfe said certaine prayers ouer her: then he lifted vp his hand and blessed her, and incontinent there flew a great Deuill out of her mouth. And the Priour bound the Deuill so, that neuer after he came there. Thus was the young Gentle∣women restored to her right minde and health againe. Then the Gentleman would haue giuen to the Priour a great summe of money for his labour, but he would take none, but said vnto the Gentleman: Sir I haue a new Church in building, and I lacke Leade to couer the roofe: and as it is in∣formed me, this is a plentifull Countrey thereof. Where∣fore Sir, if it will please you to giue me as much as shall serue me, I and my Brethren shall be your daily beadsmen, and you shall be prayed for as long as the world endureth.
Yée shall haue as much as shall serue you, said the Gentleman: But how will you doe for the carriage? Well enough said the Priour. Then the Gentleman brought him to a great heape of Lead, and bad him take as much as would serue him. Present∣ly the Priour called foorth Rush, and commanded him to take on his necke so much Lead as would couer his Church, and beare it home, and come againe quickly. So Rush tooke the Lead on his necke at once and carryed it home, and he was there againe within halfe an houre. Then the Priour tooke his leaue of the Gentleman and departed, commanding Rush to bring him home also. Then Rush tooke him on his necke, and within one quarter of an houre hee was at home. Then the Priour coniured Rush againe into his owne likenesse, and com∣manded him to goe into an olde Castle that stood farre within the Forrest, & neuer more to come out, but to remaine there for euer. From which De∣uill and all other Deuils, defend vs good Lord. Amen. FINIS.
