r1528 99887280 181989
The Royoters Ruine, In a Dialogue betwixt a Spend-thrift and a Whore. Or, a Rlation of a two-penny Bargain. Of a Spend-thrift proffering two pence to a Whore Having spent all but that on her before. The Tune is, He that hath most Money is the best Man. A Lusty young Shaver, a vapouring Gallant, That vainly had spent, and consum'd his estate, In Taverns and Ale-houses wasting his talent Resolving, repentance did then come too late, Examining then of his Pocket, he found it Was very much empty, and he was grown poor, Quoth he now my Moners gone all to one two-pence I'l make a clear end and spend that on a Whore. And as along in the stréets he was walking He chanced with one of his Mobs for to méet, All in her silks and her bravery adorned With a Complement he there his Mobsie did gréet, Swéet heart if you will go with me to an Ale-house, And grant me thy pleasure now I am grown poor. I have but one two-pence left, on thée I'l spend it, Quoth she then go look out your two-penny Whore. My dearest thou knoweth my former condition And how I have spent my estate upon thée And now for to slight me it breeds my contrition, And makes me with sorrow tormented to be. For I have but two-pence left, and I will spend it, On thee, I protest my love I have no more, Quoth she you may serve for a Pimp to another For I will be none of your two-penny Whore. WHen formerly I in my silks was adorned And obout my neck wore, a fine flanders lac'd Band Vpon my head was nole's then a Beaver, What was there then I had not at command Remember that we two, at that time together, Took sweet recreation, before I was poor, Quoth she Sir at that time I was your companion, And what must I now be your two-penny Whore. My former acquaintance with nearest relations Because I before their advise would not take Do very much slight me, men of reputation My company shuns, and do me quite forsake, And bids me go seek for my baudy companions Where I have consum'd my estate all before, Qd. she I would have all your friends for to know it That I will be none of your two-penny Whore. Thou know'st that in company we two together Have caused five pounds to be spent at a Clap All out of my Pocket O how canst thou slight me, And then could so coely hugge me in thy Lap. It was for my money and not for my person, That you did my company so much adore However I pray thée bestow me this two pence, Quoth she I will not be your two penny whore. How often with Oaths, and with great protestation Ingaged you have to be faithful to me, In weal or in wee I should nere be forsaken, And now all my Coyn's gone, I slighted must be But yet heres a two pence left pray thée now take it And let us do once as we have done before. Quoth she I nere did for two pence and therefore Be packing and hunt out your two penny whore. Wen then my dear Love if you, I not be perswaded To take this my money because it is small, Let us do a little, a very, very little For former acquaintance and that shall be all. Quoth she, I do scorn for to break my old custome, Another man I have to wait on therefore I must bid a farewel both to you and your two pence For I scorn to be counted a two penny whore. Quoth she Sir before we depart I will tell you, I dare undertake, toproscribe you a way How you may be doing, then let's to an Alehouse But take notice before, Halfe a Crown is my pay Then give your two pence in earnest at present You shall have your request sir, although you be poor But this I must tell you before you begin it, Ile set seven Groats Sir upon your old score. And thus you may sée the condition of wantons And in what a wanton condition they are, Before they will leave of their lustful occasions If they cannot get money they trust out their ware, They'l kéep a man company while his Coyn lasteth And never forsake him untill he be poor. And then much ado he shall have with his wanton, For one single Iobbe to set on the score. You Gallants and others I wish you be careful, That have an Estate, lest you vainly  waste And fly evil company, of them be fearful, Lest into Poverty you should be cast, And afterwards you be forc't with submission To creep unto those where you spent all your store The best way I know of, for you to prevent i, Is to keep your goods out of the hands of a Whore. Printed for T. Passenger at the three Bibles on the middle of London Bridge.
