2779.5 S106039 99841764 176914
THE LAMENTATIONS and holy mourninges of the Pro∣phet Ieremiah, With a Lamentable Paraphrase and exhortation, meete euery way to be applyed vnto these our dayes: For the comforting of all the true faithfull children of God that are vnder the Crosse and feele their miseries: And for the awaking of all those that haue no feeling of their miseries: Not-with-standing the great calamities which haue fallen and still are like to fall vpon these our dayes. Published by Daniel Toussaine, and tran∣slated out of French into English, by Tho. Sto. Gent. AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Windet, for Humfrey Bate, and are to be solde at his shop in Paternoster rowe at the signe of the Blacke Horse.
1577
TO THE RIGHT worshipfull and vertuous Ladie, the Lady Vrsula Wal∣singham true and perfect feli∣citie, with the encrease of God his fauour and of his most excellent gifts. IT hath beene a com∣mon and vsual thing at all times and in al ages (Right worship∣ful and vertuous La∣die) to see many gifts and presentes brought and bestowed vpon the richer and welthier sort, and vpon such as haue had no neede, veri∣fying therby that, in earthly matters, which properly is spoken and meant of the minde, to wit: To him that hath shall be giuen abundantly, &c. Euen so, the abundance of God his good gifts, the humblenesse of minde, the loue of vertue, the zeale of the seruing of
God, and the tender bowels of com∣passion which I haue credibly heard, and partly seene in your Ladishippe, hath often times stirred me vp, by wri∣ting to adde some good thing vnto the heape of those your good and ex∣cellent vertues. But finding nothing in my selfe wherewith to answere my desire, worthie the learning, what by reason of the want of knowledge and wisdome in me: I in the end resolued with my selfe to giue ouer my purpose and determination, and to finish with prayer vnto God, That it would please his Maiestie to blesse his giftes in you with encrease, so farre forth as it shall be thought good to his heauenly wise∣dome to appoint: neuerthelesse, spen∣ding some time as my leysure woulde serue me in reading ouer diuerse and sundry expositions of the sacred scrip∣tures, I lighted vppon this short para∣phrase of DANIELL TOVS∣SAINE of the holy Lamentations of the Prophet Ieremiah, an apt and fitte peece of worke (in my poore opi∣nion) to be euery way applyed vnto these our dayes, aswel for the comfor∣ting of all the faithfull childrē of God that are vnder the crosse & feele their
miseries, as also for the awaking and stirring vppe of all those that haue no feeling of their miseries, notwithstan∣ding the great calamities which haue fallen, and are like still to fall vppon this latter age of the worlde. And because (as I haue alreadie sayde) I finde nothing in my selfe to further that loue of vertue and zeale of Chri∣stianitie which GOD in great mercy hath vouchsafed vpon you, I haue ob∣tayned at the handes of this godly mi∣nister and preacher of the word, DA∣NIELL TOVSSAINE, to sup∣ply my want, whom, if it shall please your Ladiship attentiuely with good affection to heare: the paine no doubt shall be much lesse than the profite, and you therby shall not faile to reape great fruite. The point of which small trauaile shall soone take ende, and the gaine long remaine and continue. And therefore whatsoeuer here shalbe handled in this little treatise: I most humbly beseech your good Ladiship alwayes in some measure to remem∣ber. To be short, If the people of the Iewes in Ierusalem hadde made an ac∣count of the wordes of the Prophet in forewarning them of their destruction:
if they turned not vnto their God, it had not so fallen out with them as it did. But because they beleeued him not, but dealt most cruelly with him, the Lorde in his iust iudgementes re∣quited their obstinacie. For, the verie name of God his word, ought to strike into our heartes great reuerence to∣wardes it, great desire to haue it, great haste to heare it, great loue to read it, and like care to keepe it. If a King or Queene should write vnto vs, Oh, how readie would we be to shore vppe our eares? What haste would we make to heare the contents of the same? But beholde, God him selfe hath directed his letters to euerie one of vs, the Se∣cretarie of which, is his owne holy spi∣rite, and his Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers are his purseuauntes and messengers, which bring them vnto vs. And therefore, intollerable is our cō∣tempt towardes his Maiestie, that sen∣deth them, if we do not humbly heare and reade them, and diligently marke and obserue the especiall pointes and contents of them. And as it is written: the very dreadfull wordes of God doe follow such contempt. 1. Prou.O turne vnto my correction, for lo
I will expresse my mind vnto you, and make you vnderstand my words. See∣ing then that I haue called & you re∣fused t, I haue stretched out my hand and no man regarded it, but all my counsell yee haue despised, and set my corrections at naught, therefore shall I also laugh at your destruction, &c. Nowe then, what promise can be sweeter, than to haue God expresse his mind vnto vs, and make vs vnderstand his will? And what terror can be grea∣ter, then to haue his Maiestie laugh & reioyce in our destruction? Frō which dreadfull destruction I beseech him to deliuer vs, & stay vs by his holy word, vntill such time as wee come vnto his happy kingdome. Thus humbly lea∣uing the patronezing of this my poore and simple trauaile vnto your good Ladyshippe I cease. From Marke Lane in London the 16. of September. 1587. Your Ladiships most humbly to be commanded, Thomas Stocker.
The Preface vppon the Lamentations of the Prophet Ieremiah. AS men in times past, v∣sed to set vppe pillers or stakes, as markes for those whiche trauelled through Champion coū∣tries, to knowe the way by, which some mē called, Mercuries marks: And as men giue a bunch of keyes to those which would goe into an house to view and see all the chambers and closets of the same: Euen so likewise hath it beene a custome, for the setting of Readers in a right & pro∣fitable way of reading any book, to set foorth some preface, for the laying open eyther of the phrase or argument, eyther else of the Methode or order, or of the vse of that book which a man wil take in hande to interpret. Some there are that make much a do in set∣ting forth and aduauncing those authours, vpon whose workes they intende to coment, as Chrysostome, writing vpon Paule his
Epistles, hath done. Howbeit, it is a thing of all others, least necessarie, namely when the Authors are sufficiently knowen, & of such note and marke, as that in too too much cō∣mending of them, it is but a darkening of their commendacions, as of the ouer com∣mending of the Prophetes, and of the Apo∣stles. And therefore it shall not be needeful, to make any great narration in the commē∣dation of the Prophet Ieremie, who was a right faithfull seruaunt of the Lordes, and a valiant preacher of his iust iudgementes, and therefore out of all measure, more ha∣ted, tossed and tourmoyled, and crossed than any of all the other Prophets euer were, yea euen put to a thousand deathes: who issued and descended from the rest of the stocke of the Priests, that were resiant in Anathoth, belonging to the ligne of Beiamin, descen∣ding from Abiathar the high Priest, whom king Salomon, as in the 2. Chap. of the 1. Booke of the kinges, we reade, had bani∣shed thether. It shall suffice therefore at this present, that we aduertise the Readers of foure ne∣cessarie pointes to be obserued, in the rea∣ding of these Lamentations of Ieremie. First, of the Title, or inscription of this  Booke. Secondarily, of the occasion, and of the
argument, or subiect thereof. Thirdly, of the Methode, or order which  the Prophet keepeth. Fourthly, of the vse of this Treatise, and  how requisite the consideration thereof is, for the dayes wherein we liue. The first point then that in this litle trea∣tise must be regarded, which the Hebrewes alwayes accustomed to cut off, and separate from the prophesie of Ieremie, and place it after the bookes of Moses, among the holie collections (as we call them) that is to say, The Canticle of Canticles, Ruth, Ecclesi∣astes, the booke of Hester, and such other like, is this, That the Jewes in the bodie of the Bible, called this commonly by none o∣ther name, but by the first worde wherewith the Lamentations beginne, which worde is, ECHA, that is to saye, HOWE, And this worde, according to the iudgement of the Hebrewes, is encountered not without some mysterie, thrice in the beginning of three of the Chapters of these Lamentati∣ons, to wit, in the beginning of the first, seconde, and fourth: some supposing, that these three encounters of one and the selfe same worde, haue regard vnto the thee per∣sons in trinitie: some others taking it as for a perfect number, haue regard to the per∣fect, whole, and totall desolation of the citie
of Jerusalem, and of the countrey round a∣bout it. Moreouer, when as the Hebrewes make mention of this booke in their commenta∣ries they call it, CINOTH, that is to say, Lamentations or mournings, proceeding from a lamentable voyce, hauing alwaies an vndoubted regarde to the principall argu∣ment of the Booke. For, although we finde in this little booke, consolations and pray∣ers mixte together, especially in the fifte Chapiter: yet beareth it iustly and of very right, the name of the chiefe argument, and principall matter, and is a verie fee∣ling sorrowe and griefe, and a most liue∣ly representation of the ignominie and re∣proch, which at that time lighted vpon Ie∣rusalem, and vpon the whole countrey of Iudah. The seauentie interpreters vnto whome the Greeke translation is attributed, and the common latine translation also, for the helping of the argument, haue put in these wordes in the beginning thereof: And it came to passe, that after Israell was ledde captiue, that the Prophet Ieremiah sate weeping, and lamen∣ting ouer Ierusalem, with this lamen∣tation, sighing and groning in the bitternesse of his heart; and saying,
as followeth. &c. Howbeit we can finde no such thing written in the Hebrew text. As concerning the argument, subiect, and occasion of this shorte Treatise of La∣mentations, there is no likelihoode, as Rabe Salomon and some others thinke, that it should be the same booke, whereof mention is made in the 30. Chapter of Ieremie his prophecie: which when Ieremie had deli∣uered to Baruch by worde of mouth, he af∣terwarde, read to the people: and after, that king Ioachim, had once gotten it into his handes, he foorthwith cut it in pieces with a penneknife, and threw it into the fire. For there expresse mention is made, that there were no Lamentations conteyned within that Booke, but the threatninges of God a∣gainst Israel and Iudith: yea euen the ve∣ry same demonstrations, which the Prophet Ieremie had before, liuely made, which Baruch describing, was ouercome with sor∣rowing and sighing, as in the 45. chapter of Ieremie we may reade. Neither must we thinke, that that which is saide in the beginning of the third chap∣ter of the Lamentations: I am the man, that hath seene affliction in the rodde of his indignation, and that which fol∣loweth, any whit fauoureth the foresaide pinion: as though Ieremie would frame a
complaint only of his particular aduersities, and of the tormentes which the Jewes had vsed against him before the taking of Ieru∣salem. For, we knowe well inough, that it is a customarie thing with the Prophets, to represent, and as a man would saye, inuest, and put vpon them the person of the people, aswell, the more to stirre vp the Auditorie, and strike their heartes, as also because it is the nature of Charitie, to appropriate the publike myseries to her selfe, and so take them as if they particularly touched euerie one of vs. Such a great and notable courte∣sie and faithfulnes was in the Prophet Ie∣remie, as that although the people of Iu∣dah, had, through their stubbernnesse, and rebellion, heaped vpon themselues such mi∣series in that they had despitefully, & arro∣gantly contemned, and trode vnder foote, the holy aduertisementes of this good Pro∣phet: yet would hee not but be partaker of their sorrowe and ruine, as if the whole mat∣ter had particularly lyen vpon himselfe. O tr and singular strict and straite line of heartie and tender loue. Such a heartie loue also had that excellent Martyr S. Cyprian when writing vpon those, that in the time of persecution had stumbled and slidde, set∣teth it downe in these termes, I am partaker of the heauie burden of their griefe: J la∣ment
with those that lament: I account my selfe among those which are abased and cast downe: A brotherly affection suteth me in the same bunch of my forlorne brethren, &c. And thus much as concerning the fore∣saide opinion. Howbeit there are some, and that verie great Clerkes and learned personages, which are of the opinion, that these Lamentations of Ieremie were written immediately after the death of that good King Iosias, and that by reason of the Lamentable discom∣fyture, in the fieldes of Mageddo. Which they grounde vppon two principall rea∣sons. First vpon that that is recited in the 35. Chapiter of the seconde of the Chroni∣cles, That the Prophet Ieremie lamented the death of Iosias. But this me seemeth to be a verie weake reason. For certes, this is out of all doubt, that Ieremie had manie griefes, and in his dolourous life, made many Lamentations: aswell because of the greeuous sinnes of the people, and their hardnesse of heart: as also by reason of the desolations which he fore sawe: and otherwhile, eyther for the death of Io∣sias, or else for some other good and va∣orous men. Alas, howe this good seruaunt of God powred out sighes and riuers of bloudie and bitter teares, as amonge o∣ther
thinges in the ninth, 10.12.14. and 20. Chapiters of his Prophesie appea∣reth. But it is one thing to Lament for some particular accidentes, or for the death of a Iosias, for whome all the people, and all the singing men and singing women lamented: and an other thing to bewayle the whole destruction and ouerthrowe of an Estate and Kingdome, yea, and that of the moste famous and Noble Citie that then was in all the worlde, and which was, as it were, the verie Theater of all the most rare and singular fauourers of the Lorde, which verely deserueth an ex∣presse treatise, and such especiall Lamen∣tations as in this booke wee see: and it is, J say, a good thing to see, how the Prophet had hereunto in these lamentations a prin∣cipall regarde. The other reason, which they that re∣ferre these Lamentations to the dayes of Iosias, is the place in the fourth of these Lamentations, where mention is made of the taking of the annoynted of the Lorde. Vnder whose shadowe, the people sayde, they should liue, among the Heathen. But in this reason there seemeth no probabili∣tie, because that King Iosias was not ta∣ken,
but hurt, and foorthwith carried in∣to Ierusalem by his people, where he imme∣diately died. Other later learned interpreters seeme to followe an opinion betweene both, that they might reconcile both the one and the other, saying, that in very deede the begin∣ning and first occasion of the myseries of Iu∣dah and Lamentations of Ieremy, was the death of the valiant king Iosias, but that notwithstanding these Lamentations exten∣ded euen to the going forwarde of the cala∣mities which continued vnto the captiui∣tie of Babylon, and the vtter ouerthrowe of all Iudah. As in verie deede after the death of Iosias, there was no great quiet∣nesse in Iudah, but that great and huge billowes of all sortes of myseries arose one in an others necke, because, as in the 34. chapter of the seconde of the Chronicles we reade, that hardly could the horrible furie of God his iustice, which Manasses, Iosias his predecessor, had prouoked, be appeased: such a fearefull thing it is once to fall into the hands of the Almightie, and to force his patience. Ioachas, the sonne of Iosias reigned on∣ly three monethes. After him, the king of Aegypt established Ioachim, king: whom Iechonia succeeded and in his dayes, the
Babylonians spoyled the citie, and soone af∣ter destroyed it, by reason of Zedechia his rebellion. Thus we see that after the death of Iosias there was nothing, as it were, but a full and through continuance of miseries. But seeing J am freely to speake my minde, which of their opinions is most like∣ly, J willingly yeelde to them, that thinke these Lamentations of Ieremie not to bee so much a prophesie, or a denunciation, or portrayture of a thing to come, as a sorrow∣ing, greeuing, and complayning of a most notorious and euident extreame present ca∣lamitie: whether it was that Ieremie wrote them in pryson, whiles the citie was a sack∣ing: or whether it was that he put them in writing sythence, whiles he was with Go∣doliah in Masphat. For, at the verie first entrance,Iere. 40. and be∣ginning of euerie Chapter, hee lamenteth not any particular accident, but a generall ruine and deluge of myseries, which fell vp∣on the whole countrie: to be short, a totall turning vp side downe as well of the citie of Ierusalem (which Plinie himselfe hath placed in the ranke among the chiefest Ci∣ties of the East) as also of the whole seruice and worship of God: likewise of the ciuill policie, and of the whole gouernement both spirituall and temporall: a thing, which is
able mightily to wounde true setled heartes, to see the couenaunt of GOD, as it were frustrated, and the right religion derided and reproched, whiche hath mooued the Prophet to aggrauate, and engraue with∣in this notable Booke, for Posteritie to come, all these disorders, and confused dealinges: to the ende to cause the people that then were, and the generation that should come after, feele the wrath and fu∣rie of God his iust vengeaunce, and howe foolishe they are, that giue their mindes to hearken vnto priuie deceauers and false Prophetes, which lulle worldlinges asleepe in their sinnes, and fourde them on in a vaine hope, as though God for the loue of the outwarde temple, for the loue of ceremo∣nies, for the loue of an outward profession, and for the loue of the name of the Church, should surcease the execution of his iudge∣mentes,The com∣mō reward for plaine and sound dealing. as the people of Iudah were often∣times too too much falsely deceaued by these enchauntments: wishing to good Ieremie, that dealt plainly and faithfully with them an euill death, because hee soundely and roundly tolde them of the mischiefe which hunge ouer their heades, and because also, that for their daily exceeding in all kindes of sinnes, they must looke for none other paiment but vtter desolation. Thus wee
see the matter, J saye, which the Prophet Ieremie heere handled in these Lamenta∣tions. Nowe hee handeleth, and setteth it downe in such manner, as that the whole Booke seemeth rather to bee his Historie, than a foretelling of a thinge to come: hee so liuely and earnestly pictureth out and setteth before our eyes all sortes of calami∣ties, or else all the occurrauntes and cir∣cumstaunces of this Lamentable destru∣ction of Ierusalem, which the Assyrians shall bring to passe, and of the captiuitie aswell of the Princesse, as of the people. True it is, because hee right well knewe, that this shoulde not bee the last destru∣ction, and that in the ende of 70. yeares, the Lorde God would restore againe the cap∣tiued people vnto their pleasaunt countrey and restablish both them-selues and the re∣ligion within their Citie: hee entermed∣leth as it were all ouer holy prayers and consolations, to comforte the heartes of good menne with-all, to the ende they shoulde not bee vtterly discouraged, and hopelesse. Nowe, the like comfortes and promises the Jewes had not in the laste siege and destruction, when Titus and Vespasian came against them: For at that time, the Prophetes of GOD gaue
them cleane ouer, because their wickednesse was come now to the full ripenesse, when as they vtterly reiected and crucified the great Prophet of Prophetes, and the Doctor of Doctors, Christ Iesus our Lorde, banished, murdered, and persecuted his Prophetes: and to be short, would not vnderstande the time of their visitation. And thus much as touching the argument of the Lamentati∣ons. Now followeth, that we consider of the Methode or order, and artificiall handling of this writing: which no man can suffici∣ently admire, if he looke well to the argu∣ment. For, although the Orators haue nere∣ly found out and inuented many wayes and means, eyther for the highly commending of any great and excellent thing, eyther else for the bewayling or lamenting of certaine sorrowes and griefes, which kinde of speak∣ing and writing Tully in the 3. of his par∣titions, reputeth to be the most rich and co∣pious, and most profitable kinde of order for common-weales: yet the fardle of mans elo∣quence, commeth nothing neere the nature and dexteritie of the Lamentations, which the spirite of God hath framed in Ieremie his heart, and vttered foorth by mouth to the vse of all the Hebrewes. And although in this Treatise, the Prophet enterlaceth
prayers and exhortations to repentance, & withall consolations: yet they are all so pa∣theticall, or of such notable feeling as is pos∣sible: and it is the principall scope whereat he aimeth, to discouer, in lamenting the geatnesse of God his wrath, and so conse∣quently, the greatnesse of the iniquities and sinnes of the people, that they might serue him, as it were for matter and woode, to set such a fire on a light flame. Moreouer, the Prophet so Lamenteth the case, as that hee keepeth him-selfe still within his limites, without soaring a-loft in the ayre in long discourses, which haue not the grace, so liue∣ly to touch mens heartes, as graue, natural, and short sentences, proceeding from out of a sorrowefull and wounded heart, which is vnmeete for long or affected speaches: as this Romaine Oratour Tullie also testifi∣eth, It is an hard matter, sayth he, to keepe men long while in a very passioned behol∣ding of any myserie, because it is a thing that sooner dryeth vp, than the teares of a mans eyes. And such are the stile, and words of the Prophet Ieremie in these Lamenta∣tions, that is to saye, graue, and feeling, Beautified with liuely portraytures, and verie fitte comparisons, which lead the Rea∣ders euen vnto the behoulding of the verie same thinges that are spoken of. If then
by the art Oratorie, mens heartes are made flexible to compassion, when as there shalbe tould and figured out vnto them, the sud∣daine chaunges and reuolutions from great prosperitie to extreame beggerie, from an high estate, vnto a base and myserable con∣dition: then of verie right ought a man to be mooued by these Lamentations of Iere∣mie: which art is aswell practized here, as any Oratour in the worlde is able. And it is a great deale lesse suspected, because hee lamenteth not any particular mishappes, but the spoyling of an whole countrey, and the verie ruine thereof. And this J say, Ie∣remie so artificially and orderly handleth, as that it is no maruel that Gregorie Na∣zianzene wrote as he did, when he sayde: That hee neuer reade the Lamentations of Ieremie without teares. And to say the truth, who would not be mooued to see these holy Lamentations, proceeding from the loue of God: the loue of a mans Countrey: the loue of pure and holy Religion: the loue of order and policie: the loue of his fellowe Citizens, and of so many & so many fami∣lies, who with a worlde of young children are seene lead in exile, or else to the shambles, and euerie estate turned vpside downe. For, the greater, the more surpassing, and the more singular that the benefits of God were
vnto the Citie of Ierusalem, the more la∣mentable was her destruction. And there∣fore it was verie well sayde of Tully, when he sayde, That there was nothing more to be pitied, then to see a man that hath beene in great prosperitie, and aduaunced to high degree of honour, to be cast downe into great myserie and pouertie. Nowe, although in verie deede, a man shal here and there meete with many mour∣ninges and lamentations in the holy scrip∣ture, as among the rest, with that which we reade in the first of the 2. of Samuel, where Dauid hartely and tenderly mourned and lamented for the death of King Saul: most affectionately bewailing the lamentable dis∣comfiture which came to passe in the mount Gelboa: yet shall we finde nothing so am∣ple, serious, and enriched with all sortes of excellent comparisons, neither yet grounded vppon so great and manifest reasons, as are the Lamentations of Ieremie: about which, are fiue whole Chapters spent with∣out any superfluous kinde of matter in them, but diuersely handled with manie excellent and straunge protractions, ra∣uishing sometimes mens mindes with asto∣nishment, and casting them downe, as it were, into a bottomlesse depth, & sometimes againe raysing thē vp, into an hope of Gods
grace and fauour, bringing them thereby, vnto true and vnfeyned repentance. But all set out with a most comely grace: represen∣ting first of all in generall, the miseries of Ierusalem, vnder the person of a poore de∣solate widdowe, or of a Princesse, suddenly throwen downe from the highest degree of honour, into a most miserable seruile estate. And after all this, there are liuely represen∣ted the tryumphes and braueries of the ad∣uersaries, by which they thought to breake euen the very heart stringes of these mise∣rable afflicted people. In the seconde chapter, the Prophet be∣ginneth to particularize euerie charge, and to descifer by piece meale, the notablest losses that that countrey of Iudah had, vp∣on which the Egyptians at that time, furi∣ously entred, and chiefely and aboue all the rest he bewayleth, as a man would saye, the losse of the two eyes, and two perles of the countrey, which are Religion, and politicke gouernement, The order of Priesthoode and kingly state: dolefully lamenting their scla∣uerie, and the rest of the thinges depending vpon them as the ruine of the Prophetes, Nazarites, fortresses, castles, and such other like thinges. Jn the thirde chapter, the Prophet ta∣king vpō him, the person of the people, very
fitly expresseth & representeth the spiritu∣al conflictes, which the poore afflicted soules in their great distresses were wont to suffer together with the issue & victorie, which the faithfull through faith obtayned. The fourth Chapter setteth out the re∣medies, and layeth open a way and meanes to heale the wound, by setting down a forme of free confession of sinnes. For, the first be∣ginning to heale a wounde, it to haue a through feeling of the griefe and paine, and after to seeke the remedie. The Prophet al∣so in this chapter, addeth a propheticall foretelling of the destruction of the enemie: thereby continually to ease the wounde and sore of the Jewes, and aduaunce their hope. Jn the fifte Chapter, wherein the Pro∣phet Ieremie concludeth & endeth his la∣mentations, there is a verie fitte and neces∣sarie prayer, to keepe all the poore people at once, in all humilitie and true contrition: and likewise in a sure trust and hope of their deliuerance. Thus we see, that after he had throughly lamented and sorrowed, yet that he must at last be driuen to this point, euen in the middest of these extreamest desolati∣ons, to bring our heartes and mindes toge∣ther vnto this great God, that quickneth the dead, and who indeed is such a Surgeon,
as that there is no wound nor sore but he can heale, when as in a true and liuely fayth, he is sought vnto, and called vpon. Moreouer, we are here especially to note one thing, that whensoeuer the Prophetes summon the peo∣ple to repent, or appease the wrath of God, they neuer sende men to their owne satisfa∣ctions or merites, but to the only free mercie of this good God: And S. Ambrose wri∣ting vpon Luke, rightly speaking of S. Pe∣ter; sayth in this sorte: I reade (sayth he) in the Gospel of Peters teares,Peter re∣pented and made a∣mendes in teares, and not in me∣rites. but nothing of his satisfactions. Thus wee some what plainly see, what is to be noted touching the order and continuation of the Chapters of these Lamentations. Some greatly maruell why Ieremie af∣ter this sort made these Lamentions, seeing the Lorde God in the 16. Chapter of his pro∣phesie, ver. 5. sayde thus vnto him: Thou shalt not enter into the house of mourning, neyther shalt thou goe to lament for them; for I haue taken my peace from this people, saith the Lord: and so haue I also my mercy and com∣passion, &c. But here we are to note in the first place, that the Lorde forbiddeth him not simply to lament: but yet so lament, & to such an ende, as that the iudgementes of god against the people might not take effect:
As if God should haue sayde thus: Thou hast lamented fairely but it will not serue, for this people must needes be chastized. Se∣condly, our God in this place alleaged, mea∣neth not vtterly to take away hope of grace from his people: But speaketh of that that should generally fall out vnto the people, and to the obstinate and rebellious multi∣tude, who altogether hardened their hearts against the Lorde, So that the Lamentati∣ons of Ieremie were not written so much for him, as they were written to serue the peoples turne, & to be vnto them as a glasse to beholde their miseries in: and a paterne of true and pitifull mourninges, following true repentance and conuersion vnto the al∣together good and almightie God. Whilest we are nowe in speaking of the Lamentations, wee are to note by the way, that the foure first Chapters are written ac∣cording to the Hebrewe alphabet, saue that in the 3. Chapter, there are sometimes moe verses contained in euerie letter. This order of the Alphabet, is kept also among some of the Psalmes. S. Ierome thought it was be∣cause of the poesie, and trauelled to define what kinde of verses they were, and in the ende he tooke the lamentations to bee such kinde of verses, as are called Saphique, al∣leaging for testimonies Origene, & Philo
the Jewe: and yet he himselfe in his preface vpon Isaiah affirmeth, that the Prophetes wrote in plaine prose. And although in ve∣ry deed the Iewes vsed poesie, which Reuch∣lin and Munster in our time, haue verie carefully and painefully laboured to con∣fesse: yet the moste parte of the learned and wiser sorte say, that no man is able at this day certainely to shewe any poesie, or kinde of verse which the Jewes vsed, al∣though they may as yet haue their poeticall accentes. And it should seeme, that when the harmonie of their commonwealth and estates was dissolued, their fine musicque and poesie, withall their excellent singing notes, were eftsoones lost and quite ouerthrowen with the temple of Jerusalem. Thus we see what a thing it is, not to agree and be at one with the great God of heauen, and to with∣drawe our selues from his seruice and obedi∣ence. Jt should seeme that this order of be∣ginning the verses with the Alphabet, is obserued for breuities sake of the graue sen∣tences entersuing, which are of maruelous weight, and for the better imprinting of them in memorie, and the making of those sentences to be as familiar as the Alphabet it selfe: without some wrangling companie will start vp and saye, that the Prophet, by running through the whole Alphabet, ment
to shewe the great continuance of the mise∣ries that then were. It remayneth now, that we speake of the latter point of this preface, which concer∣neth the vse of the Lamentations of Iere∣mie, and the fruit and commoditie which all the faithfull may gather out of them. For, their opinion is not to be receaued, which thinke that such writinges are but olde wo∣mens tales, which only concerne the people of olde time, and vs no whit at all: seeing we are taught by the scriptures,Rom. 15.4 That what soeuer things were written afore time were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might haue hope: And that whatsoeuer came to passe vnto our fathers, are euen so many examples for vs, and that such things are written to admonish vs vp∣pon whom the endes of the worlde are come. In verie deede as it is not a gift giuen to e∣uerie man to knowe howe to reioyce as hee ought (according to the saying of the Pro∣phet Dauid in his 89. Psalm ver. 15. Bles∣sed are the people that can reioyce in thee, &c.) no more is it cōmon to all men, to knowe howe to lament: J meane, so to la∣ment, as that their Lamentations bee not made in the ayre, but to good purpose, and such as please this good God. For S. Augu∣stine
in his Epistle which he wrote to Vi∣ctorian sayth,The diffe∣rence be: tvveene the mour∣ning of the faithfull, and of the vnfaithfull. that there is as great diffe∣rence betweene the mournings and Lamen∣tations of the faithfull, as there is betweene sweete clarified oyle, and the Lees thereof: Because the faithlesse (as the Prophet Oseah in his 7. Chapter ver. 14. sayth) cry not truely vpon the Lorde with their hearts: but lie howling and lamenting vpon their beds for the losse of world∣ly thinges. Wee reade sufficiently in the Heathen histories of very passioned Lamen∣tations and mourninges: yea and so pitiful, as that the Poetes make mention of them, as if the toppes of the houses, and the hou∣ses themselues had melted into mourninges: some lamenting the death of their friendes, and other some the destructions and desola∣tions of certaine Noble and famous Cities: as the Cities of Troy, Thebes, Carthage, Rome, and such other like: And therefore it may well be saide that that went some∣what neere vnto the Lamentations of Iere∣mie. But it is an other manner of of spirite that guideth and pusheth forward Ieremie in his Lamentations, and it is also an other maner of argument when he lamenteth this peerelesse and royall Citie of Ierusalem, a Citie, whereas the Lorde had, as it were cho∣sen and set vp his throne: a citie which was
a figure and type of the Church of God: And againe, Ieremie aimed at an other maner of marke, than did either the heathen Poets, or historiographers, because he did it to this end to make mē trēble vnder the iust iudg∣ments of God, and hange downe their heads before his Maiestie, that hee might bring them vnto true repentance. To be short, he squared & seasoned his Lamentations with an assured faith and hope of Gods fauour, and with verie excellent and well knit and conioyned prayers, thereby to pricke men forwarde to returne vnto the Lorde, whome they had offended. But if there be any that would finde fault with vs and say,An obiecti¦on. that the Prophet Ieremie himselfe once passed his limites, when a (as in the 20. Chapter of his Prophesie ver. 14. we reade) He cursed the day wherein he was borne: wee aunswere him with the wordes of that auncient Doctor S. Hylarie writing vpon the 119. Psalme, who proper∣ly sayth, that he did not then curse the day of his birth, because he right well knew that he was sanctified from his mothers wombe, and ordeyned to the office of a Prophet: but rather by reason of the long continuance of so yrkesome a charge, and the consideration of the hatefull times, that then were. But be it that we did graunt, that Ieremie was
sore troubled in mind, and that he sustained some temptation: yet it appeareth that hee was not swallowed vp therof: but kept such a temperaunce in his lamentations, as that he grieued no man, neyther shewed any de∣spite against the Lorde: but rather all reue∣rence vnto his Maiestie. And as for that which the Lord comman∣deth in the 9. of Jeremie, ver. 17. 18. That they should call for the mourning wo∣men, and sende for the skilfull women to take vp a lamentation, and cast out teares vnto the people: No whit fauou∣reth vaine and fained worldly lamentations and hired mourners, whom the very Hea∣then themselues laughed to scorne: howbeit these phrases of speech; are vttered as it were scoffingly, to awaken the people, and to de∣paint out the wonderfull hardnesse of their heartes, which was such as that they were faine to hire, and cause come, all the mour∣ning men and women of the worlde, to make them shed teares. In verie deede it is good that a meane be kept in all things, as on the one side to keepe vs from hypocrisie, and from fayned and ex∣cessiue sorrowing: & on the other side, from that Stoike blockishnesse. And to be short, wee must all rule and season our passions, which this great Creatour hath not in vaine
engrauen in euery of vs: For, there is a time to be merie, and a time to be sorie: and all thinges haue their certaine limites and rules: and aboue all, it is meete that both the one and the other be moderately, and to good purpose done. For they that looke for nothing else, but for happy and merrie daies in this worlde: they are they whom the Lord chiefeliest meaneth, and whom he in the 8. of Amos. ver. 10. in very deede threatneth,A sharpe threate. That he will turne their songes of ioy and pleasure, into lamentation and mourning. And therefore (as Aristotle himselfe in the 3. chapter of his 2. booke of his Ethickes maketh mention) it was verie well saide of Plato, that men in their youth should be so brought vp, as that they should knowe how and when to be merie, and howe and when to be sorie, because sayth Aristo∣tle, it must needes be, that they greatly are deceaued, which thinke vertues to be no∣thing else but senselesse & blockish benum∣mednesse: so that a man may be merrie and sorie as he will, and when he will: so it be with such a proportion and temperance as is seemely and meete. To be short: let no man thinke so to leade his life here in this world, as to be voide of paine and griefe,Sinne the cause of all our mise∣ries. seeing we carr  vs the verie matter and sub∣stance of all  sorrowes, which is sinne, and
is the cause of all the tormentes that we suf∣fer in this miserable life.Nothing more dis∣pleaseth God, then when he by his chastise¦ments cal∣leth vs to repentance and we wil not cut off the least iot of our pleasures. And there is no∣thing in the whole worlde that more displea∣seth God, then when he by his notable cha∣stisements, calleth vs to mourning and wee∣ping, we in the meane while, in a brauerie to despite him withall, bath our selues in all our delightes, and will not once cut off anie of our least pleasures and follies, to winne him vnto vs againe. For which great vn∣thankfulnesse, the Lord God in the 22. of the Prophet Isaiah most sharpely reproueth the people of the Iewes. Thus then we see the first vse of these La∣mentations of Ieremie, which learne vs Christianly to lament, and teach vs what the very occasion of Lamentations & mour∣ninges is: which is to be sorrowfull when we offende the Maiestie of God, when we see the Church vnder the crosse, and his pure ser∣uice turned vpside downe: and not lament and weepe like children for apples or nuts: who are more a fraide, as Chrysostome saith,Of such kind of mē it is to be seared ther are ouer many in these daies euerie where. of their owne shadowes, and of visers, than of a sworde or of the fire: euen such kinde of men are they, which sorrowe for the losse of a fewe temporall & transitorie goods and for a handfull of money, neuer greatly troubling themselues for the ouerthrowe of kngdomes, of iustice, of pietie, of schooles of
learning, and of all holy discipline, no not for the sacking and spoyling of their owne countrey, so it touch not themselues any way particularly. As for the seconde, the lamentations of  Ieremie doe teach vs, what the true cause of the calamities and miseries which come vnto vs are: whereof we are wonted diuers∣ly and fondly to iudge: some attributing the cause of their woe and miserie vnto pure re∣ligion, and reformation of the worshippe of God: and some other also, because the wor∣ship of Jdols and of false Gods is banished; say with those people, of whome mention is made in the 44. of Jeremie. ver. 10. after this manner,They cal∣led the Moone the Queene of heauen. Sithence wee left burning of incense vnto the Queene of hea∣uen, and powring out of drinke offe∣ringes vnto her, as we haue done, we haue had scarsenesse of all things, and haue beene consumed by the sworde and by famine. But Ieremie telleth them that it is cleane contrary: that is to say, that it is the contempt of God, of his worde, and of his sincere worship, that are the causes of all our aduersities, which thing S. Cyprian also writing to Demetrian, verie well de∣clareth. Othersome there are which attri∣bute all ill thinges that come to men, vnto fortune: not giuing credite vnto the wordes
written in the 3. Chapter of the Prophet A∣mos, where it is sayde: Is there any ad∣uersitie in the citie, but by the iust or∣dinance of God. Some of the Philoso∣phers laye and attribute the whole desolati∣ons of countries, and other lamentable en∣counters vppon, and to a certaine dissolute harmonie of the starres and planets: As did the Philosopher Secundus, when as hee comforted Pompey, after the iourney of Pharsale, in which that great Romaine captaine lost the battel against Iulius Cae∣sar. Neuerthelesse, this we say: that kingdoms and cities haue their times set, aswell as the life of man hath, and their flourishing and decaying also: but yet we must bee driuen to confesse thus much, that the eternal Mo∣narch,VVhen sinnes en∣crease and grovve to a full ripe∣nesse in a presumptu∣ous securi∣tie in anie kingdome then is it like suddē∣ly to be de¦stroyed. giueth and taketh away kingdomes to whom, from whom, and when it pleaseth him: and that when sinnes encrease & mul∣tiply then kingdomes decaye and come to naught: especially, when those iniquities are growen to such a full ripenesse, as are ac∣companied with an arrogant and presump∣tuous securitie. And Salomon, in the 14. of his Prouerbs, ver. 34. sayth thus, Iu∣stice exalteth a people, but sinne is a shame vnto Nations. And in the 16. Chapter, ver. 18. hee sayth thus, Pride
goeth before destruction, and an high minde before the fall. Hereupon ensueth, that syth we our selues are the cause of our owne miseries, and pull vpon vs Gods scourges, through impeniten∣cie: wee are therefore patiently to beare the miseries which we our selues haue beene the occasion of, and frame a complaint rather against our sinnes, than sophistically reason against the eternall. Now for the thirde, the Lamentations of  Ieremie doe teach vs that we must not a∣buse the patience of our God.A fearefull thing to a∣bused the patience & long suf∣fring of the Lorde. Rom 2. For the longer he deferreth & surceaseth his punishments and chastisementes, the roughlier dealeth he with vs, as by the captiuitie of Babylon, & sacking of Jerusalem may appeare. And therefore it is better for vs to suffer our selues to be tolde of our faultes, and yeelde vnto the holy admonitions of our teachers, then contemne the riches, clemencie, & pa∣tience of God, and his long tarrying, which calleth vs to repentance. Fourthly, we are in these Lamentations  of Ieremie,A king∣dome cor∣rupted with sinne, cau∣seth the re∣ligion also to smell thereof. manifestly to note that saying of an auncient Poet, which saide, that what soeuer Region is corrupt, the Religion also smelleth thereof, and the Church likewise, whether it bee placed either in Prouinces, Cities, or kingdomes of the worlde, suffreth
the same.2. Kings. cap. 24. Wee see that Zedechias king of Iudah, in falsifying his oth & promise vnto the Babylonians, troubled the peace of the whole common wealth, drew the enemie, and a sore warre vppon himselfe and the whole countrey, whereupon ensued the destruction both of the temple and also of the citie: and therefore all occasions of vnnecessarie tu∣multes and warres and all other foolish gar∣boiles are to be auoyded: that we may walke in the feare of the Lorde, and in whatsoeuer vocation he calleth vs vnto, incessantly re∣commending vnto him the publique peace and estate of those kingdomes, wherein wee liue, and dwell. The fift vse, that we learne by these la∣mentions of Ieremie is this,VVhat the duety of all good men, but especi∣ally of the Pastors, ought to be inany pub∣lique cala∣mitie. that it is the dutie of all good men, but especially of the Pastors of the Church during the publique calamitie, to pray earnestly vnto God, for the restablishing of the countrie, and of sin∣cere religion: and to goe before the people in good example of life, accordingly as it is set downe in the 3. of Ioel: neither must we loue the Church, or our countrey any whitte the worse, because they are ignominious, & desolate, and too too vnthankefull and for∣getfull. For, was there euer any man worse intreated by his owne countrey men, thē was this good Ieremie? And yet we see, how the
spoyling of his countrey,It is vtter∣ly vnlawful for any man to be ill minded towards his Countrey, much lesse towardes the Church of God. which he himselfe had foretolde, wroong, and tormented him at the verie heart. Surely, it is vtterly vnlaw∣full for any man to set himselfe, or to bee ill minded against his countrey, much lesse a∣gainst the Church: considering that as Da∣uid in the 102. Psalme, ver. 14. sayth: That the Seruantes of God delight in the stones of Syon, and haue pitie on the dust thereof. By the sixt vse, we may gather out of these  Lamentations,The Lord oftentimes causeth the very hea∣then Idola∣ters to pu∣nish the disobedi∣ence of his people which haue the truth of his word a∣mongst thē, as, the Ba∣bylonians did the Ievves fo a time. that wee must not iudge by the outwarde euentes of Religion, whether the same be good or bad. For who doubteth that the Iewes had not the true worship of God: that Moses lawe was not holie: and contrariwise, the Babylonians, prophane heathen Jdolaters. And yet it pleased the Lorde to let the Babylonians, and other barbarous Nations ouer runne them, and take their pleasure vppon them: and ouer∣whelme the Iewes with a deluge of miseries, as among other thinges, the Lamantati∣ons of Ieremie, doe testifie. For, the Lorde many times, punisheth other sinnes, besides Jdolatrie and false Religion: & as S. Peter in the 4. of his 1. Epistle sayth: Beginneth first with his iudgementes at his owne house, without forgetting neuertheles to be most horribly aduēged of Idola∣trous
and persecuting Nations, whome he will haue for a time, to serue him, for the chastizing of his owne people. And to prooue this to be true, we may reade in the 14. and 33. of Isaiah, that hee spared not the Babylonians, but that they had their course and turne. And experience in all a∣ges hath giuen vs to vnderstande, that this great God is iust:Psal. 57. for although he hath for a season giuen vnto his owne people a cuppe of bitter drinke: yet hath he made the wic∣ked drinke the lees and dregges thereof in the ende. Lastly, the Lamentation of Ieremie should make vs thinke the matter nothing so straunge,Vnfaithful∣nesse vnto God vnder the Gospel is far more greeuous vnto his Maiestie, than the vn¦thankeful∣nsse of the Iewes vn∣der the lawe. although the Lorde maketh vs mourne and lament, and beholde great deso∣lations, seeing he hath not spared the natu∣rall braunches: and that our vnthankeful∣nesse vnder the time of grace, and of the Go∣spell, is without all comparison more gree∣uous than the vnthankefulnes of the Iewes, that were brought vp in Babylon. And therefore let vs learne not to trust and dwell securely vpon the iolly titles of the Church, vpon Religion, and vpon the Temple of the Lorde, who regardeth not the outward shew, and is able of verie stones to raise vp chil∣dren vnto Abraham, and repeople and re∣uiue his Church, although she seeme to bee
like a fielde full of drie and bare bones, as God in the vision of the Prophesie of Eze∣chiell right well sheweth. For it was a com∣mon saying in Babylon, That the childrē of Israell were, as it were, buried: and their estate vtterly ouerthrowen. But nowe the time is come, that God hath wyped away their teares, and restored the desolate places: so that our dutie is to liue by faith, and holde vs in a good hope, looking pati∣ently for the appointed time, staying our selues vppon the infallible promisses of the Lorde, who against the gates and power of hell, will alwayes conserue his little flocke, and a fewe humbled people, which shall call vpon his holy name: so that the most com∣fortable saying of our Sauiour Christ in the 5. of S. Mathewe, is most true, where hee sayth: Blessed are they that mourne, for they shall be comforted: Alwayes prouided, sayth S. Hylarie, writing vpō this place, that we mourne not so much for our priuate losses, as for our offending of God. Go to then, let vs learne from this great Prophet Ieremy, rightly to lamēt. A know∣ledge, alas at this day too too much requisite and necessarie: considering that the moste men, as if they meant euen of set purpose, to despite God, after so many ciuill warres, spoyles, and murders, and hauing the knife
euen at their verie throats, are more proud, dissolute and hypocriticall, then euer they were. This is it, which Ieremie in his 5. chapter speaketh of, saying: Thou hast smytten them, & they haue not mour∣ned, thou hast made them of no repu∣tatiō, but they haue refused to be cor∣rected, they haue made their faces, harder than stones. Awake vs therefore (O God) and let vs not lie still, either in de∣spayre, or in foolish mourning for the things of this worlde, neyther let vs any longer kicke against the pricke: But let vs lift vp our pure handes, and contrite heartes vnto heauen:It is a great deale bet∣ter to be in the house of mour∣ning and vveeping for a time that vve might re∣ioyce eter∣nally: then in the house of ioy and myrth to die euerla∣stingly. let vs pearse the cloudes, and the tender affectioned heart of our heauenly fa∣ther, with holy Lamentations: let vs rather goe into the house of mourning and weeping for a time, then into the house of ioye and mirth: that we may reioyce eternally, and that God may chaunge this so disfigured an estate of our miserable Christian prouinces, which looke like olde walles readie to fall in∣to a peaceable, blessed, and sure estate. Ad∣uaunce againe, O Lorde, the great numbers of dissolute Churches, and renue a people that will feare and call vpon thee, and sing vnto thee, holy and condigne prayses. So be it.
The Argument of the first Chapter of the Lamentations of Jeremiah. THIS Chapter hath no large nor long entrance into it, but beginneth euen at the first choppe to powre out such fee∣ling mourninges and Lamentations, as they that are wonted to be extrem∣ly and grieuously tormented with sor∣rowe: from whom is not to be looked any long or affected narrations and discourses. And therfore the Prophet beginneth, as it were, to make a sud∣den exclamation vnto some passenger or friende, whereby he would put him in mind of Ierusalems former prospe∣ritie, and of all the whole Countrie rounde about her, that he might with feare and trembling, the easier see the horrible destruction and ruine, nowe fallen vpon her. It is a thing almost in∣credible, to see howe artificially the Prophet setteth before our eyes, the mourning and sorrowing euen of in∣sensible
creatures: liuely picturing out the misery of the people, the vnfaith∣fulnesse of neighbours, the furie of e∣nemies: entermedling neuerthelesse an acknowledgement of their sinnes, and of their holy submissiō vnto God which is in the 18. verse, with adding of a prayer, and reprochfull wordes a∣gainst the enemie. This chapter may be deuided into foure principal parts or heads. Wher∣of the first extendeth it selfe vnto the 8. verse: wherein is conteyned a la∣mētable mourning for the goodly or∣namentes that Ierusalem was spoyled of, and the horrible and straunge alte∣ration of a flourishing estate, into the most miserable and wretched estate in the whole world. The said ornaments are spoken of in generall: and in the chapters ensuing, they are particular∣ly desciffered: As by the titles of the noble, honorable, rich, and well peo∣pled citie, of their friendes and allies: of the kingly state: of the Priestes: of the holy solemnities: of the flourish∣ing youth, & in steede of all this, there could nothing else be seene, but a de∣solate and wilde wildernesse: an vtter spoyle, all disloyaltie, no amitie, all
anguish & paine, no ioy nor comfort: and nothing else but crying out, sigh∣ng, and shedding of bloudie teares. The seconde part or head, contey∣neth a confession of their sins, which s in the 8. and 9. verses. For Ieremiah is lamentations are not entermedled ither with murmuring, or yet with espayre. The thirde part or head from the 9. erse vnto the 18. representeth vnto vs e terrible effectes, determinations, nd purposes of Gods wrath. The fourth, preacheth vnto vs his stice, and the Prophet falleth into his speech of purpose, meaning ther∣y to bridle their inordinate passions, ecause they shoulde not lay the fault pon God, and charge him with ouer∣uch rigorousnesse. And so this part  hed concludeth with a short and ruent prayer for the deliuerance of e Church frō the vnbridled vnmer∣fulnesse and furie of their aduersa∣es: so that we haue in these lamenta∣ons a notable description of godly rrow, which S. Paule in the 2. to the or. the 7. ver. 10. sayth: causeth repen∣nce vnto saluation. &c.
THE LAMEN∣TATIONS OF IEREMIAH the Prophet. According to the truth of the Hebrewe text, and other most learned translations. The first part of the first Chapter. HOW doth the citie re∣maine solitary,Aleph. that was full of people? She is as a widdowe: she that was great among the Nati∣ons, & Princesse among Prouinces, is made tributarie. 2 She weepeth continually in the night,Beth. nd her teares runne downe by her cheekes: mong all her louers she hath none to com∣rt her: all her friends hath dealt vnfaith∣lly with her, and are her enemies. 3 Iudah is carried away captiue,Gimel. because
of affliction, and because of great seruitude: shee dwelleth among the heathen, and find∣eth no rest: all her persecutors tooke her in the straites. Paleth.4 The wayes of Syon lament, because no man commeth to the solemne feastes: all her gates are desolate: her Priestes sigh: her virgines are discomfited, and she is in hea∣uinesse. e.5 Her aduersaries are the chiefe, and her enemies prosper: for the Lorde hath af∣flicted her for the multitude of her trans∣gressions, and her children are gone into cap∣tiuitie before the enemie. Van.6 And from the daughter of Syon all her beautie is departed: her princes are be∣come like Hartes that find no pasture, & are gone without strength before the pursuer. Zain.7 Jerusalem remembred the dayes of her affliction, and of her rebellion, and all her pleasaunt things, that she had in times past, when her people fell into the hande of her enemie, and none did helpe her: the aduer∣series saw her, and mocked at her sabbathes. ANNOTATIONS VPON the first part of the first Chapter. WE will here first of all consider of certaine wordes of the text,
which are verie significant, and after∣ward speake somewhat of the chiefe and principall matters. How) This first word is it, why the Hebrewes call them the Lamentati∣ons. And some other learned inter∣pretors are of the opinion, that this word is to be vnderstood and repea∣ted, not only in euery member of the first verse, as, How doth the Citie remaine solitarie? How is she that was great, be∣come now as a Widow? How is the Prin∣cesse become tributarie? but also in the beginning of all the four first verses: How weepeth she day and night? How is Iudah carried away captiue? &c. A man were neuer able to expresse how effectuall and proper, vpon the sudden and first entrance, these ex∣clamations are, immediatly to rauish mens minds to the beholding and considering of any thing, so that this very well agreeth with that which the Lord foretold in the 19. of Ieremias, vers. 3. saying: Thus saith the Lord of hostes the God of Jsrael, Behold, J will bring a plague vpon this place, the which whosoeuer heareth, his eares shall tingle. Remayneth solitarie) This speeche heere is sometimes in the holy scrip∣ture,
taken in good part, as to be at rest and peace: As in the fourth Chapter of the first booke of the Kings, vers. 25. All the daies of Salomon, euery man remayned without feare vnder his vyne, and vnder his figge tree, &c. But in this text it is taken in ill part, signi∣fying the great sorrow wherein the Iewes were then plunged: resem∣bling a widow remaining or dwelling in the world, in her sorrowfull and comfortles widowhood. And as the Hebrewes also deriue the name of a widow, from a word which signifieth solitarines, and a quiet or peaceable bodie, that taketh no pleasure in tal∣king nor scoffing: which word or title, properly belongeth to widowes, that are in very deede widowes, and haue a feeling of their plague and miserie. So that to compare the coun∣trey of Iudah to a widow, is to verie good purpose, considering that it was in deede a widow, because it had neither citizens, nor yet other men of better qualitie: for so much as they are, as it were, the husbands of all Ci∣ties and Townes, and do both beawti∣fye, and giue them estimation and credit.
Js made tributarie.) This place cau∣seth some of the learneder sort to ga∣ther, that in these Lamentations, Ie∣remiah meant not onely to lament the later captiuitie of Babylon (be∣cause that the people at that time were rather vtterly sacked, sold, and cleare anished, then made tributa∣ries) but also the former miseries, sor∣rowes and griefes, to wit, those which came to passe in the daies of King E∣liakim, who by the King of Aegypt was named Ioachim, because the people of Iudah were then made tributaries: which thing may very wel agree with the matter, if this maxime or sure ground be held, that Ieremie in these Lamentations chiefelie looked vnto the captiuitie of Babylon, and vnto the desolation that fell vpon Iudah in those daies: Although it were not a∣misse to thinke, that euen at that time a great part of the people was sacked r led captiue, yet, that there was a emnant of them dispersed heere and here, and especially such of them as emained in Iudah, vnder the go∣ernment of Gedalia, that at that ime were wounded and cabaged. Judah is carried away captiue, because
of Affliction.) The Chaldee Para∣phrast vnderstandeth this Affliction actiuely, as if the Prophet had said, that the cause of the Iewes exile and captiuitie, was by reason of their af∣flicting, rough handling, and hard dealing with the poore seruants, wi∣dowes, and fatherlesse: howbeit, this is the more likely interpretation, ac∣cording to the common manner, and ordinarie signification of the seruile Hebrew letter Mem: That the people is carried away captiue, being with extreame affliction enforced: which they suffred al the countrey through∣out, more now, then a man would that they had suffred: for, there were many of them that were not con∣strained to forsake their countrey, but they were so ill entreated, as that they chose rather to forsake both house and home, as we say, then see that they saw, and suffer that they suffered. Ja such necessities or distresses,) This is a kind of borrowed speech, taken from those that are cowped vp be∣tweene stone-walles, or in dongeons, not being able to go either backward or forward, and therefore must needs be very good prize, beeing shopt vp.
The like manner of saying also we find in the 14. verse of the Prophet Obediah, where it is thus said: Thou shouldest not haue stood vp in the crosse∣wayes of them that should escape, neyther shouldest thou haue shut vp the remnant thereof in the day of affliction. The waies of Syon lament,) The Pro∣phet,  to moue euery man to compas∣sion, maketh the very senselesse hye wayes as it were to mourne. Syon is taken for the people, and also for the Church, which is figured by Mount Syon: Syon also manye times is taken for the whole Citie of Ierusalem, yea for the whole coun∣trey, a part for the whole. Her enemies are the chiefe,) This is a  notable manner of speech vsed in the Scripture, that is, the head is ap∣poynted to be the most honorable part of the bodie in vs: and contra∣rywise, in a beast, the tayle is placed as the most abiect and vile part: as in the 28. of Deuteronomie in this sort we reade: Jf thou obserue the Comman∣dements of the Lord, he will make thee the head and not the tayle, to wit, he will exalt thee and bring thee to honor.
They mocked at her Sabboths.) This word Sabboth, which signifieth rest, may be taken for resting from theyr estates, mightinesse, and reuenues, from the which they then rested: or else for the seruing of God: as the Sabboth was one of the testimonies of the allyance and fauour of God, and a notable obseruation taken ma∣nie times for the professing of the whole seruice of God. The heathen Poets, as Iuuenall and Martiall, moc∣ked the Sabboth and Religion of the Iewes, and in a mockerie called them Sabbotharies. The principall doctrines that are to be noted vpon the first part of the first Chapter. THE first part of this Chapter, as hath been before said, is a most pitifull and sorrowfull complaint of the humbling of Ierusalem, and of the countrey of Iudah, and of all the generall losse they had, which thing, the Prophet meaneth heere to set downe in writing, thereby to let vs vnderstand, that the Lord our God will in verse deede haue vs feele his
chastisements, and be touched by them at the verie hart, as well because he would haue his truth to be knowne in his threatnings, as in his promi∣ses, as also because he would haue vs humble our selues vnder his mightie hand: for if there be any thing that displeaseth the Almightie, it is that blockishnes and hardnes of hart, wherewith the men of the world are possessed, who will neither feele the hand which scourgeth them, nor yet returne vnto him that smiteth them, which thing the Lord findeth fault withall in the ninth of Isaiah, and the fifth of Ieremiah, saying: Thou hast scourged them, but they ne∣uer sorrowed nor lamented for the same, &c. In verie deede, we are to make a  difference betweene the lamenting and sorrowing of the faithfull,The diffe∣rence be∣tvveene the lamen∣ting and sorrovv∣ing of the children of God, and the vvicked. and of the vnfaithfull: for when the faithfull crie out and lament in this sort, Out alas, they do it not anger∣lie nor impatientlie, but as it were in an admiration, and in a reue∣rent beholding of the iust iudge∣ments of God. Now then, Ieremie, who had of∣tentimes
foretold of such calamities, set them not downe in writing, as though he had not knowne the cause of all these woes, which he him∣selfe toucheth in the eight verse, nrither yet as one that meant to finde fault with God, or dispute with hym, seeing that in the tenth verse he giueth him this commen∣dation, to be iust, but to the end he would liuely touch the hard harts of the Iewes, and make them feele their miserie, and let them vnder∣stand how greeuous a thing it is to offend the maiestie of God through sinne. We farther learne in this part of the Chapiter, that wee neuer ac∣knowledge nor sorrowe our prosperi∣tie, vntill it be gone and past re∣couerie: for when we are in prospe∣ritie, we make no reckning of it, as is most tragically set downe in the three and thirtith of Ezechiel: and although all the ignominie and shame in the world should come vnto them, yet should they euen then know that there had beene a Prophet amongst them: and therefore, the words of Salomon in the twelfth of Ecclesia∣stes
verse 1. are throughlie to be con∣sidered of, where it is sayd: Re∣member thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, before the euill dayes come vpon thee, &c. Neuerthelesse, it should not be well  concluded of the heathen vpon these sorrowfull and hard bondages of the people of God, one while in Egypt, another time in Babylon, and eft∣soones amongst the Romaines, to inferre and saie, that this was a bastard nation, predestinate to bon∣dage, and to reprooue the miserable Iewes so much, as we reade they were in the thirtie Chapter of Eze∣chiell, to be a countrey that deuou∣red her enhabitants, and caused her people to miscarrie, leauing them dayly as a pray: for these calamities neuer happened them but by God his punishment: when as the Iewes would not acknowledge the great benefites of the Almightie, and the incomparable graces which were bestowed vppon them, which graces, amongst other places of the Scrip∣tures Moses highly commendeth and acknowledgeth in the three and thir∣tith Chapter of Deuteronomy, verse
29. saying: Blessed art thou ô Israel: who is like vnto thee, ô people saued by the Lord, the shield of thine help, and which is the sword of thy glorie, &c. And in the 147. Psalme. vers. 19.20. the Prophet Dauid sayeth: He sheweth his words vnto Iaacob, his statutes and iudgements vnto Isra∣ell, he hath not dealt so with euerie nation, neither haue they knowne his iudgements. On the other side, the Iewes came short of their reckoning, when as they thought to maintaine themselues in their greatnes, and florishing estate, without to be supported by the grace of God, and the keeping of his coue∣naunts and ordinances, according as the alliance which was made with them required: and ouer and be∣sides, because they extreamely exalted themselues in pride and arrogancie, for the which, the Prophet Sophonie in his second Chapter, verse 15. re∣proued the Citie of Niniuie, saying: Behold (saith the Lord) this is the reioycing Citie that dwelt carelesse, that sayd in her hart, I am, and there is none besides me: how is she made waste, and the lodging of the beastes?
euery one that passeth by her, shall hisse, and wagge his hand at her. Now, the summe and cause of their miseries and woes, yea, and of their  finall destruction, and of the vtter o∣uerthrowe of all the Countrey of Iu∣dah, was, because they would not knowe the time of their visitation. So that our Sauiour Christ Iesus his meaning was, to establish ano∣ther manner of kingdome heere vpon earth, to wit, his spirituall king∣dome, which long ago was in some sorte figured by the kingdome of Dauid and of his successors: vnto the which kingdome of Christ, not onely some of the Iewes are to ga∣ther themselues togither, but many of the Gentiles also, euen from the East vnto the West. And yet for all this, we must not  thinke that our God hath dealt de∣ceitefully with the auncient fathers, or not kept promise with Dauid, vnto whome he promised to chose his resting place in Syon,Psal. 32. verse 14. and that it should neuer be shaken: for in the first place, these promises were conditio∣nall, and was vpon this charge, that they should be obedient. Secondarily,
those promises were not to be accom∣plished so much in shadowes and fi∣gures, and in the mount Syon and kingdome of Dauid, as in the thing it selfe, and in the truth of the figures, to wit, in the Church, and in Christ, in whome, as Saint Paul sayeth, All promises are yea and Amen:2. Cor. 2. that is to saye, accomplished and fini∣shed. As for the complaint which the  Prophet Ieremie maketh, that Ie∣rusalem was made tributarie, it hel∣peth no whit the opinion of the Ana∣baptists, who imagin that the Church of Iesus Christ, the new Ierusalem, is freed from all tributes and exacti∣ons. For there is heere another con∣sideration to be had in respect of the Iewes, who from the beginning, be∣fore they were reuolted from the King of kings, were priuiledged to pay vn∣to the Lord but one halfe shekle,Exod. 30. verse. 13. but after they had cast off the yoke of the Lord, and desired to haue kings and princes as other people had, the Lord gaue power, not only vnto their owne kings to taxe them, but also vnto o∣ther strange princes, thereby to beate downe their pride and presumption.
Heere is then to be noted, that the Gospell ouerthroweth not the ciuill gouernement and order that is vsed at this day, seeing that Christ him∣selfe paid tribute money, as in the seuententh verse of Saint Mathew we reade. And Saint Paule also in the thirtenth to the Romaines exhor∣teth vs therevnto, although it were to be wished, that they would not so plucke the wooll from the sheepes backe, as if they were fleaed, neither yet so gather hearbes, as if they would plucke vp both roote and rinde. Se∣condarily, tribute money was besto∣wed to an especiall end, which is, for the defence of Countreys, and main∣tenance of Iustice, towards the char∣ges of which things Princes haue tribute money graunted them. One of the notable doctrines of  this first part, and as it were through the whole booke of Ieremies Lamen∣tations, is an excellent example what it is to serue God,To serue God sin∣cerely, is the store-house of all hap∣pinesse: and con∣trarivvise, the losse of all his blessings. and what to for∣sake the true seruing of him. For in truth, to serue God sincerely, is to rule and raigne, and the verie store-house of all happines: Contrarywise, to contemne the seruice of God, to be∣stowe
his graces ill, to turne our backs vpon him, to abuse the name and title of Religion, is the cause of all our hinderances and losses, and causeth all our brauerie, glorie, and excellencie to be taken from vs: and to be short, to make vs be spoyled of all blessings, but namely, of this blessing, for the which the people mourne and sorrow, to wit, the mul∣titude both of old and yong people: as Salomon also witnesseth, saying: In the multitude of the people is the honor of a King,Prou. 14. verse 28. and for the want of people commeth the destruction of the prince. For I pray you tell me, what are Cities and townes, what are kingdomes and prouinces with∣out men? Aristotle in the third booke of his Politiques, sayeth, that it is neither the walles nor stones that make Cities, but the Citizens and inhabitants. Now when GOD is angrie, he dispeopleth kingdomes, causeth neighbours become meere strangers, driueth friends farre off, plucketh from vs all fauour and assu∣rance. And it is no maruell though God many times maketh vs feele the vnfaithfull dealing of men, or else
their vanitie, weakenesse, and miserie,God pla∣geth prin∣ces diuers vvaies by their friends, allies, and citizens, vvhen as they make idoles of them. considering that we oftentimes make verie idoles of our friends, allies, and citizens. And as Saint Augustine vpon the 146. Psalme very wel saith, that we so much presume vpon men, and trust so much vnto them, as that if any bring vs tidings that such a Prince, or such a Citie will ioyne with vs in friendship, we are in a maruellous glorie, and make great bonefyers:A signe and token of great infidelitie, vvhich at this daie reigneth euen in those go∣uernments vvhich vvould seeme to be most religious. but when all the whole scripture shall tell vs that the God of hostes is on our side against all po∣wer whatsoeuer, we are cold in that, and care not, nor yet once reioice as we ought. Moreouer, there are many degrees and kinds of calamities, which the Prophet Ieremy bewaileth: but the highest and lowdest complaint that he maketh, is the ouerthrowing of the seruice of God, the making no ac∣compt of the Sabboth and festiuall  daies. And he hath great reason there∣in, for, the holie assemblies and festi∣uall daies are, alas, other manner of festiuall daies, then were the Olym∣piall and pithiall assemblies and fe∣stiuall dayes, wherein the heathen
feasted and sported in the honor of Iu∣piter & of Apollo. But in the Church of God, his seruice is brought in que∣stion, who hath manifested himselfe vnto vs by his wonderful workes, and by his woorde: the exercise also of our fayth, and the spirituall ioy and conso∣lation in this good God is brought in question, which is a great deale more particularly, certainely and clearely manifested vnto his people, then the Gods of the gentyles,Deut. 4. who were but diuelish deceiuers amongest the bar∣barous nations. O what a bitter, hea∣uy, and grieuous thing then is this, to all honest soules that feare God, and haue tasted of the sweetnes and plea∣santnes of his house, to see such assem∣blies cease, such exercises ouerthrown, and besides all this, the name of God dishonoured, and blasphemed, and re∣ligion laughed at: which is an huge heape of griefe vnto a true Christian heart. Such assemblies I saye, as are not brought in by superstition, or by mans inuention, but by Gods ordinaunce, for the maintenaunce of his seruice, and confirmation of our faith, are highly to be commended: for although the Lord
be very wel able extraordinarily with∣out meanes, without preaching, with∣out assemblies to gather vnto himselfe a people yet his will is that his church should here on earth be knowne by cer∣taine markes and tokens: his meaning also is to trie our faith and obedience, and to be serued by conuenient meanes to helpe our infirmities, by which meanes hee woorketh, adding there∣vnto his power: For sithence the sonne of righteousnesse, Iesus Christ hath appeared wee are not charged with so many ceremonies, nor so many feasts as the Iewes were: and being but a fewe cere∣monies, they are as S. Augustine saith, more pure, easie & more significant.
THE SECOND PART OF the first Chapter of the Lamenta∣tions: wherein is conteyned a con∣fession of the sinnes of the people. heth.8 IErusalem hath greeuouslie sinned, therefore she is in derision: all that honored her despise her, because they haue seene her filthinesse: yea, she sigheth and turneth backward. Theth.9 Her filthinesse is in her skirtes: she remembred not her last end, therefore she came downe wonderfully: she had no com∣fort. O Lord behold mine affliction, for the enemie is proude. THE OBSERVATIONS and notes of the second part of this Chapter. Hath forfaited a forfaite, or ac∣cording to the Hebrew text, word for word, hath sinned a sinne. THIS manner of speech is as much to say, as, hath greeuouslie sin∣ned: for otherwise, we knowe well ynough that euerie man sinneth, as is said in the eight Chapter of the first booke of the Kings. But the Prophet heere
vnderstādeth a long continued bead-roll of sinnes: which encreasing and ouerflowing, causeth the wrath of God also to ouerflowe and exceede, as in the 32. of Exodus it is said, That the people had sinned a greeuous sinne in setting vp a golden calfe. Moreouer, it seemeth that the Prophet in this verse meaneth to answere the former exclamations: How doth the Citie re∣mayne solitarie, &c. As if he would haue said: the verie cause of this mi∣serie is nothing else but her great and greeuous sinnes. Was derided) or as some reade, cast out, and word for word according to the Hebrew, in quaking or reeling wise. Othersome take it to be the wagging of the head, that is to saie, derision: some others, for banish∣ment, other some for seperation, as we reade the same word for word in the twelfth of Leuiticus, how the vn∣cleane women were separated: as al∣so in the 19. of Nombers, That all o∣ther vncleane persons were deuided, separated, and put out of the hoast. And thus much as touching the words.
THE PRINCIPALL doctrines of the se∣cond part. THE first and espe∣ciall doctrine, out of which wee are in this behalfe to drawe our benefite, is this, That the feeling of our miseries, must leade vs vnto a feeling of the wrath of GOD, and of our sinnes: not to murmure against hym, after the manner of the Heathen, who some∣tymes saye, that their Iupiter is cruell: but to humble our selues vn∣der his maiestie, and returne vnto him. Secondly, wee are heere to note, that wee beware howe wee excuse or extenuate our sinnes, which wee cannot sufficiently inough detest and acknowledge, seeing that all the fil∣thines in the woorlde doth nothing lyke seeme so shamefull in the eies of the Lorde as sinne. And therefore the scripture oftentimes setteth downe the menstruous cloath of a woman
and such other vile thinges: not as it were vnreuerently or vnciuilly: but to the ende wee should reuerence God: and cause vs feele how stinking and detestable sinne is: whereas now we smooth, dawbe vp, and bathe our selues in the same. Therefore it is well sayde of Salomon in his pro∣uerbes.Prou. 28. verse 13. Hee that hydeth hys sinnes shall not prosper: but hee that con∣fesseth, and forsaketh them shall haue mercy. Saint Augustine like∣wise, very graciously wryting vpon the 32. Psalme:The se∣cretlier that we seeke to couer our sinnes, the manifest∣lier the Lord lay∣eth them open, and the oftner that we remember them and repent vs hartely of them, the more the Lord for∣getteth them. O Lord I haue not hyd my sinnes, but laide them wide open, that thou mightest couer them: I haue not kept them close, because thou shouldest not discouer them: sayth, That when a man doth dis∣couer them, then God dooth couer them: when a man hydeth them, then God layeth them wide open and when man is readye to acknowledge them, that then our good God pardoneth them. Last of all, this second part of the Chapter teacheth vs, that faith & re∣pentaunce must alwaies goe hand in hand together: and that the children of God must at once fall downe & humble
themselues, and be sorie for their sinnes, and so eftsoones lift vp them∣selues in an assurance of the grace and fauour of God, vnto whome they com∣mit themselues, and call vpon him, beseeching him to behold (for so saith Ieremie) to behold I say in mercie, to looke with a powerfull and helping regard, as is the propertie of the Al∣mightie. THE THIRD PART OF the first Chapter concerning the fearefull effects of Gods wrath. Iod.10 THE enemie hath stretched out his hand vppon all her pleasant things: for shee hath seene the heathen enter into hir sanctuarie, whome thou diddest commaund that they should not enter into thy Church. Caph.11 All her people sigh and seeke her bread: they haue giuen their pleasant things for meate to refresh their soules: see O Lord and consider, for J am become vile. Lamed.12 Haue yee no regard, all ye that passe by the waie? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like vnto my sorrow, which is done
vnto mee, wherewith the Lorde hath afflicted mee in the daie of his fierce wrath. 13 From aboue hath he sent fire into my bones, which preuaile against them:Mem. he hath spred a net for my feete, and turned me backe: he hath made me desolate, and dayly in heauinesse. 14 The yoke of my transgression is bound vpon his hand: they are wrapped,Nun. and come vpon my necke: he hath made my strength to fall, the Lord hath deliue∣red me into their hands, neither am J able to rise vp. 15 The Lord hath troden vnder foote all my valiant men in the middes of me:Samec. he hath called an assemblie against me, to destroie my yong men: the Lord hath roden the vinepresse vpon the virgine, the daughter of Judah. 16 For these things J weepe, mine eye, euen mine eye, casteth out water,Aain. because the comforter that should refresh my soule, s farre from me: my children are desolate because the enemie preuailed. 17 Syon stretcheth out her hands, and here is none to comfort her:Pe, the Lord hath ppointed the enemies of Jaacob round a∣bout him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous oman in the middes of them.
CERTAINE OBSERVA∣tions vpon the thirde part of the first Chapter. Lamed.O All yee that here passe by) he turneth his speech to the strangers that passe by thereabout, to ag∣grauate the the calami∣tie of Ierusalem, and of the countrey: euen as a comfortlesse man, feeleth himselfe somewhat relieued, if at least he see a man but looke towardes him. Howbeit, this place is not read al after one sort, by reason of the shortnes of the Hebrew toong. For in the Hebrew text, these onely are the wordes: This belongeth not to you, you that passe hereby. Vatable vnderstandeth it thus: that such miserie hapneth not vnto you, my friendes which here passe by. Certain late lerned interpreters think this to be the mening of the Prophet: It is not you ye Gentiles, to whom the Lorde hath sent these scourges and miseries which here you see, but to vs that are his people: it is we whome he meaneth to chastise. Or else, It i not you that it must take hold on: bu it is we that must beare the foolish re¦bellion
of our sins. As Aegesippus the Historiographer writeth, that Titus, Vespasian his sonne, seeing the desola∣tion that was in Ierusalem: & that fa∣mine, & partiall dealing herein more preuailed against them, than the ene∣mie without: was enforced to protest & say, that it was the reuenging hande of God, and not he that had so vexed them. Now we haue followed the least restrayned interpretation, and which best agreeth with that that followeth, to wit: all yee that heere passe by, al∣though this misery toucheth not you, yet take some paine a little to consider of our miserable estate, and tell vs, if e∣uer ye sawe the like. Moreouer, no man liuing is able to expresse, how many excellent simili∣tudes & comparisons the Prophet Ie∣remie hath collected together in this part, to represent vnto vs the honor & force of the wrath of the most mightie god: as the similitude of the fire which consumeth all thinges: of the spred∣ding of a net: of a wine presse: of a yoke that is wrapped: which kindes of speeches doe right well agree, & giue an excellent grace vnto such an argu∣ment: aswell for the enriching of the
argument, as also for the strengthning thereof, liuely & iustly to expresse the matter that he treateth of. For we read in the 3. Chap. of the 6. booke of Ari∣stole his Topiques, that all metapho∣rical speeches with similitudes are ob∣scure or darke: howbeit, he speaketh not generally and simply of them, but only in respect of the definitions: and when as we haue to deale with Sophi∣sters and wranglers, who with counter∣feit and deceitfull wordes seeke to be∣guile vs. The doctrines that are to bee learned out of the thirde part of this Chapter. SO often as are seene in these lamen∣tations of Ieremy, or in ye Psalmes of Dauid, as in the 74. Psalme ver. 1. it is said, Why hast thou O Lord so long forsaken vs, & left vs to the wilde worlde? And as in the 79. Psalme, ver. 1. O Lord, the Gentiles inuade thine enheritance: that the ancient Fathers with so many greeuous grones & bitter teares, sorowed for the Temple of Ie∣rusalē, & were so sotrangly greeued and vexed for the destruction of it, which
was but a materiall temple and figure of the true Church: let vs learne how to lament and sorrowe when we see the ruine and destruction of the liuely stones, and mysticall bodie of the true Church of Iesus Christ our Lord: and when in steede of the happie signes of the true & pure preaching of the gospel, and of the true vse of the Sacraments, we see nothing else but abhominable idolatries, dissolutenesse, and ryot, and heare nothing else but blasphemies, or fables, eyther sclaunders & lies. See∣ing then that euerie man in particular ought to be the temple of God, and of his holy spirite: let vs be well aduised to walke in all holinesse and integritie of life: and suffer no vncleane thing dwell therein: which was also decla∣red & figured, by that ordinance which the Lord made in 23. of Deutron. ver. 2.3. commaunding that no bastarde, Ammonite, Moabite, or other pro∣phane body shoulde come within the holy congregation: giuing thereby an infallible aduertisement of the puritie and sanctity which is generally requi∣red to bee, as well in the bodie of the Church, as particularly in the mem∣bers.
Ouer and besides this, wee are to note that which is most truly set down in the 2. Chapter of the 1. booke of Samuel, to wit, That God honoreth those which honour him, and causeth them become infamous which disho∣nour him. Which thing most manifest∣ly appeareth in the estate of the Iewes. For so long as this mightie God fa∣uoured them, there was not the grea∣test Monarch in the worlde but feared them, and regarded their temple and sanctuarie, as in the histories we may reade:Iosephus in the 8. chap. of his 11. booke. for as Iosephus writeth, wee read that Alexander the great, ye migh∣tie Conquerour, when hee was come neere the Citie, and in the rage and heate of his furie and pride, the Lorde suddenly strooke him with such an hor∣rour and feare, that when he thought to haue tryumphed ouer the Iewes, or to haue attempted some matter against their Citie or temple,Iosephus in the 8. chap. of his 14. booke. he did Iaddus, the hie Priest that then was, the grea∣test honour that a man could do. And besides, that great Romane Captaine Pompey, as hee on a time thought to haue entred into the sanctuarie of the Temple of Ierusalem, he was so re∣strayned, as that he touched nothing
that was within it but with his eye.Comforta∣ble exam∣ples for the Church of God. And the progresse of his life and actes was afterwarde full well noted, that after that time, he neuer prospered, nor had any good successe: from that time, I say, that he dared sette foote within the sanctuarie of the Lorde. Nowe the chiefe point that we are to consider of in this third part, is the de∣scription of the fearefull wrath of our God, which is amplified and set foorth by so many notable similitudes: & ther∣fore the articles ensuing must be well weighed of vs. The wrath of God,What the vvrath of God is. as S. Augu∣stine in the 20. Chapter of his 1. booke against the aduersaries of the law and Prophets very substantially teacheth, is not such an heat of a troubled mind, as is in vs poore wretches: but a iust reuenge and punishment for our sinnes: so that the scripture stammereth out, as a man would say, but speaketh vnto vs according to our capacitie in attri∣buting vnto God, wrath, furie and in∣dignation. And it is because that wee for the more part, are so blockish, as yt we cannot apprehend as we ought: the greatnes of ye diuine Maiestie, neither yet feare his iudgements: & yet surely
his wrath is such a fearefull thing as that neither the consuming fire, nor yet the naming of the most terrible things can at the full sufficiently informe vs of the great vehemency thereof. Thus we see how the Scripture awaketh vs, to make vs conceaue at the least, some little feare of his diuine vengeance, by comparing sometimes the Lorde vnto an hoate consuming fire: as amongest other we may well see in the 32. chap∣ter of Deutron. and in the first Chap. of the Prophet Nahum. Nowe the Scripture doth not only set downe terrible wordes and simili∣tudes, when as it meaneth to paint out the wrath of God: But eftsoones lay∣eth before our eyes the terrible effectes and examples of Goddes furie. As a∣mongst others, the vniuersall deluge in the dayes of Noah: the setting on fire of Sodome, Gomorthe, Adama, Seboim, the captiuitie of Babylon which Ieremie particularly lamēteth: & in summe manie other testimonies of the horrible punishments yt haue fallen aswell vpon ye bodies of Cities & Pro∣uinces as vpō other in particular, who through their iniquitie haue enforced, & tēpted the Maiesty of the Almighty.
For, that which is sayde of the Lorde in 34. Chapter of Exodus. That hee is slow to wrath, and of great compas∣sion, must not be so takē, as though his goodnesse were decayed, & of no force: but is spoken by way of comparison: because it is an essentiall propertie in God, and wherein he delighteth, to be full of compassion, and to doe good to his creatures: as in the seconde com∣maundement of the lawe it is written: that although he on the one side punish∣eth vnto the thirde and fourth genera∣tion, yet that hee is mercifull vnto a thousande generations in them yt feare him, and keepe his commaundements. And this would soone become of vs, if God would rigorously pursue vs: ney∣ther is there any one of his creatures so mightie and strong, as that would not be soone ouerthrowen and destroy∣ed. And as for the wrath of God and his vengeance: we must alwayes hold this maxime or ground: that it is most iust: For as Paule in the 1. to the Ro∣manes ver. 18. sayth: That the wrath of God is reuealed & made seen from heauen, against all vngodlines. Which thing Ieremy also confesseth in his la∣mentations: That God properly pu∣nisheth
not men and his creatures,God pro∣perly pu∣nisheth not his crea∣tures, but their sinne that is in them. The diffe∣rence that is betvven the chasti∣zing of the elect, and the punish∣ing of the reprobate, Rom. 9. Euery smal sinne hath sufficient matter in it selfe to kindle the wrath of God: but Idolatrie, pride, the vaine con∣fidence in the thinges of this vvorld, crueltie, & inhumani∣tie, set it on a light flame. but the extreme sinne and iniquitie which he findeth in vs. And although bothe the elect and reprobate, and wicked worldlinges be punished heere in this worlde: yet is there a great difference betweene the one and the other: For the children of God are corrected and chastised for their learning, and not for their destruction: and are assured to be deliuered frō the euerlasting wrath of God, as Paule in the 1. Chapter of the first to the Thessalonians teacheth vs. But the wicked and reprobate are called the vesselles of yre, prepared to destruction. Moreouer we may knowe and vn∣derstand by these Lamentations of Ie∣remie and other places of the scripture that although euerie sinne may serue for matter and sparkes to kindle the wrath of God: yet is it singularly lette on fire through ydolatrie: pride, and the vaine confidence in the thinges of this worlde: and through crueltie and inhumanitie, which make vs reuolt from our God: and engender in our heartes a contempt of his word. Such were the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabath: of Achab also & Manasses:
and their sinnes aforesaide also, haue from them, begotten manie other sins, as licentiousnesse, vanitie, inordinate life, and murmiring against GOD: which sinnes are spoken of in the 78. Psalme, and in the beginning of the 10. Chapiter of the firste to the Co∣rinthes. When these sinnes are put togea∣ther, and ouerflowe with a contempt of all the admonitions which the ser∣uauntes of God shall giue:VVhē sins are growē to such a ful ripenes, as that the admonitiō of gods mi∣nisters are cōtemned, then com∣meth the vengeance of God vpon that people that haue so sinned. it is a to∣ken that the Apostume is growen to a full ripenesse, and will soone breake, and in summe, that the vengeance of God will not be long behinde. As we may in verie deede often times see, ei∣ther great and cruell warres, and ex∣treame desolations, or else deadly plagues, eyther else barrennes and fa∣mine accompanied with all manner of miseries: and among the rest, the death of good and famous men, and of Prin∣ces which were the Nurses of coun∣tries and Churches: and so of such examples, alas, there are too too manie in our dayes.
THE FOVRTH AND LAST part of the first Chapter, wherein the wrath of God heretofore spoken of, is moderated with an acknowledging of his iustice, and a foretelling of the de∣struction, of the enemies of Ierusalem. Tzade.18 THE Lorde is righteous, for J haue rebelled against his com∣maundementes: Heare J pray you all people, and beholde my sorrowe: my virgines and my young men are gone into captiuitie. Caph.19 J called for my louers, but they de∣ceiued me: my Priestes and mine Elders pe∣rished in the while they sought their meate to refresh their soules. Res.20 Beholde O Lorde, howe J am trou∣bled, my bowelles swell, my heart is turned within me, for J am full of heauinesse: the sworde spoyleth abroade, as death doth at home. Schin.21 They haue heard that I mourne, for there is none to comfort me: all mine ene∣mies haue heard of my trouble, and are glad that thou hast done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast pronounced, and they shall be like vnto me. 22 Let all their wickednesse come before thee:Tau. doe vnto them as thou hast doone
vnto me, for all my transgressions: for my sighs are many, and mine heart is hea∣uie. THE OBSERVATIONS OF the last parte of the first Chapter. IN this part is partly cō∣teyned, complaintes: partly, prayers and sub∣missions vnto God: part¦ly reproches to the ene∣mies. Thus we see how that in our mi∣series we may be suffred to accuse ey∣ther our sinnes, or else the crueltie of our enemies: but neuer the Almighty. And therefore it was verie well sayde of that heathen man Tully in the se∣conde booke of the nature of Gods: That it is a most wicked custome to dispute and reason against God: either in ear∣nest or in iest. Euen so here, the Pro∣phet no whit blameth the Maiestie of God, or his iudgements: but seemeth rather in this parte, to preuent those that would go about to aske this que∣stion. Is God therfore vniust or cruell, in so horrible punishing his people the Iewes? No surely saith he: for although
scarsely shal a mā see the like affliction and like losses, if thinges bee weighed according to their valure: yet we can not chose but take them to be for our disobedience and rebellions. So that it is iust in God, and open confusion & shame in vs: as in the 9. verse of Da∣niel his prophesie it is written. And in that the Prophet directeth his speech,The re∣garde of God. sometimes to one sort and eftsoones to another: he doth it as mē amazed doe, who knowe not which way to turne them, seeking all occasi∣ons possible to discharge and vnburdē their mindes. It is verie true, that one while he desireth God to looke vppon the matter, and an other while, men and strangers: For, in desiring to haue our good God to beholde it: who by his onely looke healeth all our griefes and myseries, as in the 42. Psalme, ver. 5. is sayde: That he waiteth by a sure faith for his ayde and regarde, which is full of power and force: And yet hee thinketh not, but that it is to great purpose also, that other people should beholde the myserie. First, because that when anie looke pitifully vppon vs, it somewhat mytigateth our sorrowes and griefes. Secondly, because euerie man is so to
looke into examples, and as that hee may thereby learn to be wise by other mens harmes, and think, that asmuch hangeth ouer his owne heade, as ouer any other. The Historiographer Poli∣bius writeth, That he stoode hard by Scipio the Romane Captayn his side, who destroyed Carthage, whilest the same City was on a flaming fire, and that when Scipio sawe it so burne, hee began foorthwith to weepe: although it had beene the Citie, that had long time made head against the Romans: whereupon, Scipio beeing asked why he then wept: aunswered, that when he called to minde the reuolutions & chaunges of the worlde, he perceiued that all kingdomes & Cities had their turnes and stratagemes, and that it wold one day come to passe that Rome also would be set on fire. To be short, there is no doubt, as the Poet Iuue∣nall writeth in certain verses, but that the great Creator of the whole world hath giuen vnto vs tender hearts, and fountaines of teares, to bewayle the sorrowfull estate of our friendes, or neighbours. My verie bowelles doe swell) or ac∣cording ro the Hebrewe, doe rise, or
swell, as wine that is troubled, wor∣keth, or as the sea that boyleth and swelleth: a man is no way able to ex∣presse the Emphasis and propertie of the Hebrew word, the very pronunci∣ation whereof expresseth vnto vs a kinde of troubling. Res.Thou hast made the pronounced day come vpon me, &c.) the greater nūber of the Interpreters would referre this to the enimies: as if the Prophet would haue said, Thou hast caused euē the very set day to light vpō mine enimies. For the Babylonians had also their course and stratageme, which thou mayest see in the 13. & 14. of Esaiah. But all thinges considered, it is like the interpretation which we haue folowed, to be least re∣strained, & to haue a more large scope: seeing that in the Hebrewe text it is thus worde for worde: Thou hast pro∣nounced, named, and determined the day: but they shalbe like vnto me. And therefore this should be no very good sence, to say: thou hast made come vp∣on them the pronounced day. But they shalbe like vnto me) This word then but giueth vs to vnderstande, the meaning of this place. For, when the Prophet speaketh of the deter∣mined
day, we are not curiously to dis∣pute as some doe, of the periods or fa∣tall endes of kingdomes, as they call them, or how long they shal continue: as some make their reckoning, that within 500. or 250. yeares, men shall see the reuolutions and chaunges of the estate of kingdomes and common weales. But it is ynough that we know that there is no permanent kingdome saue the kingdome of our God: and that the creator hath ordayned vnto all Kingdomes, Prouinces, and Cities, a sure and certaine ende, certaine and sure punishments, chaunges & signes, vpon which it were better for vs to lay holde, as wee are taught by the scrip∣tures, to come by reason of our sinnes, dissolutenesse of life, and such other like signes, then by the constellation of the starres, or any certaine Arith∣meticall number and proportion. Let all their wickednesse come) Some reade: let all their sorrow come.verse 22. Some others: Let all the trouble and afflicti∣on which they haue brought vpō me, come before thee. Howbeit, I gladly yeelde to their opinion, which referre this vnto the wickednesse of the ene∣mies. For the scripture speaketh after
this manner, that God setteth before him the sinnes of all such as hee mea∣neth to punish. S. Ierome giueth vs to wit, that this is not here takē so much for an imprecation or curse: as it is for a kinde of prophecie, of that which shall fall vppon the enemies. This is true, that it is no newe thing, to read in the Prophetes, of the curses they pronounce, not in their owne priuate names, or according as flesh & bloud directeth them: but according as the spirite of God guideth them, and put∣teth it into their mouthes: and to this end for the which we dayly pray and saye, Thy kingdome come: and so conse∣quently, that all thinges contrarie to his will, be brought to naught. And treade them vnder foote: or presse them together.) This is a notable say∣ing, and doth signifie in deede to tread vnder foote, euen as a man treadeth together grapes in a vine presse: the summe and effecte whereof is this: Deale with them, as thou hast dealt with me: dresse them, after the same manner, as in the 137. Psalme ver. 8. it is written: Euen so shall Ba∣bylon also be brought to dust and ashes.
The doctrines of the last part, of the first Chapter. THe Lord is righteous &c. It is the property of the children of God to speake reuerently of the iudgements of the Lord, which as Dauid sayth in the 36. Psalme, are bottomlesse depthes: and therefore the most sure way for e∣uerie man, is to submit himselfe vnder the mightie hande of the eternall, and not howle and cry out against him as some did, of whom Oseah in the 7. of his prophesie speaketh, who neuer would turne vnto God: neyther yet so∣rowe, saue onely for the losse of their tē∣porall commodities and pleasures, no whit waying the abhominablenes and greatnes of sinne, ne yet the purenes and holines of almightie Gods iustie, which can by no meanes abide sinne to go vnpunished.There are too too ma¦ny of such carnall Gospellers in this lat∣ter age of the vvorld euery where. And therefore it is a verie ill custome amongest vs, in cry∣ing out for our losses, griefes, and af∣flictions: and neuer care, when our sinnes, rebellions, vnthankefulnesse, and contempt of his worde touch vs, to be halfe so eloquent and copious in crying out against them: and yet this is it, that we ought both feele, aggra∣uate,
and lament. This is the holie reuenge which we ought to make, whereof the Apostle Saint Paule in the seuenth Chapter of the 2. to the Corinths the eleuenth verse speaketh. And he words of Ieremy are great∣lie to be considered of, in saying: I haue rebelled against thy commaun∣dements, against so holie, redoubted, and true commaundements of the li∣uing God: and when is that? forsooth euen then, when as we contemne the words of his Prophets and seruants which speake vnto vs, shewing vnto vs as from his owne mouth, his holy will which he putteth into the mouth of his seruants yt carry his Ambassade in his name, as in the 10. of S. Mathew, & in ye 5. of the 2. to the Corinths we reade. To conclude, the righteousnes of God on the one side maketh vs hang downe our heads in our afflictions, and beare them patiently: and on the other side it amendeth vs, when as in deede we as∣sure our selues that it is so. And Iere∣my in the end of this chapter sheweth, that God wil exercise the same not on∣ly vpon vs, but also vpon our aduersa∣ries, who also shal be sure to haue their
paiment: and therfore, as Dauid in the 75. Psal. ver. 5. saith, they need not lift vp their hornes so bye, considering that they shall drinke the lees: and if, as our sauiour Christ in the 23. of Saint Luke, saith: if this happen to the grene braunches what shall become of the withered ones and of such as are alto∣gether vnprofitable and prophane. Now followeth a Paraphrasis, to wit, a more larger interpretation of the first Chapter of the Lamentati∣ons, not word for word, but sentence for sentence. OVt alas, what meaneth this most pitifull and  strange change and re∣uolution? What is the cause, I beseech you, hy this noble and famous Citie, but f late so mightelie peopled, rich, and xceeding in all prosperitie and ho∣or, to be thus humbled, and become ke a poore, solitarie, and comfort∣esse widdow, who in her sorrowfull iddowhood, sitteth all alone, with∣ut companie, staie, and furniture? How fareth it, I saie, that the most
royall Prouince, which sometimes made so many kingdomes stande in awe of her, to become now bonde and thrall, and to be pulled, and torne in pieces by straunge and barbarous na∣tions. Beholde how this poore Citie shed∣deth teares day and night, and is so farre of from any so heartie a kinsman or friend, to comfort her, as that the neerest friendes she hath, rurne their backs vpon her: and as a most vnfaith∣full kinred, are of friendes become meere enemies. Alas that poore Iudah is now come to the very end of her fall and destru∣ction, and shee who it is that made this reckoning, that her exile and ba¦nishment should mittigate the griefe and sorrowes which she both suffret and seeth. For is there any sence mo tender, and woundeth more the ha than that which is of the eye. And is so farre of that she findeth any re as that straunge Nations haue fors¦ken her. Can she I beseech you, take any way well, and stay her selfe as were in so great distresses and ang¦shes? But what speake I of the people
Iudah? Would ye properly say, that ye sawe the wayes leading to Ierusalem, vnto the mount Sion, sorrowe, and hed teares: which shed and burst out before the multitude of the people: who yeerely went vp into the holy Ci∣tie in iolly and great troupes: and are neere, (alas) become as it were alto∣gether abashed, with so small a terror nd scourge, as that they coulde see now no bodie come vnto the solemne eastes commaunded in the lawe. But what should I say? There is nothing now in all Iudah to be seene, but cru∣eltie and anguish. For the noble gates of the Cities, where al their honoura∣le personages sate, and where the re∣doubted head of Iustice was, are vn∣dermined and ouerthrowen. To be short, her enemies haue had  the vpper hande of her, and all things else they can wishe. For poore Iudah hath not had to doe with man onely, but with the mightie God of hostes, who meaneth to make her feele the multitude and greeuousnesse of her sinnes, by the horrible sighes which she shall see before her face: & among the rest, when she shall see her young children driuen before her into the
straunge countrey of Babylon, euen as a man would driue an heard of brute beasts before him. In summe, all the glorie of Syon is turned into smoake, in so much, that her verie princes and nobles (so greatlie is their magnificence aba∣sed) are chased and put to flight, e∣uen as Hunters chase and pursue the poore hyndes, vntill they haue brought and snared them within their toyles. And this is presentlie done, that vndiscreet Ierusalem might againe remember herselfe, how wonderfullie the Almightie had in times past en∣riched her: but alas, it commeth all too late, considering that all is now consumed with fyre and out of order: the most actiue and deliuer people so discomfited by the enemie, and so vn∣likely to be releeued, as that her aduersaries make themselues merrie with beholding her, and skorning her Sabboths. Alas, what Sabboths can they be, when as the seruice and wor∣ship of God ceaseth, when as the land lieth lay for want of manuring, and when as the flowre and choise of the people lie miserablie slaine vp∣pon
the earth? Surely it may verie well be sayd,  and without dissimulation truely con∣fessed, that Ierusalem had forgotten her selfe, and committed great and greeuous offences, seeing she was growne to such a point, as that they which honored her, made now no ac∣compt of her, because she was so vile and filthy, as any woman in the world could be, insomuch that euen with ve∣rie shame and griefe she got her selfe into a corner, and kept her aloofe out of all mens sights. To be short, the verie hemmes of  her garments were filthylie spotted, and yet she neuer thought to come to any such end: for a foole neuer belee∣ueth that the plague will ouertake him, vntil such time as it lighteth vpō him: and therefore is she so subiected and cast downe, as that she might no way find comfort heere vppon earth: wherevpon, she is enforced to seeke helpe from heauen, and call vpon the Lord, saying: O thou that art the God of reuenge, & iudge of al the world, al∣though al such as tread thy people vn∣der foot say, The eternall seeth it not,Psalm. 99. Psal. 123. yet shew thou thy selfe manifestly, and
with thy mercifull eye behold mine afflictions: for I haue too too much abidden the despite of the prowde, which haue risen vp against me. She is without all doubt very poore and comfortlesse: And againe, she that fleew the highest pitch in all re∣spectes, hath not now left her one plume amongst all her iollie plumes, which the enemie hath not pluckt from her. But that which hath chiefe∣lie burst her verie hart strings, is this, to see these villanous prophane hea∣thens thrust and intrude themselues euen into the Lords holie place and Sanctuarie, a place heeretofore cleer∣lie forbidden vnto such people, by Gods expresse commaundement, to enter into. Is not this an extreame miserie to see an vniuersall people vtterlie dis∣comfyted and frusshed in peeces, to seeke a small pittance heere and there most lamentablie, for a poore refres∣shing of them selues, and as a mans life is farre more worth then rayment, to exchange their most pretious iew∣els for cantles of bread. O, this people had verie good occasion to call vppon God, and beseech him somewhat to
looke downe to behold their miserie and slauerie. And now I speake vnto you also  which heere passe by, that although you feele none of this miserie, which the Lord keepe you from, to beseech you onely to see and consider, if euer you sawe or heard tell of the like de∣struction which hath fallen vpon me, in the hoat indignation of this great and terrible God. Such a fearefull and pearsing in∣dignation,  as that me thinketh a fyre from heauen is fallen vpon me, which is entred my skinne into my verie bones, or else, that a net hath beene pitched to catch and ouerthrowe me, that I might liue in continual miserie and distresse. I am like an Oxe that is drawne  with a rope by the hornes into the slaughterhouse to be slaine. My sinnes and iniquities, alas, are the rope wher∣with I am tied: I should haue taken vpon me the sweete and amiable yoke of my good God. Alas, I am vtterlie vndone: for behold, I am deliuered into perpetuall bondage, without hope of any likelyhood to come out thereof againe.
For all my valiaunt and olde men are, as a man woulde saye, by the eares, as from out of the moste principall parte of theyr Countrey: and so assayled and charged, as that a man might saye, that the Lorde had inuited an huge companie of ene∣mies vpon a solemne festiuall day, to ouerthrow and tread vnder foote, the pride of my youth, as mē tread grapes in a vine presse. And therefore what shal I most my∣serable wretch doe, but powre out e∣uen riuers of teares, when as I shall see my selfe in the iudgement of the worlde, voyde of all comforte, berea∣ued of my children; and encompassed with a cruell, fierce, and victorious e∣nemie. I must therefore be fayne to holde vp both mine handes, and crie out for mercie. There was neuer man that e∣uer had pitie vpon poore Syon. For it was the ordinance of the most high, that her enemies should encompasse her, and Ierusalem became stincking and infamous. And yet GOD is iust: and I for my oft rebelling against his holye woorde, and the sacred mouthes of
his mynisters am woorthie of shame and confusion. But yet let mee a little sorrowe and lament my mise∣ries: and yee people, what so euer ye are, if there remayne anie sparke of humanitie in you, doe mee yet this courtesie, as to vnderstande and take knowledge of my sorrowes and griefes, and beholde a little my mi∣series: if you haue anie heart, to looke vppon such lamentable cases. But alas, I can not houlde me from talking hereof. For where a manne is greeued, of that hee will com∣plaine. Beholde howe my chast vir∣gines and tender Damselles, beholde howe my stronge and gallant young men, that yet liue, are lead captiue by a barbarous Nation into a straunge countrey. At this time I finde no friendes: for  there is none that will knowe mee, which right well teacheth mee, that all men are lyers, and that friendes are fardest of & wanting, when a man hath most neede of them. And as for my Church-men, and Iudges, they themselues dayly dye, for want of vi∣ctualles. There remaineth now, my good God,
no hope of ayde, but that thou looke vpon me with thine eye of pitie. For I am perplexed and greeued at the ful: my bowels swell, and my heart is tur∣ned within me: and because I haue re∣belled, the sworde without, and fa∣mine within, make warre vppon mee, and sore wound me. Manie there are which heare mee sigh and sobbe: but there is not one of them all, that any whit comforteth me. I see nothing else but the brauing and tryumphing of mine enemies, & therefore I right well perceaue that it is thou that wouldest haue me to be thus dealt withall, and that it is with thee that I haue to doe: and I con∣fesse nowe indeede that thou makest mee see these dolorous dayes, where∣with thou oftertimes threatnedst mee by thy holy Prophets. But howe euer it fareth nowe with mee, yet let them be sure, though long first, that they themselues will be payd home as well as I, at the last. Goe to nowe then most righteous God, thou that punishest without ac∣ception of persons: as thou hast con∣sidered of my wicked transgressions, euen so likewise call thou mine ene∣mies
to the like reckoning, punishe thou them for their so infinite, horri∣ble and greeuous sinnes, who haue as well deserued to be proceeded against as I, and be aduenged of them, & tread them vnder thy feete, euen as thou hast troden mee most miserable and sorrowfull caytife. THE SECOND CHAPTER. The Argument of this Chapter. SVch mē surely do great∣ly ouershoot themselues who thinke that there is no art, or skilfull hand∣ling in the proceedings of the holy scriptures. For Saint Am∣brose writing to one Iustus in the viij. booke of his Epistles, sayth thus: Al∣though (sayth he) it were graunted that the Prophetes wrote nothinge Rhetorically, yet must wee needes confesse and say that they wrote ac∣cording to the gift of the grace of the spirite of God, which surpasseth all arte and knowledge. In so much as it it is to be presumed, that the most ex∣cellent Orators haue borrowed many
thinges of the holy scriptures, especi∣ally such, as might any way come by the bookes to reade thē. For are there any passions, descriptions, compari∣sons, and such other like thinges ta∣ken or appertayning for or to anie matter or purpose, whereby to mooue and stirre vp the heartes and mindes of men, which are not to be founde in these Lamentations? Namely in this seconde Chapter, which, as the first Chapter beginneth with this woorde ECHA: to wit, HOW: euen so like∣wise doth this, and hath also the ver∣ses diuided according to the order of the Hebrewe Alphabet. Nowe this Chapter is diuided into two principall partes. The first is drawen downe in the first twelue ver∣ses: and beginneth moste fearefully sette foorth in such wordes, as if the heauen and starres would fall, and the Elementes melt. And therefore wee may see, that the Prophet heere wri∣teth an higher stile, and proceedeth more pathetically or feelingly, than he did in the former. And this method or order of his, is also verie resolute. For first, he at once speaketh of the bo∣die in generall, and afterwarde parti∣culariseth
all the members and partes thereof. The bodie and whole sub∣stance of the matter, was the Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall Estate: the Regali∣tie and Nobilitie, and Priesthoode, or ministerie of the Church. Where this beginning to be shaken and fall, the estate of the Countrey is in a la∣mentable case: and the Ciuill go∣uernment being troubled and chaun∣ged, Religion abyeth for it, conside∣ring that common-weales, as Plato in his bookes of lawes writeth, are as it were an house established by GOD, or an Inne and place of re∣ceipt of manie laudable and holie lawes, ordinaunces, and good and honest studies, in so much that all good and godlie men are iustly gree∣ued, when as they see the estate and policie of kingdomes troubled and in an vprore. When as the Prophet Ieremie hath generally spoken of these thinges, hee after particula∣rizeth the whole, and descendeth vnto the members and partes, as vnto the palace, fortresses, walles, gates, feastes, Sabothes, Priestes, olde men, and young children, the holie lawes, &c. For, common-weales
stande and are grounded vppon all these partes: in so much that when the Lorde promiseth a restablishment: he sayth among all other thinges, that they shall see in the streates, the reue∣rende fatherly old men sitting in their Gates: and the young children play∣ing in the streetes. Zachary. 8The other parte of the Chapiter from the 12. verse, vnto the ende of the Chapiter, is a kinde of speeche which the Prophet addresseth vnto the people, in telling them of their dutie: and shewing them in the first place, what they ought to beware and take heede of: to wit, that they should not beleeue or trouble their braynes with the friuolous wordes of the false Prophetes, who would extenuate or lessen the wrath of God, and induce the people, not to make so great an account of it: on the other side, that they waxe not sauage and become like brute beastes, at the proude threates of the aduersarie: which keepe a proude stirre with the people: spea∣king thousandes of reprochfull words vnto them: but that the best counsell and resolution for them, was to ad∣dresse them-selues foorth-with vnto
God, in teares, and sorrowe of heart: seeing that the ende for the which he afflicteth his people, is onely to sum∣mon and call them to repentaunce: And therefore sythe there was yet a meane and way left to finde grace, and appease him that is naturally pi∣tifull, and who neuer reiecteth those soules which are in deede truely con∣trite and sorrowefull: there was no better way, than to call vppon his di∣uine goodnesse: as in verie deede in the ende of this Chapter hee setteth downe before them a short forme of heartie and earnest prayer. Heere wee see the firme and sure Anker of the soule,Hebr. 6. which the chil∣dren of God haue in their wrackes: This is the hope (sayth the Apostle) which wee laye holde on, staying our selues vpon the infallible promises of our good and true God. This hope maketh not ashamed: this hope, maketh vs passe through the redde sea of the myse∣ries of this worlde: and patiently, and quietly to waite, for the promised deliue∣raunce.
THE SECOND CHAPTER. Aleph.1 HOWE hath the Lorde darkened the daughter of Syon in his wrath: and hath cast downe from heauen vnto the earth, the beautie of Israel, and remembred not his footestoole in the day of his wrath. Beth.2 The Lorde hath destroyed all the ha∣bitations of Jaacoh, and not spared: hee hath thrown downe in his wrath, the strong houldes of the daughter of Iudah: he hath cast them downe to the grounde: hee hath polluted the kingdome, and the Princes thereof. Gimel.3 He hath cut off in his fierce wrath all the horne of Jsraell: hee hath drawen backe his right hande from before the e∣nemie, and there was kindled in Jaakob like a flame of fire which kindled rounde about. Daleth.4 He hath bent his bowe like an enemie: his right hande was stretched vp as an ad∣uersarie, and slewe all that was pleasaunt to the eye, in the tabernacle of the daugh∣ter of Syon: hee powred out his wrath like fire. He.5 The Lorde was an enemie: he hath de∣uoured Israel, and consumed all his palaces:
he hath destroied his strong holdes, and hath encreased in the daughter of Judah lamen∣tation and mourning. 6 For he hath destroyed his tabernacle,Vau. as a garden, he hath destroyed his congre∣gation: the Lorde hath caused the feastes and Sabbothes to be forgotten in Syon, and hath despised in the indignation of his wrath, the King and the Priest. 7 The Lorde hath forsaken his Alter:Zain. he hath abhorred his sanctuarie: he hath giuen into the hande of the enemie, the walles of her palaces: they haue made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of solemnitie. 8 The Lorde hath determined to de∣stroye the wall of the daughter of Syon:Heth. he stretched out a line: hee hath not with∣drawen his hande from destroying: there∣fore hee made the rampare and the walle to lament: they were destroyed togea∣ther. 9 Her gates are soonke to the grounde:Theth. he hath destroyed and broken their barres: her King and her Princes are among her Gentiles: the lawe is no more, neither can her Prophets receaue any vision from the Lorde. 10 The Elders of the daughter of Syon sitte vppon the grounde,Iod. and keepe
silence: they haue cast vp dust vpon their heades: they haue girded themselues with sackecloth: the virgines of Jerusalē hange downe their heades to the grounde. Caph.11 Mine eyes doe fall with teares, my bowelles swell: my lyuer is powred vppon the earth, for the destruction of the daugh∣ter of my people, because the children and suckelinges swoone in the streetes of the Citie. 12 They haue sayde to their mothers, where is bread and drinke:Lamed. when they swoo∣ned as the wounded in the streetes of the ci∣tie, and when they gaue vp the Ghost in their mothers bosome. THE OBSERVATIONS vpon the first part of the seconde Chapter. HAth darkened the daugh∣ter of Syon) This is a simi∣litude that fitly serueth for yt purpose: by which the Prophet opposeth the darkenesse of the afflictions which they had heaped vppe vnto them∣selues, vnto the light and bright∣nesse of the grace of the Lorde, as if the Prophet should thus haue saide:
Alas, what is nowe become of that brightnes of the fauourable face of the Lord, which once shined vpon vs in all ioy and felicity: which is of such power and strength, as that so long as the Lord fauoureth vs, although, as Da∣uid in his 68. Psalme sayth, we were as blacke and foule, as they that lie among the brands ends, and handirons in a chimney corner, yet would he make vs shine more bright then the siluer glistering wings of any doue, most curiouslie pictured. Some other Interpretors suppose, that Iere∣my speaking in this place of a darke and blacke clowde, had regard vnto the glorious clowde which was seene in Ierusalem at the dedication of the Temple, as in the eightenth Chapter of the first booke of the Kings we reade: meaning that there had beene a great alteration of things sithence that time. He hath not remembred his footestoole.) This is a kind of speech borrowed from the manner of men, for, we right well know, that God, who is a spiritual substance, hath no neede of a foote∣stoole. But by this allegoricall manner of speach, is meant the Temple, in which they saw the signes and tokens
of God his presence. The earth also in comparison of heauen, which is the throne of the heauenly maiestie, is sometimes called, as in the 66. of Esay we reade, The footestoole of the Lord. But when the Temple is so called, it is vppon some other consideration, to wit, because it seemeth that God, as it were abode in that temple, and there testified that he walked among his people. But when the Lord calleth the Temple his footestoole, he gi∣ueth vs to vnderstand, that we should not set our minds vpon the materiall Temple, or take it for the verie dwel∣ling place of his maiestie, but only for some small testimonie of his presence, and that there is a farre great deale more to be said, betweene his heauen∣lie glorie, and the shining glorie in the Temple, as may be spoken of a kinglie throne and a footestoole, be∣cause the people should alwaies lift vp their hearts on hye towards the true Throne of glorie. He hath polluted the kingdome.) This is such a kind of the Hebrewe maner of speeche, as we finde in the 89. Psalme, verse 39. Thou hast profaned his Crowne, casting it to the ground: that
is to say, thou hast reiected & forsaken it, as a polluted and prophane thing. He hath destroyed, or pluckt downe his  tabernacle, as the shed or cabane of a Gar∣den.) Some reade: He hath despised, or violentlie turned vpside downe: but it seemeth to agree better with the similitude of cabanes, or sheds: let vs therefore reade, He hath destroyed, or pluckt downe: euen as shepherds which entrench themselues sometime in one place, somtime in another, or as sheds and cabanes that are set vp in a gar∣den, one while in one place, another while in another. This is much like vnto that which is spoken of in the 80. Psalme, verse 12. Thou hast pluckt downe her hedge, that euery one that passeth by might destroy her. And in the fifth of I∣saiah, ver. 5. I will breake downe her hedge, and tread it vnder foote, and lay her waste. This speech could the Iewes hardlie disgest, who perswaded thēselues that their Temple should cōtinue for euer, & their gates to be euerlasting, accor∣ding as Dauid in the 24. Psalme saith. But heere is to be noted, that the promises which we fynde made in the Scripture, concerning the euerlasting continuance of the Temple, were
not made in regard of the stones, or the materiall building thereof, but for the loue of the Church of Christ, which shall be mainteined and preser∣ued vnto the end of the world, not∣withstanding that the visible taber∣nacle was transported one while to Sylo, another while to Gabaa, and a∣nother time some whether else: or al∣beit that the kingdome of God and the Gospell be transported to a nati∣on that shall profite thereby, whether it be one time into Greece, another time into Almayne, one while into Fraunce, or else whether. Her kings and princes are among the Gentiles: there is no more lawe:) Some reade: They are among the Gentiles without lawe. The Chaldee interpre∣tation is thus, They were led away be∣cause they regarded not the lawe. But in mine opinion, this place is rather to be referred vnto the discord that was then in Ierusalem, and in all Iu∣dah, when as they which should haue been the obseruers of the lawes, and haue kept the people vnder discipline, were either dead, or else led captiue. Heere then is represented vnto vs the sorrowfull countenance of a people,
voide of good direction and gouerne∣ment. For the verie office and dutie of all Magistrates, is, to mainteine the authoritie of the lawes of peace, of the seemely order, and quiet of all Cities and countreys. And it was in elder daies,22 of the first booke of the Kings. in the raigne of good King Io∣sias, an especiall happie time that the booke of the law was found againe, that was so long missing, and troden vnder foote as it were in the time of that wicked infidell king Achas: or at least, as Lyra writeth, was hid in a wall, and found at such time as the Temple was restored. To be short, it is verie well said of the Lawyers, That it is to small purpose to haue lawes and orde∣nances in Cities, if there be not also qualified men to render to euery man his right, and to execute iustice and iudgement. For we see how that in the daies of Ieremy the laws of God were of no force, written either in paper, parchment, or tables, seeing that the Prophets, Priests, Iudges, and such as should haue been the life of the law vnto the people were either dead, or scattered. Theodoret in the 15. Chap∣ter of his first booke of his Ecclesiasti∣call historie, alleageth what an holie
ordinance the Emperour Constan∣tine the great had made, which was this, that he caused the holy bookes of the holy scripture to be copied out, for the which, at his fyrst entrance in∣to the Empire, he was highlie com∣mended: to the end they might euery where he read, that thereby the will of GOD might be vnderstoode and knowne: where contrarywise, that curssed Iulian pretended nothing more, then the suppressing of them. And we see that among the Turkes and barbarous nations, all good lawes and holie bookes are made no ac∣compt of, and such beastlines establi∣shed, as that the people haue no knowledge of the word of God, ney∣ther yet of any other good lawes esta∣blished by Christian Emperours: and therefore we see alas, that ciuil warres bearing sway, euery thing is abased, so that there is neither rule nor law, but the violence and will of the most wic∣ked and mightiest men, a thing which can not ynough be bewailed with the Prophet Ieremy. The Prophets can receiue no mo visions.) His meaning is not, that there were no Prophets in the dayes of the capti∣uitie
of Babylon: for vnto that time there were Ieremy, Ezekiel, Daniell, and others: but he meaneth that vi∣sions ceased for a time, euen when the people lay sowzed in captiuitie, which was foretold them by manie visions. They were silent,) To wit, by reason  they were so greatly distressed: they were so stuffed with sorrow and griefe, as that they were not able to speake,Extreame sorrow so pincheth the hart, as that the eyes can not burst out into teares, but became like dead blocks: and as we reade in histories of a king of Ae∣gypt named Psammenitus, who being asked by King Cambyses, why he be∣wayled not the death of his sonne, aunswered, that men were wont to weepe for common and ordinarie af∣flictions, but if the sorrowe pinch vs neere, our heart is so great, as that we are not able to weepe. Mine eyes do fall with teares,) that is to  say, I am euen bleare eied with much weeping: and yet, sorrow & heauines is not always eased with weeping. Dauid also in his 6. Psa. saith, That he washed his bed with teares. Such representations of extreame sorrow are very feeling: but this descriptiō specially which Ieremy maketh of the lamētable condition of the yong childrē that died of hōger in
their mothers bosomes, and knew not how to come by their wonted foode, is able to kill the verie harts of those with sorrow and griefe which consider of it. And although we haue no ex∣presse histories of the famine that then was, and of that which hapned vnto the yong infants, yet are we not to doubt that the Prophet hath set downe anie thing that came to passe at that time in Ierusalem, otherwise then as Iosephus the historian hath left in writing in the tenth and ele∣uenth Chapt. of his sixt booke of his historie. And besides, we find that in our daies, both at Harlem in Holland, and also at the seege of Sansare in Berrie, in the yere 1573. mothers were brought to great extremities by the like famines. Neither are we to doubt, that famine is one of the most cruell deathes, and one of the most fearefull whips that can be laid vpon vs by the hand of God. And Aristotle also in his Ethiques writeth: That to dye of famine, is one of the most miserable deaths that may be.
CERTAINE POINTS AND common places to be noted vp∣pon the first part of thesecond Chapter. HEere is to be noted a∣mong other things, that the Prophet alwaies setteth downe before our eyes, as it were, the most principall losse, and the most pre∣cious iewels: to wit, the kingly state, and the priesthood which then were a∣based and brought lowe. And to say the truth, these are the two most notable lights of the people of God: yea, two of the most notable remembrances of his maiestie, whereupon ensueth, that it is a feareful thing to see such things foyled, and troad vnder foote: which thing, the comicall heathen Plautus doth vs to vnderstand, in bringing in a man, saying: what man is he that is so bold and shamelesse, as dareth do violence vnto a priest. But yet aboue all the rest, the kinglie state and priest∣hood among the people of the Iewes was most honorable, because they figu∣red the Messiah, and anointed of the Lord, which should come into the
world: and also because that the Lord had especially established their two degrees and dignities among the Iewes. Moreouer, as the Iewes had recei∣ued from the hand of God moe excel∣lent benefites and surpassed all the rest of the people in glorie and honor before the Lord: euen so also, according to the old saying, their fall was the more greeuous and straunge, in asmuch as they fell from an hye: and it hapned vnto them as it did vnto the Cities of Capernaum and Bethsaida, of whom our Sauiour Christ spake in the 11. of Sainct Mathew, That because they were exalted vp vnto heauen, they should be cast downe into hell. Such examples in very deede ought to make vs looke well to our selues, to the end we might make an accompt to come to the like market. if we abuse the excel∣lent graces by his maiestie bestowed vpon vs in these latter daies:A fearefull iudgement of God for vnthank∣fulnesse of his graces bestowed vpon any nation. as we alreadie see that the axe is layde to the roote of the tree, and the hand of God stretched out ouer all the world, to do vengeance, for the horrible vnthanke∣fulnesse against the Gospell, and the contempt of so many aduertisements
bestowed vpon vs, wherevpon it hath come to passe, that in stead of zealous Princes, and of great magnanimitie, we see Tyrants, dissolute, and effemi∣nate men gouerne in diuers places, and in stead of excellent teachers en∣dowed with godlinesse and know∣ledge, which seeke the glorie of Christ, and the building vp of his Church, we see manie disturbers and hire∣lings, who seeke nothing else but themselues, and the confusion of Chur∣ches. But yet let vs notwithstanding be∣ware and take heede how we imagine God to be either inconstant or cruell, when we see these changes, and when as we see him thus abase his Church, and the pure ministerie of his word, one while in one place, another while n another, but rather call to minde hat his promises are conditionall, as in the lawe of Moses we may see: for there is a condition enioined vs to o∣bey God, and keepe his commaunde∣mets. And in the new Testamente, we haue pomises of grace made vnto vs, if wee beleeue in Iesus Christ, and haue a liuely and stedfast hope in
him, which he himself giueth and wor∣keth in his chosen, we shal then do God great wrong, if we complaine against him, seeing that our disloialtie is the cause of all our miseries, as the Histo∣riographer Titus Liuius wrote of the Romaines, saying, that it was against reason that they which violated both diuine and humane things, should re∣quire to be inuiolable, and holily dealt withall. Marke how Saint Ierome writing vppon this place of Ieremie, rightly applieth it to our vse, when as he saith, that we had neede take heede that the holy Ghost by reason of our iniquities,The holie Ghost will not dwell in an hart sold vnto sinne. forsake not the tabernacle of our harts, and that we then become as it were a prophane place, and as an ouergrowne garden, which a man will no more dig. nor water, Are you saith Saint Paule in the sixt of the first to the Corinths, the temples of God? glorifie then God both in bodie and soule, whose they are. As concerning the feastes and so∣lemne daies which are spoken of heere in this place,Of the so∣lemne feastes. we are to note, that this serueth nothing the Papists turnes, who would yet play the Iewes, an after the Iewish manner retaine man
festiuall daies in the Church, wherein they shew their slouth, and desire of idle life, for such men hunt alwaies after holydaies. Now, the cause why Ieremy lamenteth the Iewes feastes, was not for any loue that he bare to the feastes, but because of the seruice of God that was exercised in them, and by reason of the solemne assem∣blies that were vsed there in those daies. But the Papists feasts which the Popes ordeined for the honor of creatures, and many other Idola∣trous deuises, full of riot and excesse, haue no more communitie with the holy feasts of the lawe, then had Bac∣chus feastes. If then, as it is written in the first of Isaiah, it be said of the feastes which God himselfe expressely ordeined: I hate your solemne feasts: my soule abhorreth your new moones because you abuse them, and because the people looke to nothing else but to the outward shew. What would the Prophets at this day say, if they sawe these superstitious and riotous feastes deuised by men, and by nurse mothers, of a thousand and a thousand dissolute things, as by experience we commonly see. So that the festiuall daies of the
people in the old time were a part and parcell of the ceremonies and schole∣maistership of the lawe and shadowes, the bodie, and accomplishment where∣of was in Christ, as in the second Chapter of Saint Paule his Epistle to the Colossians it is written: in so much that now at this day no man may, or can binde vs vnto any suche feastes, either condemne or find fault with vs for any such dayes or Sab∣boths: but we must rather put in pra∣ctise the spirituall meaning of the feastes: and that is it which Isaiah, speaking of the later times maketh mention of in the last Chapter of his prophesie, saying: Let vs make vnto our selues perpetuall Sabboths, accor∣ding to the spirite, and rest from our euill workes, and reioyce in the Lord. As for the Law, whereof Eusebius in the 24. Chapter of his fourth booke of the Ecclesiasticall historie writeth in the life of Constantine the Emperour by him made, concerning the obserua∣tion of the solemne feastes of the Mar∣tyres. First of all we must vnderstand, that it can bind no mans conscience, because it is not the ordinance of God,
but of man. Secondarily, it was at that time another manner of thing to commend in assemblies the faith and constancie of the Martyres, to the end to stirre vp others couragiouslie to suf∣fer for the name of Christ, then to ce∣lebrate feasts, for the hudlings and roaring out of Masses, or for the prea∣ching of shod fables and legends, and to passe the day in all vanitie & ryot, as the Papists in their feasts at this daie do. Now Ieremy right well teacheth vs by his example, what a losse it is to lose good lawes and ordinances, and good gouernors: and what a miserie it is, when as there is neither faith nor law to be had, neither yet any good exhortations: and to be short, when as God reuealeth himselfe no more vnto vs. Such was the great misery of king Saul, whē the Lord so withdrew him∣self frō him,1. Sam. 28. as yt he neuer more answe∣red him either by prophets or visions. Lastly, we see in this first part of the second Chapter, what a fearefull iudgement of God it is, when as our poore infants do feele his heauy wrath and fierce fury: so that, although we our selues haue no compassion of our
selues, yet ought we at least to haue compassion of our tender Infants, vpon whome, for our sinnes, and licen∣tious kinde of life, we bring them into those miseries wherein they are wrap∣ped: not for that this great, good, and mercifull God punisheth the Inno∣cents which can not do withall,VVhen God lay∣eth his crosse vp∣pon yong Infants, he doth it not of any ma∣lice to thē, but to wound the rebellious hearts of their pa∣rents with such sights to call them ther∣by to re∣pentance. or ha∣teth the yong Infants, whome he espe∣ciallie cherisheth, and maketh much of, as in the first of Deuteronomy, and in the 10. & 18. of S Mathew we reade. But it is his pleasure first of all to pu∣nish the parents in their owne childrē, being a part of themselues, and their owne flesh: and therefore it is the Lords will to wound and cast downe by such sights, the stubborne and rebel∣lious harts of such fathers and mo∣thers against his holy word. And yet notwithstanding, he is able to discerne his chosen children which are ordeined to euerlasting life, from the reprobate, drawing his chosen in good time vnto himselfe, because they should no more sinne heere in this world: or else he punisheth those children which he seeth still so go on in their fathers wicked∣nesse, as we put to death yong woolfe cubbes. To be short, there is great dif∣ference
betweene ciuil iustice, who pu∣nisheth none but such as she manifestly seeth consent vnto wickednesse, and be∣tweene the liuing God, before whose face we are all sinners, and by nature the verie children of wrath. THE SECOND PART OF the second Chapter. 13 WHat thing shall J take to wit∣nes for thee?Mem. what thing shall J compare thee vnto, O daughter Ierusalem? what shall J liken thee vnto, that J may comfort thee, O virgin Syon? for thy breach is like the Sea: who can heale thee? 14 Thy Prophets haue looked out vaine and foolish things for thee,Nun. and they haue not discouered thine iniquitie, to turne a∣waie thy captiuitie, but haue looked out for the false Prophets, and causes of banish∣ment. 15 All that passe by the waie,Samech. clappe their hands at thee: they hisse and wagge their head vpon the daughter Ierusalem, saying: is this the Citie that men call, The perfection of beautie, and the ioie of the whole earth? 16 All thine enemies haue opened theirPhe.
mouth against thee: they hisse, and grinde their teeth, saying: Let vs deuoure it: cer∣tainely, this is the day that we looked for: we haue found and seene it. Ain.17 The Lord hath done the thing which he had purposed: he hath fulfilled his word that he had determined of old time: he hath throwne downe and not spared: he hath caused thine enemies to reioyce ouer thee, and set vp the horne of thine aduersaries. Zade.18 Their heart cried vnto the Lord, O wall of the daughter Syon, let teares run downe day and night like a riuer: take thou no rest, neither let the apple of thine eye cease. aph.19 Arise, crie in the night: in the be∣ginning of the watches powre out thine hart like water before the face of the Lord: lift p thine hands towards him for the life of thy yong children that faint with honger in the corners of all the streetes. Res.20 Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast done thus: shall the women eate their fruite, and children of a spanne long? shall the priest and the prophet be slaine in the Sanctuarie of the Lord? Schin.21 The young and the old lie on the ground in the streetes: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword: thou hast slaine them in the day of thy wrath:
thou hast killed and not spared. 22 Thou hast called as in a solemne daie my terrors round about,Van. so that in the daie of the Lords wrath none escaped nor remay∣ned: those that J haue nourished and brought vp, hath mine enemie consumed. CERTAINE NOTES VP∣pon the second part of the second Chapter. THIS part conteineth in it such new & strange deduc∣tions and amplifications of the strange miseries which then were, as that the prophet was no way able to tel wherevnto to compare them: howbeit, he goeth on further, & putteth the people in mind of the cau∣ses of their troubles both present and past. Thus we see why he maketh men∣tion aswell of the wrath of God, as of the false Prophets, and iolitie of the e∣nemie. To be short, he bringeth in the fearefull effects of God his wrath, and runneth through all kindes, ages, and conditiōs, declaring therby, that there was none exempt. And yet he so hand∣leth the matter, as that his purpose is not to driue men to desperation, but
rather to cause them seeke the Lord, and to waite for their deliuerance from his hands, as from one who both woundeth and healeth, who leadeth into the pit, and bringeth out againe: and in sending the aforesaid afflic∣tions,Cyprian in his 4. booke of his Epistls the fourth Epistle. will (as Cyprian sayeth) send also the promised deliuerances, and as discipline and correction haue gone before, so also will grace and pardon follow, so that we incessantly crauing, and through faith beleeuing to receiue, do simplie, and with cou∣ragious minds call vpon the Lord in weeping and groning. Moreouer, the Prophet Ieremy setteth before vs the way how to repent, first, by certaine outward signes, as by weeping, lamen∣ting, and lifting vp of the hands, and also by the duties which euerie faith∣full soule ought to poure out before the Lord. Verse 13.What shall I saie.) Some reade thus, whome shall I bring in for witnesse? God or men? Some others reade, what shall I giue warning of, what de∣claration shall I make? Howbeit, me thinketh that this translation which we follow agreeth best. What shall J say? what testimonies, or what ex∣amples
shall I bring in and set downe? Now although this seemeth to be an hyperbolicall or excessiue kinde of speech, yet if we weigh all the circum∣stances, we shall fynde that neuer people had so great cause to com∣plaine, as the people of the Iewes then had, who right well felt that they had to deale with the liuing God, and that he banded himselfe against them, and had receiued from him more largely, then euer any people else had, and therefore were more astonied at this alteration, which caused Ieremy to redouble these wordes: Consider O Lord to whome thou hast done these things: consider that they are thy chosen people: consider also that it is thy Citie Ierusalem, which thou so highlie esteemedst, that thou hast thus so roughly handled and entreated. Surely there is nothing more hardlie to be borne, then the anger of a deere freend, or of a father. Euen so was this a bitter thing to feele at that time the hand of the heauenly father turned, his countenance altered, and his fa∣uors cōuerted into fury & indignatiō. Virgin daughter of Syon.) He vnder∣standeth by this Syon hil which was in
Ierusalem, all the whole Citie, euen all the people of the Iewes: The He∣brewe word Bethulah, signifieth a maid that is of ripe yeeres, and in the flower of her age. And so sometimes are the people of God called, as heere they are, and in the 37. Chapter of Isaiah, He hath contemned thee thou may∣den daughter of Syon. Thus we see how the holy people of God are called, either for their weakenesse, and be∣cause they wholie depend vpon God, as a maiden dependeth vpon her mo∣ther, either else for their chastitie, and puritie of their religion: as con∣trarywise, Idolatrie is oftentimes cal∣led whoredome and adulterie. But this speech sometimes is taken in a scoffing manner, noting thereby a delicate and an effeminate people, as in the three and twentith of Isaiah we reade, That Tyre is called the may∣den daughter of Syon: as if the Lorde should haue sayde: Thou delicate, and effeminate Citie of Tyre, which wert neuer taken by assault, but re∣mainest as a mayde that neuer lost her virginitie. Verse 14.Prophesies and banishments.) We haue not so much expressed the words of
the Prophet, as we haue his meaning, because his meaning is, that the pro∣phesies and visions of the Prophets were banishments, that is to say, that the people sleeping in theyr sinnes, were the cause, what with theyr flatteries, and supposed visi∣ons, that, they were banished theyr countrey, and fell into so great mise∣rie: and it seemeth in verie deede, that the Prophet had reason to vse this Hebrewe word, which properlie signifyeth an heauie weight, or bur∣denous prophesie: as if he would haue sayde, Surely thy false Prophets haue prophesied of burdens and ba∣nishments: for although they see∣med to be milde and gentle Prea∣chers, and that there were none of the seruants of God but we, that were the greeuous and burdenous Pro∣phets, yet for all that, the effect hath shewed, that these thy notable Prea∣chers haue preached and prophesied such prophesies vnto thee, as haue wayed thee downe to the ground, and are the cause of these burdens, banish∣ments, and afflictions which at this day thou suffrest. Their hart cried vnto the Lord.) Some
learned Interpretors reade, Against the Lord, and referre this verse vnto the enemies, and to their blasphemies and roisting iolities: howbeit, I had ra∣ther in this place follow those Inter∣pretors, who with one consent meane this, of the Iewes: vnto whome, Iere∣my also in the fourtenth Chapter of his prophesie giueth them councell, to poure out teares day and night, and to runne vnto God in all theyr troubles and distresses, and to say tru∣ly, this manner of speech is worthy the noting, Their harts cried vnto the Lord, bicause the crie which pearseth the heauens, is not onely the crie of the voice, but also of the hart: for the voice and hands are but the outward signes of the affection of the heart, which Sainct Paule in the second Chapter of his first Epistle to Timo∣thy ioineth together, When as he ex∣horteth vs to lift vp pure hands vnto the Lord. And the Prophet Ieremy him∣selfe also so interpreteth it, when as he admonisheth the people to poure out their hearts before the face of the Lord: for, it is God alone vnto whom we must addresse our selues, bi∣cause it is he whom we offend, & he it
is which scourgeth vs for the same. Howbeit, as S. Augustine vpō the 139. Psalme writeth, we flie from his seue∣ritie and rigour, and appeale vnto his bountie and grace. Here follow the doctrines that are chiefely to be noted in this seconde part of the seconde Chapter. THis is one of the chiefest pointes that we are here to consider of, to knowe and vnderstande what a mischiefe it is to haue to doe with false Prophetes, who smoo∣thing vs vp with faire speeches, and flattering vs in our sinnes, doe vtterly destroy vs: And are in verie deede, as S. Peter in his 2. Chapter of his 2. Epistle, calleth them, welles without water. Let vs then here note, that it is our greatest auaile and benefite, when as our Pastors and Doctors doe not only instruct vs: but also when as they doe liuely and sharply reproue vs: see∣ing it belongeth to their charge so to do, as in the first Chapter of S. Paul his Epistle to Titus wee may reade.
For it is good and profitable for vs to bee powdred with the salt of reprehen∣sion, because we should not putrifie in our sinnes. For this purpose wee are to weygh and consider the saying of S. Cyprian an auncient Doctor of the Churche, in these wordes: That man (sayth he) that smootheth vp a sinner with flat∣tering wordes, giueth him a light bur∣ning torch to sette his sinne on a light burning fire, and in steede of casting it abroade and putting of it out, doth by all meanes possible maintayne and nourish it. But hee which liuely ex∣horteth and admonisheth his Brother, furdereth his saluation. Euen so it behooueth euerie minister of the Lord, not by fayre and deceitfull woordes to beguile ye people: but to prouide whol∣some remedies for euerie disease. He is a very foolish Chirurgion, that will neatly and tenderly handle inuetered and olde sores. For, he that so fauou∣reth his pacient, maketh his wounde the worse: & letteth the poyson lye hidd within the infected partes: But hee shoulde open and make incysion of the wound, yea although his patient shold euen whine & byte, and shewe himselfe
neuer so impatient by reason of his paine & griefe: but he will, after hee is once whole, giue his Chirurgiō great thāks for his so doing. Ther is at this day a new & straunge crueltie discoue∣red, when as vnder the title and colour of mercie and compassion, there is brought in pleasaunt poyson, and a dis∣ease dormant to deceiue the people, &c. Thus wee see what S. Cyprian hath written. S. Barnard also hath written a notable Homely vppon this matter, wherein he sheweth, That an Eccle∣siasticall person ought, if the case so requireth, to bee both gratious, and ustere. Wherefore it is most cer∣taine, that they which desire to haue pleasaunt thinges preached vnto them, seeke by al meanes possible their owne destruction, as we may read of them, that are mentioned in the 30. Chap∣ter of Isaiah, who vtterly reiected the hearing of the admonitions and ad∣uertisementes of Gods heauie wrath and indignation. Whereuppon also Ieremie in. the 8. Chapter of his pro∣phesie complayneth, when he speaketh of the false Prophetes, that sclender∣ly dawbed vp and healed the peoples woūds, Crying vnto thē peace peace,
when in very deede there was no peace at all. Therefore, (sayth the Lord) they shall fall in the day wherein I will vi∣site them: And in the 4. of Oseah it is sayde, There is none that will chasten nor reproue one another: and there∣fore shalt thou stumble in the day and the Prophet also with thee. The other point which wee are to note, is the scoffing and euill fauoured iesting of the aduersaries, who seeing the calamities of Gods people, as in the 1. of Habacucke it is written, re∣ioyce and waxe proude, offring vnto their nettes, and commending their owne counsels and enterprises: how∣beit they shall buye these their reioy∣cinges and iolities full deare. For as our Sauiour Christ in the 23. of Luke ver. 31. sayth: If this be done to a green tree, and that the faithfull be afflicted, what shall be done to the drie, that is to say, to vnprofitable othes and pro∣misses, what shall the reprobate looke for, but for eternall fire? Ouer and be∣sides this, we knowe that the wicked can haue no power ouer vs, without it be giuen them from aboue which thing Ieremie putteth vs in minde of, when as hee so often reciteth these wordes:
The Lorde hath caused this to fall vp∣on vs, euen as he had determined, To shewe vnto vs that Tyrantes and wic∣ked men are but God his instruments to doe his will for the chastizing of his owne people, and the executing of his iust iudgement, although they thinke not so, as in the 10. of Isaiah wee read. When the Prophet speaketh of the voice,Of the out∣vvarde shewes and gestures of repētance. and of the rest of the gestures of the bodie which are commonly vsed of such as humble themselues before the Lorde: as teares, sighes, hanging downe of the heade, lifting vp of the handes, knocking on the breast, & such like: we are to learne and knowe, that the whole man both in bodie and soule humbleth himselfe, and by such out∣warde signes testifieth vnto vs our in∣warde affection: otherwise, all our gestures & lamentable speeches were verie mockeries, and plaine hypocri∣sie. And therfore it was very well said of Basil, writing vpon this place in the first of Isaiah: When as they shall lift vp their handes, I will not heare them. It is no maruell sayth he, For they a∣lone lift vp their hands as they should, which seeke after heauenly thinges:
and as a young child, simply lifteth vp his hands vnto his nurse, euen so haue they recourse vnto their God. But the Iewes lifting vp their handes full of violence, vnto the Lord, prouoked him more and more, faring like a man that had slaine a Kinges sonne, and after∣ward imbruing his hands in his bloud would then come and shew himself vn∣to the King: were this the way to mi∣tigate the Kinges wrath? Moreouer, yt which hath beene here∣tofore sayde is very notable, That we must poure out our harts before ye lord, which thing Dauid in his 62. Psalme aduertiseth vs of, saying: put you trust in him, ô ye people, alwaies, and poure out your harts before him: which ma∣ner of speech giueth vs first of al to vn∣derstand, yt we may frankly and freely tell all our sorrowes & griefes vnto the Lord, and poure out our anguishes in∣to his bosome, as a young child would do into the bosome of a most louing fa∣ther, Besides, we are aduertised to be∣ware of hypocrisie, and to confesse our selues perfectly vnto God, & tell him whatsoeuer lyeth in our hearts. For he it is that soundeth the hearts: and as Dauid in the 51. Psalme saith, All our
sinnes lie open before him. This great God, loueth perfetnes & inward truth:S. Ambros in the 5. Chap. of his 2. book of repen∣tance. And as S. Ambrose also very wel saith, It auayled Iudas nothing to powre out his heart before the Iewes, saying: I haue betrayed innocent bloud. For the Iewes sent him backe without cō∣fort, and in steede of easing him of his griefe, they despitously chid him: but no man euer powreth out his heart be∣fore God in vaine, because it is he that blotteth out al our iniquities, as in the 103. Psalme we read, and in the 43. of Isaiah, and therfore dischargeth our wretched consciences, & cōforteth thē. A Paraphrasis or exposition of the scond Chapter. HOW hath the Lord, I be¦seech you, in his iust fu∣ry,  withdrawē the bright¦nes of his countenance frō Syon? Howe hath he darkned the whole honor of Israel, & mightily obscured this people that he once made shine aboue all the people of the world? How hath he beatē down to the grounde, & cast downe from on hie into the lowest parts, those whō as it seemed, hee had lifted vp aboue the
skies, without regarde (such was the greatnesse of his yre) vnto this holy place, that he who hath his throne in heauen, had choosen as his resting place and footestoole. He hath at one blowe shattered in pieces all what so euer, not sparing a∣ny thing, he hath hedlong cast down all the Manors of Iacob, set on fire the fortresses of Iudah, shaken in sunder and troden vnder foote as a prophane thing, the kingdome it selfe which had beene so long agoe holy, and all her Princes. Euen the Princes, alas, which were  the strength and glory of the people, as the braunched hornes are the strength and glorie of the Hartes: but such their hornes are pulled & torne in pieces, because God seeing the peo∣ple lift vp their hornes against him, he withdrew his hande from ouer his ad∣uersaries to rebate such their pride, and cast vpon them his fierce wrath. Nowe therefore hee purposeth to  deale with his people, as with an ene∣mie: bendeth his bowe against them, and thrusteth out his right arme to cast downe to the ground all their ex∣cellent and pleasant thinges: powreth
out, alas, in the middest of the Taber∣nacle of Syon his fierce wrath, as a consuming fire. Alas, it is a hard peece of worke, to  haue the Almightie himselfe an ene∣mie, who ouerthroweth and destroy∣eth whole palaces, fortresses, and Ca∣stels, multiplying nothing, alas, vnto the miserable spoyled daughter of Iu∣dah of all her ornaments, but sorrow, sobbes, and griefe. And al this was done as it were with  a trice. For he dispatched and threwe vp the notablest tabernacles of Iacob, and the holiest Manors which a man would haue thought impregnable, as easily as a man would throwe vp the tent or pauillion of a garden: In so∣much that whosoeuer had seene these myserable people, would haue sayde that there had neuer beene amonge them, eyther holy assemblies, Sabba∣othes, or yet festiuall dayes. To bee short, he brought to naught both the kingly estate, and also the order of the Priesthoode. So that all the seruice of God cea∣sed: And a man would haue saide, that  hee had abhorred both the altar and the sanctuarie, in which, (alas) wee
altogether beleeued, hauing a grea∣ter regarde to the outward matter, thē vnto the inwarde. And in the meane while, behold, all our notable palaces destroyed, our goodly strōg walles laid flatte; and besides (which would haue burst the heart of any man) behold, in steede of praysing of God, and singing of holy Psalmes, the fearefull how∣ling noyse of the barbarous idolaters, most irreligiously roaring out, in the middest of the house of God. To be short, the Almightie execu∣ting his righteous counselles, is re∣solued to destroye the walles of Ieru∣salem, and to laye it plaine, and in steede of laying the lyne to builde it vp, he layde it nowe to destroy it, ne∣uer with-drawing his hande vntill hee had razed it: in so much that a man would haue saide that the verie Bul∣warkes and walles themselues lamen∣ted this desolation. Her royall and costly gates were soonke an hundred foote within the ground: her great and mightie strong bars, were shaken and brought to dust: but that which was worst, the kinges and Princes that were the verie hen∣gies of the Citie, were prisoners in a
straunge countrey: the lawes were si∣lent: There was neither Religion, law, Priest, nor religious house left. The Elders of the people which re∣mayned  behind, sate vpon the ground with brokē harts, in sackcloth & ashes, in token of their extreame sorrow and griefe: the young damselles also, who before time (alas) went boult vpright, were faine now to hange downe their heads to the grounde. When I sawe these dolefull sightes, I could not holde my selfe from won∣derfully  weeping: all mine inwarde partes were drowned, my bowels swel∣led, my lyuer consumed cleane away. In summe, I was cleane beside my self, when I considered these desolations: but especially, when I sawe the young infantes die, hanging at their mothers breastes. Who would not be amazed to see a  companie of young children worne to the bare bones, with very hunger, cal∣ling vpō their mothers with most faint and pitifull voices, where is our meate and drinke, and our ordinarie foode, scarsely able to make an ende of these wordes, without yeelding vp the ghost into their mothers bosomes, as if they
had beene euen slaine with the sword. What then shall I say, or speake vn∣to thee, O thou desolate Citie? Where shall I finde the like miserable exam∣ple, whereby to appease thy sorrowe and comfort thee? Alas, I can finde none at all. For this thine aduersitie is a sea and gulfe of miseries, where shall a man finde a remedie to heale such a wounde as this? Wilt thou goe vnto thy iolly Pro∣phetes,VVhen a people will not harken vnto the faithful mi∣nisters of God in re∣proouing their sins, but giue eare vnto foolish Prophetes▪ vvhich smooth thē vpin them, then sud∣denly com∣meth their destruction and capti∣uitie. who with their foolish and de∣ceitfull prophesies, haue greatly abu∣sed thee? For they in not discouering thine iniquitie, haue left thee wallow∣ing in thy sinnes, by meane whereof this captiuitie hath come vpon thee, which thou mightest haue escaped, if thou haddest harkened vnto the true seruaunts of God, who seemed to thee at that time to be too too seuere men, preaching vnto thee hard and burde∣nous thinges: but now thou seest the fruite of thy pleasing and milde Pro∣phetes, that is, thou bearest the bur∣den of all the mysteries in the worlde, and thy children are lead captiue. And now beholde thou art a skorne  to all that passe by, for they clappe their handes, hysse, and wagge their
heades at thee, saying: ho, ho, is this the Citie, that was called the beauti∣full Citie of the East, and such a one as was most pleasaunt to beholde? All thine enemies haue opened  their mouthes and mowed at thee: they haue hissed, and grynded their teeth at thee, saying: wee haue in the end deuoured it, and gotten it as wee would: is this the day which wee so greatly desired to see, and so long loo∣ked for? Surely this is the day which the Lord  had purposed, who alone ruleth all thinges by his prouidence, and hath fulfilled the word which he had deter∣mined and concluded vpon of old, yea hee hath throwen downe and not spa∣red, and hath caused thine enemies to reioyce, and set vp their hornes. In the meane while these miserable  people, could doe nothing else but with wounded heartes braye and crie vnto the Lorde, who scourged them, and healed the wounde which he him selfe had made. And in verie deede this was the best, (ô Syon) to let teares runne downe day and night like a ry∣uer, and not take any rest, not yet let the apple of thine eye once winke.
Arise therefore I say, and cry in the night in the beginning of the watches and powre out thine heart before the face of the Lorde: lift vp thine handes vnto him, & beseech him to haue mer∣cie vpon thy young children, who dy∣ing for famine, yeelde vp the ghost in all the corners of the streetes. And beseech him in all humblenes  of minde, that it would please him, to consider to whome he hath done this, that hee hath doone it to his poore Turtle, to his holy Citie, to the sheepe of his pasture: to poore young chil∣drē of a spanne longe. Alas must these extremities be, to see mothers eate the frute of their owne bodies, and to see the Priests and Prophets slaine in the middest of the sanctuarie. And the young and the old without  respect of age, or qualitie, lie in the streetes: the chast virgines and lustie young men fall by the sworde without pitie and mercie. Beholde me, O Lorde, most misera∣ble oppressed citie of Ierusalem, howe horrour and griefes assayle me, as if they were solemnely summoned to ap¦peare at a day, and the affliction is so greeuous, as that no man escapeth the
wrath of the Almightie: and besides, I must see these, whō I haue with great paine and diligence nourished and brougt vp, to be slaine by the enemie. THE THIRD CHAPTER. The Argument and summe of this Chapter. A Man might saye that this thirde Chapter is the strength, and as it were the verie soule of these Lamentatiōs: be∣cause it is so furnished with such graue sentences, similitudes, and comparisons, as are most apt and meete to mooue mens affections, and thereby driue them to compassion. For although the Prophet handleth the selfe same subiecte or argument which he doth in the Chapters going before: yet he here, more notably ad∣uaunceth and garnisheth his style or vaine of writing and more at large amplifieth the miseries of Ierusalem & of the countrey round about: wher∣by, it seemeth that his meaning is to shewe, that no toung, art, nor compa∣rison
is able sufficiētly to expresse the calamitie thereof: and in very deede, it is impossible for a mā, more affecti∣onately, and more eloquently to set it foorth, than he doth. Moreouer, the Prophet in this chap∣ter, speaketh no more in the third per∣son, neyther yet in generall, as he did in the beginning of the first Chapter, in the person of a comfortlesse wid∣dowe: but speaketh in his owne per∣son: or, as it is most likely, hee bring∣eth in a certaine person outragiously lamenting, and representing all the people of Iudah: euen as some of the auncient Fathers thought the booke of Iob to be a representation of a man wrestling against most mightie temp∣tations, and in the ende got the victo∣rie: although there is more likeli∣hoode that this booke is an historie of things that came to passe and were done, both by reason of the circum∣stances of the places and personnes which are therein particularized. The order of the Alphabet is not heere in ech point folowed, as in the rest of the Chapters. For, there are three verses ioyned to euerie letter, saue that the letter, P H E, is left out.
As for the poesie that may be in these Lamentations, it is not needefull to haue it curiously sought after, and be∣sides, the most learned interpretors neuer busie nor trouble themselues a∣bout it. Now there are in this Chapter con∣tayned three principall pointes, the first, reacheth vnto the 20. verse, and is a paterne of an extreame combat betweene the flesh and the spirite, and of a stronge assault which a manne sustayneth, when he is brought into extreame sorrowe and griefe: The like whereof wee may reade in the 73. and 77. Psalmes. For this is most certaine, as Saint Augustine writeth vppon the 60. Psalme, to wit, That we can not liue in this pilgrimage of ours without temptation: because that through temptations wee must pro∣fite and aduaunce our selues, and no man can know it, without he be temp∣ted, & no man can be crowned, with∣out he conquer, neyther can any man ouercome, without hee fight, and no man can fight, without hee haue an e∣nemie to set vpon him. In the seconde parte is contayned the victorie ouer the temptations, and
the meanes to bridle and abate the impatiencie of our fleshe. In this part, which goeth vnto the 40. verse, are manie excellent sentences, which in this Chapiter glyster like orient pearles. But to bee shorte, the Pro∣phet houldeth vppe these three buck∣lers against all temptations. First of all, he compareth the punishment which they abide, with that, which the people had well deserued, by reason of their sinnes: and so findeth, that in respect, they were verie gently dealt withall. Secondarily, he beholdeth & setteth downe the constancie of God, and his great goodnesse, which farre surpasse our small, and momentanie temporall miseries, which, in regarde of the glo∣rie and felicitie that the children of God looke for in the life to come, are of no valure. As in the 4. chapter of the 2. Epistle of S. Paule to the Co∣rinthes, we may read. Thirdly, Ieremie setteth before the peoples eyes, the ende and pur∣pose of our GOD in his chastise∣mentes, who seeketh not, nor desireth our destruction: but our amendment and saluation: and is wonted by affli∣ctions
to trie and cleanse those that are his, that he might afterward more amplie bestowe his holy graces vpon them. In the third part, from the 40. verse, vnto the ende of the same Chapter is contayned a prayer. For although the faith of the children of god ouercom∣meth the worlde and all temptations: yet the same fayth neuer presumeth or waxeth proude therein: but giueth all the glorie to God alone, & maketh vs also alwaies to call to minde our in∣firmitie, and the stratagemes and cun∣ning policies of the deuill: who for a time maketh shewe to depart from vs, that he might therby afterward more fiercely set vpon vs. And therefore we are continually to watch and stande vpon our guard: and according to the counsell of S. Cyprian, be alwaies rea∣die to withstand Sathan, as often as he assayleth vs. Now the weapons where∣with we must resist him, are laid before vs in the 6. Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians. Let vs therfore in these latter daies, and most miserable times, make pro∣fite of the doctrines contayned in this chapter, that we may therby together,
liuely feele our miseries, and with∣stande desperation and impatiencie, to the ende we walke not in the waies of the Apostles, who in the time of af∣fliction fall away, shewing themselues for a while, to be but shallow Christi∣ans, much like vnto the seede sowed in the stonie ground, written in the 13 of S. Matthew his Gospell. THE FIRST PARTE OF the third Chapter. Aleph.1 I Am the man that hath seene af∣fliction in the rodde of his indigna∣tion. 2 He hath led me and brought me into darkenes, but not into light. 3 Surely hee is turned against mee, and turneth his hande also against mee all the day. Beth.4 My fleshe and my skinne hath hee caused to waxe olde, and hee hath broken my bones. 5 He hath builded against me, and com∣passed me with gall and labour. 6 He hath set me in darke places, as they that be dead for euer. Gimel.7 He hath hedged about mee, that J cannot get out, he hath made my chaynes
heauie. 8 Also when I crie and shout, he shut∣teth out my prayer. 9 Hee hath stopped vp my wayes with hewen stone, and turned away my pathes. 10 He was vnto me as a Beare lying in wayte, and as a Lyon in his denne.Daleth. 11 Hee hath stopped my wayes, and pulled mee in pieces: he hath made me de∣solate. 12 He hath bent his bowe, and made me a marke for the arrowe. 13 He caused the arrowes of his quiuer to enter into my reynes.He. 14 J was a derision with my people, and their song all the day. 15 He hath filled me with bitternesse, and made me dronken with wormewoode. 16 He hath also broken my teeth with stones, and couered me with ashes.Vau. 17 Thus my soule was farre off from peace, I forgate prosperitie. 18 And J sayde, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lorde. 19 Remembring mine affliction and my mourning, the wormewoode and the gall. 20 My soule hath them in remēbrance, and is humbled in me.
THE OBSERVATIONS OR notes vpon the first part of the third Chapter. THE Subiect or Argu∣ment is this, That there can bee nothing more miserable, than such a people as God taketh in hande to punish in his wrath, lea∣uing them altogether comfortlesse. Such a miserable condition the Pro∣phet amplifieth and setteth downe, by the similitudes of the most sorrowfull and lamentable things that are in the whole world to be founde. And this is the vse and benefite of this part, That when wee consider of these things, we should make more ac∣count of the louing kindnes & fauour of God, then commonly we doe. For if we vnderstoode what a treasure and felicitie it were, to bee in the fauour and grace of the most mightie God, there should nothing touch our harts more, than to keepe our selues in his fauour and grace. But herein is all the mischiefe, that few men taste & sauour the goodnes of the most high, accor∣ding to the exhortatiō of the Prophet
Dauid in his thirtie & fourth Psalme, Taste ye and see,Verse. 8. (sayth he) how gratious the Lorde is: blessed is the man that tru∣steth in him. Surely, who soeuer he be that through¦ly tasteth of this gracious goodnesse, shall finde that there is nothing more good & gratious, and that that which was saide vnto the Apostle S. Paule in the 12. chapter of his 2. Epistle to the Corinthes, was not without cause spo∣ken, to wit: My grace is sufficient for thee. And contrariwise, there is nothing more fearefull then the fierce and ter∣rible wrath of God, and yet there are fewe men which vnderstande & looke into the force thereof: as in the 90. Psalme we may reade. Now, this first part of the Lamen∣tations rightly setteth foorth vnto vs, howe that this great GOD of∣tentimes leadeth his holy ones in to hell, and as it were into a bottomlesse depth of temptations and griefes: in∣somuch yt whosoeuer at the first sight, should heare thē speake after yt maner, would take them to be desperate men, and voide of all consolation and com∣fort. Such another combate sustained the Prophet Dauid, as in the 77. Psalm
verse, 3.7.8. we reade, when he sayth: J did thinke vpon God, and was troubled: I prayed, and my spirite was ful of anguish: will the Lorde absent himselfe for euer? Js his mercie cleane gone for euer? And after∣warde I saide, This is my death, &c. S. Au∣gustine also writing vpō the 91. Psalm, ver. 6. supposeth, that that which is there spoken of the plague, which de∣stroyeth at noone day, is vnderstoode, of such hoate and vehement tempta∣tions. J was a derision with my people) Thus the latter learned Interpretors doe read,Verse. 14. as Tremelius and Iun. whose in∣terpretation we haue followed. Some others there are that read thus: I was a derision vnto my people:Ierem. 20. which kinde of interpretation they fauour, who think that Ieremy wrote this Chapter when he was in prison, before the captiuitie of Babylon, at what time his owne countreymen persecuted him. How∣beit wee may very well see that hee handleth one and the verie selfe same argument, which he handleth in the Chapters going before, albeit he set∣teth it downe in another manner of sort, and in an other maner of person. And this is a thing which greatly stir∣reth
vp the readers, when as they heare a people sorrowing and lamen∣ting, one while in the person of a poore desolate widdow, and another while in the person of a man vnmea∣surably sorrowfull. This also serueth to humble vs, and to make vs more de∣sirous of the mercie of the Almightie, euen as was the preaching of the law, to the end to beate vs downe, and to prepare vs the more earnestlie to re∣ceiue the newnesse of grace. My soule is humbled.Verse 20.) Some learned Interpretors reade: My soule medita∣teth: Howbeit, I haue followed the common translation, because it best agreeth with the saying of the Pro∣phet, to wit, that the people remem∣bred their miserie, and that they had so considered of it, as that it went to their verie hearts: and therefore, that through the remembrance and consi∣deration thereof,The often remem∣bring of our mise∣ries, is the next way to humble vs. they were in deede humbled. For when as we stand vpon our pantoffles to shew our selues gal∣lant, not looking into our miseries, but lie sleeping in a certaine kinde of shew of prosperitie, it is the verie right waie to humble vs, if so be we play the prowde Peacocks, and looke vpon our
feete, filthinesse and miseries. And then will we say as Dauid sayd in the 39. Psalme, Man that liueth, is nothing but vanitie: Surely, man walketh like a shade. And in the 144. Psalme, verse 3, 4. What is man that thou so thinkest on him, or the sonne of man that thou so much esteemest. Man is like vnto vanitie: his dayes are like a shadowe that vani∣sheth. THE SECOND PART OF the third Chapter. Cheth.21 I Consider this in mine heart, there∣fore haue I hope: to wit. 22 It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions faile not. 23 They are renued euerie morning: great is thy faithfulnesse. 24 The Lord is my portion, saith my soule: therefore will J hope in him. Teth.25 The Lord is good vnto them that trust in him: and vnto the soule that see∣keth him. 26 It is good both to trust, and to waite for the saluation of the Lord. 27 It is good for a man to beare the yoke in his youth.
28 He sitteth alone,Iod. and keepeth si∣lence, because he hath borne it vppon him. 29 He putteth his mouth in the dust, if there may be hope. 30 He geueth his cheeke to him that smiteth him: hee is filled full with re∣proches. 31 For the Lord will not forsake for euer.Caph. 32 But though he send affliction, yet will he haue compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. 33 For, he doth not punish willinglie, nor afflict the children of men. 34 Jn stamping vnder his feete all the prisoners of the earth.Lamed. 35 Jn ouerthrowing the right of a man, before the face of the most high. 36 Jn subuerting a man in his cause:So is the word, to see, taken in the 12. of Deuter. verse 13. the Lord seeth it not. 37 Who is he then that will say, that a thing commeth to passe, if the Lord com∣maundeth it not? 38 Proceede not both euil and good from the mouth of the most high? 39 Wherefore then is the liuing man sorrowfull, for suffering for his sinnes?
THE OBSERVATIONS or Notes vpon the second part of the third Chapter. WE haue heard in the first part, of verie boyste∣rous temptations and assaults, but we shall by and by heare of farre more mightie and strange consolati∣ons and comforts: for, he which dwel∣leth within vs, and standeth for vs, is much stronger then he that is against vs, now, we were soone ouergone in these fightes, if we trusted to nothing else but vnto the world, seeing that the hope and trust of all worldlings (as Iob in the eight Chapter of his booke saith) is like vnto the spiders web. But we must in such assaults put vpon vs all the whole armour of God, to the end that we, who haue not to do with Ba∣bylonians, and outward enemies only, being fenced with his power, might be able stoutly to stand and fight against our owne selues, against flesh and bloud, and spirituall wickednesses. We are therefore to note, that the second part of this Chapter leadeth
vs vnto the verie storehouse of muni∣tion and defence of the faithfull,The store∣house of munition, and de∣fence of the faith∣full. and teacheth vs with what armour and weapon we should fight against such enemies, and how sure and resolute we should be of our God, and of his iudgements. To be short, heerein is shewed vnto vs, that the faithfull must alwaies with the one eye looke vpon their owne miseries, and with the o∣ther, vpon the mercies of the Lord, and vnto the right hand of the most high, who turneth all the euents vnto a good end, according to the saying of the Prophet Dauid in his 77. Psalme and 11. verse, for if we should behold and consider nothing else but our owne miserie, it were such a gulfe as would swallow vs cleane vp. The first thing then that the Pro∣phet Ieremy setteth downe for the ap∣paysing of the peoples griefe, is the comparing of the punishments with the sinnes. And forthwith he findeth no equall proportion, for that our sinnes haue without all comparison, deserued greater miseries and tor∣ments, then is possible for vs to en∣dure in this life. For, we hauing infi∣nitely offended his diuine and infinite
maiestie, haue all deserued as much as is possible, infinite punishments, yea, euen to be vtterlie destroied: so that it was the wonderfull great grace of God, to leaue in the fiercenesse of his wrath such a number of Israelites as he did, placing them heere and there in passable places, & assuring them by his promise, that he would in the end of seuenty yeeres visit their captiuitie. Jt is the Lords goodnesse that we are not consumed.) Some others, as Vatable for one, reade: The mercies of the Lord are not consumed, which inter∣pretation, some verie notable men do follow, and seemeth to haue reference to that which followeth, to wit, they are renewed daily. But for mine owne part, I had rather in this place follow the translation of Santes and Treme∣lius, because it agreeth better with the text, and with the literall meaning of the toong. The word to consume, in the Hebrew toong signifyeth sometime perfection, and is taken in the good part: but heere it is taken in the worse part, and signifieth, to destroy, as in the fourteenth Chapter of the first booke of the Kings, verse 10. we reade, where it is said, J will rase the
house of Ieroboam, and sweepe it away, as a man sweepeth away doong, till it be all gone and consumed. Let vs then take the say∣ing of Ieremy heere, as it is taken in the first Chapter of Isaiah, ver. 9. where it is said, Except the Lord of hoastes had reserued vnto vs euen a small remnant, we should haue beene as Sodome. Now, the cause that Ieremy alleageth, why the people were not consumed, was, by reason that his compassions failed not. For, although he stay his bene∣fites heere for a season, yet do his compassions neuer faile, neither doth the fatherly affectiō which he beareth to his, which as a father, he assureth them of, faile, although for a while he chastise thē. Wherevpon, the Prophet Habacuck calling the same to mind in his 3. Chap. saith, O Lord in thy furie, re∣member yet thy mercy. The Prophet spea∣keth not this as though the Lord were forgetful, but thereby to comfort him∣selfe, as after in the 23. verse we shall see, how Ieremy more at large, and in better tearmes setteth it downe, say∣ing: that the mercies of the Lord are renued euery morning, to wit, daily, & so long, as the day dawneth, & not on∣ly euery moneth, as the moone doth,
which the Hebrews tearme by a word that signifieth renewing, bicause she reneweth the moneths by her perio∣dicall course, as by her farre departing from the sunne, and her neere dra∣wing vnto the same. But Ieremy spea∣king of the mercies of the Lord, goeth on further, and saith, to wit, that there is not one day that passeth ouer our heads, wherein we do not see new tokens of Gods mercies and fauour, according to that saying of the kinglie Prophet Dauid in his 30. Psalm. ver 5. Although (sayth he) that weeping com∣meth in the euening, yet ioy commeth in the morning. For this end and purpose, is greatly to be noted the saying of S. Cyprian in the fourth Epistle of his fourth booke of his Epistles, where he making mention of the afflictions that at those daies fell vppon the Church, saith: The Lord God (saith he) sheweth in the person of his ser∣uants which he afflicteth, and whome he oftentimes taketh out of this world, a wonderfull renewing of his Church, as when after raine, he sen∣deth faire weather, after darkenesse light, and after tempests, calmenesse. Great is thy faithfulnesse,) or as some
reade, Thy truth. Some heere in this place take faithfulnesse for our faith or beleefe, and it is no small matter to beleeue in God: but yet heere, it soun∣deth rather to be referred vnto the faithfulnesse of God, and the assu∣rance of his promises. For, the verie efficient cause of the renewing of the Church, and of the graces of the Lord, is his assured faithfulnesse, and constant veritie. For, God being alto∣gether true, and such a one as hose goodnesse is not grounded vpon our deserts, it can not be, but that he must establish his Church, according to the free goodnesse, and the eternall and infallible truth of his promises, re∣newing in vs a taste of his graces, which we find to be most pleasant vn∣to vs, after we haue for a time beene afflicted and beene depriued of his lo∣uing kindnesse. And therefore it was to great purpose, that the Prophet Ie∣remy speaking of this faithfulnesse of the Lord, cried out and said, Great is thy faithfulnesse, putting vs in a mar∣uellous admiration of the fidelitie of this mightie God, who as S. Paule in the third Chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians, verse 20. saith, is able to do
exceeding abundantlie, aboue all that we aske or thinke. And so also writeth Da∣uid in his 36. Psalme, verse 7. saying: How excellent is thy mercie O God, there∣fore the children of men trust vnder the shadow of thy wings. The Lord is good,) not onely good, but also louing, and liberall. But heere is to be noted, how Ieremy restraineth these promises which he sheweth vnto vs, when as he saith, That God is good vnto them that trust in him. For al∣though the louing kindnes of God be great, and his fidelity most sure, yet so long as the wicked and faithlesse re∣maine stil in their wickednes & incre∣dulitie, they shut vp the gate against the fauour of God, and neuer enioy this faithfulnesse, because God neuer promiseth in his word any such thing to such kind of people, but rather de∣nounceth his wrath & mighty threats against thē, because, as in the 1. Tim. 2. Chap. it is written, his will is, that they which should be saued, should come to the knowledge of his truth, for all the elect of God are brought therevnto, in whom he worketh that which he commaun∣deth, and giueth them new hearts to feare & reuerence him. And aboue all
the rest, he would haue vs still trust in him, and neuer be weery in trusting to his goodnes, according to the exhor∣tatiō of the Prophet Abacuck in his 2. Chap. And therfore in the 78. Psal. the Iewes are sharply reproued for their impatiency, bicause they would limit the holy one of Israell, & enforce him to do as pleased thē, & help thē at such time & in such sort as liked their fan∣tasies, as in the history of Iudith we reade the inhabitants of Bethulia did. The Lord is my portion.) This is ano∣ther  argument of comfort, taken from the aboundance of Gods benefites, and from the contentation which e∣uerie faithfull man hath in him: and this is the right propertie of faith, to applie and appropriate such treasure vnto a mans selfe, and constantly be∣leeue that the Lord is our rich reward, portion, and enheritance: wherof Da∣uid in his 16. Psalme, ver. 3.6. assureth himselfe, boasting himselfe to haue a farre better portion, and a more excellent lot, then all the children of this world. Wee commonly knowe, that there is a distinction and difference be∣tweene moueable, and immoueable goodes, whiche are not so easilie
to be carried away as mouable. Now, the Prophets call the Eternall, our right inheritance, firme, certaine, and immoueable prosperitie and welfare. For, when we haue said all we can, all the rest that we possesse are but wan∣dring and fleeting possessions, euen vanitie it selfe, as by many examples we haue set downe, of whatsoeuer is vnder the sunne in the booke of Ec∣clesiastes, where in the twelfth Chap∣ter is concluded, That to feare God, and keepe his commaundements, is the totall and whole summe that is required in man. And therfore, when we reade in this place, or else-where, that God is called our portion and enheritance, we must re∣member that it is to this end, that we should contemne, and make no reck∣ning of the fraile & transitorie things of this world,How gret∣ly the mightie and rich men of the world are deceiued in theyr false opi∣nion of the faithfull seruants of God. nor yet of these great mightie earthlie ones, who take all the faithfull that feare and obey God, to be but miserable wretched caitiffes, who for the more part haue scarsely one inch of ground, and yet for all that, they are richer then all the Em∣perours in the world, who in the end are enforced to leaue all their arrayes, kingdomes, and whatsoeuer else, and
be contented with three or four feete of earth, or as much as may burie a dead corps. Away therefore with all such vaine confidence, fye of all such enheritances, which so soone depart from vs, yea euen vnto those whome we neuer knew, nor yet will euer once thanke vs for them. Such I say, is the state and condition of all those, whose portion is heere in this world, and who feede themselues, as Dauid in his 17. Psalme, verse 14. saith, with these earthly delightes. But let vs hold this principle and ground which is written in the 73. Psalme, verse 1. That surely God is good vnto Israel, and to all those that reuerence him with pure hearts, so the same proceede from faith, al∣though they be for a time but poore with the goodes of this world: and that there is no such thing, as con∣stantlie to trust in God, who will let it be well knowne, as in the third Chapter of Malachy is sayde, That a man shall not lose his payne in seruing of him: and that although to the outward iudgement of man, there is great difference betweene the chil∣dren of God, and the children of this world, yet let them knowe, that
death and afflictions are common to them both. Silence, the verie power and force of the chil∣dren of God.We are also to note this notable manner of speaking which is vsed in the scripture, that we must be quiet and still before God, and that our strength and power standeth and re∣steth in silence and in hope. Now, this silence cōsisteth not only in not mur∣muring nor replying against God, but we must also take heed, that we in no case stubbornely and rashly depart frō our vocation, and quietly & patiently walke in such sort as God hath called vs. For, Aristotle himselfe writeth, that it is the property of a wicked man to be always boiling, storming, and neuer resting and abiding all in one mind: so that a certain miserable and wretched man said once in Virgill, that if he could obtaine nothing at the hands of the Gods, that he would go down into hell, and see if he could obtaine any grace there. Who shall beare his yoke in his youth,) or from his youth: for no doubt of it, it is a maruellous matter for any man to accustome himself so frō his youth, & frame himself vnto obedience. S. Hi∣lary writing vpon the 119. Psal. and in∣terpreting
these words, Wherewith shal a young man redresse his way? sayth thus, the prophet Ieremy (saith he) in the 3. Chapter of his Lamentations, right well declareth, that it is the most bles∣sed and most requisit thing for a yong man in his youth, to beare the yoke: for in very deede, custome doth and can do maruelous much. The Prophet therefore hath reason not to haue vs tarry vntill such time as we be either hardned, or waxe old and obstinate in our sinnes, against all discipline. True it is, that youth is verie impatient to beare the yoke, but after it hath once taken it, and accustomed it selfe there∣vnto, it will then be quiet, and reioyce in the Lord: these men afterward be∣come such valiant champions, and such notable practised souldiers a∣gainst sinne and iniquitie, as God re∣quireth in this spirituall battell. The scripture commonly calleth wicked & dissolute men, the children of Beliall,VVhat the chil∣dren of Belial are. that is to say, disordered mē, reiecting all rule & gouernmēt. Now, there is no such way to bring thē to obedience, as to bow thē in time: neither is ther any age fitter, or soner framed to subiectiō, then youth, specially christian youth:
and when we are once accustomed to abide sorrow and paine, we are after∣ward a great deale the pacienter in all kindes of aduersities whatsoeuer, yea and we ioyfully receiue them: for, when we consider of that which is written in the 12. to the Hebrewes, That when God chastizeth vs, he offereth himselfe vnto vs as a father, chastizing vs for our good, that we might be par∣takers of his holinesse. To be short, Salomon in the 12. of his Prouerbes, verse 1. sayeth, He that loueth correction, loueth wisedome, but he that hateth disci∣pline, is a beast. He is quiet or contented with that which is laid vpon him.) Some learned men reade, he will be silent, bicause he hath taken vpon him the yoke of the Lord, that is to say, bicause he is determined to beare the yoke of the Lord patient∣ly, or else, bicause that the Lord hath laide it vpon him, as in the 39. Psalme, verse 99. we reade, how Dauid there sayeth, J was doombe and held my peace, bicause thou diddest it. Some others reade, that he would be patient when any thing hapned him: but we haue followed the translation which best agreeth with the Hebrew text, and
meaning of the Prophet. To put the mouth in the dust,) Is a  phrase of speech which the Hebrewes vse, and is as much to say, as patiently to hang downe the head, and to be humbled in silence without reply. The like phrase of speech we shall reade in the 14. of the first to the Co∣rinthes, verse 25. where it is saide, He will fall downe on his face and worship God, and say playnely, that God is in you in deede. If haply there be hope.) This manner of speech is to be wel weighed, bicause it shal not be thought to confirme the error and opinion of the Papists, who faine and forge an obscure and doubt∣full faith: for the scripture borroweth many speeches from vs, in our ordi∣narie talke, as for example, we com∣monly say: Let vs see whether this thing will be brought to passe, or ob∣tained, yea or no. And yet this phrase and manner of speech proceedeth not of mistrust, but of a christian modestie, not prescribing vnto the Lord either the time, or yet the meane of our de∣liuerance, and in acknowledging our vnworthines of his fauour, is alwayes spoken by way of submission, as in the
second of Ioel, vers. 14. is said, Who kno∣weth whether he will returne and repent, &c. And likewise in the 8. of the Actes, verse 22. it is said vnto Symon the ma∣gicien, Pray vnto God, that if it be pos∣sible, the wicked thought of thine hart may be forgiuen thee. S. Peter heere speaking of the mercy of God, was not in doubt thereof, but he said thus much to Sy∣mon, to the end to humble him the more, and because he doubted of the soundnesse of his heart. For, as there is nothing more certaine and sure then the grace of God, euen so it is not for vs to define and determine when, and to whome he will communicate and bestowe his graces, seeing we are not sure of the faith of men. Moreo∣uer, when as the promises of God are receiued by faith, they are certaine & infallible: and this is most sure, that the Lord thrusteth not them backe frō him which come vnto him: and to be short,Iohn 6. ther are none which beleue, shal perish, but shall haue euerlasting life. He turneth his cheeke to him that stri∣keth  him.) This also is a figuratiue kind of speech, named by the schoolemen Metonomia, when as the signe is taken for the thing signified. And so in this
place, to turne the cheeke, is taken to haue patience, and is asmuch as if Ie∣remy should haue said, he is so patient and curteous, as that, as a man would say, he turneth his cheeke to them that smite him. And therefore the Anabap∣tists, because they knowe not, nor vn∣derstand this manner of speaking, do conclude according to the bare let∣ter of our Sauiour Iesus Christ in the 5. of S. Mathew, That if we be striken vpon the one cheeke, we should turne the other. That he would make vs very idiots, to giue the wicked occasion to buffet vs on both cheekes, which were to vp∣hold and maintaine euill, and mens outrageous liberty, and that were to tempt God, whose meaning is that we should auoide and withstand iniury & wrong,Iohn 18. verse 22. euen as Christ Iesus himselfe did, who is the most perfect paterne, & example of patience. For, whē one of the high Priests men stroke him on the cheeke, he turned not the other to him, but auoided the mischiefe, & said, he was iniuriously dealt withal. We are therefore to obserue & hold this rule, that when such commandements and aduertisements as these are, to wit, to turne our cheek to those that strike vs,
we must not thinke them to be spoken of our outward behauiour and ge∣stures: but we must vnderstand, that by these signes christian patience is greatly commended vnto vs,VVhat the tur∣ning of our cheek to our enemy meaneth. which ought alwaies be ready to beare new violēces, if it so please God, whē as we cannot otherwise by honest & lawfull meanes auoid thē. Now, it is one thing patiētly to beare an iniury, & another thing to oppose our selues vnto the iniuries & violences of men, & to giue thē occasion to no purpose, and with∣out reason, despitefully to entreate vs. He forsaketh not for euer.) This is the third argument of comfort, which is drawne from the vse and end of our afflictions. Now, the miseries and ca∣lamities of this life which we can so hardly suffer and beare, commeth frō this, that we most oftentimes thinke that they will oppresse and cleerely o∣uerthrow vs, and that God hath vtter∣ly forsaken vs: howbeit, it neuer fal∣leth out so, neither is it yet his mea∣ning, and therefore there is no reason why we should be so impatient. The Prophet heere prooueth his saying by two reasons, the one, taken from the euent, and common experience, the
other, from the nature of God, and from his counsels. We are then heere in the first place to note, that the Lord neuer vseth to forsake those that are his, but rather vpholdeth them in the middest of their temptations, and with the temptation giueth a blessed and happie issue, as witnesseth vnto vs the holie Apostle Sainct Paule in the 10. of the 1. to the Corinths: where∣of, besides our common experience, we haue the examples of Abraham,God ta∣keth no delight in the afflic∣ting of any. Ioseph, Dauid, Iob, and many others. Moreouer, this is most sure, that the nature of God is such, as that he de∣lighteth not in our afflictions, being himselfe naturally good, gentle, slowe to anger, and of great compassion. Thus we see how God is described vn∣to vs throughout the whole volume of the scripture, namely, in the 34. Chap∣ter of Exodus, insomuch that when as Isaiah in his 28. Chapter, saith, He pu∣nisheth and afflicteth vs, it seemeth ra∣ther that he dealeth like a stranger, and not like himselfe. And namely, in the middest of all our afflictions, he maketh his singular goodnes alwayes appeere in the moderating of our pu∣nishments, turning them all to our
benefite and welfare.It is as ne∣cessary, and many times bet∣ter for the children of God, sometimes to suffer affliction, then con∣tinually to be in pro∣speritie. And according heereunto, most notably wrote Sainct Augustine in his Epistles to Felix and Rusticus, saying, what is it that our good God will not mercifully do vnto man? And how can it be, but that he will shew him all the fauour he can, considering that all the tribulations which he sendeth, are more bene∣fites. For, as prosperitie is a benefyte, and an effect of his comforts, euen so is aduersitie also a gift of God, to ad∣monish vs, that we haue as great need of good admonitions, as we haue of consolations. And although God cau∣seth Tyrants and wicked men to serue his turne for the punishing of vs, yet doth hee in no wise allow of theyr wickednesse, as Ieremy in the 34. 35. and 36. verses of this third Chapter most especially declareth. To subuert the right,) To do iniurie to prisoners. Such things, saith he, the Eternall seeth not, neither doth he allow of them, but rather dete∣steth them. Some Interpretors haue read this a little otherwise, as Ieremy in the verses aboue mentioned, coun∣terfetteth the sayings of the wicked, who make themselues beleeue, that
the Lord seeth them not, when as they peruert iustice, and do wrong. According to which also, Dauid in the 94. Psalme speaketh of the wic∣ked: and such a one was that Tyrant of Sicile, who after he had sackt the Temples,The wic∣ked when they scape punishmēt for doing of some notorious wicked deede, think that God likes of their villanous dealing, which is most blas∣phemous. and was at Sea with a pro∣sperous winde, bragged, and swore most blasphemouslie, that the Gods fauoured and liked of Pyrates and Church-robbers: howbeit, it seemeth that the Interpretation which wee haue followed, stretcheth it selfe fur∣ther, and agreeth better with the meaning of Ieremy, to witte, that God taketh no pleasure in seeing of iniuries and extortions committed, neyther is he the author of them. And besides, he putteth not euill nor wicked thoughts into mens harts, al∣beit, he ordeineth and guideth them to such ends as pleaseth him, repres∣sing theyr boldnesse and malice when he himselfe thinketh it best. And although in man his iudge∣ment there seemeth to bee great contrarietie in these sayings, that God alloweth not of wicked mens sinnes, and yet, that nothing is done without his commaundement
and ordinance: yet shall we see a no∣table concordance and agreement betweene them, if so be we first of all looke into the great difference that is betwixt that which God created in man, and his naturall actions, and be∣tweene his sinne, which is a blot and a leprosie in his nature.God is not the author of sinne. For, first, as concerning sinne, God neither allo∣weth of it, nor yet commaundeth it: but, as appeereth by his commaun∣dementes, both forbiddeth and ab∣horreth it: and yet notwithstanding, he gouerneth his creature, and in him, and by him, all men mooue and liue. He limitteth also, and proportio∣nally frameth and ordereth mens actions to such an end as best liketh him, whether it be for the chastising of those that are his, or for the puni∣shing of the world, which he by his woonderfull power and wisedome doth. Moreouer, it is verie needefull that we knowe after what sort God ordeineth and commaundeth a thing.God com∣maundeth two man∣ner of wayes. For, one while he commaundeth, when he teacheth vs in his word, from whence he would haue vs learne his will, and what it is that we must do, or what it is that we must leaue
vndone, and therefore in the eigth of Esay, wee are sent vnto the lawe, and testimonie. Another while hee commaundeth that which hee gouerneth, determi∣neth, and guideth to such an ende as he himselfe lusteth: for in the 34. of Ieremie, it is there saide, that He com∣maunded famine, the sworde, the pestilence, and the Chaldeans to sacke Ierusalem: and yet the wicked knowe not, nor thinke any thing lesse then to obey him: and therefore are they punished and con∣demned. From the mouth of the most high, pro∣ceede  both euill and good) here we haue great neede to beware, how we vnder∣stande this manner of saying, to the ende wee may keepe vs from such as haue made God the Author of sinne, as did the Valentinians, the Mani∣chees, & other Heretikes, who taught, that God created both sinne and euil, which is a most blasphemous, perniti∣ous, and insupportable doctrine, which thinge, Plato himselfe, in his bookes which he wrote of the lawes testifieth, And Homere likewise, who in the first booke of his Odes, bringeth in his Iu∣piter speaking, sayth thus, That it is a
straunge and foolish custome in men, to attribute vnto God the euill which they thēselues do and procure. Howe much more should Christians then be far off frō any such thoughts, & detest and abhorre such as sclaunder the Al∣mighty, in casting and laying vpō him all the sinne & iniquitie that is in thē∣selues? Nowe, when wee heare the mouth of the Lorde spoken of, in such places, we must take it for his decree and ordinaunce, and so is it taken in the 8. Chapter of Deutro. and allea∣ged also in the fourth of S. Matthewe. That man liueth not onely by breade: but by euerie worde which proceedeth from the mouth of the Lorde: That is to saye, by his commaundement, ordinaunce, grace, and power: So also is it saide in the 25. chapter of Ieremie, That he cal∣leth the sworde vppon all the inhabitantes of the lande, in which place, his mea∣ning is, that he is determined to pu∣nish the iniquitie of men, and that swords, and all other things else serue him, when as hee will execute his iust iudgementes. Nowe, we haue shew∣ed that what soeuer God ordeyneth, is iustly ordeyned: but yet it is in his onely woorde, that wee must learne
what to doe, or what to leaue vn∣done, and that hee commaundeth be∣sides, what so euer happeneth in the worlde, not by way of instructing or counselling the same, but by waye of ordeyning or determining it vnto a certaine and good ende, as well the malice, as the wicked counsell of men: and heere among other thinges wee must see howe these woordes, that are written in the 16. Chapter of the seconde of Samuell, are to be vnderstoode, where GOD com∣maundeth Semei to curse Dauid, not that the Lord gaue him commaunde∣ment to doe it: But insomuch as the Almightie by his sure & certaine pro∣uidence, directed & addressed Semei his curses to another end then Semei his meaning was: to witte, to humble Dauid. Now this doctrin stayneth not God with any blot: but rather giueth him the commendation of the most highe, in that, as Dauid in his 115. Psalme. ver. 3. sayth, He doth whatsoeuer he will both in heauen and in earth. This doctrine also maketh vs patient in all our aduersities, and causeth vs submit our selues vnto his wil and ordinance: it stirreth vs vp also to call vpon him,
and to hange wholely vpon his proui∣dence,God, ne∣uer created sinne in man, but ordereth and dispo∣seth the same which came of him selfe, through his fall, to such righ∣teous ends as he him∣selfe in his holy and eternall counsell hath ordei∣ned. as vpon him who by an incre∣dible, power, wisedome, and goodnes, guideth all euentes and all things else whatsoeuer. And as for the euill of the fault, to wit, of sinne, It is not GOD that maketh it, but ordereth and disposeth the same to such righte∣ous endes, as he himselfe in his sacred and eternall counsell hath ordeyned. And for the euill of the punishment, to wit, of the aduersities, it is he that sendeth, willeth, and alloweth them, not so much by reason they are ex∣treame, and did exceede, or that the wicked so gently greeue and harme vs (for this our good God, hath no pleasure in our miseries) but because it is the execution of his iustice, and by reason also that they are whole∣some remedies, although bitter and sharpe ones, to awake our slouthful∣nesse, and to whette our fayth and pa∣tience. That place of the third of the Prophet Amos, where it is sayde, Js there any euill in the Citie which the Lorde hath not done? Must altogether be vn∣derstoode of the euill of the punish∣ment, or of the calamities, according as the circumstaunce of the mattet,
which the Prophet heere handleth, doth permitte: So that this Hebrewe worde Raah, is not alwayes taken in the scripture, for the euill of sinne: but also for the euill of affliction, as in the 15. of the Prouerbes, ver. 15. it is ta∣ken, where it is sayde: All the dayes of the afflicted are euill. And in the 45. of Isaiah, it is saide: Jt is the Lord that ma∣keth peace, and createth euill: where, is well to be seene, That the worde euill, is taken for that that is contrarie to peace and prosperitie. And therefore seeing that all things are doone and gouerned by God his prouidence and appointment: It were an vnneedefull thinge to bring into the Church the doctrine of fortune or chaunce, which for the more part is borrowed of Aristotle and Tully, and grounded vpon an euil and false prin∣ciple, as though free will were such a thing, as that something might fall out or come to passe against the will of the Lord, if we should not restraine the same vnto our selues, that in re∣garde of vs, certaine vnlooked for thinges and euentes, which we see not the causes of, might come vnto vs by fortune or chaunce. Notwithstanding
this is certain, that although the cau∣ses which goe before, seeme to vs to come by fortune or chaunce, yet the eternall gouerneth them not by a chaungeable will (for there is no chaunge or ranging will in God) but by an immutable & an eternall coun∣sell, which ruleth aboue nature, and although nature fayle in her actions, yet he neuer fayleth in his determina∣tion. As for example, by nature the re∣surrection of the dead, is not necessa∣rie, but it is because God hath so de∣creed, which cannot be stopped. Now then, although nothing be done with∣out Gods prouidence: yet can not man excuse himselfe when he sinneth, because he looketh not vnto God whē he sinneth, but sinneth without con∣straynt, freely, and of his owne accord. Secondly, because he hath the will of the Lorde declared vnto him in his woorde, according to which his life must be squared and ruled, and seeth as much in the worde, as he seeth in the punishing of the wicked, howe greatly sinne displeaseth the Lord. Wherefore is man sorrowefull for suf∣fering for his sinnes) This worde sinne is not taken here onely, for the pu∣nishment
of sinne: but in many o∣ther places of the holy scripture also, as in the fourth of Genesis, where Caine sayth: My sinne is greater than J am able to abide. Hee meaneth the pu∣nishment for his sinne. Some reade. The man against or vp∣pon his sinne) As if Ieremie woulde haue sayde: why should man striue and be angry with God: seeing hee continueth wallowing in or vppon his sinne: why returneth hee not ra∣ther (O Lorde) vnto thee? To what purpose is sorrowing and lamenting without repentaunce? Howbeit the interpretation which wee haue fol∣lowed is lesse strayned, and better a∣greeth with that that went before, and with the doctrine of Gods proui∣dence: For, syth it is God that cha∣stiseth vs, and he who neuer forget∣teth his mercie: why behaue we our selues so naughtily: why weepe wee and frette we against the most high? Haue not we to doe with the Almigh∣tie, who knoweth better what is meete for vs, then we our selues can tell?
THE DOCTRINES THAT are gathered from these verses. THere are almost as manie notable doctrines in this part, as there are verses: but the principall doctrine concerneth the prouidence of God: the remembraunce whereof comforteth the Prophet Ieremie and the people in their greatest distresses. Nowe the Prouidence of God, as appeareth in the 37.VVhat the prouidence of God is. and 38. verses, is no naked and bare foreknowledge: or permission, or contemplation: but a continuall dispo∣sing and administration of all thinges, addressed to a certaine good end, which our God, by a sure, eternall, and holy counsell doth, in working all thinges by his firme and stayed will: and by him, all thinges consist and worke con∣tinually: and as Ieremie here in our text sayth:Ephes. 1. Colloss. 1. Iohn. 5. All thinges proceede from his mouth, That is to say, come from his ordinance, as heretofore hath been saide. They then are deceiued, who ei∣ther wil not acknowledg a prouidence in God: as all Epicures: or else faine vnto them selues an vniuersall and
confused prouidence only: For the ho∣ly scripture sufficiently telleth vs, that there is not so small and vile a thing, which the prouidence of God gouer∣neth not, and turneth to such an ende, as pleaseth himselfe, and therefore hee alone is commended to be Almightie: doing whatsoeuer he will, both in hea∣uen and in earth: and who gouerneth not onely the whole generall thing: but also all the meanes and instrumentes: which cannot doe, or execute any thing without his leaue, and ordinance. As for example, when as God had deter∣mined that the seede of Abrahā should serue in Epygt, and that such a bon∣dage was pursued with a memorable deliueraunce. I beseech you tell mee, after what sort brought this great god this matter to passe: and how followed and performed he this worke? He sent dreames to Ioseph. He is solde to the Ismaelites: cast into prison: and from thence exalted to verie great honours: Long after that, was Moses borne: hee was miraculously preserued, and brought vp in king Pharao his house: and a great many of other wonderfull thinges came to passe, before such time as the people came out of Egypt, and
so might we also bring foorth many o∣ther mo like examples. But to conclude, let vs keepe in minde,The vse of the doctrin of God his prouidence that the vse of the doctrine of Gods prouidence is this: First of all it maketh vs a great deale the better vnderstande the excellent power of the eternall: who hath not onely cre∣ated the worlde, but also ruleth and gouerneth it: shewing and declaring no lesse his power in the gouernment, than in the creation of the whole. Se∣condly, this doctrine stirreth vs vppe, to pray earnestly vnto God, and inces∣sauntly to recommend our selues vnto him, who hath all in his hande and conduct. Thirdly, it driueth vs vnto patience, and to abide and take all in good worth, whatsoeuer that this al∣together good and mightie God sen∣deth: as wee are taught to pray. Thy will be done. Last of all, it induceth vs, most reuerently to vse the seconde causes and meanes which God offreth vnto vs, when as we beleeue, that we haue them from the hande of the Lord: but yet so, as that wee, notwithstan∣ding, trust not, nor rest not to and vp∣pon those meanes: considering, that we are alwaies to haue a regarde vnto the
first cause, to wit, vnto that great and Almightie Creator, and Gouernour of the whole worlde. Neither is this doctrine common, with that foolishe destinie of the senselesse Stoikes, cal∣led by them, FATVM. For, the power and wisedome of God, in go∣uerning the world, is another manner of thing, ouer and besides that coniun∣ction of causes necessarily twixt ensu∣ing, whereof the Stoikes forge their destinie, neuer looking vnto God. THE THIRD AND LAST parte of the thirde Chapter. 40 LEt vs search and trie our wayes,Nun. and turne againe vnto the Lorde. 41 Let vs lyft vp our heartes with our handes vnto God in the heauens. 42 We haue sinned, and haue rebelled, and therefore hast thou not spared vs. 43 Thou hast couered vs with wrath, and persecuted vs, thou hast slaine,Samech. and not spared. 44 Thou hast couered thy selfe with a cloude, that our prayer shoulde not passe through. 45 Thou hast made vs as the ofscouring
and refuse, in the middest of the people. 46 All our enemies haue opened their mouth against vs. 47 Feare and a snare is come vpon vs, with desolation and destruction. Ain.48 Mine eyes cast out riuers of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people. 49 Mine eye droppeth without staye, and ceaseth not. 50 Till the Lorde looke downe and be∣holde from heauen. 51 Mine eye breaketh mine heart, be∣cause of al the daughters of my Citie. 52 Mine enemies chased me sore like a byrde,Zade. without cause. 53 They haue shutte vp my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone vpon me. 54 Waters flowed ouer my head, then thought J, J am destroyed. 55 I called vpon thy name, O Lorde, out of the lowe dungeon. 56 Thou hast heard my voyce: stoppe not thine eare from my sighe and from my crie. 57 Thou drewest neare in the day that J called vpon thee: thou saiedst, feare not. 58 O Lorde thou hast mayntained the cause of my soule, and hast redeemed my life.
59 O Lorde thou hast seene my wrong, iudge thou my cause. 60 Thou hast seene all their vengeance and all their deuises against me. 61 Thou hast hearde their reproch, O Lorde, and all their imaginations against me. 62 The lippes also of those that rose a∣gainst mee, and their whispering against me continually. 63 Beholde their sitting downe, and ri∣sing vp, how J am their songe. 64 Giue them a recompence, O Lorde, according to the worke of their handes. 65 Giue them sorrowe of heart, euen thy curse vnto them. 66 Persecute with wrath, and destroye them from vnder the heauen, O Lord. CERTAINE NOTES VPON the thirde and last part of the thirde Chapter. LEt vs search and trie our  wayes) These words, are as it were a preparatiue to prayer: which is al∣wayes necessarie, name∣ly euen when wee are in the middest of our greatest temptations: according
to that of S. Iames, saying: Jf any man among you be afflicted, let him pray. Now this is a verie good way to prepare vs to prayer, when as wee diligently trie and examine our selues: because God liketh of an humble and contrite heart. But it is a verie rare thinge to see anie of vs all take the paines to acknowledge our faultes: And S. Au∣gustine in the 11. Epistle of his thirde booke of his Epistles writeth thus: It is a rare thing (sayth hee) to see in vs, a true confession of our sinnes: for our nature will in no wise take know∣ledge thereof: and manie times a ve∣rie fonde kinde of shamefastnesse stay∣eth vs from the same. To be short, wee had a great deale rather flatter our selues in them. And therefore is Ieremie thus instaunt, to haue vs searche and trie our wayes. For, our wicked wayes, as Ieremie in his fourth Chapter writeth, are the cause of our miseries. Howebeit wee must on the other side, of necessitie, ioyne fayth with the tryall that wee make of our selues and of our wayes, where∣by wee may assure our selues to bee in Gods fauour: as Ieremie in ad∣ding these wordes afterwardes, teach∣eth
vs, saying: Let vs lift vp our handes with our heartes vnto God. The con∣uersion therefore or returning vnto the Lorde, is not in our power, ney∣ther yet commeth of our naturall strength, but is an effecte of fayth, whith enligtneth vs, and maketh vs certaine and sure of Goddes mercie: which is farre aboue our iniquities: according to that saying of Dauid in his 130. Psalme, ver. 3.4. Jf thou O Lord (sayth hee) shalt looke straitly vnto our sinnes, who is able to abide it? But with thee is mercie, that thou mightest be reuerenced and feared. As for the Prophets amplifying of Gods wrath, and the peoples calami∣ties, with newe parables and simili∣tudes, setting God before vs, as one that were couered with a cloude, and with anger, hee doth it to the ende to make vs more humble, and to cause vs feele, in verie good earnest, the greatnes of Gods wrath: and to make vs see what a fearefull thing it is to fall into the handes of the lyuing God.Hebr. 10. We are made as the ofscouring and re∣fuse)  This is spoken as it were accor∣ding vnto that of S. Paul in the fourth
of the first to the Corinthes, ver. 13. saying: That there is nothing so vile and abiect in the worde, as are the children of God, and yet that this is their comforte, that they are deare in the sight of the Lord, and as Isaiah in his 62. Chapiter wri∣teth, like an honorable Crowne, and kingly Dyademe in his hande. Thou drawedst neare, saying, feare not) The Prophet here, confirmeth both his owne, and the peoples fayth: part∣ly, through the experience of the time paste, and partly, by the nature of GOD: for hee, beeing alwayes like vnto himselfe, it can not bee but that he must alwaies help his Church, which hath recourse vnto him, euen as hee hath euer doone sythence the beginning of the worlde. The Pro∣phet Dauid in his Psalmes, manie times vsed such a kinde of argument, and such a like reason, and among the rest in his 85. Psalme, ver. 1.2.3. hee sayth thus. Thou hast brought Iacob out of captiuitie: Thou hast forgiuen thy peo∣ple all their sinnes: and now therefore also, let thine anger cease. Nowe, it is sayde in our text, That God draweth neare vnto vs, so as we may feele him: because it seemeth he
is neare vs, when as he putteth foorth his hande to helpe vs, and that hee is farre from vs, when as wee feele not his wonted fauours. Although in ve∣rie deede, he is then nearest vs, when as he seemeth to bee fardest off from vs: and is alwayes neare vnto them, who truely call vppon him: as in the 145. Psalme, ver. 18. it is sayde. More∣ouer, God biddeth vs not feare, not onely when wee shall see visions, as sometimes when the Angell, as it is written in the 27. of the Actes, ver. 24. appeared vnto Paule and sayde, feare not Paule: or as wee reade in the 25. chapter of the first booke of the Histo∣rie of Theodoret; howe that two men appeared in white vestmentes vnto the Emperor Theodosius in a dreame, when as hee was greatly tormented, who badde him bee of good cheare: but wee are to note, that the Lorde also assureth, and emboldeneth vs, in his word and sweete promisses: and likewise by his holy spirit: who ioyeth and delighteth our heartes, testifying vnto vs, that wee are the children of God. As in the 41. of Isaiah it is saide, J am the Lorde which tooke thee by the handt, saying, feare not, it is J that will
helpe thee. Recompence them the like) There are contayned in this prayer which Iere∣mie here maketh, two pointes: The one, that GOD deliuereth his Church: The other, that hee exerci∣seth his iudgementes against his ene¦mies, I meane not such iudgementes, as fleshe and bloud, or desire of re∣uenge, would pronounce and set forth vnto vnregenerate men: but suche iudgementes as God setteth downe in his worde: as in the 14. of Isaiah, we reade, howe the Babylonians were touched with reprochfull wordes: not after a fleshly brauerie: but to an∣nounce the iust iudgementes of the eternall, long before foretolde: For, it is written in the first of the 2. to the Thessalonians, ver. 6. Jt is a iust thing in God, to punish those that haue afflicted his Church. Giue them sorrowe of heart: or accor∣ding to the signification of the He∣brewe worde, A shielde or Target for the heart) our later Interpretors of the Bible, referre not this vnto the ene∣mies, but vnto the Church: as if Ie∣remie should haue prayed God to be her target and buckler, that is to say,
her protection: and contrariwise, that he would curse the enemies, But be∣cause all these verses, vnto the 60. verse, tende to the enemie, I purpose not to follow the opinion of those In∣terpretors, which take this couer or shielde of the heart, for an obstinate and hardened hart, bent against God; euen as harde as a flynt: which is a signe of a cursed and reprobate heart, as Ieremie also soone after maketh mention of cursing and malediction. It seemeth here then that the Prophet requireth that an heape of curses might be layde vppon the heartes of his enemies, so as they might bee co∣uered eyther with darkenesse, or with anguishes, or else with hardnesse of heart: as was Pharao, and all those whose hearts were fatted vp, as in the 6. of Isaiah we reade: so that that be∣ing brought so to passe, they might fall out of one mischiefe into an other. Contrariwise, when God sendeth de∣liueraunce to his, and causeth them feele his fauour and grace: Their harts are molified and enlarged to reioyce in God their Sauiour, as in the 60. of Isaiah, is sayde.
A PARAPHRASE VPON the thirde Chapter. WHosoeuer hee bee that entendeth to see a most miserable & wretched person, most feareful∣ly afflicted on euerye side, proceeding frō the heauie wrath of the eternall, let him looke vppon mee. He hath, alas, cast me downe head∣long into all kindes of darkenesse, and hath turned away from mee the plea∣saunt brightnesse of his face. It is I my selfe, I say, whom he mea∣neth thus to deale withall, houlding alwayes his heauie and harde hand o∣uer me. Insomuch that my miserable fleshe, and skinne is altogether wonted ther∣unto, and my very boanes likewise are all to broosed. For, he hath besieged mee on eue∣rie side, and enuironed mee with sor∣rowes bitterrer than any gall. He hath laide mee downe in darke places, like vnto them which long sy∣thence were dead. A man would say that hee had en∣closed
me within foure strong walles, to the ende I shoulde neuer come out: because he holdeth mee in so straitely: and not contented therewith, houl∣deth me bounde, as it were, with a ve∣rie great lynked yron chaine. Neyther will he fuffer mee to crie  out, and bewayle my myserie and griefe, as hee will suffer the most mi∣serable. For hee reiecteth my cryes, and will not once suffer them come before him. To be short, I knowe not on which  side to turne mee, I am so barred from all wayes; as if a man should lay great mightie squared stones ouerthwart a∣gainst me. What should I say? He, (alas) that  was wonted to shew himselfe my most gracious and louing Father, is nowe become like vnto a Beare that lyeth in waite to spoyle & pray vpon the flock: or like a cruell and fierce Lyon in his denne. By him I am altogether left at large,  broosed, and discomforted. A man would say, that he had bent  his bowe: and made choyse of mee as of a butte, to discharge his whole qui∣uer of arrowes at me.
Such arrowes (alas) as are shotte  from the hande of the most mightie, insomuch that I alreadie feele them pearse my very raines. What maruell then is it, though I, and my people be had in derision: yea to become euen a verie song vnto our most cruell enemies? Alas, I am euen dronke, howbeit, it is neither with wine, nor yet with biere: but with bitternes and griefe: which so dulleth me, as that I scarsely knowe what I do. I wretch that I am, am like as if a man had made blunt my teeth with flynt stones: and had couered me ouer with dust. Insomuch, that if ye looke on mee, ye shall see me like one forsaken of all felicitie, and as a dead bodie: yea I can scarsely bethinke mee that euer I had any prosperitie here in this world. Whereupon I, like a forlorne man, and as one ouercome with sorrow and griefe, sayde: I am vtterly vndone: it is not for mee to looke any more for succour and aide, at the handes of the eternall. Thus (alas) we see, what a notable discourse this poore and wretched
flesh hath made, when it sawe it selfe thus abased, and brought vnto such miserie. But at last, when I had gathered  together my spirites, and was come a∣gaine to my selfe, I eft-soones became bold, and had a good hope, and con∣sidered thus with my selfe and sayd. What a woonderfull mercie of  the Lorde is this, that wee were not all consumed and vtterly extirped: but that his great compassions can ne∣uer faile. But they are renued daylie, so great  and constaunt is his holie faythful∣nesse. Wherefore my soule submitteth  and comforteth her selfe, in that shee acknowledgeth God to bee her portion, her inheritaunce, and whol∣ly hers. And that in summe the Lord is good  and liberall to all those that patiently trust in him, and neuer cease calling vpon him. And in verie deede, what so euer  flesh and bloude imagineth and thin∣keth: there is no such thing as to trust in the eternall, and peaceably attende for the saluation and deliueraunce
which he hath prom ed vs. And a better course can no man  take, then to bee happely kept vnder discipline, and accustome him selfe to beare the yoake of the Lorde in his youth: To waite, and be contented: peace∣ably bearing the burden which is laid vpon vs. To behaue our selues, howsoeuer  the world goeth with vs, most humbly and patiently not looking vnto things present, but vnto those thinges which we hope for. Although we should, as a mā would say, turne the cheeke to those which smyt vs, & be filled ful with reproches. For, sure it is, yt we shall not alwaies  abide such despitefull dealing, as if we were men altogether destitute of gods helpe. But after he hath once afflicted vs,  hee will haue so much the more com∣passion vpon vs: and bestowe vpon vs his great mercies. For, our good heauenly Father ta∣keth  no pleasure in troubling misera∣ble wretched men: but with grief cor∣recteth them, as an earthly father cha∣stiseth his children.
Moreouer, he can not abide to see  affliction added to afflicted persons, nor poore prisoners trode vnder feete. Neither can he abide to see the  right of a man ouerthrowne, before the face of the Magistrates. Or that a man should make a brab∣ling  and altertion in any thing, thereby to make a poore man loose his cause or suite, in such things I say the Lord hath no delight. And yet this is true, that nothing  commeth to passe in the whole world, without the leaue and commaunde∣ment of the most high. From the holy decree of his mouth  proceede both prosperitie and aduer∣sitie. Why then should a man contend  and be angry, when he suffereth pu∣nishment for his sinnes? Well then, in stead of murmuring  against the Lord, let vs examine and try our selues, let vs make suite, and after turne againe vnto the Lord. Let vs come before him with harts  and hands lifted vp vnto the heauens, calling vpon his diuine goodnes, say∣ing in few words: O Lord God, we haue sinned and
rebelled against thee: and therefore hast thou corrected and not spared vs. And hauing thy wrath before thine eyes as a vale, hast hid thy selfe from vs: thou hast pursued and slaine vs, without shewing vs any fauour or grace. And certainely, a man would say, that there were a clowde betweene thee and vs, to the end our prayers might not come vnto thee. In so much, that we are become as it were, like the offskowring and scomme of the world. And being in this estate, our ene∣mies  make mouthes at vs, and nick∣name vs. We see nothing else before our eyes,  but feare, captiuitie, ruine, and destruction. Great riuers of waters haue fallen from our eyes, to see the people of God in so miserable a case. And as afflictions and miseries ne∣uer cease, no more also can our eyes cease from powring out of abundance of teares. Still waiting that the Lord wil looke down from heauen with a fauourable eye vpon vs.
Alas, I can not tell what it is that hath brought me into these distresses,  & into these massacres of the daugh∣ters of my most vnhappie people, but eyes altogether blubbered, or my mi∣serable heart filled all ouer with sor∣row and heauines. I am sore chased on euery side like  a poore bird, and mine enemies lay their nettes for me wrongfully, and without cause. A man is not able to expresse the  mischiefe which they haue done vnto me, for it might be said, that I were cast into a dongeon, and couered ouer with stones. And I am lost and drowned as one that were ouerwhelmed with great  riuers of water. Now, in these dongeons of euils, I  called vpon thy name, O Lord. And in very deede thou many times  heardest my voice: hide not thy selfe therefore now, and stop not thine eare from my sighes and grones. Thou hast many and sundry times  drawne neere vnto me, & assured me by thy grace, saying to me, feare not. Thou hast maintained my right, and  redeemed my life from death.
Seeing then that thou seest the wrong and harme which they do me, iudge and pleade thou my cause O God. For, thou once hast seene the ven∣geable spirite, fury, and wicked deuises of mine enemies against me. Thou hearest the words and de∣spitefull reproches, which they that persecute me, poure out against me. Behold, I beseech thee, how they sit downe and rise vp against me, and how I am their song. Let thy iust iudgements pay home into their bosomes, the euill which they haue done to others, and recom∣pence them as they haue deserued. And according to thine accusto∣med proceeding against hard harted people, make thou their harts as hard as a flint, and send them thy curse. Persecute thou them in thy wrath, and powre vpon them the lees of thy fury, because that they, who haue contemned thee, the Gouernor of the whole world, might be destroyed, and vtterly rooted out; that there neuer be any remembrance of them heere∣after.
The fourth Chapter. The Argument of the Chapter. THis Chapter followeth, as it were, in his verses, the same order of the Hebrewe Alphabet, as the first Chapter doth: and although some ground them∣selues vpon the words set downe in the 20. verse, of the king taken in the ene∣mies nettes, meaning to referre this Chapter to the dayes of the death of king Iosias: yet because the history no whit agreeth with that which is heere spoken, we will be of their opinion that suppose and take, that in this Chapter is pursued, the selfe and same matter which is in the Chapters go∣ing before: and that it is altogether a Lamentation, which the Prophet greatly desireth to engraue in the harts of all men, concerning the cap∣tiuitie of Babylon, and that which in those dayes fell out among the Iewes. For, Ieremy vseth no superfluous re∣petitions, neither doth he lightly and as it were after a sclender sort, lament the miseries that then were, but deli∣uereth
deepe and holy sighes and groanes, proceeding from an heart, enlightened, guided, and gouerned by Gods owne spirit, who furnished, and deliuered vnto him by word of mouth those complaints that he might touch to the quicke, all such as commonly shew themselues too too blockish and drowsie. And in very deede, if we would but a little acknowledge our imper∣fections, we should finde that wee are by nature very dull and sluggish, being nothing touched at the heart with the threats of Gods heauy wrath and indignation, so that we can not be too much spurred forward. For, there is no kind of matter or substance so easily to be set on fire, and therevn∣to apt and disposed, that of it selfe will burne, if a man put not fire there∣vnto: much lesse will man, who in heauenly things is farre colder then yse, become feruent and hoate, that is to say, be touched to the quicke, to vnderstand the iudgements of God, if he meete not with the fire of Gods word, and with some good and zea∣lous preachers of the same, and of the iudgements of the Lord. Now,
it is not for any man to say, with what diuersitie of art these Chapters of the Lamentations of Ieremy are made and colored, and of what weight and importance the similitudes and comparisons which he bringeth in, are both for the awaking of the veriest dullards, as also for the brideling and mouing to compassion the most sa∣uage and brutish persons. This foutth Chapter standeth vpon three partes: the first, beginneth a∣fresh by way of exclamation, How, &c. In which are conteined forcible la∣mentations vnto the 11. verse. The amplifications of these Lamentati∣ons are drawne partly from the per∣son and dignitie of those that were desolate, and comfortles prisoners, partly from the Nobilitie, Priestes, Nazarites, and yong children: some making great mone by reason of the great dignitie from whence they were fallen: and other some, because of theyr age: partly, by that that Ieremy compareth that people vnto certaine cruell and sauage beasts, and compa∣reth also their ignominie vnto the ig∣nomie of Sodome and Gomorre: partly, the Prophet taketh occasion to
amplifie the miserie that then was, by the sorowfull euents that at that time fell out: in that there was nothing else there to be seene, but lamentable and monstrous sightes, nothing but most infamous, miserable, and extreame dealings, euē to the seeing of vnnatu∣rall mothers eating their own childrē. The second part, is the aunswere to this demaund, exclamation, & lamen∣tatiō that is made in the beginning of the Chapter, and goeth on to the 20. verse. And in this part are partly in∣structions, partly reprehēsions: for he there techeth, that these miseries pro∣ceed frō the very wrath of God, but yet from a rightuous God, who, as in the 6. of the booke of Wisedome it is said, greeuously punisheth greeuous sins: shewing himselfe thereby to be a true God, in effecting that which he had threatned vnto men, and therefore it is past time, as in common prouerbe we say, to shut the stable dore when the steed is stolne, and to remember our selues, when vengeance is fallen vpon our heads. But it is our best to acknowledge our faults in time, whiles God speaketh vnto vs, and calleth vs to repentance. Howbeit, fooles, as we
commonly say, are neuer wise vntill they are beaten, and neuer beleeue what is said vnto them, vntill it lye vp∣pon their iacks. After these instructions of Ieremy, he addeth also certaine demonstrati∣ons, reprouing the cruelty of the Ma∣gistrates, in the 13. verse: reprehen∣ding the exceeding dissolutenes of the people in the 14. and 15. verses: and in the 17. and 20. verses, he fin∣deth fault with mens vaine confi∣dence in the arme of flesh and bloud. The third part of this Chapter is a prophesie, wherein is foretold the iudgements of God against the ad∣uersaries, namely, against the Idu∣means, who shewed themselues more outrageous, then all the rest of the e∣nemies, as also may be seene in the prophesie of Obediah. Thus we see, how, after that the wic∣ked haue braued themselues, and at their pleasures raunged abroade, that they themselues also shall haue their turne and course, and be called to a reckoning, and it is they that shall drinke the lees and dregs of the Lords cup, although his iudgements begin first at his owne house. Now this is a
very profitable doctrine for vs: for, as Sainct Ambrose in his Offices sayth: There is nothing that bringeth a man sooner to an honest course of life, then when he setteth before his eyes, that God will iudge the world: yea euen that great God, from whose eyes nothing is hid nor couered, and who alloweth of nothing, but of that which is good and honest, detesting all beastlinesse and villany. This consi∣deration of Gods iudgements ma∣keth vs patiently beare our afflicti∣ons, and the insolencies of the wic∣ked, according to that saying of Da∣uid in his 119. Psalme, verse 51. 52. The wicked O Lord (saith he) haue made an exceeding skorne of me: yet haue J not declined from thy lawe. J haue cald to mind thy iudgements which thou hast done of old, and haue by them beene comforted. THE TEXT OF THE fourth Chapter. Aleph.1 HOW is the gold become so dimme? the amasse of most fine golde is chaunged, and the stones of the Sanctu∣arie are scattered in the corners of euerie streete.
2 How is it, J say,Beth. that the noble men of Syon, comparable to fine gold, are no bet∣ter esteemed then earthen pitchers, euen the handyworke of the potter. 3 Euen the dragons draw out theyr breasts, and giue their young ones sucke:Gimel. but the daughter of my people is become cruell like the Ostriches in the wildernesse. 4 The toong of the sucking child clea∣ueth to the roofe of his mouth,Daleth. euen with ve∣ry thirst. 5 They that did feede delicately perish in the streetes:He. they that were brought vp in Scarlet, embrace the doong. 6 For,Van. the punishment of the iniquitie of the daughter of my people is become grea∣ter, then the punishment of Sodome, that was destroyed as in a moment, without once laying any hand vpon her. 7 Her Nazarites were whiter then the snowe, and purer then the milke:Zain. they were more ruddie then the Ruby, and more poli∣shed then the Saphire. 8 Now,Heth. their visage is blacker then any coale: they can not be knowne in the streetes: their skinne cleaueth to their bones, and is become as drie as a sticke. 9 They that were slaine with the sword,Teth. were in better case, then they that wer killed with honger: J say, that they were in better
case that were runned quite through, then they that died for want of the fruite of the earth. Iod.10 The hands of the pitifull women haue sodden their owne children, which were their meate during the destruction of the daughter of my people. THE OBSERVATIONS or notes vpon the first part of the fourth Chap∣ter. THE noblemen of Syon, com∣parable to fine golde,) or the gold of Vphas, which is a kind of most fine gold, as a man would saye, the gold of India. This fine gold in the scripture is called the gold of Vphaz, or of Ophir, as in the 45. Psalme, verse 10.14. By this comparison of fine gold and fine sil∣uer, the scripture representeth vnto vs most excellent and perfect things. In the first Chapter of Isaiah, the Lord maketh this complaint, saying: Thy siluer (saith he) is turned into drosse: And thy wine is mingled with water: meaning heereby, that the most notable men among the people were degenerate.
Now Ieremy expoundeth it himselfe, when as he nameth the noble men of Syon, and compareth them vnto fine gold: for the more honorable that we haue sene a man placed in high roome and dignity aboue other, so much the more straunge it is vnto vs, when we see the same man abased and brought lowe. It is euen as fearefull a sight, as to see the Eclipses of the Sunne and the Moone, or as Iob in the 24. Chap∣ter of his booke, verse 24. saith, As if a man should cut off in sommer the top of an eare of corne: or, as if a man should see a Crowne of fine gold troden vnder feete. And as we reade also in the 28. of Isaiah, verse 23. where this great God threat∣ning the king of Israell, and the chil∣dren of Ephraim by his Prophet, saith thus: Because, saith he, of your pride and dronkennes, your crowne of pride shall be broken and troade vnder feete, and all the flower and beawty of your magnificence shal fall to the ground. Thus we see, that the Prophet Ieremy doth not only lament that which generally hapned vnto all the people, but setteth downe in par∣ticular what hapned to all estates, as well to the mightie ones, as also to the baser sort, giuing to the great and
noble men of this world,Two aduer¦tisements vnto the mightie ones of this vvorlde. two notable aduertisements: first, that they ought to be more excellent and vertuous in life and conuersation, then others, and therein surpasse all the rest, bi∣cause that true nobilitie should so farre surmount the common people, as fyne gold surmounteth all other mettalles. Secondly, he maketh the mighty ones of the world vnderstand, that they are as subiect to falling and affliction, as are the most poore and miserable: and that for them to be a∣based, is to themselues so much the more intollerable, bicause they had beene once exalted vnto high digni∣tie. And this commeth to passe, when as we feare not him that is Lord ouer all, and whose throne is exalted aboue the heauens: by reason whereof, Da∣uid in his 29. Psalme, verse 5.6.7.8.9.10. exhorteth all Princes to giue glorie vnto this great Lord, who with the onely noyse of his thundering voyce, ma∣keth the whole world tremble. They there∣fore that regard not this great Ruler, before whome, all the mightie Poten∣tates of the world are but dust and ashes, do wonder to see how the most honorable personages, and men of
note, should decline or fall: euen as Titus Liuius in the 9. Booke of his 4. Decade, wondred how these three fa∣mous and lusty men could come to so lamentable an end, and so farre disa∣greeing frō their former high estates, to wit, Anniball, who being betrayed by his hoste, was poisoned, and Philo∣men and Scipio, who died in exile. Now, Ieremy describeth vnto vs these mightie and noble men, not onely by these comparisons of golde and siluer, but also by the fashions of their fine and straunge kinds of appa∣rell, according to that which Iesus Christ in the 11. of Sainct Matthew, setteth downe, saying: They (sayth he) that weare fine and costly apparell, are, for the most part in kings houses: and it was spoken to this end, that such lustie gallants should wisely learne to vn∣derstand that they haue a great Lord in heauen, who can easily pull from them their ornaments and costly ap∣parell, and cloath them with sack∣cloth and ashes, as in the third of I∣saiah, verse 24. he threatneth, say∣ing: That in stead of sweete sauours, he will send them stench, in stead of a girdle, a rent, and in stead of braue fashions of
apparrell and curling the haire, sackcloth and baldnesse, &c. And therefore, let all the mighty ones in the world vse their braue and costly apparell modestlie, and without pride, alwaies acknow∣ledging that all the cost that is besto∣wed heere in this world, is but euen as smoke. Euen the Dragons drawe out their breastes,) as if he should haue sayd, It is a lamentable case to see the most sauage beastes giue their young ones sucke, and to see the women of Ieru∣salem so famished, and so forget themselues, as that they had neither strength nor mind to giue their yong ones sucke. The Hebrewe word Ta∣nin, which is translated, Dragons, is taken for earthlie Serpents, and sea monsters, that creepe on the earth. Some thinke, that in this place hee meaneth the sea calues, of whome, Plinie writing in the 13. Chapter of the ninth booke of his historie, sayth, that when they come neere the shore, they giue their young ones sucke, and lay them in some warme drie place, vntill such time as they haue by little and little wonted them to the water. Earthly Serpents and Dragons
haue no breasts, and among flying things, only the Butterflye hath. Cruell, like the Ostriches in the wilder∣nesse.) He speaketh of certayne O∣striches, of whome, Plinie in his tenth booke writeth, calling them Struthiocameles: who, notwithstanding that they are feathered, yet haue much to do to rise from the ground: of whome also Aristotle maketh men∣tion in the 14. Chapter of his 4. Booke vpon that part thereof, wherein he treateth of liuing creatures. Some reade thus, like vnto the Owles, who as they say, forsake their yong ones. It should seeme that this place of Ie∣remy hath a kind of reference vnto that which is written in the 39. of Iob, verse 19. where it is said, That the O∣strich is as cruell vnto her young ones, as though they were none of her owne, &c. There is none that breaketh, or distri∣buteth  bread vnto them.) The Hebrewe word, signifyeth not so much to breake, or pull in peeces, as to de∣uide and distribute: and it is the same word which is found in the 58. of I∣saiah, verse 7. where it is said, See that thou part or deuide thy bread to him that is hongrie. And therefore among the
Prophetes, it is another manner of thing to distribute bread, then to breake bread, as is vsed in the Lords Supper, and as Iesus Christ expres∣seth by a word, which signifyeth, to breake, or pull in peeces: where he maketh a distinction betwixt distribu∣ting and breaking, regarding the Ce∣remonie of the bodie of Christ broken and torne in peeces vpon the Crosse with torments, as in the 11. Chapter of the first to the Corinthians we may reade. They haue embraced the doong.) That is to say, they that before were cloa∣thed with all manner of silkes, are now quite and cleane couered ouer with doong: or rather, the famine was so extreame, as that the richest of them were enforced to digge in the doonghilles, to get them whereon to eate, as came to passe in the famine of Samaria, written in the sixt Chapter of the second booke of the Kings: du∣ring which time, pigeons doong was verie deerely sold. My punishment was thought to be grea∣ter.) Some reade, my time is greater then the iniquitie of Sodome. How∣beit, the verie sequele of the text de∣clareth,
that the Prophet conferreth not sinne with sinne, but punishments with punishments: bicause that, as the Prophet heere expressely tou∣cheth it, Sodome was destroyed in a moment, and had to do with none but with God, and fell into the hands of none other: whereas the Iewes du∣ring the seege, and after, abode con∣tinually in theyr miseries, and fell into the bloodie hands of their aduer∣saries. And the Hebrew word signi∣fyeth not iniquitie alone, but for the most part also, the punishment of sinne. Thus we see, how the shortest punishments are easiliest borne of vs: euen as a sicke or diseased man is best contented, when as he hath a medicine giuen him,2. Sam. 10. that he may readeliest dispatch: and the Prophet Dauid also chose rather to fall into the hands of God, then to haue long warres in hand, and to deale with men. The Nazarites were whiter.) The  Prophet Ieremy hauing regarde to those dayes, and to the honorable de∣grees that were among the people, frameth a cōplaint of the misery that came vpō al estates. Among which, the
Nazarites had the first place, a kind of people that had wholy vowed them∣selues vnto the seruice of God. Their order of life and institution, is to be found in the 6. Chapter of the booke of Nombers. And although they ab∣stained from wine, and many other pleasant things, yet Ieremy in this place testifyeth, that they had lustie bodies, and well colored faces: as in the first of Daniell we reade, how that he and his companions through the same prouidence of the Lord, were in as good case and better with their pulse, then they which did eate the most delicate meates that came from the Kings table. Howbeit, this order now of the Nazarites hath an end in the new Testament: as also the order of the Leuites, euer sithence the great and excellent priest Iesus Christ ap∣peered: who, although he was not by profession a Nazarite (for he did eate and drinke as other men did) yet is he a right Netzer, that is to say, the Sur∣geon of the house of Dauid, that see∣med to be lost: and being a dweller in Nazareth, would haue it, as it were by the allusion of the word, to be made so knowne. And as for Christians,
they should be alwayes right Naza∣rites, seperating themselues from all vncleannesse, as in the sixt of the se∣cond to the Corinths it is written. For, although the Ceremonie be a∣bolished, yet ought we truly and in deede be an holy and sacred people vnto God, because we haue this ho∣nor giuen vs to be called the temples of the holy Ghost. THE SECOND PART of the fourth Chap∣ter. 11 THE Lord hath accomplished his indignation:Caph. he hath powred out his fierce wrath, he hath kindled a fire in Syon, which hath consumed the foundati∣ons thereof. 12 The kings of the earth,Lamed. and all the inhabitants of the world, would not haue beleeued, that the aduersarie and the ene∣mie should haue entred into the gates of Ierusalem. 13 For the sinnes of her Prophets,Mem. and the iniquities of her Priestes, that haue shed the bloud of the iust in the middest of her.
Nun.14 They haue wandred as blind men in the streetes, and they were polluted with bloud, so that they woulde not touch their garmentes. amech.15 But they cryed vnto them, Depart ye polluted, depart, depart, touch not: there∣fore they fledde away, and wandered: They haue saide among the Heathen, they shall no more dwell there. 16 The anger of the Lorde hath scatte∣red them,Plie. hee will no more regarde them: they couered not the face of the Priests, nor had compassion of the Elders. Ain.17 Whiles wee waited for our vaine helpe, our eyes fayled: for in our waiting wee looked for a nation that could not saue vs. Tzade.18 They hunt our steppes that we can∣not goe in our streetes: our ende is neare, our dayes are fulfilled, for our end is come. 19 Our persecutors are swifter than the Egles of the heauen:Caph. they pursued vs on the mountaines, and laide waite for vs in the wildernes. Res.20 The breath of our nosethrilles, the anointed of the Lorde was taken in their nettes, of whom we saide, vnder his shadow we shall be preserued aliue among the Hea∣then.
CERTAINE OBSERVATI∣ons vpon the seconde part of the fourth Chapter. THE Lorde hath accompli∣shed all his indignation) This part goeth on vn∣to the 20. verse, and lai∣eth downe the causes and occasions of the calamitie of the Iewes. Nowe, the Prophet bringeth in heere two occasions: The one is the sinne of the people, as heretofore wee haue seene in the 8. verse of the 1. Chapter: The other is the wrath of God & his iust iudgements, according to which he punished the sundrie sins which raigned in this people. But be∣cause we haue heretofore treated of this point of Goddes wrath and of the effectes of the same we will speake no further of it. The kings of the earth would neuer haue beleeued,) As if he would haue saide, This is a verie straunge calamitie, and such a one as that the most barba∣rous Tyrauntes durst not once haue thought that euer such miseries shold haue ouer taken vs. For when God fauoured vs, it was a pleasure to see
these people, whome all the kings in the world feared, as in the 48. Psalme we reade, where it is said, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the Citie of our God, euen vppon his holy moun∣taine. Mount Syon lying Northward, is faire in scituation, it is the ioy of the whole land, and the Citie of the great King. Jn the palaces thereof God is knowne for a re∣fuge: for loe, the Kings were gathered, and went together. When they sawe it, they maruelled, and were astonied, and suddenly driuen backe. Feare came there vpon them, and sorrowe, as vpon a woman in trauell, &c. But now, sayeth Iere∣my, it appeereth how all things are turned and changed, considering that they which heeretofore were astonied to see our greatnesse and prosperitie, are at this present abas∣shed to see our aduersitie and calami∣tie. And in the meane while it fel vpon them euen as the Lord had said in the 28. of Deuteronomy, to witte, That if they would diligently hearken vnto the voyce of the Lorde theyr God, that they should be blessed with all kindes of bles∣singes, and that all the people of the world should acknowledge, that the name of the Lord should be called vpon ouer them, and
that they should be afraide of them. But that if they woulde not obey him, that the Lorde would bring them and their King vnto an vnknowen Nation: in the middest of which they should serue straunge Gods, and be a by-worde and prouerbe among all people, &c. Whiles I am a writing of these things, I cannot without great griefe and sor∣rowe of heart, but call to minde the great number and well peopled Chur∣ches, which I remember I haue seene in the principall Cities of all the Pro∣uinces of Fraunce, sithence the yeare 1560. vntill the yeare, 1570. which in the prime yeares, did so agree, & were so zealous, and were so honored and feared, as that the enimies themselues neuer thought that it had beene possi∣ble to haue become so, as it were in a moment, ouerthrowen and destroyed: such was the accord, courage & mag∣nanimitie, namely of a good part of the nobilitie of France. And although the destruction was sudden, straunge, incredible, yea and such as that verie hardly might or could the Churches bee raysed vp againe, yet for all that, the faithfull should neuer bee discou∣raged, nor helpelesse: For the destru∣ction
of Churches is not so straung, as the deliuerāce is wonderful, & worthy the noting: which thing is notably re∣presented vnto vs in the 126. Psalm. in these wordes following, saying: When the Lorde brought againe the captiuitie of Syon, we were like thē that dream. Thē was our mouth filled with laughter, & our tongs with ioy, then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them. And in the 49. of Isaiah it is there said: Thus saith the Lord, the redeemer of Israel, to the despised soule, to a Nation that is ab∣horred: to the seruauntes of Rulers: Kings shal see & arise, and Princes shall worship, because of the Lorde that is faithfull, and for the loue of the holy one of Jsrael which hath chosen thee. Because of the sins of her Prophets) now the Prophet beginneth particularly to set down the cause of their desolatiō: not acknowledging only, as it were by the way, the sins of the people, but also aggrauateth and greeuously accuseth thē in particularities. For hee cōplay∣neth and telleth them that their wic∣kednes did so exceede, as that they all erred and became degenerate: yea e∣uen they, on whō the world had a sin∣gular opinion of holines & integritie.
Now, this is a miserable estate, & e∣uery way to be lamented, when as the Magistrates & Doctors of the church, who should shew the way, and a liuely lawe vnto others, shall shamelesly de∣file thēselues, & wallow in al maner of pollutions. For, our Sauiour Christ, as in the 5. of S. Matt. it is writtē, speking to his disciples, & to the doctors of the Church, saith thus vnto thē: ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt loose his sa∣uour, to what vse is it good? It is good for no∣thing els, but to be cast out of the dores, & trāpled vnder foote. In the 4. & 5. of Ose∣ah also a great cōplaint is made of the sinnes of the Priests and Magistrates, because yt they who should throughly haue administred equitie and iustice, laye in waite for the life of others: e∣uen as foulers laye their nettes for birdes. This then is an heape of mise∣ries,A most sure signe and token of a destruction at hand vp on any na∣tion and not to be avoided. and a sure token of a destructi∣on at hande, and not to be auoyded, whē as they that should be the master Masons, do thēselues destroy & ouer∣throw the Church: & they which with good & holesome doctrine & example shold teach the world, shew thēselues to haue in them, neyther soundnesse of doctrine, nor yet holinesse of life.
And this (alas) is too too common a thing, That by how much more excel∣lent giftes, men are endewed withall, and as it were the lights of the world, euen by so much the more, are their faultes the greater, and do more hurt, and are the more straungly eclipsed when as they goe astraye: yea and be∣come farre more cruell and intollera∣ble: As among other examples wee may see in the 26. of Ieremie, howe that the furie of the false Prophetes was more barbarous, and more vnrea∣sonable against him, thē was the rage of the King, or of the people; which thing we haue long sithence by wofull experience found. And therefore the meaning of Ieremie in this our text, is this, that this people could not long continue in this case and quietnesse, where such dissolutenesse of life was, and where the will and affection of the Magistrates and Priestes stood for lawe: whose handes also were all full of bloud: whereupon may soone bee coniectured, that the state and condi∣tion of the common people was verie euill and too too vile, when as the most notable personages, and such as should haue shewed good examples
to others, had so greatly forgotten themselues. But if there were anie of them that went somewhat farther, yet exceeded they their office and dutie, in that through a foolish and vaine as∣surance they more looked for ayde out of Aegypt, and trusted more to the arme of flesh and bloud, than vnto the liuing God. Of the estate and condition of these dayes, especially after the death of Manasses, we reade in the thirtie sixe Chapter ver. 14. of the second booke of the Chronicles that which ensueth: where it is saide: All the chiefe of the Priestes also, and of the people trespassed wrongfully, according to all the abhomina∣tions of the Heathen, and polluted the house of the Lorde which he had sanctified in Je∣rusalem. Therefore the Lorde God of their Fathers sent vnto them by his messengers, rysing earely and sending: for he had com∣passion on his people, and on his habitation. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his wordes, and misused his Pro∣phetes, vntill the wrath of the Lorde arose against his people, and till there was no re∣medie, &c. S. Cyprian in his treatie De Lapsis,The com∣plaint of Cyprian in his daies maketh the like report of the disor∣ders
and sinnes that were in his time saying: because that long rest and quietnesse hath bastarded the disci∣pline and good order that was among vs: The heauenly correction hath re∣dressed our altogether feeble & sleepy faith. For in very deede no man once thinketh but particularly of himselfe, & of the encreasing and enlarging of his patrimonie, without any remem∣brance of the time past, & of yt which ye Apostles & all true faithfull men were wont to do: to be short, ther is nothing among vs, but an insatiable desire of scraping together of this worldly pelf: insomuch that there is neither religi∣on, nor yet deuotion in the ministers of the Church: neyther sounde fayth, nor mercie in works: nor discipline in our manners. Manie Bishops in steede of excelling, and giuing good exam∣ple to others,A practize ouer true in these mi∣serable dayes of ours, in so great light of the Gos∣pell. leauing their charge, burdē & troble thēselues about world∣ly affayres, & forsaking their pulpit & flocke, trauell and compasse diuers & sundry Prouinces, & thrust thēselues into many worldly dealings, whereby they may get money, & so getting into their owne clowches other mens pos∣sessions, help thēselues by deceit and
vsurie. Now when we shalbe such kind of men, what punishment can be too greeuous for vs to suffer? Namely, see∣ing that long ago, as appeareth by the 89. Psalm. That the Lord admonished his Church, That if his children propha∣ned his statutes, and contemned his lawes, that he would visite their sinnes with rods. Thus wee see what S. Cyprian hath sayde of his dayes. Heere then we see in summe, what haue beene the sins that haue caused the ouerthrowe of mightie peoples and nations, and haue beene sure forerunners of a very neare desolation,The sinnes that are the fore∣runners of the destru∣ction of a kingdome. when as the Magi∣strats & gouernors of the People, shall suffer their affections runne at rouers, and bee bought and solde, drawing by their example all the rest of the people to an extreme licentiousnesse of wicked dooing. And although the ciuill lawes say, That the people ne∣uer die, because ther are alwaies some others to succeede, yet is it a sorrowful death, to see a good policy or gouern∣ment die, and to cause a chaunge in the estate, which is the ruyne and de∣struction of all well ordered thinges. For although new men dayly come in place, as in sōmer, new leaues bud out
and spring, in steede of the olde fallen leaues, yet there come not vertuous men yearely into the world to rule in good gouernement and flourishing common weales: for wee see at this day, that there is as great difference, for the more part, betweene the Prin∣ces, Teachers, and guiders of the peo∣ple, and the Churches which professe the Gospell, that were within these twentie or thirtie yeares, as there is betweene high Ceders and bramble bushes: considering that the more part which would bee accounted the grea∣test Doctors, & pillars of the Church, namely in Almayne, in steede of ad∣uauncing and setting foorth of the truth, are through masterlike and per∣nitious disputations, contentions, & condemnations, quite & cleane gone backe: and in steede of bearing the crosse themselues, cause honest and godly men to beare it: euen as Ieremie complaineth of the crueltie of the Priestes in his dayes, & as Iesus Christ himselfe in the 23. of S. Mathew, fin∣deth fault with the Scribes and Phari∣seis. They haue wandred as blind men) these two verses are somewhat darkeby rea∣son
of the construction and shortnesse of the Hebrewe tongue, which vseth not many words. The most Hebrewes vnderstande this according to the let∣ter, to wit of the blinde: that they fell in the streetes through the multitude of dead bodies yt lay vpon the ground, & therefore were polluted with bloud, for which cause, as many as mett with those blind mē, would crie out a farre of vnto them and say, depart ye pollu∣ted, depart, depart, and touch vs not, least ye pollute vs, and it seemeth that the Zurich translation hath followed this interpretation. Howbeit the grea∣ter number of other Interpretors, whō we in this place followe, suppose that the Prophet calleth these wicked Priestes and false Prophets (of whom he heretofore spake) blind men, who being ouercome with crueltie & rage, made quarrelles and seditions in the streetes, and imbrued themselues in bloud: whereuppon, it came to passe that the common people, or, some o∣thers thinke, certaine of the heathen, in way of mockerie, cryed out vppon them and saide, depart ye polluted, de∣part, depart: get you a good way from vs, hauing regarde vnto the comman∣dement
in the law, for the separating of the vncleane: as if it had been a re∣proch, which ye Lord had through his iust vengeaunce caused, these pro∣phane Priests polluted with bloud, to be dispersed, & driuen farre away from the sanctuarie: banishing thē this way and that: In so much, that the profane Nations scorned them, & tooke them to be a profane and an abhominable people. Moreouer, when the Prophet sayth, They shall no more dwell there: or they shall returne no more thether to dwell: It was not to put the people out of hope of their returne: but speaketh it there only in regarde of those wicked ones, whome God punished for their crueltie: and speaketh also according to the outward shew of the things that then were: at which time all thinges were in a lamētable case, so that there was nothing there to bee seene but a very deepe dungeon of all miseries: In such sort as that whē the Prophet Eze∣chiel in his 37. chap. meant to cōfort the people, & assure thē of their return out of captiuitie, saith: That it should be like vnto the resurrection of the dead, euen as if drie bones should be clad with skinne, and a newe soule breathed thereinto. This
place then is manifest & cleare, if we consider the meaning of the Prophet, and the sequele of the verses, and the manner also of the vsuall speaking in the scriptures, which commonly call the blind, such as are blinded through couetousnes & presumption: as in the 42. of Isaiah ver. 10. it is saide of the Iewes, in this maner:Mat. 15. Who is blinde but my seruaunt? Iesus Christ also calleth the Scribes and Phariseis blinde, and leaders of the blind. Here also, for the vnderstanding of this place wee must call to mind, the ceremony comman∣ded in the law: where euerie man was forbidden to touch anie dead thing, or bloud: such a wonderful mind had the Lord to estraunge his people from all kinde of crueltie: and aboue all other, the Priestes were enioyned holines: who were especially forbiddē to be at the buriall of the dead, and to come where any dead dody was: as in the 21. Chap. of Leuiticus we may read. And it was ordeined by the lawe that who∣soeuer were vncleane, namelie the leapers, meeting with anie, should cry a farre off: I am vncleane, I am vn∣cleane: as in the 13. of Leuit. the 45. verse we read: from whence it seemeth
that the Prophet Ieremie hath bor∣rowed this manner of speech, Depart, depart, &c. This place to be short, teacheth vs, that there cannot be a greater abho∣mination nor profanes, then when the ministers of God defile themselues: and that the straunge and ignoraunt Nations, yea euen the very Heathen themselues, haue more shewe of god∣linesse in them in verie deede, then they which so vilanously misuse the name of God. For, we haue in all ages seene amonge the verie Heathen Priestes, some shewe of wisedome and vertue, which made the people honor them, as we may reade in Plutarch his treatie vpon Isis and Osiris, where he writeth,The Egyp∣tians chose their kings eyther frō among the Priestes, or from a∣mong the Souldiers. That the kinges of Aegypt were chosen either out of the order of the Priestes, or else from among the souldiours, because the one was ho∣noured and feared for their valure, and the other, for their wisedome: and therefore it is no maruell though the Prophet Ieremie bringeth in the very Heathen, scorning the profanes, shamelesnesse and infamie of the Priests and false Prophetes of Iudah. Verse. 17.Our eyes consumed with wayting for ou
vaine helpe) This is a gentle represen∣tation of this vaine wayting of the Iewes, who, so greatly bent and fixed their eyes vppon the helpe of Aegypt; as that with ouermuch wayting and bending their eyes that way, they euē consumed themselues. The like words we find in the 69. Psalme, ver. 3. where it is sayde: Mine eyes faile, while J waite for my God. That is to say, I haue dili∣gently, and without ceasing looked, and neuer cast mine eye aside. Nowe vpon this place we are to note the hi∣storie, & call to minde how the Iewes in verie deede oftentimes called for the helpe of the Aegyptians, and wai∣ted for the same. True it is that wee read in the 37. Chapter of Ieremie, how that Pharao his armie marched out of Aegypt against the Chaldeans, whereupon the Citie of Ierusalem for a while had some rest, & was not alto∣gether so straightly besieged:A daunge∣rous thing to con∣temne and set light the wrath of God de∣nounced by his mi∣nisters. which thing made the false Prophetes waxe hautie & proud, and band themselues against Ieremie, as though his threats of Gods wrath, and of the destruction of Ierusalem, had beene friuolous and nothing worth: as commonly fonde and foolish worldlinges are woont to
tryumph before the victorie. Howbeit it was the determined Counsell of God to punish this people: as in the Chapter aboue mentioned, ver. 8.9.10. is founde this threatning of the Lorde, saying: The Chaldeans shall re∣turne and assault this Citie: and shall take it, and set it on fire. Deceaue not your harts, saying, the Chaldeans shall surely depart from vs: for they shall not depart. For though ye had smitten the whole hoste of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should euerie man rise vppe in his tent, and burne this Citie with fire, &c. Wee reade also in the 24. Chapter of the 2. booke of the Kinges, howe that the power of the Babylonians was so great as that the Aegyptians were enforced presently to retire, and keepe them∣selues at home in their own countrey. And yet notwithstanding it is an in∣credible thing to see in what a wonder¦full iolitie the Iewes were, of the aide of Aegypt, most slauishly gaping after it, and putting all their whole trust & comforte therein: which made the Prophets manie times testifie against them, as in the 30. Chapter of Isaiah, it is sayde, Woe to the rebellious children
(sayth the Lorde) which walke foorth to goe downe into Egypt (and haue not asked at my mouth) to strengthē themselues with the strength of Pharao, and trust in the shadowe of Egypt: but the strength of Pha∣rao shall be your confusion, and the trust in the shadowe of Egypt, your confusion. For thus saith the Lorde your God, in quietnesse and in confidence shall bee your strength, &c. It is wonderfull to see howe these wretched Iewes could neuer haue the mindes to looke for any helpe at the Aegyptians handes,Plutarch in his treatise of Isis and Osyris. considering that Plutarch himselfe, as heathenish as he was, testifieth, that the Aegyptians laughed to skorne the worshipping of creatures, and brute beastes, and that they neuer had such brutish & beastly thoughtes: And as they were many in number, so also were they cōmonly a fickle and an vncertaine people: and therefore the eternall and almightie God had great reason to forbidde his people to haue any league and famili∣ar dealing with the Aegyptians: first, because ye Iewes had alreadie so much degenerated in Aegypt, as that they could not but sorrrow in that they had forsaken the Garlicke and Onyons of
the same Countrey, notwithstanding all the slauery which they there suffe∣red, and were brought at last euen to be defiled with the cursed Idolatrie of Aegypt, as in the 20. of Ezechiel, ver. 7 we may reade. Secondly it was impos∣sible in so great an incompatibilitie of religion and manners, whereof wee also reade in the 45. of Genesis, that there could be any true and faithfull loue and amitie continued betweene them: considering the naturall and auncient hatred which the one of thē bare to the other: which thing, with∣out doubt, representeth vnto vs the hatred and malice which the diuell & Antichrist beareth vnto the church of Christ, and the bondage of Aegypt vnder Pharao, with the bondage of sinne, which esclaueth vs vnto Sathā. Thirdly, the Lord right well sawe, that this trusting to the helpe of Aegypt, brought his people a sleepe, and with∣drewe them from hauing any hope in the conduct of the Almightie, who a∣lone is the God Schada, for so hee cal∣leth himselfe in the 17. of Genesis, when he spake vnto Abraham: that is to say, he that is all sufficient: where∣upon, the Lorde also sayth in the 31.
of Isaiah, ver. 3. The Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses flesh and not spirite; and when the Lord shall stretch out his hande, the helper shall fall, &c. And therfore Dauid went more re∣solutely vnto worke, when as he saide in his 73. Psalme, ver. 25.27.28. Whom haue I in heauen but thee? Neither haue J in earth any other but thee. Thou destroyest all those which withdrawe themselues from thee:It is a pe∣rilous thing to be in league or haue any familiaritie with Idola∣ters. as for me it is good that J draw neare vnto God, &c. They thē are at all times deceiued, and dayly deceiue them∣selues, that fall in league, and be fa∣miliarly acquainted with the children of this world, namely with Idolaters: who care not for the purchasing of the welfare and good of the Church, which to them, is a verie thorne in their foote: neither had God any such regarde, as to doe the Aegyptians the honor to make them the instruments for the deliueraunce of his Church. In so much as it is a lamentable thing, to see such a great number of Churches, after so many scorchings and fryinges so opinatiuely seeke after the deceiue∣able fellowship of Aegypt, & the ima∣ginatiue power of the mightie ones, whose greatnesse consisteth more in
titles and opinion, then in effect or in deede: For, let them knowe this, and take it for a principle or ground, That God will in no wise deuide his honour with men: but will reserue this honour of the ayding and defending of his Church to himselfe alone: and shee also shall call vpon him, and worship him alone: as in the 43. of Isaiah, ver. 11. it is sayd: J, euen J am the Lord, & be∣side me there is no Sauiour. I haue declared, and J haue saued, and J haue shewed, when there was no straunge God among you: and therefore you are my witnesses, sayth the Lorde, that J am God. And in the 23. of Ezechiell, ver. 27.28.30. our God is so angrie against these goers and commers into Aegypt, as that he saith after this manner: J will make thy wic∣kednesse to cease from thee, and thy forni∣cation of the lande of Egypt:A fearefull laying. so that thou shalt not lift vp thine eyes vnto them, nor remember Egypt any more. I will deliuer thee into the handes of them, whome thou hatest: I will doe these thinges vnto thee: because thou hast gone an whoring after the Heathen, and because thou art polluted with their Idolles, &c. By this he mea∣neth not, that men should despise the means which God offreth vnto them,
or not aide themselues therewith. But in the first place, the Lordes meaning is, that we should not vse any vnlawe∣full or forbidden meanes to helpe our selues, or which might any way, were it neuer so small, withdrawe vs from his true seruice and worship. And be∣sides, hee would not haue vs set our whole minde and affection vppon the meanes which hee giueth vs, nor yet trust altogether vnto thē: But depend vpon his onely prouidence: and make his helpe our buckler: considering that it is hee which rayseth vppe the meanes for vs: and he who without a∣ny worldely meanes, and against all hope, is able, and can defende vs:2. of the kinges 19. Chap. as he shewed vnto Ezechias king of Iu∣dah: when in one night the Angell of the Lord slew an hundred foure score and fiue thousand in the Tentes of the Assyrians. Ouer and besides all this, it beseemeth not Christians so to fly the Crosse and eschew it, as if they should alwaies carrie it away with the force of mightie armies:Psal. 110. seeing that Christ reigneth in the midest of his enimies, and maketh his Church flourish and waxe fresh amiddest the greatest per∣secutions. According, as that aunci∣ent
Doctor Tertullian, writing to Sca∣pula, president of Carthage, testifieth, where hee sayth, That the Church of Christ is of such a nature, as that the more it is despitefully entreated and persecuted, so much the more it is ad∣uaunced and strongly edified. Verse. 19.Our persecutors are swifter than the Ea∣gles of the heauen.) Surely the compa∣rison is good: for in verie deede, the flight of an Egle is maruelous swift: as Aristotle in his 9. booke of the history of liuing creatures writeth. They flie, I say, so hie, as that this foule is called the heauenly birde: and Ieremie cal∣leth them the Aegles of heauen, for their high flying, by reason whereof they seeme as it were, to pearse the heauens. Now we reade in the 39. of Ieremie, howe swiftly the Chaldeans pursued the king that fledde from Ie∣rusalem. The breath of our nosethrilles, the an∣nointed of the Lorde) It hath beene said in the preface and argument of this Chapter,Verse. 20. that some referre this place vnto king Iosias, although the whole circumstaunces plainely shewe, that it is to bee referred to king Zedechias. And it is no newe thing in the scrip∣ture,
to haue wicked kinges adorned and beautified with honourable titles: as we see that Saul and others, were called the anointed of the Lorde:The vvic∣kednesse of Princes ma¦keth their office no whit the worse. not in regarde of their persons, but in re∣spect of their charge & calling which they receiued from God: For, the wic∣kednesse of kinges maketh not the of∣fice any whit the worse; neither doth the wicked gouernment and loose be∣hauiour of many married persons pre∣iudice the honourable estate of mari∣age: and withall, all the kinges issuing from the house of Dauid are honou∣rable, because ye from them, as touch∣ing the flesh, our Sauiour must come. The historie of king Zedechias that was taken in his flight, is to be founde in the 23. Chapter of the 2. booke of the Kinges. And in the yeare of our Lord 1453. the like issue as it were, had Constantine Paliologue, the last Em∣perour of Constantinople, who flying away, was put to death, after that Ma∣homet the seconde had besieged the said Citie, & taken it by assault a little while after. But ye which fell vpon Ze∣dechias, was farre more lamentable: because that in his owne sight his own children, and the greatest part of the
nobilitie, were slaine: and himselfe ha∣uing his eyes put out,God ab∣horreth the falsifying of faith in one Prince to another and in his good time greeuously punisheth the same. & fettered with copper chaines, was ledde prisoner to Babylon: which was more greeuous vnto him than death it selfe. And this was his punishment, first, for his rebel∣lion against God, and next, for his re∣bellion against the king of Babylon, vnto whom he had falsified his fayth: whereupon he was wrapped and foul∣ded in all kinde of miserie: For, no flying could saue him, nor any secret place hide him, when as God would haue him render an account. For, God is not bound to keepe promise, and be fauourable with, and to those, which will not keepe their faith, and be obe∣dient, with, and to him: So that when God forbiddeth vs not to touch his anointed,Psal. 105. he meaneth that we should not touch those Princes, which ho∣nour and acknowledge him for their soueraigne: otherwise it is meete that they execute their office: for God is no acceptor of persons, and they shall die as well as the rest, as Dauid in his 82. Psalme sayth: How long will ye, corrupt Judges, False iudgement then awarde, And afterwarde he sayth,
Yet notwithstanding ye shall die as men, and so decaie, Thus shall ye Princes passe from hence aswell as we, J say. And in the 49. Psalme, he speaketh of kings that shall be fettered in yron chaynes. Now, the Prophet Ieremie,A note worthy the obseruati∣on. by the way, meaneth to reprehende and taxe the foolish confidence which the Iewes had in their king Zedechias, vnder whose shadowe they looked for nothing but peace and quietnesse. For although the Lorde in verie deede, of∣tentimes cōmunicateth vnto vs great benefites by the handes of all kinges and Princes, as in the 4. Chapter of the first booke of the kinges we reade, that in the dayes of Salomon euerie man liued peaceably vnder his vine and figge tree, and that for that cause kinges are compared to great trees full of greene leaues, vnder which, manie liuing creatures shadow them∣selues:Daniel. 4. yet must wee put great diffe∣rence betwixt good Princes, and wic∣ked and Apostate Princes, in which ranke Zedechias was one: and yet withall, very good Princes are subiect to alterations and chaunges, and eue∣rie man is a lyar, whereof wee haue a
notable example in the person of Sa∣lomon: and therefore the surest way for vs, is to beleeue that which Dauid setteth downe in 33. Psalme, ver. 12.16. where he sayth: Blessed is that nation whose God is the Lorde: The King is not saued by the multitude of an hoast: And in the 146. Psalme, ver. 3.4. he sayth: Put not you your trust in Princes, nor in the sonne of man, for there is no help in him His breath departeth, and he returneth to his earth, &c. The complaint of Ieremie, taken from the king of Iudah, putteth mee in remembraunce of such thinges as in our dayes haue come to passe about the Churches that professed the Gos∣pell, which is, that the greatest Prin∣ces amongst them, and of whom most account was made: as namely the two braue and stout Princes, Fredericke Duke of Saxon, & Philip Landgraue Hesson fell into the enemies handes in the dayes of the Protestantes wars: as also of later date, but after a more cruell and barbarous manner, hath beene seene trapped, the vertuous men of note, my Lordes the Prince of Conde, and the Admirall Chastil∣lon, vnder whose two shadowes, the
worlde verily thought the Churches should safely and peaceably remaine: as in deede the Lorde had brought great things to passe by them. But be∣cause we cannot, or at least will not, but make flesh & bloud too too much our Arme: therefore the Lorde will haue such Princely nourish fathers to be taken from vs, to the end we should call vpon him, and say as Dauid in his 57. Psalme, ver. 1.2. sayde: Haue mer∣cie vpon me, O God, haue mercie vpon me: for my soule trusteth in thee, and in the shadow of thy winges will J trust, till these afflictions be ouerpassed. J will call vppon the most high God, euen vpon the God that performeth his promise towardes mee. And in verie deede, It hath beene alwayes the meaning of our good God to de∣clare vnto his people, that although he raysed vp kinges who should be as remembraunces of the Messiah, yet for all that, that they should not think, that it was eyther Salomon, Ezechias, or yet Zedechias, who were but wret∣ched sinners, and subiect to manie in∣conueniences, whose kingdomes also came to an ende, that they must looke for, but for the true king, whose king∣dome is euerlasting, and whose nme
should be called The God of our righte∣ousnesse, as in the 23. of Ieremie wee reade. It is hee alone, as Zacharie in the first of S. Luke writeth, That shall saue vs from the handes of our enemies, that wee might serue him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse, &c. THE THIRD AND LAST part of the fourth Chapter. chin.21 REioyce and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the lande of Vr: the cup also shall passe through vnto thee: thou shalt be dronken and vomit. Ta.22 Thy punishment is accomplished, O daughter Syon; he will no more carrie thee away into captiuitie, but will visite thine iniquitie, O daughter Edom, and discouer thy sinnes. CERTAINE NOTES vpon this last part. IN this thirde and last part of the Chapter, the Prophet addresseth his speech vnto the enimies of the Church: but espe∣cially to the Idumeans, vnto whom is
foretolde their ruine: and with such reprochfull wordes as a cruell and an vngodly Nation deserueth: as if the Prophet shoulde haue saide thus. I would not wish you thinke, O ye Idu∣means, that poore miserable Iudah a∣lone, shal lie soaking in these miseries, and drinke the sower soupe alone that is within this cup: but that you also shall haue your turne, and marche in your owne ranke. The like reuolution also the Prophet Obadiah in the 16. and 17. verses of his prophesie, fore∣tolde vnto the Idumeans, saying: As ye haue dronke vpon mine holy mountaine, so shall all the heathen drinke continually: yea they shall drinke and swallowe downe, and they shall bee as though they had not beene. But vpon mount Syon shall be deli∣ueraunce, &c. To the same purpose al∣so speaketh the Prophet Michah in his 7. Chapter, ver. 8.9.10. saying: Re∣ioyce not against me, O mine enemie: though I fall, I shall rise: when I shal sitte in dark∣nesse, the Lorde shall be a light vnto mee. J will beare the wrath of the Lorde, because I haue sinned against him, vntill he plead my cause, and execute iudgement for mee: then will he bring mee foorth to the light, and J shall see his righteousnesse. Then she
that is mine enemie, shall looke vppon it, and shame shall couer her which sayde vnto me, where is the Lorde thy God? Mine eyes shall beholde her: and see her trooden downe as the mire in the streetes, &c. Moreouer, we are to note this ex∣cellent manner of speaking vsed in the holy Scripture, when as the Prophet sayth: That the cup shall passe vnto the Jdumeans: and as it is also sayde in the 75. Psalme ver. 8. That there is in the hande of the Lorde a cup, and the wine is red: and it is full mixt, and he powreth out of the same: surely all the wicked of the worlde shall wring out, and drinke the dregs thereof. Which saying is thus much to declare vnto vs, that like as the father of an housholde distributeth to euery one his portion and due, euen so doth our great God, appoint to euerie one his charge, punishment and chastise∣ment, but yet to diuerse ends and pur∣poses: For, this drinke is to some, to wit, to the elect of God, an holesome medicine, as a draught of wine mode∣rately taken is comfortable and glad∣some to the heart of man. For other∣wise, as Dauid writeth in his 16. Psalm ver. 5. The Lorde is their portion and their cup, &c. But it destroyeth the wicked,
euen as the dregges of wine which dronkardes drinke, destroyeth them. Such a cup of drinke was it that was giuen to the Idumeans, who should be discouered and layde bare, euen like drunkards: and as it fell out with poore Noah when hee was ouertaken with wine. Which thing the Prophet Iere∣mie in the 49. chapter of his prophe∣sie, ver. 10.11.12.Gennes. 9. hath more expresse∣ly declared, saying: J haue discouered Esau, I haue vncouered his secretes: and be shall not bee able to hide himselfe: his seede is wasted, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and there shall be none to say: Leaue thy fatherlesse children, and I will preserue them aliue, and let thy widdowes trust in me: beholde, they whose iudgement was not to drinke of the cup, haue assuredly drunke, and art thou hee that shall escape free? Thou shalt not go free, but shalt sure∣ly drinke of it, &c. Now it may be asked, howe it com∣meth to passe, why these Idumeans are set before vs, as the greatest enemies of the Church: seeing they were de∣scended from the auncient fathers. For Esau, who was surnamed Edom, that is to say, Redde, because he solde his birthright of eldership for a messe
of redde potage, as in the 25. of Gene∣sis we reade, was the sonne of Isaak, Iacobs brother. The reasons which hereon are to be noted, are these: first, the righteous and vnsearchable iudg∣mentes of God: who hated Esau, and made his mountaines desolate, & yet iustly, as in the 1. of Malachy we read. For, throughout all the scriptures may be seene an extreme pride, and a very reuolting in Esau, and in al his, who sequestred and withdrewe them∣selues into the mount Seir, and there trusting to their fortresses, lay in wait to vexe and trouble their brethren, in euerie place where they were able, as in the prophesie of Obadiah: and in the 137. Psalme we may read. And the inhumanitie and cruelty of these peo∣ple was so great, as that they denied passage vnto their poore bretheren which were comming out of Aegypt: notwithstanding that they most hum∣bly besought them, as in the 20. chap∣ter of Nombers may be seene: To bee short, this was but a mingle mangle in their religion, although they were cir∣cumcised: for there was nothing in them, but pride in their manners and behauiours, and violence in their
actions. And without all doubt, the fa∣milie of Caine and Esau was but a fi∣gure and representation of the tyran∣nie, Apostasie, and wickednesse of An∣tichrist: who after hee had once be∣gunne to disturbe Christian Religion, and had attayned to great authoritie and power: set vp himselfe more cru∣elly against all true and faithful Chri∣stians, then all the rest of the heathen, and barbarous Nations. But wee will not here deale about the iolly and ho∣norable titles of the Church, or yet of the successors of Peter: For, the Pope is such a successor to Peter,A compa∣rison. in the or∣der of all his dealings, as Esau and the Idumeans were Successors to Abra∣ham. Neither must we be discouraged, or thinke that God will continually suffer and abide this his arrogant and shamelesse boldnesse: but let him bee assured that he shall also drinke of the cuppe with the Idumeans: and that this great Babylon shall come downe, which hath doone thus manie and so great wickednesse, and spilt so much Christian bloud: as in the 18. of the Apocalipse is foretolde. That dwellest in the lande of Hur) Hur, was Aram his sonne, and Sem
his Nephew, from whome are issued the Aramites, that is to say, the Syri∣ans: who were neighbours to the Idu∣means in Trachonite: which is the countrie of Hur, of which countrey, as some suppose, Iob was. Verse 22.Thine iniquitie is consumed, or thy pu∣nishment is accomplished) The Hebrewe worde, Tam, signifieth not only perfe∣ction, but also an ende and consum∣mation. Nowe, Ieremie his meaning is not, That the iniquities should be so consumed, as that there should be no more account made of them, but that the punishmentes and chastisements of their iniquities were ended & past. For, after that the 70. yeares were en∣ded, the Lordes anger was past, and it neuer fell out after that, that all the people were ledde captiue: vntill such time as for their not acknowledging the day of their visitation, & for their despitefully contemning of the glad tydinges of grace, the Citie of Ierusa∣lem was rased by Tytus and Vespasi∣an, and all their gouernement ouer∣throwen and brought to naught. Whē the Prophet sayth, That their iniquities and chastisementes were past: it is spoken to shewe vnto vs, That God is not al∣wayes
angrie, and that when he hath executed his iudgementes, he will re∣member his mercies: as in that nota∣ble place of the 40. of Isaiah, ver. 12. we read, where it is saide: Comfort yee, comfort yee my people, will your God saye, Speake comfortably to Jerusalem, and crie vnto her, that her warfare is accomplished, and her iniquitie pardoned Let them then, that with great arrogancie, and bolde confidence, looke vpon the ca∣lamities that haue lighted vpō France, and vppon the Lowe Countries, and haue of them no compassion, but at∣tribute those punishmentes, to come to them, either for their maintaining of the Gospell, or else for the dissolute and wicked liues of the saide Nations, thinking it as it were to be a iust recō∣pence, and very well bestowed on thē: remember themselues, that the ini∣quitie of those afflicted people shall be consumed, and their cup emptied,A good lesson for E. to learn, and beware in time. and taken away: and that then, God will laie before his rightuous face, the ini∣quities of other Nations, which now liue in a iolly securitie: and make thē drinke by turne, of the cuppe of his wrath: and their drinke shalbe sowrer & bitterer, than euer they were proud,
vncourteous, and lulled a sleepe, in their sinnes and iniquities.An admo∣nition of Constan∣tine the great to all his famili∣ars. Wherefore it were verie requisite for euerie man to thinke wisely with him selfe, and do as Constantine the great was woont to doe, which was this, he would com∣monly admonish all those that were about him, and say, my masters, wee must all of vs one day render an ac∣count vnto God of our administrati∣ons and gouernements. Which thing Dauid marueilously well declareth in his 11. Psalme, ver. 4.5.6. saying: The Lorde is in his holy place: the Lordes throne is in heauen: his eyes do behold, and his eye lippes doe trie the children of men. The Lord trieth the righteous: but his soule hateth the wicked. Vpon the wicked he will rayne, coles, fire, and brimstone, and a stormie tem∣pest shall be their cuppe, &c. HERE FOLLOWE THE principall doctrines which were brieflie handled in the obser∣uations or notes. OF the true ornamentes of common weales, and kingdomes. Of the sorowful issue and condition, which of∣tentimes
befalleth great personages. Of the degrees of punishments: ac∣cording to the diuerse and sundry de∣grees and circumstances of sinnes: as for example, the people of Iudah com∣plaine and say, that their punishment was more rigorous than the punish∣ment of Sodome: for their vnthanke∣fulnesse also was farre greater. Now the captiuitie that they then were in, seemed to them more rigorous than the destruction of Sodome: first, because it seemeth in very deede, to bee more gentle and tollerable, precisely to fall into the handes of God, than into the handes of men, euen as Dauid in the 24. of the 1. of Samuell said. Second∣ly, we alwaies thinke short punishmēts and aduersities more tollerable, then those that continue long: as in the cap∣tiuitie of Babylon, to beholde whiles Ierusalem was besieged, the starued young children die of hunger in the streetes: the horrible murders of the Babylonians, the nobilitie carried a∣way captiue like poore beasts: the san∣ctuarie destroied: to heare the blasphe∣mies of the barbarous people: To liue and not to haue the meanes to liue well, was a great deale more greeuous
than if they had beene suddenly cast downe hedlong into a dungeon, and beene consumed with fire from heauen. In very deede as for that that remay∣neth, the destruction of Sodome is set downe vnto vs in the scripture, as a notorious and fearefull iudgement of God against the reprobate: as in the 13. of Isaiah. ver. 19. wee read, where it is saide. That Babylon which is the glorie of kingdomes, shall be in the destruction of God, as Sodome and Gomorhe. And in the 34. of the saide Isaiah, ver. 9.10. when a greeuous pu∣nishment was denounced to the Idu∣means, it is said, That the riuers ther∣of should bee turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the lande thereof should be burning pitch: it shall not be quenched night nor day, and the smoke thereof, shall go vp euer more. And in the 7. verse of S. Iude his Epistle it is also saide, That Sodome and Gomorhe and the Cities about them, are set foorth for an example, and suffer the vengeance of eternall fire. And therefore the Pro∣phet Ieremie his meaning is not to compare in euery condition, the capti∣uitie, with the destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrhe: but only that in respect of the continuaunce, it seemed that the Sodomites were sooner ridde and dis∣patcht. Here is also to be noted the place of  the Nazarites, vnto which they whom Basill calleth the order of ASCETES, are like: who were not like Monkes and Fryers, and that iolly rabble which liued in howling and chaun∣ting: But a choise kinde of people, that vsed a straite manner of life in all vertuous thinges, and especi∣ally in the exercises of all godlinesse, and reading of the holy scriptures, not meaning thereby to merite heauen, but rather to tame their flesh: not ty∣ing themselues to any humane tradi∣tion: For, it is lawfull for euery Chri∣stian that hath this gift of God, to cō∣mand whatsoeuer particular exercises of pietie he will. The fift point is, how cruell a thing  the rodde and scourge of famine is. The sixt doctrine is of the greatnes of Gods wrath: whereof hath beene  heretofore sufficiently spoken. Of the signes of a neare destruction  of a Countrey, and what an ill presage it is, when as the Gouernours and
Teachers of the people ouerflowe in wickednesse. Of the vaine confidence in the arme of flesh and bloud. Of the shortnesse, weakenesse, and inconstancie of the greatest Princes and mightiest kinges, of the shortnesse of their liues, and how subiect they are vnto a thousande inconueniences and chaunges. Of the boundes which the Lord li∣miteth to our miseries, appointing them certaine periodes, and making all people come to their turne & course when they are called by name. A PARAPHRASE VPON the fourth Chapter. BEholde, I beseech you,  howe all our glorious glittering is bedimmed: beholde I say, if euer ye sawe fine golde, or any ingote of the most excellent golde, so dusked in the middest of a furnace, as were all the glittering and beautifull outwarde shewes that were among vs: beholde, (alas) how all the goodly an beautifull stones of this proud and sa¦cred
Temple are scattered about all the corners of the streetes. Howe, forsooth, the noble men of  Iudah, who were of an other manner of mettall than the finest golde in the worlde, are no more esteemed nor ca∣red for, then olde earthen pitchers. O straunge and fearefull case: That there should be founde wilde beastes,  yea in the middest of the mercilesse sea, to swimme to the shore, and giue their young ones sucke: and to see the women of Ierusalem more cruel than the Ostryches of the wildernesse, not to be able to do the like duety to their sucking babes. For, the famine (alas) in this be∣sieged  Citie was such, as that the drie tongues of poore thirstie babes, stucke fast to the ruffe of their mouthes, and besides, there was manye and often times seene, during that siege, poore children houlding vp their hands, cra∣uing of a peice of bread, whose fathers and mothers were not able to afourd them the least morsell to put in their mouthes. Yea euen they that were wonted to  fare most delicately, and liued most easily and pleasauntly, died of hunger,
and threw vpon the myerie doonghils of the streets, the most rich and sump∣tuous apparell, and most costly furni∣ture that was in all the Citie. So that it verily seemed that the e∣state of this miserable people, was far wretchedder than the state of Sodom and Gomorrhe, who languished not so long, but were soone cōsumed with fire, without falling into the hands of the enemie. But among the rest, what an heart∣breake, I pray you, was this, to see the venerable and reuerende Nazarites, reuerende euerie may, both for their godlinesse, deuotion, comelinesse of bodie, and well coulored faces: which God had made whiter than eyther milke or snowe, yea more orient than eyther pearles, or yet white Sa∣phires. And now, (Alas) were become so tawnie coulored and disfigured, as that no man was able to knowe them that mette them in the streetes. They were (alas) drier than anie kexe, so as their skinne cleaued to the verie bones. Thus wee see, what a scourge fa∣mine  is, which woundeth more cruel∣ly
than the edge of the Sword, and the death of those that died for want of victualles was more greeuous, than they that were runne through and through with a launce staffe, or with a sharpe pointed sworde. For this was a monstrous sight to  see in this famine, mothers, who at all other times, were saide to bee tender hearted, and yet in this miserable di∣stresse of Ierusalem, had such harde hearts, as that they slewe their owne children, and after boyled and rosted them, to satisfie their hunger, for the prolonging of their miserable liues. But what shall I say? It was the  wrath, and iust furie of the eternall a∣gainst their sinnes, which nowe were growen to a full measure. It was the fierce wrath of the Almightie, who ra∣sed euerie thing to the bare ground. Otherwise, there were neuer anie  that once durst thinke, that anie such shame should touch vs: no, not the most stout and mightie Monarches of the worlde, neuer thought that they should euer haue come to so good a market of vs, nor our enemies to haue so tryumphed ouer vs in the middest of our gates, and holy places of Ieru∣salem.
And therefore wee must take it to come by reason of our sinnes: yea euē by reason of the sinnes of these iollie Prophetes and Priestes, who chiefely seduced the people, to cause them to liue loosely, and were also the most cruell, mutinous, and extreame dea∣lers in all kinde of violence. Euen to runne blinded with rage through the streetes, like distraught people, and to spill so much bloud, as that their verie garments were all em∣brued with bloud. So as they cryed out vnto them, ac∣cording to the ordinance of the lawe; depart ye men defiled with bloud, de∣part & defile not others. And indeede God did verie wel to cause thē depart, and take their flight to some place els: In so much as that the verie Heathen skorned them for it and sayde, That they shoulde looke no more to defile the sanctuarie, whereunto they should neuer returne againe. Considering that it was the iust wrath and vengeance of God, to haue them dispersed: and cōmitted into the enemies handes, who were so merci∣lesse, as that they respected not Priests,
nor yet age. And yet notwithstanding, we poore  fooles, we I say, euen vnto this present haue fixed our eyes vppon the vaine aide of straungers, and wee, as a man would say, vse sharpely to looke out for the iolly helpe of Aegypt, seeking for figges among thistles or bryers. But we are well ynough serued. For  beholde we are so pend in, as that we are watched in the streetes: neither is it lawefull for vs to come out of our dores: our ende (alas) and terme is come and finished: wee are vtterly vndone. The Aegles which soare and cut the  highest cloudes in the ayre, are not swifter nor nimbler than our enemies, that pursue vs through the moūtaines: yea they laye waite for vs in the wil∣dernesse. And that (alas) which most discō∣forteth  vs, is the king our Maister, the Lordes annointed, who was woont to put vs in a snoring sleepe, and vnder the shadowe of whose whinges, wee thought our selues very safe, and hee that vsed to iest at the Heathē, is now himselfe fallen into the handes of his enemies, fettered like a sclaue, and
carried away captiue. Goe to nowe yee Idumeans, a peo∣ple which haue alwayes reioyced at our miseries: stretch out your selues nowe, cheare vp your selues with our miseries, and bath yee in them: and doe it so much the rather, because ye shall shortly be taught to daunce the selfe same daunce, and lie soaking in the same bath, wherein we nowe lie a soake: and shall drinke your filles out of the same cup: vntill such time as ye be discouered, and your shame laide wide open. As for thee Syon, and thou people of Iudah, thy reckoning is ended and thy miserie wearing away: GOD is for the rest, contented with that which thou haste fuffered for thy sinnes. But it is yee (O people of Idumea) with whom the Lorde nowe meaneth to haue to doe: and will call thee by name: to examine thy sinnes, cruelties, and wicked∣nesse, which hee will bring in euidence against thee.
THE FIFT CHAPTER. Th Argument of the Chapter. THIS Chapter is com∣monly called: The praier of the Prophet Ieremie: for it carrieth not with it the like argument that the others do: but seemeth to be, as it were, a verie recapitulation of the la∣mentations. The order of the Alpha∣bet is not obserued in this Chapter, but beginneth & endeth with a pray∣er: whereupon it is called, The prayer of Ieremie. For, although the Lord was fully resolued, as heretofore wee haue shewed, to accomplish his furie, and exercise his iust iudgementes vppon the captiued people into Babylon: yet for all that, on the other side, the mi∣serable Iewes were promised to be one day deliuered, as in the 29. of Ieremie ver. 10.12. we read in these very words: After seuentie yeares (sayth the Lorde) be accomplished at Babell: I will visite you, and performe my good promise towarde you, and cause you to returne vnto this place: Then shall yee crie vnto mee, and yee shall goe and pray vnto mee, and J will heare
you, &c. By these wordes Ieremie tea∣cheth vs, not to be faint hearted, nor yet yeelde, no not vnto the most ex∣treame greeuous, and intollerable tri∣bulations and afflictions, but rather with an invincible assurance laye fast holde vppon this anker of fayth and hope, in the infallible promises of our God, which the Apostle in the 6. to the Hebrewes, verse 19. calleth, The sure and stedfast anker of the soule. Vpon this anker did good Kinge Ezechias lay fast hould, when as after hee had heard the wicked blasphemies of Rab∣shaketh, hee sent Ambassadours vnto Isaiah,Isaiah. 57.4. praying him to lift vp his prayer vnto God, for the residue that were left: that is to say, to pray feruently and ef∣fectually. See also howe the Prophet Habacucke concludeth his prophesie with a prayer in his 3. Chapter. For, after he vnderstoode by an especiall reuelation, that many great calami∣ties should light vpon the people, hee presented himselfe both in his owne name, and in the name of all the peo∣ple, before the diuine Maiestie, giuing to th rest a forme of most humble & heare prayer, according to the pro∣mise which we haue in the 50. Psalme
ver. 1. where it is sayde, Call vpon me in the day of trouble, and I will heare thee.The teares & praiers of the faith¦ful are ve∣ry effectu∣all before God. And it was also verie well sayde of S. Ambrose, That teares and prayers are the very true armour and weapons of the seruantes of God: yea, armour and weapons of great effect, and terrible to the wicked. Now, there are in this Chapter con∣tayned three pointes. For, in the fiue first verses is comprised the proporti∣on, abridging, and abating of the mi∣serie, not to the ende to make knowen vnto GOD a thing which he before knewe not: but by our humilitie, to drawe him to compassion, and make vs our selues vnderstande and feele our miseries. And to make the matter more lamentable, the Prophet like∣neth the people to poore fatherlesse children and widdowes, which kinde of people are greatly to be pitied, and are recommended in the lawe, forbid∣ding any man to hurt them, as in the 16. and 24. of Deutron. we may read. Ieremie amplifieth this complaint, by the excellencie of the thinges which they had lost, as of their so honoura∣ble possessions which were deliuered vp vnto the Heathen: and of their ex∣treame
pouertie, and how the people with the endaungering of their liues, must get their foode, and howe that hunger oftentimes causeth men take ill counsell and part, so that they be∣ing pressed with hunger, were brought to submit themselues vnto the Aegyp∣tians and Assyrians, for bread: In so much that in steed of abundance they suffred want, in steede of libertie, scla∣uerie: and that which was most gree∣uous, no age nor sexe was exempt, or spared. But here a question may be moued, whether Ieremie keepeth a good or∣der and right proceeding in his praier, yea or no, because that in his prayer and petition, hee beginneth first to craue worldly thinges. For it seemeth, that it agreeth not with that order, that ought to bee in prayer, whereof the auncient Doctor Basil in his book of solitarie life speaketh, saying: There is in prayer sayth he, two partes? The first, requireth the glorifying of God, with a true submission: The other, the petition which wee entende to make vnto God. And therefore when thou entendest to pray vnto god, thou must not at the first choppe, beginne with
thy demaunde: for in so dooing,After what maner vve ought to beginne to pray. thou discouerest a dishonest kinde of rashe boldnesse, as though nothing else mo∣ued thee to pray, but thy necessitie & want. Wherefore, when thou meanest to pray, cast thy selfe, thy wife, thy children, yea and al the world besides, behinde thy backe: and then let thy heart ascende into heauen, and be∣ginne thy prayer for his glorie, who created all things both in heauen and in earth. And after thou hast glorified God, his power, goodnesse, and Ma∣iestie: and acknowledged thine owne wretchednesse, vnworthinesse, and in∣sufficiencie, then craue at God his handes, that which thou hast to de∣maunde, &c. Thus wee see what Basil saith. And this right well agreeth, with that forme of prayer which Iesus Christ himself hath taught vs, making vs beginne with sanctifying, hallowing of his name. But here we are to note, that God regardeth not so much the order, and eloquence of wordes, as he doth the heart. In so much that Iere∣mie oftentimes in the chapters going before, highly cōmendeth the iustice of God, and testifieth the acknow∣ledgement of the peoples sins. Lastly,
there is a difference betweene artifi∣ciall prayers which a man vpon some meditation before hande, maketh and powreth out, although they be verie large, and those prayers which S. Au∣gustine calleth rouing prayers, as it were,Augustine to Probā. shot out of a bow, which we sud∣denly and lightly powre out, euen as we finde our want. The other part of Ieremie his pray∣er, is a sounde and free confession of sinnes, as in the sixt verse may be seen. Woe be vnto vs, because we haue sin∣ned: And from that place and verse we drawe the interpretation of the 7. verse, where it is saide: Our fathers haue sinned, and are not: and wee haue borne ini∣quities. It seemeth by these words that the Prophet murmureth, as though they had wrongfully & without cause, borne the paine and punishment due to their Fathers: but when we conferre and compare it with the saying of the 16. verse, it appeareth that Ieremie his meaning was nothing else, but accor∣ding to that which is sayde in the 9. of Daniel his prophesie ver. 5. saying: We and our fathers haue sinned, &c. Which thing also Ezechiel in the 18. chapter of his Prophesie ver. 2. makerh men∣tion
of, saying: Our fathers haue eaten sower grapes, and the children teeth are set on edge: nowe this is not the Prophet his opinion, but the opinion of the Iewes: who tooke the wordes amisse: as afterwarde in the 20. verse is decla∣red, for thus it is saide: That the soule that sinneth shall die: and that God layeth no punishment vpon any man, except he deserueth it: And therefore these words of Ieremie, Our fathers haue sinned, and are not, are spoken only by way of la∣menting the long continuance of the aduersities, from the fathers to the children: So that their auncestors that were dead, seemed to haue escaped farre better cheape, than they that li∣ued, who sawe so long a continuaunce of miseries. Howbeit in the 16. verse he acknowledgeth it to bee the iust vengeaunce of God. And therefore both the one and the other is true, that is to say, That the childe beareth the fathers iniquitie: for so much as the children also are sinners: and it is all one reason with the Lorde to pu∣nish the childrē, as well as the fathers: againe, it is true that the children beare their fathers punishmentes, and doe continue from the fathers to the
sonne, yea many times vnto the third and fourth generation: but yet most iustly, when as the iniquities of the fa∣thers descende vnto the children by inheritaunce, and that when the chil∣dren followe the wicked steppes of their fathers, then many times the sinnes of their auncestors are heaped vpon them, without God of his meere fauour and grace meaneth to exempt some one or other. And therefore Ie∣remie his intent was nothing lesse thā to flatter, or excuse the people: whom he alwayes as sharpely reprooued as any Prophet could doe: as in verie deede, it is the office and dutie of Pa∣stors, to make men liuely feele the greeuousnesse of their sinnes: as S. Ie∣rome very notably hath written vpon this place of the twelfe of Ecclesiastes ver. 11. The wordes of the wise are like goades. These wordes (sayth he) are not spoken to flatter and smooth men in their sinnes,Flatterers the grea∣test and most nota∣ble idiotes and fooles but to pricke and awake them that they might be stirred vp to repentaunce. If wordes therefore be accompanied with flattery, a man may very well conclude, that they proceed not from a wise heart. &c. The third part of the chapter, from
the 19. verse vnto the end, is a prayer, and petition full of holy deuotion, and an acknowledging of the greatnesse of our God; as in the 19. verse, is cele∣brated the eternitie and stabilitie of the Lordes throne, which is opposed vnto the frayle and weake thrones of earthly Princes, and of the Temple of Ierusalē, that was set on fire & burnt, and is as much as if Ieremie shoulde haue saide. Although, O Lorde our God, all the world should tremble and shake, and the Temple of Salomon become more ruinous than it is: yet thy glory, O thou most high, remay∣neth firme and sure, and thy domini∣on lasteth for euer, & thou art strong ynough to vphold and maintain those that are thine. All the force of his ar∣gument is in the 20. verse, where Ie∣remie sayth: Wherefore dost thou forget vs thine owne people for euer, &c. For a Master of a housholde hath great care ouer his seruauntes, and maintayneth them: now, wee O Lorde are thine, and therefore we beseech thee to de∣fende and vpholde vs. But it may bee that some man will say, why? Euerie Master is bound to do that, if he be a∣ble whereunto Ieremie aunswereth;
that God, whose throne is euerlasting, is full of abilitie to doe it. Againe on the other side, if any man would saye, why? it is reason that euery mā should helpe his seruaunts. But these people were sinners, and were reuolted from the obedience of the Lorde. Now Iere∣my referreth al this vnto the free pro∣misse, & maketh his foundation ther∣on, according to the saying of the Psal¦mist in his 79. Psalme, We are the sheep of thy pasture: And in the 120. Psalme, the Prophet also concludeth in this manner, that by reason of the vnion which the faithfull haue with Christ, therfore as the throne of God is euer∣lasting, euen so also shal his seruantes remaine and his church be preserued. In the 21. verse followeth the de∣mande, Conuert vs vnto thee O Lorde, and we shall be conuerted. Euen thus do Va∣table and Santes read this verse, and the greatest number of the Interpre∣tors vnderstand this place to be meant of repenting and conuerting to God: out of which place, this doctrin of the Pelagians hath beene wonted to bee drawen: that it lieth not in our power and strength to conuert: but we must desire it at Gods handes with earnest
and feruent groanes: as Dauid in his 51. Psalme beseecheth the Lord to cre∣ate in him a pure and cleane heart. Our la∣ter Interpretors, as Trimelius, and Iu∣nius read it thus, Restore vs O Lorde a∣gaine into our former estate, that wee may returne: as in the 80. Psalme it is said, Restablish vs O Lord God: as if he should haue saide, Chaunge our captiuitie, O Lorde, into freedome, and bring vs againe into the lande of promise. The like words also we finde in the 126. Psalme, ver. 4. where it is said Cause vs O Lord, to return out of captiuitie. And thus much as touching the argumēt of this 5. Chap. THE TEXT OF THE fift Chapter. 1 REmember O Lord, what is come vnto vs: consider and behold our reproch. 2 Our inheritance is turned to the stran∣gers, and our houses to the Aliantes. 3 We are fatherlesse, euen without fa∣thers: and our mothers are as widowes. 4 We haue drunke our water for money, and our wood is solde vnto vs. 5 Our neckes are vnder persecution: e are wearie, and haue no rest. 6 We haue giuen our handes to the
Egyptians, and to Asshur to be satified with bread. 7 Our fathers haue sinned and are not: and we haue borne their iniquities. 8 Seruauntes haue ruled ouer vs, and none would deliuer vs out of their handes. 9 We gate our bread with the perill of our liues, because of the sworde of the wil∣dernesse. 10 Our skinne was blacke like as an ouen, because of the burning winde of fa∣mine. 11 They defiled the women in Syon, and the maides in the Cities of Judah. 12 The Princes are hanged vp by thei hande: the faces of the Elders were not had in honour. 13 They tooke the young men to grinde: and the children fell vnder the wood. 14 The Elders haue ceased from the gate: and the young men from their songes. 15 The ioye of our heart is gone: our daunce is turned into mourning. CERTAINE OBSERVATI∣ons vpon the first part. REmember O Lorde,) S. Ierome vpon this place had great rea¦son to say, that it was an vn∣comely
and vnfit thing to attribute forgetfulnes vnto God. ut it is a kind of speech which we vse, when as wee would he God let vs vnderstand by some good and gracious effect, that he remembreth vs. Our inheritaunce) It is very God him  selfe, to speake properly, that is our true possession and inheritaunce: as the Prophet Dauid in his 16. Psame calleth him. But here Ieremie hath re∣garde vnto the holy lande that was promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cob, and their posteritie, whereinto, by the especiall and wonderfull conduct of the most mightie God, they were brouht: which lande, was as it were a visible power and testimonie of gods fauour, and of the incorruptible in∣heritance, that was reserued for them in heauen: as in very deede the Apo∣stle in the 12. to the Hebrewes. ver. 28 most notably exhorteh vs: That wee should looke for a kingdome, which cannot be shaken: retaining notwithstanding the grace, whereby we may serue & please God in the ful obedience and reuerence of his ho∣ly name, as becommeth his faithfull ser∣uantes. And whensoeuer the Tyraunts of this world shall driue vs out of our
landes or possessions, let vs remem∣ber that wee are not tyed to anie cer∣taine lande in this worlde nd that our Citizenship is in heauen: where al our ioy is, that is to say, Iesus Christ, in whom and by whom, we are establi∣shed the inheritors of the worlde, as in the 37. Psalme it is said, yea the ve∣ry right & true inheritors of al things: as S. Paule in the 8. to the Romanes teacheth. And therefore let it not greeue vs to see the wicked put vs out of our earthly manors or possessions, but let vs say as Dauid in his 119. Psalme, ver. 19. sayth: I am a straunger vpon earth: hide not thy commaundements from me. And in the ver. 57. O Lord, thou art my portion, I haue determined to keepe thy wordes. We haue giuen our handes) Some vn∣derstande these wordes, as if the Iewes had made a couenant with the Aegyp∣tians. But because Ieremie sayth as much in that behalfe of the Assyrians, that the Iewes had giuen to them also, their handes: it cannot be taken for a couenaunt made with them alone: but it is rather to be vnderstoode of a great submission, whereinto they were driuen, euē with lifting vp their hands
to begge their bread of them both. Our fathers haue sinned) The meaning of this place, wee haue handled in the  argument of this Chapter. Seruaunts haue ruled ouer vs) This  falleth to their lot that are ouercome: To wit, They must be bondslaues, and make coursie euen vnto their seruants that haue subdued them. Nowe, there is not a more greeuous bondage than for a mā to become bondslaue to beg∣gers and beggers brattes, who most commonly are the cruellest and har∣dest to be pleased, and will take vppon them more than their Masters them∣selues: as our Sauiour Christ in the 18. of S. Mathew sheweth, speaking of the parable of the seruaunt that dealt hardly with his fellowe seruaunt. And it is not to be thought anie straunge thing, that there were in this great Courte of Babylon proude and dis∣dainefull seruauntes: seeing that in the meanest houses that almost can be, a man shal finde arrogant and pre∣sumptuous seruaunts, who if any haue to do with them, will take vpon them more than any noble man or gentle∣man of great worship. Because of the sworde of the wildernesse)
Some, by this worde, desert, or wil∣dernesse, vnderstande the land, which at that time was made desert or a wil∣dernes. Howbeit the scripture calleth most what, a desert, all landes that are not throughly manured and enha∣bited: and it seemeth that the Prophet his meaning is, that hunger so sore pressed them, as that it no whit gree∣ued them to runne ouer the wildest places to get themselues foode, if the daunger of the souldiers had not stay∣ed them. They made the young men grinde) This was a most greiuous paine which they layde vpon seruauntes and sclaues for a punishment: euen to grinde in the milles, as Asses did. In the 11. of Ex∣odus ver. 5. where the first borne of Aegypt are spoken of: it is saide, That all the first borne should die, euen from the first borne of Pharao that sate vppon the throne, vnto the first borne of the mayde that was at the Mill, that is to say, from the honorablest personage, vnto the meanest and basest. The Elders haue ceased from the gate) Ieremie vseth a very good grace, when as he attributeth to euerie age such pleasure as chiefely belongeth vnto
him, and whereof he was then depri∣ued. For all iudgementes were vsed in the gates of the Cities, as in the 16. of Deutro. we read. So that it was a signe that all iudgementes ceased, when as none of the Elders were seene sitting in the gates. Vnto the young men is attributed Musicke: which the olde men cared not for: as in the 2. of Sa∣muel 19. ver. 3. we read what the olde father Barzellay sayde vnto Dauid, That in that his so great olde age hee could not heare any more the voice of singing men and women. Nowe, this can be no small griefe, but also a very lamenta∣ble estate, to see all degrees of men so discountenaunced, as that none can be suffred to vse his ordinarie and ac∣customed exercises. This is as much as if the sunne, the earth, & the stars, should cease any more to doe thir of∣fice. Among all the rest, Musicke, is an especiall gift of God, not onely to re∣ioyce and recreate mens mindes: but it is meete also for euerie honest man to take pleasure in sweete Harmonie: and besides, all the faithfull shoulde bende all their Musicke to the pray∣sing of God: and according to the times and places, serue him therwith:
alwayes keeping a comely and decent order in all thinges. Whereupon, S. Iames in his 5. Chapter, ver. 13. set∣teth vs downe a rule saying: Js there a∣ny man among you that is afflicted? Let him pray. Is any merrie? Let him sing. Ie∣remie in his 33. Chapter, ver. 10.11. speaking of the deliueraunce and re∣storing of the people sayth: There shall be heard in this place, the voice of ioy, and the voice of gladnes, the voice of the bride∣grome, and the voice of the bride, &c. But when in the peace and rest which God bestoweth vppon them, they become secure, and exceede in all licentious∣nesse, plonging themselues ouer head and eares in the delightes and plea∣sures of the worlde, in steede of loo∣king vnto GOD: then the Lorde is enforced to change his Musick and Harmonous accordes, into pytifull cries, sighes, groanes and sobbes: as in the 8. of Amos he threatneth to do. THE SECOND PART OF the fift Chapter. 16 THe Crowne of our head is fallen: wo vnto vs that euer we sinned. 17 Therefore our heartes are heauie,
and our eyes dimme. 18 Because of the Mount Syon which is desolate: the Foxes runne vppon it. THE OBSERVATIONS vpon these verses. THE seconde part, is a confession of sinnes, which right well shew∣eth that the Prophet meaneth not to excuse the people, but teacheth the very selfe same lesson which all the rest of the Prophetes do: which is this, That the best and soundest way for vs, in all our afflictions, is to humble our selues be∣fore God, and crie him mercie: For, heare what the Lorde sayth in the 66. of Isaiah ver. 2. Vnto whom shall I looke, sayth the Lorde, euen vnto him that is poore, and of a contrite spirite, and trem∣bleth at my wordes. The Crowne) he calleth the crowne of their head, their honour and orna∣ment: which thing most manifestly appeareth in euerie common wealth: For, the crowne is the most honora∣ble ornament that kinges keepe in
their closets. Salomon also in the 16. of his Prouerbes, ver. 31. sayth: That age is a crowne and ornament of glorie, when it is founde in the way of righteousnesse. In this place Ieremie by a Crowne, meaneth whatsoeuer honourable and notable thing they haue: which thing hath bin particularly set downe in the 4. chap. Woe vnto vs that euer we sinned) here we see the right and sure remedie a∣gainst impatiencie: to feele how gree∣uously wee haue offended this great God: and that therefore his wrath is iustly enflamed against vs: For, from whēce come our murmurings? whēce proceedeth our impatiencie? Saue on∣ly but that we thinke wee haue great wrong, or that God sheweth himselfe too too rigorous vnto vs? Which thing no man in truth will thinke, that will in very deede acknowledge what a greeuous fact it is to offende the Ma∣iestie of God. S. Hilarie, writing vp∣pon 126. Psalme sayeth: That wee should sowe with teares the confessing and acknowledging of our sinnes, to the ende that we being thus humbled, might reape and gather together with ioye the comfort promised by Iesus Christe, which consisteth in the for∣giuenesse
of our sinnes, and in the assu∣rance of his grace. Because of the Mount Syon) By this Mount is meant also the other mount ioyning to Moria, whereuppon the Temple was builte: yea euen the whole Citie of Ierusalem, but be∣cause Dauid his Castle was built vp∣pon Mount Syon, and that Dauid the King and Prophet was hee, who was not onely a figure and represen∣tation of the Messiah, but also hee, of whom hee shoulde bee borne ac∣cording to the fleshe: it falleth out manie times, that in the Scripture, mētion is made of Mount Syon, as the thing that representeth the Church. But nowe the sayde Mount Syon is abandoned as well as Sylo, where the Arke of the Lorde in olde time rested: as God in the seuenth of Iere∣mie menaceth, as well because of the vaine confidence which the Iewes had in that mountaine, and in that Tem∣ple: as also for that time the is nowe come, whereof Iesus in the 4. of Saint Iohn, ver. 23. spake vnto the woman of Samaria, That the true worshippers, without beeing tyed to anie certaine moun∣taine or Countrie, shoulde worshippe the
Lorde in all places of the worlde in spirite and truth. Now Ieremie complayneth in our text, that this holy mount Sy∣on was ouerrunne with Foxes, which wandred about there at their pleasure shewing thereby, that it was become altogether a wildernesse, and an habi∣tation for wilde beastes: or else signi∣fying thereby, allegorically, the subtil Tyrauntes which are compared to Foxes, as in the seconde of the Croni∣cles, and thirde of S. Luke, where Ie∣sus Christe speaketh of Herode, wee may read. THE THIRDE PART OF the fift Chapter. 19 BVt thou, O Lorde remainest for e∣uer: thy throne is from generation to generation. 20 Wherefore doest thou forget vs for euer, and forsake vs so long time? 21 Turne thou vs vnto thee, O Lorde, and we shall be turned: renue our dayes as of olde. 22 But thou hast vtterly reiected vs: thou art exceedingly angrie against vs.
THE OBSERVATIONS vpon these verses. THIS last parte, as be∣ing the conclusion of these lamentations, is verie feeling, and gar∣nished with arguments, taken from the verie nature of God himself, euen by auncient experience: thereby to induce the Lorde to reach out his hande vnto them, for their de∣liuerance. Thou O Lorde remainest, or sittest for euer) This manner of speech is taken from the thrones, & chaires of Estate, of worldly Princes, wherein they sitte, and wherin they meane to shew their Maiestie, as in the 12. of the Actes we reade: what a stirre Herode kept, to shewe him selfe in his kingly throne, when as the Tyrians and Sydonians came to reconcile themselues vnto him. But as cōcerning God, although heauen in the scripture is called his throne, yet we must not imagine him to be an earthly, corruptible, and cor∣porall substaunce:Math. 5. but that by his throne is meant, an holy, righteous, and stable rule: his gouernement and
rightuousnesse. And therefore as of∣ten as wee see numbers of wronges, and violences proceede from these worldly thrones: or that the mightie ones vpon their royall seats pronoūce decrees against vs, yet let vs remem∣ber this firme throne of our God,Psal. 2. who reigneth on high, and laugheth mens enterprises and deuises to skorne. For although the greatest Kinges in the worlde shall loose their thrones, and all kingdomes come to an ende, as in the 2. of Daniel was shewed by that great image, yet shal the kingdome of Christ & his throne remayne stedfast for euer, & S. Paul in the 5. of the 2. to the Cor. sayth: That we must and shall, all appeare before the iudgement seat of Christ. Wilt thou forget vs for euer) This is spoken according to the capacity and weakenesse of our flesh, which alwaies feareth we should be forgotten: In so much yt our ill cōsciences many times perplexe vs, & make vs doubt of Gods fauour. And although the faithfull a∣bide many great conflictes, as if God meant vtterly to forget thē, and haue many cogitations in their heades, yet they come to this point at last which Dauid in his 94. Psalm, ver. 14. mentio∣neth,
That the Lord will not faile his peo∣ple, nor forsake his inheritaunce. Turne thou vs) This is not spoken  here properly of the inwarde turning as we haue said in the argumēt: but of the turning, or returning of the peo∣ple into their former estate, seing that he addeth, Renue our daies as of old: and it is much like vnto that which is spo∣ken in the 90. Psalm, ver. 13.15. saying: Returne (O Lord, how long?) Comfort vs ac∣cording to the daies that thou hast afflicted vs. And that which Ieremy saith, to thee: Turne thou vs to thee: is to shew the end of the deliuerance: as if he shold haue said, that it may be for thy glory, or, to the ende thou mightest haue a people which may honor thee, in thy sanctu∣arie, as heretofore they haue done. As in very deede this is the end of all spi∣ritual deliuerances,1. Pet. 2. That we should shew his power, who hath called vs out of darke∣nesse, into his merueilous light. Wilt thou vtterly reiect vs?) Some  read thus, If thou hast not reiected vs: or surely, if thou hast reiected vs, thou art exceedingly angrie with vs. All commeth as it were to one poynt: onely this is to be noted, that the Pro∣phet his meaning is not to charg God
with an vnbridled kind of fury or cho∣ler, as men are possessed withall: but as it is notably set downe in the 11. of O∣seah, ver. 9. where it is saide: That God will not execute the fiercenesse of his wrath, because he is God, and not man. Where∣fore, the Prophet Ieremie was well assured that the Lord would not vtter∣ly reiect his people whom he had cho∣sen: which thing S. Paule also in the 11. to the Romanes assuredly setteth downe, howsoeuer hee punished the Iewes: howbeit Ieremie meaneth thus to conclude this his excellent prayer: O eternall and euerliuing God, is it possible that thou wilt euer faile thy people? And continue thy furie for euer, as in very deede wee haue well deserued: and as at this day in open shwe, and by the sorrowfull counte∣naunce of the whole Countrey, many ay well thinke: but (alas) thou hast no such respect: thou art most faithful in thy promisses: and most able to de∣liuer vs euen out of the middest of the graue. Whereof, there is in the 51. of Isaiah, ver. 6. a verie notable promise, wherein is sayde: Lift vp your eyes vnto the heauens, and looke vppon the earth be∣neath: for, the heauens shall vanish away
like smoke, and the earth shall waxe olde like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall perish in like manner: but my salua∣tion shall be for euer, and my righteousnesse shall not be abolished, and in the 16. ver. he sayth: J haue put my wordes in thy mouth, and haue defended thee in the shadowe of mine hande: and that J may say vnto Syon, thou art my people. Nowe vnto the King of Kinges, and Lord of Lordes, be all ho∣nor and power for euer. So be it. A PARAPHRASE VPON the fift Chapter. TO conclude, O eternall God, vnto whom all things are open, and which know∣est vs before we were, and remembrest vs before we sought thee: shew vnto vs, if it be thy good pleasure in this our extremitie, wherein it see∣meth thou hast no care nor thought of vs, yet that thou hast not forgotten vs. Looke vppon vs with thine eyes of mercie, that thou mayest consider of the miserie and shame which we nowe suffer. 2 For, (alas) what a lamentable
thing is it to see a barbarous Nation rush in vppon our possessions, and fu∣riously enter vppon our sweete and pleasant houses: to see (I say) a stran∣ger in this lande of promise, out of which, thou in olde time, drauest out the people, that in it thou mightest plant our forefathers. 3 But what speake I heere, of our fore-fathers, we are nowe Orphelins: without Father: and our Mothers, through these horrible slaughters, are become widowes. 4 We haue no water, but that wee must pay for, and as for our wood it is solde vnto vs. 5 Our necks are laden with an hea∣uie bundle of afflictions, and wee can haue no rest in all our paines. 6 If we will haue any meate, wee must bee faine to bowe vnto the Bar∣barians, Aegyptians, and Assyrians, and beseeche them vppon our knees for it. 7 This miserie (alas) continueth from the father to the sonne: but as for our fathers, they are dead and gone, and haue borne their punishment for their sins: and we still suffer the same punishmentes.
8 We haue in this sorrowfull and violent transporting, to do both with masters & seruants: whereby we haue very well experimented, that there is not a more rude & vnmerciful villain, than a begger or beggers bratte, that commeth once to be a commaunder: euen as we now are mastred, & chea∣red vp by the Assyrians stonie hearted Lackies: so that we are dealt with all out of all reason. 9 We cannot goe any way to seeke for victualles: yea although we trauell the most vnknowen and wilde waies, but that wee trauell in perill of our liues. 10 Whereupon hunger hath made vs so taunie, & donne coloured, as that a man would say, we were altogether skorched, as it were in an ouen, or in a skorching winde. 11 But the thing that is more intol∣lerable than death it selfe, there is nei∣ther wife nor mayde in all the coun∣trie, whom the Barbarians haue not enforced and defiled. 12 For they had so little regard, as that they tooke maruelous great plea∣sure in hanging vp the Princes and men of greatest note of all Iudah: not
sparing or reuerencing olde gray hea∣red men. 13 And as for the young men, they emploied their flourishing age, as they employed their Asses and milhorses to drawe in the mill, or else to the carry∣ing of such great burdens of woode as pressed them to the grounde. 14 In so much as they had no care to see the reuerende old Fathers sitte in the gates of the Cities, or in their seates of Iustice: neither yet to heare the pleasaunt songes and sweete har∣monie of any iolly and lustie young Damsell. 15 Alas wee haue forgotten what mirth meaneth, & it is so long since we had a breathing time, as that in stede of melodie, there is nothing to bee heard among vs, but sighing and wee∣ping. 16 For, the crowne of honour, and whatsoeuer notable thing else that we had, is fallen to the grounde, and cru∣shed in pieces. O cursed sinnes which haue caused so many miseries. 17 Which maketh our heartes lan∣guish, and dimme our sorrowfull eyes, with powring out of abundaunce of teares.
18 When as we see this noble moūt Syon, with the little holie hill neere adioyning to bee an habitation for Foxes. 19 But thou O most high and migh∣tie God, whose throne is stablished a∣boue the heauens, and whose king∣dome is euerlasting. 20 What auaileth it to haue gotten vnto thee, by thy mightie and terrible arme, and with so many woonderfull exploytes, this people, & so long time conducted, dressed, and addressed, and of thy meere fauour and grace allying them vnto thee, and making vnto thē so gracious and beneficiall promisses: if thou wilt nowe let them lie still in their miseries, and leaue them for e∣uer. 21 Now therefore, thou great shep∣heard of Israell, bring once againe the captiued people into their auncient manors: restablish thou thy Church, and gather together thy flocke, and poore seruantes, and through thy fa∣uour and grace, renue thou our estate: as the rose in the spring time renueth and refresheth the face of the earth. 22 Declare and shewe (O heauenly father) vnto the whole worlde, that
thou mindest not to contemne those that are thine, and reiect them for e∣uer, although for a while, thou corre∣ctest and chastisest them. Let the effect shew thee to be a God, yea, and that a gentle and mercifull God, and not a man that will alwaies keepe extreame choler and anger in his heart. A PRAYER FOR THE Church in these dayes, wherin is con∣tayned a Lamentation of the pre∣sent miseries, and an earnest praier vnto the Lord, for the deliuerance of his people. O Almightie, euerliuing, most good, most true, & most gracious God, and most mercifull, louing, and holy father: If euer it was lawful for thy Prophet Ieremy to lament the miseries of his time, and the captiuitie of Babylon: and if it was in olde time expedient to engraue in mens memories such ignominies, as that by thē they might learne to feare thy iust iudgementes and stoupe vnder thy Maiestie: we beseech thee suffer vs to powre out our heartes vnto thee as
this day, that thou mightest feele our sorrowes, & grone for our desolations, which (alas) are so much more ye grea∣ter, by howe much more wee are nowe come to the very end of the later times, and hauing beene euen heaped vp to the full, with thy most rare and perfect blessinges, haue through our vnthank∣fulnesse, caused an huge heape of mise∣ries to fall vpon vs: such miseries, as are so much the greater, in yt we haue little or no whit acknowledged them & which the lesser part of vs haue felt: and yet so great as that our posteritie will hardly beleeue: neither wee our selues are scarsely able to number, or yet in words possibly present them, and set them downe. For, who is hee that knoweth the power of thy heauie dis∣pleasure: much lesse then able in words to expresse howe lamentable & pitifull they are, O Lord our God, thy iudge∣ments are a deepe sea, and bottomlesse depth, which neuer man yet sufficiently hath feared: neuer haue anie seene the more terrible effects of thē, thē ye effects of those which we dayly see before our eies. For how vnbridled (alas) is the furie of Tyrantes at this day? how d mens wickednesses & villanies exceed,
in whome is neither faith, nor lawe, and who also glorie in their most hor∣rible treasons, and most desperate cru∣elties. Howe are the fairest Roses of our garlande, euen the most precious pearles of the Crowne of the people, in fewe yeares withered and dried vp? how many gallant, and stout Princes and noble men, howe many reuerende aged fathers, howe many resolute and skilfull men, how many zealous and faithfull Doctors of thy Church, haue in fewe yeares beene made away? how many great congregations, and nota∣ble and flourishing Churches, haue beene dispersed, and rent in sunder? How haue all youth, for want of good examples, beene bastarded and depra∣ued: by seeing nothing else but perniti∣ous and bloudie commotions: by hea∣ring nothing but blasphemies, droms, phifes, trumpettes, and the noyse and cries of men of warre? How is the dis∣cipline of Churches changed into dis∣solute licentiousnesse: the feruent zeale to thy worde, into contemptible colde yse: charitie, into vanitie: iustice, into auarice: to be short, good & pure wine, into water, fine gold into copper, and into other grosse mettal: and the sunne
into darkenesse? And the reason (alas) is this, that euerie thing euery where is in the declyning, for faith and truth fall downe in the streets, and in regard of godlinesse and iustice, euerie thing goeth downe in the weast, whether ye trauell Southwarde or Northwarde. For, we haue long time sithence, alas, seene the East in the West: and thy cleare bright shining sunne; couered with the countries of the Leuant. But yet this is a forrwfull and lamentable thing, that they which heretofore sate in the shadowe of death: haue much to doe to see thy light, but go on still gro∣ping in their former darkenesse: and that they which were the Master Ma∣sons and chiefe builders, put to their helping hande to destroy & ouerthrowe by new and monstrous doctrines, the foūdations of faith: beholding at their pleasure with proude eye browes, like vnto newe Idumeans, the woundes, murders, and desolotions of a mar∣uelous great number of poore faith∣full ones, greatly daring men which haue no faith, and they themselues ma∣king a mocke of faith, giue lawes to euerie man. Alas, O Lorde shall the earth for euer bee dimmed with thy
wrath? shall the poore be like the food of fire, shall not one spare an other, but yt euery man must eat the flesh of his own arme? shall Manasses be against E∣phraim, and Ephraim against Ma∣nasses, and they both at once against Iudah? Shall the streetes, riuers, and open fieldes, be continually died with the bloud of thy children? Shall thy seruauntes and worde be still blasphe∣med, mocked, and sclaundered by wic∣ked men? Shall we on the right hand, be ouerthrowen by the ambition and couetousnesse of some, and on the lifte hande, by vnsatiable crueltie by other some? O most good & mercifull God, thou which hast made an euerlasting couenant with thy Church: which is not grounded vpon our sufficiencie or merites, but vpon the free loue which thou bearest vs, in thy sonne Iesus Christ, looke vpon vs in his face. For, we are in very deede nothing else but myre and corruption, and yet hast thou done vs this honour, to call thy selfe our God and Father. We are all coue∣red with sinne and iniquitie, and yet we prostrate our selues at thy feete, co∣uered with the perfect righteousnes of thy sonne Iesus, which he giueth and
imputeth vnto vs, as to his members. We are foule and filthy, but yet our sins are washed away by the shedding of the precious bloud of thy deare sonne Iesus. We haue offended thee, & haue beene vnthankefull manie & sun∣dry times, but yet thou hast promised vs, yt although thou chastisest vs with reddes, that thou wilt not for all that, withdrawe thy mercie frō vs, alwaies remēbring thy fatherly goodnesse. O Lord God if it be thy good will, we be∣seech thee to be cōtented with our cha∣stisements past, to the ende yt the ouer∣long continuance of these shames, di∣stresses and miseries cast vs not vtterly downe and make vs become desperate, that thy name bee not blasphemed by Infidels; and that a great number of weake persons, enforced through im∣patiencie, suffer not them selues to followe the desire and will of Ido∣lators, thereby wounding and sleaing their consciences, for the auoyding of the sworde without, and slaughter of their bodies. Shewe some good to∣ken of thy fauour towardes vs: as in verie deede, thou canst with thine on∣ly looke, heale all our tormentes. But especially and aboue all other things,
we beseech thee, to turne vs vnto thee, and giue vs true sorrowful hearts, and repentant soules, to the end that we all may returne againe vnto thee, both Princes, Magistrats, Doctors, & Pa∣stors, & all we thy seruants, and sheepe of thy Pasture. Create in vs (O Lord) we beseech thee, new hearts: enlighten in vs a liuely faith, & holy loue of thy word, and a blessed perseuerance ther∣in. Restore againe to thy Church a good policie, & an holy guiding of good lawes and ordinaunces, notsomuch to be written in paper, as in the hearts of euery of vs, & plucke vp by the roots al those plants which thou hast not plan∣ted, powre out thine whole indignatiō vpon the seate of Antichrist, who blas∣phemeth & dishonoureth thee: and most outragiously persecuteth al those which beleeue in thy sonne Iesus: & shew in summe that thou art the king of kings, the iust & righteous God, vnto whō the dominion of the whole world appertai∣neth, and heale all our sores, that wee may in peace & ioy of the spirit, glorifie thy name, and sing a new song vnto thy glory, wayting for the blessed cōming of thy sonne Iesus. So be it. FINIS.
