A607B C.112.f.9[136] C.112.f.9[139] C.112.f.9[147] R231755 99888736 195944
AN ADVERTISEMENT At the blew Ball in Great Knight-Rider-street, by Doctors Commons Bck-Gate LIveth a Physician which hath a Pill far beyond any Medicament yet ever known, or at least pub∣lished; which cureth those Diseases so many pretend to and so few do understand, called, The FRENCH Pox and Gonorrhea, though formerly damnified by poisonous Medicines, wherein Mercury hath been prepared to the danger of the Patient. This Pill by its attractive and mun∣dificative quality clenseth the Patient of what Mercury he ever received, though of long continuance, by taking any Mercurial Medicine, which is too commonly given by most of the pretended Artists of this Age, which have made the Cure prove so dangerous to many, by causing of Dulness of hearing, Dimness of Sight, black stinking▪ Teeth, and many worse Distempers which are admired by the Patient, from whence they should proceed; when if the Artist understood the nigh and safe way of Cure, not any of these bad affects would ever possess the Patient, these pills take away all Buboes, Nodes, Scabs, Knots in the Head and Face, or any part of the Body. This pill cures all Deafness whatsoever caused by Mercury, when all other means fail, they cure all spreading Ulcers, and take away all pains in the Head, Arms or Legs, though so intolerable that the Patient cannot rest. This pill Cures all Arthritick pains, as pain in the Joynts, and makes the Patient free of all Scorbutck pains, which Disease is near a kin to the Venerial Evil. This pill infallibly prevents the sinking of the Nose, or loosing of the Pallat, though in never so great danger, as many have found to admiration and their great comfort, after spoiled by the ignorant and their poisonous Medicines. This pill cures the Dimness of Sight, often caused by those dangerous Medicines wherein Mercury is made the Physicians Deus. These pills likewise prevent the Diseases here∣mentioned to admiration, if three or four of them are taken either by Man or Woman for two or three Mornings after they fear any danger received. This pill performs these cures with such safety and Gen∣tleness, that the tendrest and weakest Patient may take them, in short, these Pills should not have been made publick, but in favour all may not perish that have not five or Ten pounds to lay down for a Cure, but may here be Cured at a small Charge, and without hindrance of their Employments. Let none de∣spair and think they are too far gone to be Cured, for I will warrant a Cure though the Disease be old and Virulent, so the Patient observe the Directions which you shall have with the Pills; These pills will keep good two or three years, therefore good for them that are forced into the Countrey, or to Sea, where they may certainly with this Pill Cure these Diseases here-mentioned; Or prevent them, if but in danger. These Pills are in Boxes, from 1 s. 6 d. the Box to 2 s. 6 d. the Box, and so to Five shillings the Box, and will be delivered to any Person, with a Note of Directions. (☞) Likewise this Pill Cures the SCƲRVEY, though never so far gone, insallibly. With these Pills I have done Cures to Ad∣miration, that is to say, in these Distempers here mentioned; And that Man or Woman that bath my Pills, if they be of a known Integrity, if they come to me, and tell me faithfully that they have observed my Directions, and are not Cured of the Distempers here specified. Let them bring the Boxes which they had with the Pills, and I will return the Money. ☞ I have likewise a Sweating Pill which is infalllble against all Diseases where Sweating is gnod. It is a very great Cordial, and strengthneth the Patient in Sweating, when other ways of Sweating weakneth. It takes away all pains coming of Cold, and all Venrial pains whatsoever. The Dose of Sweating Pills are two, the price 1 s- ☞ I take away all Scabs in the Head and Face in three Nights, that others cannot do in three Months. With this Pill only I have Cured some thousands, many of which have been given over by others, and I never had two Patients that took these Pills that went without their Cure, though their Distemper was never so old and virulent. I de∣tain none from their Occasions. * I Flux no one, let them be never so bad, or give any Mercurial Medicine. (☞) Observe, that every one that is a good Physician or Chyrurgion cannot Cure this Distemper, nor one of a hun∣dred that Cures it safely, therefore take care of them that use Mercury, for the effects of it are dangerous. * I Cure any one though they have had the Disease twenty years, and have been given over by others, in a shorter time than can be expected, and I never use any Mercury. ☞ I Cure all Ʋlcers in the Throat and Mouth, Pallat or Nose, though never so bad, and though past Cure by others. ☞ I Request a favourable Construction upon this publick Way of Practice, (AND as I am a Graduate Physician) should wholly Omit to appear in Print, as well in this Disease, as I have at all times in all other Diseases, only in oppo∣sition to the ignorant that pretend to the Cure of this Disease, and to prevent the ruine of them that labour under that violent Disease, the POX or Gonorrhaea, and I see daily do throw themselves upon many ignorant outlandish Pre∣tenders, to the Patients utter Ruine of Body and Purse, and shall only wssh that all Patients would be so kind to each other, as to tell by whom they and their Friends were Cured; as they do in other Distempers. And then you shall hear no more of me. In hac Pseudovia Exercitations. Sed, Scire tuum Nihil est; Nisi te Scire hoc Sicat alter. These Pills may be taken in the Coldest Weather safely, and never fails to Answer the desired Efct.
