A3116A 551.a.32[134] R232629 99888993 196125
Gemelli Pulmonales. THe two greatest Remedies Extant, for the Restauration and Preservation of the Lungs, Breast and Organs of Respiration, (viz.) Our Pectoral Lozenges, and Balsamick Syrup. Both of which do joyntly and mutually Operate with Admirable effect in the Cure of the various Distempers of those Noble Parts. Intercepting all Defluction of Rheum, called Catarhs, upon the Lungs, Curing the most Violent and Inveterate Coughs, Phchysick, Asthma, or short and difficult Breathing, Foul-spiting, Wheesing, Opression and Pain of the Breast, Inflation, called commonly Rising of the Lights, and even the most Deplorable Consumption, when timely re∣garded, and in a Word, all Affects of the whole Thorax, or Capacity of the Breast, to the great Comfort of all Persons who suffer under those dire and fatal decays of Nature. The Lozenges are your Campanion in the Day, the Balsamick Syrup your Guard in the Night, when the Body by continual Coughing, and Defluctions of sharp Rheums is disappointed of its sweet and natural Repose by Sleep, and thereby indisposed to all business, as well as the necessary Offices of Nature. Note, That the Reason why I offer two Medicines in these Cases is; that no one Medicine in the World is sufficient to answer all the Intentions of Cure in the said Cases, because as the Symptoms are abundantly various, so must the Operations of Medicines be different in their respective places, which cannot be supposed of any one single Medicine whatsoever. Noe farther, That my Balsamick Syrup here mentioned, is not that which is usually sold by the Apothecaries under that Title, but of a far higher and more Noble Preparation, and of more Eminent Vertues then that. The Lozenges are sold at one Shilling the Paper containing above two Ounces. The Balsamick Syrup at one Shilling the Bottle, of about three Ounces; And Books of Direction given with them for the use of these, And several other Excellent Medicines, necessary to the Life and Health of Mankind. Prepared by Edw. Andrews, M.D. At the second House on the right Hand in Bolt and Tun-yard in Fleet-street. And sold also by Mrs. Feltham Bookseller at the Stairs foot going up to the Parliament House. Mr. Samuel Holford Bookseller in the Pell-mell, Westminster. Mr. Samuel Crouch Bookfeller at the corner of Popes-head-alley in Cornhil, London.
