A3318 99827571 206925
AN ANSWER TO A LETTER TO A BISHOP Concerning the Present Settlement And the New Oaths. Printed in the Year, 1690.
AN ANSWER TO A LETTER TO A BISHOP, &c. IT is not my present Task to enquire, nor is it material to the Cause herein debated to know, whether the Letter to a Bi∣shop was composed by one or more: I shall cite it as the Work of a single Person, and treat the Authour of it with all Christian Candor and Charitable Decency, that he may conclude Christia∣nity to be the Practice of the Refusers of the New Oaths, as well as Conscience to be their Guide. I shall not pursue him in any other manner than the subject in controversie and his Discourse shall lead me to, and his Arguments deserve; for the Design of these Papers is, not contumeliously or with bitter reflexions to provoke or exasperate any person or party to a scurrilous Reply; but fairly to debate that momentous point of the Oaths wherein not a few persons are very deeply concerned. However plausible his Arguments about the Oaths may seem to an unwary Reader, yet on a serious and strict Review, most of the Allegations will be as transparent as the Lawnsleeves, to whom they are directed; and will be found to want a more close
and solid substance to terminate the enquiry and satisfie the consci∣ence of a considerate Refuser. The Authour saith, Page 2. That he will not judge what Reasons of dissa∣tisfaction some of his Superiours may have. Perchance his Inferiors also may have the same Reasons to plead for themselves. It is ob∣vious from those words to infer, that he is not certain of that point for which he writes, but may be under mistakes, because he knows not all the Reasons which may be alleged in contradiction of his Sentiments. I shall wave those strong and numerous Arguments which are taken from the matter of the old Oaths of Allegiance and Supre∣macy, wherein we have solemnly renounc'd and abjured the Po∣pish principles of deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from legal Oaths; and passing by other various and dreadfull Consi∣derations, which forcibly dissuade from taking the new Oaths; I shall confine my self to an impartial Examination of what the Let∣ter to a Bishop allegeth, and by fair and plain Answers make it ap∣pear that his Reasons are not sufficient to determin the Judgment, to satisfie and secure the Conscience; but that the Gordian knot of the old Oaths remains as yet undissolved. There are two things proposed by our Authour, by the proof whereof he hopes to remove all doubts and scruples. The first is, That the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to King James do cease to oblige us. Page 3. The second, That we may lawfully transfer the Oaths on K. W. and Q. M. On the full proof of these the truth and the stress of the Cause depends; and, when they are fairly pro∣ved, they may be inducements to comply. But notwithstanding what he hath artificially and smoothly attempted by specious insi∣nuations, the scruples remain unsatisfied, the light is as dimm as it was before, and we cannot induce our judgments to comply with what the understanding doth not perceive; but whether the failure is in our faculties, that like vitious organs are indisposed, or in the arguments, which like delusive objects exhibit false repre∣sentations, is now to be considered. The foundation that he lays to prove his first point is, Page 3. That Oaths cease to bind when the Government of that Person to whom they are taken is at an end. This is an ill foundation, and there is no hopes that a firm building can be erected on such a basis. 'Tis the onely thing he desires may be granted to him, in order to ascertain his Cause and establish his Argument. I would fain be obliging,
and grant him what he craves, since 'tis but one thing civily desi∣red, could I be just to my self, and a friend to truth by such a complyance. In this postulatum there is both sophistry and fals∣hood, and therefore I cannot but deny it. It is craftily put, but it is not generally true. He was mistaken about it, when he thought, none would deny it; and that he is mistaken, is plain to him that reads the old Oaths; for therein we swore not onely Faith and Allegeance to the King, but by our Oath we recogni∣zed his Right also; for in the Oath we declared him to be our Rightfull King; and this we testified in our Consciences and before God. Now, I think, none will deny, though an actual exercise of the Government may cease, yet then and there the Right may continue: a possession may be in one, and the right in another; or else what will become of the distinction de jure and de facto, in deed and in right. I would also willingly know, whether the Oaths to the Right of King Charles the First, did cease when he ceased to govern? And, I think, none will deny, but that his actual Government ceased a considerable time before he was murthered. Neither is it impertinent to demand, how the years of the Reign of Charles the Second are computed? from the years 1648 or 1660? To humane appearance his Government seemed to be at an end, as much as King James's at present, and something more, if you put Ireland and Scotland into the balance. Can he be so hardy as to say, that our Oaths then ceased, because 'twas thought his Go∣vernment was then at an end? and, was his Government at an end when he continued to reign? and, was he not said to reign, because his right continued, though he was out of possession, and could not actually exercise it any more in England than King James at present doth? When our Authour saith, The Government is at an end, he speaks with relation to King James, as his following words do manifest, and without such a reference his supposition would have been as impertinent as 'tis now notoriously false. By, an end, doth he mean totally, perpetually and irreversibly so? is he infallibly sure of this? if not, how can he be certain, that the Oath is at an end? is King James's Government totally at an end? and, doth he cease to be a King in Ireland? if it is said, Ireland affects not us in England, let it be remembred, that we have recognized him in the Oath to be rightfull and lawfull King and supreme Governour in all his Dominions and Countries; and Ireland was then certainly rec∣koned
in that number when we swore. It seems then by this Au∣thour, that if one who had formerly taken the Oaths should be in Ireland, his Oath would not cease to bind, because King James's Covernment is not there at an end. According to this doctrine the Oath may be split, and commodiously said to bind, or not to bind, according to the diversity of Climates, and that the Latitude of the Conscience is to be measured by the Elevation of the Pole, and according to the Variation of the Longitude. To this Consideration I shall not here improperly add one more, about the New Oath, which (as it must be granted) was made to K. W. and Q. M. as King and Queen; and they are to be look'd on in the Oath to be King and Queen, as the Convention hath declared them to be; and that is of England, France and Ireland; now I would be informed, what sort of King and Queen of Ire∣land, W. and M. are, since according to our Authour they are nei∣ther so de jure nor de facto. Not this way, because King James doth not cease to be King de facto; if de jure, then for the same reason, that they are so in Ireland, they must be so in England too, which yet the Convention abhorr'd to swear to. If the Right is in them, why should any scruple to recognize it by Oath? If not, where is the Right lodged? Is the Kingly right either voted or disputed out of the World? If it remains in King James, then the inference should be, Render to all their due, and seek not to deprive him of that which is his right. The Kingly right must be in James, or William and Mary, or in the People, or is altogether ceased: and 'tis worth a man's knowing what is become of it, that we might doe right to every one, and no wrong to our own Consci∣ences. Whereas 'tis said, Page 3. that, The Oath ceaseth to bind, when the Govern∣ment of the Person to whom we have sworn is at an end; I answer farther, That a temporary cessation of a Government (and no more can be certainly meant as yet) doth not void the full obli∣gation of the Oath, that is absolute. For though the variety of circumstances, and the necessity of affairs, and the impossibility of some performances, may for the present suspend the actual exer∣cise of some duties, which in other circumstances the Oath might require, yet they do not totally null the obligation, when 'tis just∣ly required, and can be truly and honestly paid; the Conscience is still bound, though the particular acts pro hic & nunc are forborn, and we may safely say with the Moralists, that the Oath binds
semper, though not ad semper; always, but not at every time. From hence, and from our Author's Position, we may undeniably infer, That if the Government should revert, (and who can tell what will be, or shall come to pass) then 'twas not at an end; and if not at an end, then the Oath doth not cease to bind; and what satisfaction can any one give me, if I should be eventually, and cer∣tainly forsworn? Lastly, His desired Principle is not grantable, but 'tis denied as false, and detested as impious; for, where an Oath is made to di∣vers persons distinctly, and successively, as the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are to the King, his Heirs and lawfull Successors, by the Oath I am as firmly bound (respect being had to the time) to these as to him. What consequence then can there be? what show of reason to infer, that because the Government of King James (taken in his own sense, whatever it be) is at an end, therefore the Oath doth cease to bind to his Heirs and lawfull Successors? or thus, because King James ceaseth to be a King, I will be perjured to others; he is fallen from the Crown, and I will renounce my Oath, my Truth, my Sincerity, and my Conscience, all which I pledg'd and plighted when I swore; and the words of the Oath will declare what, and how I have sworn. Upon this hopefull basis we may conclude, what a noble Pyra∣mid will be erected to entomb a living King, and the Consciences of his Subjects, and to bury both out of remembrance; but should I examine by a larger disquisition each particular in his Building, his Edifice, like the Pyramids, would dwindle into an impercepti∣ble extremity. His first advance is to give us several instances (the same, which are to be found in a certain Ascham. Book, condemn'd by the Decree of the University of Oxon 1683.) whereby the Government of a particu∣lar person may cease. 1. By Death, of which there is no doubt; and, which if it could have been proved of King James, some of his Enemies would have thought it a much better instance than all the rest. 2. When the Person will govern no longer, and voluntarily deserts the Government. 3. When he is Conquer'd, and involuntarily withdraws himself, and can protect his Subjects no longer. These two last ways are all the rest, as he calls them, and by his disjunctive (or) makes no more, as 'tis evident to him that reads
the third Page of the Letter, and yet presently divides them into three, and omits the popular way of protection, which he had mention'd before; if the proof of one of these three had been suffi∣cient to satisfie all honest men, as he thinks, was it not to think all honest men unreasonable, or his work superfluous, to undertake the proof of more? But how all these ways can be applied to King James, I think it a very difficult task to prove either to honest, or dishonest men, though he may not think it so; and for this very reason I judge it no easie attempt, because the ways contain, and evidently exhibit such things, as the unlucky men of a disputing Age call Contradictions; for (except he flies for refuge to the dis∣pute of mixt actions in Morality) voluntarily and involuntarily are contradictory terms; and if it be proved that he was conquer'd, and forc'd away involuntarily, it will not easily be apprehended how he Abdicated; and (pag. 7.) he says, That the Government was subverted in the Parliament after Monmouth's Rebellion: And I am of opinion with him, that if the Government was subverted, the constitution was at an end (in his own words) except he will be so critical, as to say, that the Government may be subverted, and yet not at an end, which would be destructive both to his argument, and his method of arguing; and yet (pag. 14.) he affirms, that the King's voluntary withdrawing was a receding fully from his Govern∣ment; and (pag. 21.) the late King fell perfectly here from all Sove∣reignty, by deserting the Government; whereas (pag. 22.) he saith, the late King did lose his Kingdom; and (pag. 4.) the late King ceas'd to govern as King of England a good while before the Prince of Orange Landed here. Now I would willingly know how the Government was at an end, when the King did not cease to Govern: or if it was at an end in Octob. 1685. how came it to an end by the King's leaving his Kingdom, when 'twas at an end above three years before? Is not this to kill a dead man, and to repeat, and re-act, what was ne∣ver said or done before?  Though, by the way, if the Writer of the Letter had respected Truth as much as his Cause, he might have opportunely, and easily, without the racking of his brains, distin∣guish't between withdrawing out of the Kingdom, and receding from the Government; for though King James quitted the King∣dom, his Letters, Declarations, and the manifold Post-facts evi∣dently demonstrate, that he did not voluntarily quit the Govern∣ment, except the Author will say, that he knew the King's mind
better than the King himself did, or could; to which our Author seems to pretend, by presuming to know some of the King's In∣treigues about his return, which the King never discover'd to him. I will add one Remark more, That whatever deference of ho∣nour he would be thought to pay to the Wisdom of the Nation met in the Convention, or however justly severe against the saucy Author of the Dissenter's Case, for want of Manners, he seems to fall under the same condemnation, by attempting to prove a Con∣quest, the thoughts whereof the Prince of Orange disclaim'd, as wic∣ked, in his Declaration; and the Convention, waving all pretences of a Conquest, vacated the Throne on the account of Abdication: How dares he then to say 'twas a Conquest, when the Conven∣tion voted it an Abdication; but if Conquest and Abdication be the same vacating, I cannot ken the subtilty of our Writer to di∣stinguish them in the foundation and process of his discourse. Whoever shall impartially weigh, and compare these things to∣gether, will think it as improper, as inconsistent, to apply these contradictory ways to the case of King James: If then his gene∣ral lump proves naught, 'tis to be doubted, the Particulars will not be found on tryal very sound; nor that to be saleable in the Retail, which is not vendible in the Gross. But before I undertake the Discussion of any one of these parti∣culars, I crave leave to tell the Reader, and thereby to obviate all unjust Censures, that my design herein is not to affront the present Powers, nor to justifie any Male-administration, nor apo∣logize for any Violations of the Subject's Rights, nor excuse any unjust Prosecutions, or illegal Proceedings. This would be a Theme for a Sycophant, as fordid and as gross as the attempt would be vile and barbarous to trample on crowned Heads, to blacken all the Royal actions, and aggravate all their humane failures into monstrous Crimes, and unpardonable Errors; whatever some Men in their great Wisdoms may think, the wisest of Men hath taught us, Not to curse the King in the Bed-chamber. Few there are who consider the anxious cares, the vexatious sol∣licitudes, the numerous troubles, and the unaccountable miseries that seize the Crown, and continually haunt the Throne. It may be said of most Diadems, what Pope Adrian the Sixth said of him∣self, That it was a miserable thing to be a Pope, because he could not do what good he would. What base ends and projects do bu∣sie and designing Courtiers, under fair pretences, suggest to Kings,
and with repeted Clamours, and specious Allegations, insinuate in∣to the sacred Breasts of easie Princes most flagitious methods to accomplish their wicked designs. If all publick Acts and Counsels were sent home to their proper Authors, the King's share would be found less than the proportion of many others; and if every one was to bear their own burthen, the King might find ease, whilst others sink under their weight; 'tis neither common Charity nor Justice to load the King with all the corruptions of Courts, and the miscarriages in his Officers. If such proceedings were approveable, how many Grandees would be rendred altogether mute, when they should be required to an∣swer for all the irregularities of Tenants, that should be committed in their Families and Lordships. Let the Nobles apply the in∣stant case, and perhaps they may find a great parity of reason to pity and indulge a King, wherein they themselves may stand in need of Mercy. It ought to be consider'd, that scarce any illegal courses can be introduc'd among us without the concurrence of the Subjects; the unjustifiable Commands of a King, attended even with frowns and menaces, will prove fruitless and vain, without the instrumen∣tal compliance of sneaking Inferiors to actuate them, who by their dastardly submission may prepare a disingenuous method to ruine their own Posterity, if not themselves, in a turn of affairs, and change of Governors, and may be called to a severe account in a future Reign, though they escape a just prosecution in the present; the Injunctions of a King may be unjust, but can injure none, ex∣cept the fellow Subjects put them in execution, which may prove as fatal to themselves, as injurious to others; and on that the Maxim in our Law, and the Practice in the Government is foun∣ded, That the King can do no wrong. There was scarce any thing attempted by King James, but there were specious pretences of Law alledged to justifie and maintain it; and many, whose Office it was (if not their Oath also) rightly to inform the King, and to do Justice between Him and his People, who either voted for its Lawfulness, or acted the thing. Were there not a Lord Chancellor, and a Lord Chief Justice in the Ecclesiasti∣cal Commission? Were there not two Judges employed in ejecting the President, Fellows, and Demies of Magdalen-Colledge? Did not many of the Judges give their Opinion for Law for executing de∣serting Soldiers in time of Peace, and for the Suspending and Dis∣pencing Power?
Deplorable is the state of Kings, if they must be dethroned, be∣cause their Judges are not so wise, nor so honest as they ought to be: when by that Law their Opinions, and Determinations, and Constru∣ctions of the Law must go for Law, and yet it must be unlawfull for Kings to follow their Judgments, and execute their Decrees and Sen∣tences; and to act contrary to them, is either a breach of the Law, or an undue enlargement, or diminution of the Prerogative, or an encroachment on the People's Rights: How unhappily intangled are those Princes, who fall into such intricate Labyrinths, that they must necessarily offend in whatsoever they are directed, or inclined to chuse: 'Tis not their Province to understand all the difficulties of the Law, nor the exact qualification of such whom they ap∣point to be Judges; they see with other mens Eyes, and approve by other mens Commendations. Now if those that are thus appointed undertake the employment, when they know the Law doth incapacitate them, let them suffer for this insolence and pre∣sumption; if they know not the Law, let their insufficiency hasten their chastisement and removal for the admonition of future gene∣rations. If it be objected, that King James knew some incapable, whom he preferred to Employments: It may be replied, 1. That the ac∣tual exercise of the Office by such, and not the nomination of them to it, is the breach of the Law. 2. That the Judges, whose Office it was to interpret the Law, actually concurr'd in the confirma∣tion of them, and in the actual exercise of the Office by them, were joyned in Commissions with them, acted with them, and were treated as legal Judges in their proceedings; which, 3dly, proves, That not the devices of the King, who can do no wrong, but the acting of the Subjects properly, and immediately deprave the Go∣vernment; which Considerations, in some measure, will invalidate his first Proposition, which is now to be discuss'd. 1. That the Oaths to King James, as King, oblige no longer, nor fur∣ther, than he continued to be King, i. e. to govern as King of England; and that he ceas'd to govern as King of England a good while before the Prince of Orange Landed here; which was, as he says, pag. 7. in October, after Monmouth's Rebellion, when the King by resolving to continue some Popish Officers, altered the English Constitution, and made a complete subversion of the legal Government. Lo here an excellent rope of Sand to bind a loose Conscience; a most curious receipt, if well improved, to ease crown'd Heads of the burthen
of their Diadems, and to gratifie all ambitious pretenders, if they can prove but successfull; a doctrine if well confirm'd, that de∣serves the best preferment; but chiefly a most seasonable Caveat to all regnant Princes to beware of Popish Officers, and of per∣verting one single Law, which, besides other direfull invisible effects, by this Author's argument, destroys a whole Government, and dethrones a King for ever, and may be as terrible to any other, as to a rightfull Prince! I think our Author will not say that King James broke all the Laws of the Land; and at present I will not dispute with him, but suppose that he brake some of them; though to establish this supposition, and thereby make room for his Inferences, he should have evinc'd, that the Laws against Recusants and Dissenters did equally bind the King not to nominate such to Offices and Employ∣ments civil or military, as it did bind them not to exercise those Employments; the Laws were enacted against those that were in∣capacitated, not against those that should conser the places of Em∣ployment on them; it would be extremely rigorous for a Patron to lose the perpetuity of an Advowson, because his Clerk is a Pa∣pist; or a Corporation their Charter, because the Town-Clerk is a Recusant, or Dissenter: Doth every Collonel forfeit his Freehold Estate if he nominates an unqualified person to an inferior Office? The Law provides a penalty for the Offendor, but that can be no offence which the Law hath not forbidden: It had been honestly done by the Author of the Letter, if he had prov'd, 1. That the breach of some Laws completely subverts the whole Government, and unkings the supreme Governor; and that every act of injustice voids the Magistracy: It had been a notable Ex∣ploit, if he had proved the same of our National Laws, which Saint James speaks of the Divine, That he who offends in one, is guilty of all: If so, Lord have mercy on the generality of this Nation. 2. He should have shown what those particular Laws were, pro∣duced the very particular proviso's, and branches of the Statutes, that were broken by King James, wherein the Kings of England have bound themselves, their Heirs and Successors, under a forfei∣ture of the Crown, if they break this or that Law, or preferr'd persons who were not qualified. 3. He should have proved plainly and clearly, that the Oaths were taken on such a condition, and with such a reserve, that they did bind no longer than the King did punctually and exactly ob∣serve
all the Laws, and that the Oaths ought to be, and have been constantly thus understood. For want of these proofs on this Head of discourse, I conclude, that by this Argument it doth not appear, that the Oaths do cease to bind; To say, that the King would govern no longer, is an Assertion that may please or delude a credulous person, who will not be scrupulous, because he resolves to comply, but will never be swallowed by him who is govern'd by sincere Truths, not bold Asseverations. Perchance some may understand hereby, that King James totally abandoned, and willingly quitted the Go∣vernment, and that he never intended to resume it actually a∣gain, nor would, if he might and could, return to govern again. This is such a bare fac'd errant contradiction to common sense, that it would be little less than a shamefull attempt to refute such a notorious falshood; and to say, that he subverted all Laws, be∣cause he violated some of them; and that the Violation of a few, or of one Penal Law, presently dissolves the whole constitution of Government, is such a gross inconsequence, that if the nature of the thing would bear it, it might be felt, as the Aegyptian darkness was: If it be a true consequence, I know not, whenever we had a Government, when all our Laws were duly observed, and, I believe, never shall; I am sure they are not at present: And, will our Author say, we are under a Dissolution, when his Title-page calls it a Settlement? but whether a Settlement in our legal Posses∣sions, or a Settlement out of them, sad experience, I fear, will re∣solve too many. Kings may cease to be Regular Governors, and yet continue Regnant Kings still; the Government, and the Right to govern may remain, when the Administration in some particulars is found to be illegal: this the Author frequently thought, when he fre∣quently, according to the English Liturgy, prayed for King James after October, Anno 1685. That the King may legally employ Pa∣pists as inferior Servants, or as common Soldiers, I think, none can legally deny; That Popish Officers should not be employed, was the intent of the Law; but that the King would cease to be, when he should resolve to continue such (for their fidelity to, and cou∣rage for the King) as Commission'd Officers, is an effect, that, I believe, the Law-makers were not sagacious enough to foresee, nor thoughtfull enough to dream of: If King James by granting such Commissions, and thereby dispensing with one Law, did forfeit the
Government, how came it to pass that King Charles the Second continued the Government, when he granted a Toleration to the whole Kingdom? and, is it not intolerable partiality, to be so se∣vere against a King for dispensing with the Oath, when so many Protestant Officers, and the generality of the Kingdom, dispensed with themselves, by omitting to swear Allegiance, which the Law required of them? And is it express'd in the Statute, or can the construction of it be? that the King dispossesseth himself of his Kingdom, when he grants such preterlegal Commissions: but whatever malignity there is in such Grants, this is not the very unkinging Crime, as our Au∣thor states the point; for then King James would have ceased to govern when he granted those Commissions, which was before Monmouth's Rebellion. But the fatal demerit, and the complete subversion is founded on his Resolution to stand by the Grants of such Commissions. Page 7. So that if he had only granted them, but not resol∣ved to continue them, he had not uncrowned himself. By the same sort of Logick one might argue, that the unlawfulness of the New Oath consists not in the taking of it, but in the resolution to stand to it, and keep it. I wish we were not more likely to suffer for the former Oath at present, than he is for the latter. I cannot but wonder at our Author's design in enumerating the serveral breaches of Law, (pag. 11.) as if his whole Government had been one intire opposition to all Laws, [inferring according to his usual practice, a general from a few particulars] which breaches happened after the dismission of the Parliament in 1685. to what purpose, I pray you, when the subversion was completed before; except by a new-found rule in policy, a subversion can be more than complete. But what is wanted in reason, shall be supplied and supported by one single authority; to which end the old Lawyer Bracton is cited in these words, Non est rex, ubi dominatur voluntas, & non lex. And (pag. 12.) the Author hath another Citation, Nec nomen regis in eo constabit. An easie and happy way of arguing it would certainly be, if every good expression of an old Author could be converted into a good reason; is not this to argue from merit to reality, and to conclude every one to be no more than he truly deserves? What may not one continue a King, Judge, or Subject, though he ceaseth to be a good and a just one? Doth every man cease to be a man, who doth not govern himself in all things, ac∣cording
to reason? or, is every living Traytor executed, that de∣serves to be hanged? Let us beware of such argumentations, for fear we should de∣prive our selves of what we do not deserve to possess, and devest our selves of all our legal rights; because we have not made the Law the rule of our obedience, and the measure of our submission. The Subjects indeed may forfeit their rights, for the Law and Prac∣tice hath determined so, though some may think it intolerable, it should be so, because their crimes and misdemcanours are really intolerable. Whatever gloss the Author of the Letter put on Bracton, his meaning cannot be, that the King loseth his Authority by an arbi∣trary illegal act, for these are his express words in the close of the same Chapter; Si autem ab eo (sc. Rege) petatur (cùm breve non currat contra ipsum) locus erit supplicationi, quòd factum suum cor∣rigat & emendet; quod quidem si non fecerit, satìs ei ad poenam, quòd Dominum expectet ultorem; nemo enim de factis suis praesumat disputare, multò fortiùs contra factum suum venire. The same Bracton saith of the King; Omnis quidem sub eo, & ipse sub nullo, nisi tantùm sub Deo. He addeth also, Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, & sub Lege, i. e. under the direction of the Law, [for no other sense the words can bear] and only ac∣countable to God, but not to man, who hath no power nor supe∣riority over the King, as Bracton there argueth. Cap. 8. li. 1. But if our Au∣thor thinks that every sentence of Bracton is good Law and good Divinity, let him favour the World with a Comment on these words in the same Chapter of Bracton, Virgo Maria, mater Domini, singulari privilegio supra legem fuit. We know, Depositions have not been impracticable in this Land, but a Forfeiture of the Crown we think (by our Author's leave) to be very monstrous here; and if rarity and deformity make Mon∣sters, the Author's assertion will be a very ugly one, and no way reconcileable to the Oath of Supremacy. Who is sufficient and capable by the constitution of our Government to determine the cause and merit of a Forfeiture? Who shall erect the Court to examine the matter of fact, and to pass sentence on the allegati∣ons, but such diabolical Monsters as erected an High-Court to mur∣ther King Charles the First? To whom must the Forfeiture be made, and who shall take it? If the King be Supreme, and we have sworn he is so, can there be a Superior to the Supreme? and,
where must the Dernier resort be in our Constitution, which must be acknowledged in all Governments, beyond which there lies no Appeal. The Crown of England is declared by the Laws to be Im∣perial, and the Statute of Praemunire, 16 Rich. 2.5. expresly saith, that it is immediately subject to God, and none other. If you'll say, he hath forfeited the Supremacy, this is a begging of the que∣stion, and the foresaid demands will return still. Suppose a Rab∣ble or a Consult should vote a Forfeiture, and the King should gain-say it, what effect can the sentence have? If you fly to force and arms, this the Law utterly disclaims; and many of the chiefest Subjects have declared, that it is unlawfull to take up arms against the King, upon any pretence whatever. And the Statute 12 Car. 2.13. hath declared, That by the undoubted fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the People collectively or representa∣tively, nor any other person whatsoever, ever had, hath, or ought to have any coercive power over the persons of the Kings of this Realm: How this agrees with the late transactions, every one can tell without much labour to inform him. Where a forfeiture is supposed, there the King is accountable; but how he can be supreme, and over all, and all judicial procee∣dings issue forth in his name, and by his power, and yet be accoun∣table to subjects, who have no power over him, who have sworn allegiance to, and supremacy in him, is to me unaccountable, and, in regard of our Laws, to all men invisible: Mr. Prinne's critical distinction would here do good service to our Author, who makes the Parliament the supreme power, and the King the supreme Go∣vernour; but, hath the King no negative voice? can he govern supremely without a supreme power to govern by? and what∣ever power he pretended then to be in the Parliament, yet the fore-quoted Statute faith, that, by the fundamental Laws of this Land, the Parliament hath no coercive power over the King. And another Statute in the same King's reign hath declared the Militia to be solely in the King. Where can there be a supreme power, that hath not a coercive power? Let the point of forfeiture be as plainly proved from our constitutions, and let our Author tell us in what Statute Forfeiture is to be found; as we can, that the King is Supreme in all causes, and over all persons, and unaccountable, and subject to none but God; and then 'twill appear that he hath omitted something which he ought to have performed. But to
call things by what names he pleases, and then to give what sense he pleases to those names, is not enough to satisfie inquisitive honest men. He who supposeth and would prove a forfeiture, must infer and acknowledge the excellent and usefull doctrine of deposition, which, I believe, our Author hath renounced more than once or twice; for, I believe, he hath taken the old Oaths, and subscribed to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Articles and Homilies more than thrice. For if a forfeiture be voted, and a King will not sub∣mit thereto, how can the forfeiture take place, except a depositi∣on be enforc'd? and to what purpose is a forfeiture, except a de∣position doth ensue? To this our Author subjoins a wild, uncharitable, and unaccount∣able supposition, and then makes a demand thereon; If a King should impose taxes by his sole authority, and levy them by borrowed French Dragoons, should annul our laws, rights and properties, and should require obedience without reserve, by what names should such practices be called? I answer, unjust, tyrannical, illegal practices; such unkingly violences would declare a wicked and merciless tem∣per of mind, but would not properly null the Laws, which were not made, nor can be repealed by his single act; their obligation and sanction would continue, though they were grosly invaded and violated for a while. But if a King should attempt to alter the whole frame of Government, and make his free-born subjects bond-slaves, Must patience be the onely business in such a season? and, can a loyal heart either with honesty make, or with patience yield to such vile and indecent surmises? Did our Author really believe that King James intended such things? if not, why doth he sup∣pose them? if he does, was it not a strain beyond episcopal rheto∣rick for our Author in his Addresses and Petition to style King James his most excellent and gratious Majesty after the cessation of his Government by male-administration, and not many months before his departure? if such practices import grace and excellen∣cy, may the invention of the complement be the Author's ho∣nour, of which, I believe, none will bereave him, and to which at present I'll make no return. But granting what is disingenuous to suppose, if such practices should ever happen, which God avert from this Nation, the inno∣cent and most Christian remedy which I know of, and which the Scripture allows, is, with patience to submit to that which legally
I cannot prevent nor remove. The Law is our Director, which says, It is not lawfull to take up arms against the King on any pretence; and submission is our refuge: Resistance by force of arms is not our Counsellor or Sanctuary, the Law pronounces it unjust to bear arms offensive or defensive against the King, and Christianity dooms it sinfull; except we can plead one Crime to be a cure for another, and that the best remedy to preserve some Laws is, to break many more, that are more necessary to the safety and ends of Government. I believe there is scarce any one but will assert, that some in∣conveniences of an unjust Government are far more eligible and tolerable than Rebellion with all its deplorable attendants, effects and consequents: if we compare this years war and changes with the last years violations and oppressions, I believe, some may say, we have bought a very dear bargain, when some must sell their estates to preserve their properties, exchange their liberty for a prison, possessions for ejectments, and when the Tradesmen are ruined in hopes to increase the trade of the Nation. The two main hinges and fundamental supports of our Govern∣ment are said to be, Legislation, and Administration, both which our Author says were subverted by King James, and both which shall now be considered. The legislative power is in King, Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons assembled in Parliament. The King is the Lord paramount, principal and supreme in that power, therefore the Laws are called the King's Laws, and the form of many is, that, The Commons pray the King, that it be enacted, and it is enacted by the King; the Lords and Commons beseech the King's Majesty. Now though the Laws be made by the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons, yet they are said to be enacted by the King's Ma∣jesty, whose royal le veult gives life, vigor and force to the petitions and draughts of the Lords and Commons, which before were but as dumb, formless and dead letters. The Lords and Commons are subordinate and ministerial in that power, being summoned and dis∣solved at the King's pleasure and by his rightfull power; all their votes pass into laws by his impression and ratification, without which, all their debates and resolves can acquire no higher title nor stronger obligations than that of Counsels: Now if le Roy le veult actuate the Parliaments votes, and it is necessary (as our Author says) to make them to pass into Laws, then it will necessarily fol∣low,
that without the King's consent no Law can be legally enacted; Page 5. and to make Laws without and against the King, is, to break off one of the hinges of our Government, as our Author speaks; on which grounds it may be modestly and inoffensively enquired, whether the present settlement of the Crown by the Convention be a Law or no? If a Law, then le Roy le veult is not necessary to a Law, and so, according to our Author's principle, the Convention hath sub∣verted the Government, by assuming the whole legislative power, which by the Law, as we grant, belongs not solely to them, and thereby have forfeited their right, and the right of the people: If no Law, why then is submission required as to a Law, under severe penalties? where there is no Law, there can be no obligation; and is it not hard and unreasonable to punish for that which no Law requires to observe? Our Author farther saith, Page 4. That the three Estates are necessary to make a Law, wherein, I think, he is mistaken; for though Lords spiritual and temporal are of right to be summon'd to Parliament, yet if either Estate be legally summon'd, and refuse to appear per∣sonally, or by proxy, the act of the other Estate in the house of Lords shall be reputed as valid as if both appeared; and this ap∣pears by ancient practice; for though they be two Estates, yet they make but one House of Lords, which is determined by plura∣lity of voices, whether Spiritual or Temporal; if the majority of suffrages of each Estate was necessary to every act of that House, the Statute of Mortmain, I believe, had not pass'd in the days of Edw. 1. nor the Act to take away Bishops voices in Parliament in the reign of Charles 1. their concurrence then is not necessary to the doing of that which without them can be sufficiently done; what their presence cannot legally prevent, their voluntary ab∣sence cannot null. An house of Lords is necessary to the enacting of a Law, but the presence of both Estates is not necessary to make that House, the majority of the present Estate conclude the absent also, and the reason is, because both the Estates sit in the House in respect of their temporal Baronies, which are of the same tenure from the Crown, though different in the manner of their descent. We are told (pag. 5.) That the Essence of a King of England is, Page 5. that he is one sitting on the Throne, and governing by the known Laws of the Land. From whence I infer, First, That the Coronation is not needfull, because all that may be without this; for what is
unnecessary, is no part of an essence, as some old Logicians have told us: and yet with respect to his definition, there can be no difference assigned between Protector Cromwell and some regnant Kings, but Coronation onely. If it be said, that Cromwell gover∣ned not according to the Laws, yet the definition will agree to any Usurper that doth. If it be replied, that he cannot govern accor∣ding to Law that usurps contrary to Law, then 'twill unavoidably follow, that he who hath the Essence of a King, must have a le∣gal Right to govern according to Laws, and what then will be∣come of a great part of our Author's Scheme. Secondly, Others may infer from hence, that then King Charles the First, in his Im∣prisonment, and King Charles the Second, in his Banishment, were no Kings, because they did not fit on the Throne, and govern by the Laws of England. Thirdly, I infer, That the known Laws of the Land must be such Laws as are known to the King, or else he cannot govern by them: but how can he know many of them, but by the information of his Counsel, and the interpretation of his Judges, wherein, if they happen to mistake, must he unhappi∣ly cease to be a King? or, in our Author's language, lose the Es∣sence of a King? The Essence of a King of England I take to be, That he is a rightfull supreme Governour; a regular King I take to be one that governs according to Law; and a bad King, to be one that perverts and violates the Laws; now a bad King, by a violation of the Laws, and an invasion of the Subjects rights, no more ceaseth to be a King, than a bad Landlord ceaseth to be a Land∣lord by the invasion of some of his Tenants rights and customs; or a disobedient Subject ceaseth to be a Subject; for if his disobe∣dience makes him no Subject, how many have lost the rights of Subjects, and how can they reasonably suffer by the Power to which they are not subject. Certainly our Author did not want Skill nor Learning to distin∣guish between the Power, and the abuse of it; between a Gover∣nor, and his ill administration; between a King, and his irregulari∣ties. Should it be meted to many of us with the same measure, we should be forc'd to quit that Kingdom, which King James is said to have Abdicated. But confused Arguments are most suitable and sea∣sonable for times of confusion. The only Argument which he produces to prove, that King James subverted the Legislative Power, one of the Fundamentals
of our Government, is, Page 6. That he to all intents and purposes assumed the Legislative Power to himself; and this he did, because he dispens'd with some few Laws, (one, according to our Author, was enough to dissolve the Government,) the consequence whereof he proves thus, Because no Law could do more than the Dispensing Power did. Page 7. All this is of a thred, and so finely spun, that it will scarcely endure the gentle touch of a tender Examination; a small puff will blow all this into its primitive nothing; in all which he doth no more than stoutly affirm and suppose, what he should truly prove, viz. 1. That the breach of a Law is the repeal of a Law. 2. That the dispensing with a few, or but one Law, destroys the whole Legisla∣tive Power, and the fundamental constitution thereof. Now if the Dispensing Power did really and truly (which it did not) null the Laws to all intents and purposes, it did but reduce us to the same condition, wherein we were before the making of those Laws; and certainly we had then a Government, a Legislative Constitu∣tion, as extensive and authoritative as now we pretend to. 3. That King James by his Dispensing Power, and Suspending Power, did intend to Repeal those Laws; and that those that reaped the be∣nefit of those Indulgences, did thereby believe and take them as repealed; for 'tis very difficult to believe, that such a publick act should have such a general effect without the intention of the dis∣penser, or acceptation of the dispensed; especially since 'twas so generally known, what Closetings, and Regulations of Corporati∣ons, with other curious and precious Arts, were made use of to compass such a Parliament, as would repeal what the King had only suspended and dispens'd with, and ratifie all his Indulgences by their solemn Act; for if it had been thought, that the King could have perfected a Repeal without a Parliament, to what pur∣pose were all those industrious artifices, superfine politicks, and superlative fetches to procure a complying Parliament, without which, 'twas concluded, the design would be imperfect. 4. He should have proved, that the assuming of more Power by the King, did not only lessen, but totally destroy all that he had: this is a pretty method of Substraction by the art of Multiplication, of lo∣sing all by gaining more: The Courts at Westminster do not pre∣sently cease to be, when the persons in Authority there assume more Power than of right belongs to them. He farther saith, That the Kingly Power was subverted in the subversion of the Government, and this subverted by a dispensing
with a Law. What! is the Kingly Power totally subserted, when it commenceth arbitrary, and is enlarg'd? or do all the Royal Rights fail, when some of the Laws relating to the Subject are per∣verted? by what Law or Reason can this be proved? and was our Government completely subverted by the Dispensations, when all the legal Courts of Justice were open; Terms, Assizes, and all sorts of proceedings observ'd; and when the Magistrates acted in their several stations and capacities, in their Courts, Gowns, Cities and Jurisdictions? or did we lose any particular Rights, because some evil-doers were pardon'd? or were we illegally ruin'd on that very account, because some were illegally preferr'd, and we un∣done, because some were saved from their deserved penalties? Is there such a malignant influence, such a diffusive venom in one illegal Dispensation, that it marrs all the Regalities, and inevitably dethrones the King without a possibility of Restauration? If this was known by our Author some years ago, why did he not then discover this hidden mystery, which was never heard of before, nor will ever be found, so much as in the Original Contract of the Demogogical King-makers? And why did our Author so frequent∣ly pray for the King, as his King, after the Subversion of the King∣ly Power, and Rights of the People? and Address him with his Sovereign Titles, when he thought him to be no King; and sub∣mitted to him, as to the most rightfull, actual, supreme Power? It had been far greater sincerity and integrity to have transferr'd all these things on the next rightfull Heir, upon whom (by our Author's doctrine) all the regal Rights were devolved. But for what reason a King loseth his regal Rights, when he assumes an Arbitrary Power, I do not as yet perceive, nor can find in the Let∣ter to a Bishop; the People's Rights may be subverted, when the Kingly Power remains, as well as, and something better, than, a King be Conquer'd, and not his Kingdom. Hath the Constitution been totally subverted, when the Com∣munity hath invaded one or more of the Prerogatives of the Crown? if so, I doubt 'tis not yet patch't up again. He tells us, that we swore to the Constitution; but what, when, and where we swore, he tells us not, and, I believe, no body re∣members: He adds, we only swore to the King's Authority; but if he pleases to peruse, and reade over his Old Oath, he will find, that he swore to the King, and to defend his Person; and there he will find also, that his Oath was not pactional, or conditional, but
absolute, and independent; and there he will find no foundation for a distinction between the King's personal and politick capacity, which his last Assertion too plainly intimates. 5. He should have proved, that the King's Dispensation is as va∣lid, and as secure, as an Act of Parliament; or else how, to all in∣tents and purposes, is it the making of a Law? or how can he say, the Law can do no more than the Dispensing Power? was the Law dead by the Dispensing Power, and its force totally and perpetu∣ally nulled? why then is it now revived without an Act of Re∣vivor, and some of the penalties thought fit to be inflicted by the judgment of some of our Legislaters? What is repealed by Parlia∣ment is certainly void, and there is no fear of suffering thereby; and what is enacted by Parliament continueth its force and obli∣gation, though 'tis not at present put into execution; and like cer∣tain politick dilatory poysons after many days and months, proves dangerous, if not fatal: A particular dispensation doth not infer an universal dissolution; some persons thought (as our Forefathers, and antient Lawyers did, and 'tis but what the Convention assumed to themselves) that the King might remit or dispense with the pe∣nalties of some Laws; yet I never heard, that they said, the King by his sole Power might make new Laws: Let our Author re∣member, what he hath often heard, if not read publickly at the close of Briefs, which is yet continued, Any Law, Statute, Act or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. When all these Considerations are weighed, I hope others, if not our Author, may be satisfied that King James's Dispensations were not of that fatal consequence to the Legislative Power, nor a total dissolution of our Government, nor a subversion of the King's Power, nor our complete ruine, as he supposes them to be; except it be said, what is most true, that the clamours about them ministred occasion, and pretences to effect all those things that have ensued since. I wish there had been no grounds, nor the same arguments to retort all upon a Revolution of a later date; whether here, or elsewhere, too many can tell without consulting the Oracles. Upon our Author's principles he, as much as in him lyes, sub∣verted the Government by making new Laws without the concur∣rence of the Legislative Power; for he hath justified arm'd resi∣stance, and asserted forfeiture, which is a doctrine of subversion: Are these Laws of our Kingdom, or not? if not, then he insists on
that for legal, for which there is no Law; if they are Laws, let us know when, and by whom they were made, and where now to be found? If King James nulled our Constitution by making that a Law, which was no Law, and contrary to Law; doth not our Author, as much as in him lyes, do the same? Beside, if we allow his principle, it will prove too much to justi∣fie the present settlement; Page 5. for he hath told us, That if the Parlia∣ment without the King make a Law, one hinge of the Government is broken off; and if it act, and fit contrary to Law, the other hinge of Government is broken also, and so the legal Government cea∣ses. Now, according to his own arguing, the dispensing with a Law is to all intents and purposes the making of a Law; and is not, 5 Eliz. 1. both suspended and violated? since the present Parliament-Mem∣bers have not taken the Oath of Supremacy, as that Act requires, before they can legally fit; and disables every one from being a Knight, Citizen, or Burgess to Vote in Parliament, that takes it not, with which disability the King himself cannot dispense, as Cook says, (3. Instit. cap. Simony;) and if the King cannot, who, without an higher Supremacy, can? And 'tis further observable from the same Statute, that what is done by such disabled persons, is made null and void; for they shall be reputed, as if they had never been returned for Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses. Will our Author now say, that this makes the Law of none effect, and erects an arbitra∣ry and illegal Power? And can he say, that the Government sub∣sisteth, when 'tis destroyed, by his own Position, and in his own Ex∣pression? He would seem reverent to crowned Heads by a pretended averseness to aggravate their crimes: But can King James be ren∣dred more black and enormous, or his Government more mon∣strous than he hath represented both to be; he hath affirm'd of them a subversion of the Government, the ruine of the Subjects, and a forfeiture of the Crown; whereby he provokes Children and Subjects against him; and what can be added more, but a sentence to the Block? for which some of his Authors could have furnish'd him with as good, and as proper arguments, as they have done for a forfeiture: He spares not to particularize every thing that can be objected; and rather than the particulars shall want either number or weight, uncharitable conjectures and groundless censures about French Dragoons, &c. are added to the tale.
Having thus discuss'd what our Author hath affirm'd of Legisla∣tion, I proceed. In the second place, to consider the other fundamental of our Constitution, viz. Administration, and to debate whether King James did cease to be King, because he did not govern according to Law, as the Writer of the Letter saith, who gives a particular Catalogue of divers breaches of the Law, wherewith he chargeth King James. Before he had pass'd this peremptory sentence, it might have consisted with good manners, and would have prevented an un∣wary opposition, if he had considered what the Prince of Orange declared in the second Paragraph of his Declaration, viz. That King James's Counsellors overturn'd (and is not this a subversion) the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Realm, and subjected, not se∣cretly only, but openly, Conscience, Liberty and Property, to arbitrary Government: Here all is imputed to the Counsellors, and nothing to the King; in the Author's Letter all to the King, and nothing to the Evil Counsellors; and in the additional Declaration they are styled the Suberters of the Laws and Religion of these Kingdoms: But let the particulars of his List be as true as he would have them to be, is there any tolerable consequence in his arguing? Because King James did those illegal things, therefore he subverted the whole Constitution; except he could have proved, that the whole Constitution did consist in those particular Laws which he is said to have; and that because he did not govern by some Laws, there∣fore he govern'd by none at all; and because he brake some, there∣fore he violated all the rest. These consequences are so mighty wide, that something more than ordinary Logick is required to tack them and the premises together. It is a bold adventure to call those Laws, which King James brake, the Essence of our Con∣stitution; and the Essence of a King to govern according to those numerical Laws; yet this was the task, and this should have been the proof, and without it all the rest must be inconclusive. Is not a legal King our right, and part of our Constitution? and are there not many particular Laws which respect the King, his Person, Safety, Crown and Dignity, and many other Laws which respect the Subjects? and most of the branches of Magna Charta, which this Author cannot in conscience say were broken by King James? How strange and uncouth is it then to say, the whole Constitution was subverted, when the greatest part of it remain'd untouch'd
and unchang'd: the Essence of our Constitution no more ceaseth by the breach of some Laws, than a man ceaseth to be a man, because he hath lost some of his toes, or when the Cramp hath seiz'd some of his fingers, or he hath broken a leg or an arm: neither doth an irregular King, for promoting or licensing some particular irre∣gularities, any more cease to be a King, than a Mayor, or a Ju∣stice of Peace ceases to be such, if one keeps a disorderly Tipling∣house, or the other doth not punish every Drunkard and Swearer, whom he actually knows to be such: the Office continues to be legal, though the Officer acts illegally, untill he is legally discharg'd. But who can say unto the King, What dost then? or who is impower'd by our Laws to give him his discharge and Quietus? and though an illegal act may render an Officer obnoxious to a legal Penalty, yet it doth not presently divest him of his legal Power and Right to the employment; for his Power is founded on the rightfull au∣thority of his Commission, not on the goodness of his personal Acts; from whence 'twill follow, that the Office of a King continueth, notwithstanding some illegal practises committed by him, unless an inferior Magistrate hath a firmer Title than the supreme Power hath; and if the Office of a King continues, he does not lose the Essence of a King; except it can be said, That one may have the true Office of a King, and not be a King. The Author of the Letter saith, He that doth not govern by Law, doth not govern at all. If by the Law he understands the whole Law, or the Law in general, with what truth or prudence can any one admit the consequence? how inconsiderate, unreasonable and intemperate must that King be, who rejects all Laws, and will govern by none? It is not conceivable, that any Prince should be so extremely furious, so void of common sense and reason, as to attempt so much violence and injustice, as to violate all the Rules of Government to his own trouble and shame, and the confusion of the State, and the ruine of his People. But if by Law the Au∣thor understands some particular Laws, (which he must if he ap∣plies it to King James, for none, without impudence, can say he broke all the Laws,) how notoriously false, and grosly illogical, must it be, to argue from a particular to a general? But such are our Author's confused Methods and Assertions, by making some∣thing to be every thing, and some Laws to be all Laws. But granting that King Jame, did not govern at all, because he did govern by some particular Laws; how consistent is this princi∣ple
with the practice of our Author, and others of his judgment, who frequently and solemnly in the House of God, and in their Prayers called King James their Sovereign Lord and Governor, after all the breaches of the Law now particulariz'd by him? Is it sincerity to own such a one to be a Governor, and yet to justifie, that he did not govern at all? There is one thing that our Author saith, He had almost forgot, Page 11. viz. King James's laying aside the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which he calls an instance of the Dispensing Power, and a condemna∣tion of the Oaths as unlawfull. Could he have truly evinc'd, that King James did dispense with the Oaths in such a sense, that there∣by he did to all intents and purposes release and discharge all the Takers of the Oaths from the obligation of them, that would have given more satisfaction than all the Letter beside can truly effect: But this wants proof, and had nothing to support it but a bare insinuation: A dispensing from the taking of the Oaths, is certainly no relaxation from the Oaths already taken; though the Scrupu∣lous are exempted, yet the Swearers are not absolved. Whatever King James thought of the Oaths, it doth not appear by any evi∣dence from our Author, that the King thought the Oaths unlaw∣full: If he had thought so, a Prohibition had rather been his duty, than a Dispensation an act of his favour; a Dispensation doth not necessarily suppose or infer the unlawfulness of the matter, from which we are dispens'd, any more than a permission of Conventi∣cles infers the sinfulness of the Church-service, because the Dissen∣ters are indemnified for being absent from it; or that the Old Oaths are unlawfull, because the Convention hath abrogated them, and Abrogation is something more than a Dispensation. Sup∣pose the King thought the Oaths unlawfull, doth the Error of his Judgment lay a good foundation to free us from that obligation, about which, we believe, he is very much mistaken? and unless he had been mistaken, he would not have cancelled the obliga∣tion: And allowing this to be so, doth the discharge to the pre∣sent King, on a mistake, totally exempt us from that bond of the Oaths to the Heirs and Successors, who may think otherwise of the obligation and lawfulness of the Oaths. Whatever the King might think of some passages in the Oaths, yet certainly a great part of the Oaths belonged to the King's An∣cestors in the days of old; and the old homagium ligeum bound the Subject to be the King's man of life and member; and this was
never thought opposite to Popery. If the King disliked that part which related to the Pope, yet he never freed any from the obli∣gation to that obedience and fidelity which was a right belonging to the Kings of England, whether Protestants or Papists. If the forms of the Oaths were his complaints, certainly the Allegiance was never his grievance, unless it was, because it was no better kept. If he discharg'd his Subjects from those bonds, why doth he charge some in England, and hang others in Ireland for the breach of them? and why doth he in his Declarations require the Allegiance of his Subjects? If we suppose he thought the Oaths unlawfull, can it therefore be inferr'd, that he hath actually re∣leas'd us from the Obligation? And supposing he hath freed some, hath he therefore freed all? And if he thought some part unlaw∣full, will it therefore follow, that the Swearer is freed from that part which the King thought lawfull and obligatory? or because some had the liberty not to take the Oaths, had others therefore indulgence not to keep them? because some would not swear, therefore others might forswear? This is a new sort of Logick and Divinity adapted to the Cause and the Modes of the times. Where there are divers particulars conjoyned in one Oath, that only part ceaseth to bind, whose matter is sinfull; but to as much as is law∣full, there remains an obligation to observe it punctually: He that remits part of a Bond, doth not thereby remit all; and he that lends Money to John-a-Nokes, does not thereby cancel all the Bonds of his solvible Debtors. To prove therefore this instance, he should fairly and justly make evident, 1. That King James thought all the Oath, and every part there∣of, unlawfull. 2. That what he thought unlawfull, we were not bound to by the Oaths, nor by the Law of the Land to observe; so that if he had thought the Supremacy to be in the Pope, we were bound to acknowledge it so, at least not to be in the King. 3. That by his Declaration he declar'd his Judgment, and con∣demn'd the Oaths as unlawfull. 4. That by his Dispensation he cancell'd their Obligation, and discharg'd all from their Bonds. 5. That a remission of something in and about the Oaths to some persons, is an entire absolution of all from every thing contain'd in the Oath. If these things had been cleared, few scruples could have remained as to the obligation of the Oaths to King James's Person,
but that he granted as real a Relaxation from the sworn Allegi∣ance, as ever the noble and generous King Ferdinand did to the Neapolitans from their Oath and Homage, when in person he told his Nobles, Gentlemen and Citizens, that because he was willing to secure their honour, and preserve them from ruine, whom he could not at present protect from the power of the French Forces, he freely absolved them, and gave them leave to make the best terms they could with their prevailing Adversaries. The whole scope of this specious Plea in the Letter may be sum∣marily reduced to this,— Our Oath to King James ceaseth, be∣cause he ceaseth to be a King; he ceaseth to be a King, because he ceased to govern by Law; he ceaseth to govern by Law, be∣cause he hath completely subverted the Government (though the Covention in the Instrument of Government say onely, he did endeavour to subvert it;) he subverted the Government, be∣cause he subverted the fundamentals of our Constitution, Legisla∣ture and Administration; and this he did, because he suspended and dispensed with some few Laws: These are the lincks to bind a King and unshakle his Subjects; these groundless and inconse∣quent assertions are as true, as that King James finished our ruine, (for so our Authour saith (pag. 7.) when the King gave Commissi∣ons to Popish Officers and resolved to stand to it; and that he ruin'd the Government by his dispensations; as if there were no diffe∣rence between sickness, and death; a male-administration of some things, and a destruction of the whole. According to this rule he may prove the present settlement to be a dissolution, because the hereditary Crown law is altered, and that the Parliament hath sub∣verted the Constitution, as sitting without the King's Writ, or his Consent first had, and without taking those Oaths which the Con∣stitution of our Government did require; and that many of the Kingdom have forfeited and lost their rights in the Constitution, be∣cause they have taken up arms against their rightfull King James, then in possession of the Crown; which is contrary to Law and their Declaration: To justifie which our Author saith, that King James ceased to be King, which very few at the Prince of Orange's invasion did either believe or think of; for since his date of sub∣version in 1685. had we no Government? did we live in a state of Anarchy? was nothing done by King James's royal Power, nor any administration of Justice in his royal Name? are all the Com∣missions granted since that time void? and are all the Acts of Ju∣stice
null and of none effect? if not, then King James did not cease to be King, because he govern'd as a King, though not ac∣cording to every particular Law. All Promises, and solemn Oaths, and Declarations to a King sig∣nisie but little, when all must cease to bind, by saying, he ceaseth to be a King; this is a summary way to promote and justisie all Re∣bellions; for if it be not true to say so, 'tis easie to pretend it; this is an excellent method and art to cut the Gordian knot, which could no otherwise be untied. The Author tells us farther, Page 12. That the Declaration about taking Arms against the King was for the preservation of the Government; but doubless and principally of the King, who therein is express'd, but the Government is not; and if he pleases to consult the Sta∣tute, and consider the occasion of that Act, and what happened to King Charles the First, may perchance be induced to believe, that it was enacted for the King's safety, whom he thinks not sit to in∣clude in the application of it. Had King James prevailed against the Prince of Orange, these casuistical Salvo's would not have exempted some from the Charge of Rebellion and Treason, and from the Violation of their Oaths and Declaration, for which (according to our Author's Scheme) they could not have suffered without Tyranny and Usurpation, be∣cause long before King James ceased to be King, though none had the skill or the luck to demur to the Jurisdiction of any Court, by which they were fined and sentenced to execution. Strange was the Mystery, and dark was the Ignorance both of King and State, to have no King, and yet not to know it; to have a governing King, and yet no Government; an unaccountable happiness surely to enjoy three years peace and prosperity under a King that was no King, and in a dissolved constitution, that no body thought so; for whatsoever our Author saith, his practices declared, that he did not then believe it: I cannot but wonder, that none should have that fineness of wit, sagacity of apprehension, largeness of reading, or depth of judgment to understand this mystical demise; nor yet so much ho∣nesty or courage to assert the devolution of the Crown on the next Heir; if these things had happened, many warm debates and earnest tuggings about Abdication would have been prevented; which point also gives us as little encouragement or satisfaction to take the new Oath, as the pretence of a total subversion of the
Government doth to the renouncing of the old Obligations; which point of Abdication I am next to consider whether it can satisfie our Consciences, that the old Oaths cease to bind, and that the new one may be righteously taken. Let it not seem insolent to debate that point of Desertion which the Convention hath already determined; there is a strong im∣pulse, and it can be but highly reasonable to speak of that wherein our Consciences, Rights and Interests are so much and so nearly concerned; 'twas thought wisdom to debate it in the Parliament∣houses, within whose walls perchance neither the word Abdicati∣on was ever heard of before, nor the thing argued there; and for which no legal Precedent can be (at least hath not been) produ∣ced. Let it not now seem a breach of good manners to treat of that wherein our Religion and Interest is so much concern'd: For whatever deference is to be paid to the Assembly of the Nation, I do not, cannot rely on their decisions so as to be infallible. Certain∣ly many Assemblies have grosly erred, and shamefully miscarried; sive times was the Sentence of the Spencers in four Kings reigns en∣acted and repealed: in six months time King Henry the Sixth and Edward the Fourth were both voted Usurpers, and rightfull Kings; and if the Wisdom of a Nation (as a Parliament is called) should be the Rule of a Man's Conscience and Christian Conversation, it must be said, that they did very well who turn'd Papists, and re∣nounc'd Protestanism in Queen Mary's days, and subscribed little less than Contradictions in her Father's; and they in foreign parts do well to continue Papists, Turks, and Heathens on the very same principle. The first time, Tho. White's grounds of Obedience and Go∣vernment. that (I remember) the word occurreth in the English Print, is in White the Popish Priest's book, wherein he treats of the Deposing of Princes; and shews the meaning of the word in our days, and in the days of Henry the Third of France: many years before White wrote his book, the said Henry is said to abdicate without either quitting his Government or his Kingdom: from that Romish Priest and some of his brethren too many politick principles have been suck'd in by many of the English Nation; How ominous it is let others judge, I will not add any farther censure. Deposition and Abdication are two distinct terms, and of different signification in their ancient and modern usage; the first is invo∣luntary, the second voluntary; but how to distinguish them in
King James's Case, I do not know, nor do I pretend to art enough for such an undertaking, unless, by a dispensation from the Criticks, I may call a Deposition an Abdication in the Kingdom, and an Ab∣dication a Deposition out of the Kingdom; mutato nomine, I know no other difference. It would have been a great satisfaction to a great many persons, if King James could have been proved to have laid down his Go∣vernment, as really, as truly, and as formally, as the Emperor Charles the Fifth, or Christina Queen of Sueden did, though he had left no better resignation than Richard the Second, or Edward the Second, Kings of England, did sign; but no such Instrument was ever seen or heard of. In the case of Abdication it is acknowledged by the learned Gro∣tius, by others, and by the use of the word in Classick Authors, and by the practice of the thing, that (Abdicatio) Abdication doth import a free and spontaneous Cession from the Government, with∣out any just fears, fraudulent arts, or compulsary violence; when a King quits his Government with an intention, and full resolution of quitting it, and totally abandoning it for ever, without any thoughts or reserves of resuming it: If such a resolution of King James at his departure could be proved, it would be equivalent, or tantamount to a solemn resignation: But to argue as our Au∣thor doth, that King James by a voluntary withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, receded fully from his Government, is neither truth in facto, nor truth in jure; neither sound in the supposition, nor conclusive in the consequence. Can it be found in our Law? (and, I hope, that must be our guide,) or was it ever heard from History, or Records, that a King of England, by sailing into France, lost his Right to England? An excellent Topick for the French to plead, that he Abdicated France also by sailing into Ireland. Whe∣ther King James withdrew willingly, or unwillingly, I cannot see any reason how it should, or how it can affect his Right of Go∣vernment, which doth not depend on his willingness, or unwilling∣ness to go into France, but on the Gift of God, and the Laws of the Land. Now if our Author could make out by those Laws, that it is a total subversion of our fundamental Constitution for a King of En∣gland to go into France, (voluntarily, or involuntarily,) and a for∣feiture of all his regal Rights to sail thither without the consent of the People in general, or of a Convention in particular, he would
have argued much better, and more pertinently, than now I can commend him for. It is not pretended, that if King James withdrew unwillingly, that then his Government was at an end. I will therefore examine these two things: 1. Whither King James withdrew willingly, or unwillingly? 2. That, if he withdrew willingly, whether thereby his right∣full Power ceas'd? 1. The best way to clear the first, is to consider the circumstan∣ces of affairs, when King James went away, and his own sense of things; of which, without doubt, he was able to give the best ac∣count. So long as the state of things was peaceable and calm be∣fore the Landing of the Prince of Orange, we hear of no inclinati∣ons, or resolutions to quit the Kingdom, and yet that had been the season for so grand an affair of relinquishing his Government with a willing mind; nay, after the Landing of the Dutch, so long as his Army and Subjects seemed firm, his Intentions and Actions were in order to meet, and engage with the Prince, and not to fly the Kingdom: But when the Insurrections, and the Prince's Forces en∣creas'd, and his Army decreas'd; when his Soldiers, who ate of his Bread, lifted up the heel against him; when his Children, his pretended Friends, his Servants and his Subjects forsook him; when his Affairs daily declined, and his Condition seem'd little less than desperate, (and the event proved it so,) then 'twas that he resolved on a departure, but in order to make a better provision for the management of affairs, and procuring his own re-settlement in his Throne, with the peace of his People, and a legal settlement of all things in the Government in all its due requisites; the fears of danger, and the better hopes of safety, made him fly; and when he was gone, 'twas his desire to return, and to meet his People in a free and legal Parliament, and to preserve Liberties and Proper∣ties both in Church and State: For the proof whereof, I appeal to the King's own Letters to the Earl of Feversham, and the Lords and others of the Privy Council, wherein the King gives an ac∣count of Himself, and the Reasons of his departure; and who can pretend to know them better than himself? Who is best able to state the Reasons of the King's fears? the King, or our Author? or who is the best and proper Judge of them? and yet, if we be∣lieve the Author, he might have continued secure in his Palace, and taken care of the Government? Of what Government, I pray? Page 14. of
the Kingdom, that was dissolv'd and ruin'd according to him; and how could he take care of that which was at an end, and not in being? Thus the Author imposeth on his Reader, and a little for∣gets himself. He urgeth two Reasons (such as they are) to prove a volun∣tary Cession; Page 14. one is, because the King was actually on a Treaty with the Prince. What then? doth an actual Treaty remove all fears and suspicions from a King, and make him willing to do every thing that he is not inclined to, and, as our Author says, he had not rea∣son to do? Doth a Garrison willingly quit their Hold, which they think not tenable, when they in the interval of a Truce steal away, for fear they should not find honourable terms and mercifull deal∣ing on a fair surrender? His second Reason is just of the same weight, and is no more, nor better, than this: the Popish Parties de∣sign was to persuade King James to withdraw himself; therefore he withdrew willingly; there is need of the strength and length of an hundred Cables to hold these things fast together: How many things do Men with much averseness perform, to which they are persuaded by others? If the Popish Party thought the King in danger, (as the sequel hath proved it a little too true,) and were as willing, as obliged, to preserve him, they had reason to per∣suade him to depart; and what he did out of fear of danger, can never be truly deemed a spontaneous action; nor doth the gene∣rality of men think it so; but if he willingly quitted the Realm, it doth not follow, that the Disbanding of the Army was a demon∣stration of it; or that, 2. He willingly quitted and surrendred the Right of Govern∣ment; if he went, as he was persuaded by the Roman Catholicks Letter, (of which our Author gives an account,) that he might re∣turn, Pag. 14, 15. and, as it is phrased, have his ends of us, in as bad a sense, as others have had of him; 'tis a plain evidence, that he did not to∣rally surrender and abandon the Government, because he did in∣tend to resume it as soon as he could; and shall a Man be blamed for parting with that which he could not keep, though he was willing? and for returning to his State before he can, and is able? And shall this be thought a just and sufficient Abrogation of our Oaths? And is this as formal a Resignation as the Queen of Sue∣den made, who never pretended an unwillingness to resign, nor a willingness to return to what she had resigned, since her retirement to Rome? both which are notorious to the World in the case of
King James; his Letters, Declarations, and other Overt-acts in England, France, and Ireland, plainly demonstrate it, and of which no rational Man can doubt. Now if she raised no Forces, nor im∣ployed any Armies to continue in, or re possess her Throne, as King James did, and doth; if her Resignation was formal, solemn, and perpetual, without the reserve and power of Revocation; and King James's Divestiture was only pro tempore, Page 15. (as our Author speaks, and, for how long, he would have done well to have told the World,) their cases are not parallel, nor is their Government equally at an end; the Author hath instanc'd in the similitude, but 'tis much unequal in the application, as any one may perceive; shall then the strength of the obligations of our Oaths depend on the disbanding of an Army, which could no longer be kept nor paid, and a departure of a King out of his Kingdom, where he thought he could not safely tarry. To which Cases the Oaths in no wise reserred when we took them; and scarce will there be found any one that took them in that sense, which without a pro∣phetick Spirit he could not certainly foresee. Fidelity is not confi∣ned to one numerical place; a Subject may be guilty of Treason without the Kingdom as well as within, and it ought to be remem∣bred, that we have recognized the King's Titles in all his Domini∣ons, as 'tis in the old Oath of Allegiance, and to him in all of them Allegiance is due. How we were left (by the King's departure) to a rabble and to a disbanded army let loose upon us, our Author, who hath said it, Ibid. is best able to declare his own meaning thereabout; as for the common disbanded Soldiers they suffered more by their disban∣ding, than all the Kingdom from them; and if their case was ex∣amin'd, it will be found, that they suffered as many affronts and misusages, as an incogitant and furious rabble are wont to confer on persons in the like circumstances; fewer really feared them than they were afraid of, and many of them did scarce know whither to fly for succour or shelter; there was indeed a great consternation upon a bruit of the Irish Soldiers burning Towns and Villages, and most of the Fires that happened afterwards were generally imputed to mercenary and desperate Irish, but all was noise and sham, the hurt was none, the fears and frights were all. But why he should aggravate the Desertion by being left unto the rabble is not easie to divine, since the rabble was celebrated from a publick place by somebody (as 'tis said, and perchance
not unknown to our Author) for what they had done. If Queen Christina's Resignation and King James's Cession be compared, I must comply with the Author's saying, that our con∣dition (and the consequence) is far worse than that of Swedland; for their Peace and the Laws continued without any alteration or interruption, but we are involved in an unnatural, bloudy and expensive War, and God onely knows what bitterness, effusion of bloud and ruine will be in the end. I wish we may not lose those things, which by ways, not very justisiable, we have sought to de∣fend. We find no Law nor Precedent alledged by our Author to justi∣sie his stated Dereliction; but many Kings have withdrawn out of this Realm, and were not concluded to abdicate the Govern∣ment, or their Right thereto. William Rufus went out of the King∣dom, and left no Commission for a Vicegerent; Edward the Fourth withdrew, when the Earl of Warwick appeared too strong against him; Charles the First fled into the Isle of Wight; and what is it that makes a difference between a withdrawing thither, or into France or Ireland? Charles the Second fled from Worcester Fight in∣to (the same) France, and yet they were never thought to abdicate the Kingdom: If you say Charles the First went into his own Ter∣ritories, I think none will say, that King James went out of all his when he went into France; for if that was not his rightfull Territory, the Convention can tell why they bestowed the Title thereof on King William. Neither do I find it agreed, where the Epocha of the Abdication is to be fix'd; if on King James his first departure, 'tis answered, he withdraw no farther than the Kentish shoar, which belongs to the English dominion; and after this he was treated and owned as a King, sate in Counsel, and in a Royal manner signed an Act of Counsel, as 'tis publickly confess'd. If the Aera be plac'd on his second departure, it may be ask'd, Did King James willingly consent to the change of his Guards? Did he willingly condescend to be hurried out of White-hall by a mid∣night Order? his Strength and his Forts were seized, and his Re∣venues employed for another's use, and the best thing that was left him, was an opportunity of saving himself by departing from that People, who in a surprizing manner had first left him, and left him nothing, but his Person, to secure; which desolate and forlorn condition called to his remembrance the fatal example of his mar∣tyr'd Father, and his too true an observation, That the Prisons of
Princes and their Graves are not far distant, as K. James writes in his Letter to the Lords of the Privy Council. Let none be so furiously rigorous as to say, he took no care for the Government before he went; if we impartially weigh all his circumstances, and the circumstances of that distracted time, what could be well expected more, than what he did? He left the Com∣missions of Peace, and the Militia, as well as Regal Commissions could make them? He left a Lord Chancellor, [I dispute not here for his goodness, but his authority] but he was imprison'd; he left authorized Judges, but they were not permitted to act; and he sent a Letter to the Privy Council to take care of the Kingdom till his return; this was such an effectual Deputation, that if our Au∣thour could have produced as plain a Resignation from him, the Cause would have been irrefragably gained, loudly proclaim'd, and a Triumph assuredly appointed. But if none of these things had been done in England by King James, what was possible more to be done for Ireland than K. J. did, or that Kingdom could in all respects desire? considering what has happened; unless it was, that he left a Popish Deputy, and a Popish Army; if nothing else could be said, the event must necessarily commend the wisedom (though not the legality) of that practice; for thereby he hath secured something of his just Right, and preserved a part of that Kingdom to himself, and thereby the greater hopes of regaining something that he had lost. 'Tis granted by our Author, Page 17. that if King James departed willing∣ly, he had notwithstanding animum revertendi, which shews most plainly, that it was not a total Dereliction, nor that he resolv'd to govern no longer, as the Letter hath affirmed; from which Sup∣position of a willingness to return, he makes many barbarous In∣ferences on K. J. Ibid. his intention to come with borrowed Forces from France to destroy the Protestant Religion, and the Civil Constitu∣tion: This shews rather the rancor of his mind against K. J. his Person, than a sincere aim at Truth, to ascertain this Argument; he sets up a deformed mark, and then shoots at rovers, to beat it down; if unkind jealousies and feigned suppositions were good proofs, 'twas easie to exhibit a large scroll, that would not tend to our Author's satisfaction, nor the delight and honour of the times. He tells us (pag. 9.) Page 9. He was not willing to aggravate the crimes of Princes: To recompense this tenderness to crowned Heads, he in∣vents
those faults which he will not aggravate, and in civility cre∣ates a guilt, which, in truth, he could not severely chastise. As for borrowed Forces, whence could King James have them, but from France? and why should not a borrowing thence be as good, and as lawfull to regain his undeniable Right, as for some of his Sub∣jects to borrow Foreign Forces to drive him from his Kingdom, and keep him from his Throne. Our Author tells us, that it signifies nothing to the dereliction, whether King James intended to return, or not. Truly, in my poor opinion, it signifies, that he was willing to continue to govern, and therefore did not willingly cease to govern: But by the Cession was King James's Government at an end? and could not the Con∣stitution subsist in such a case? Well! then it seems the Government was not at an end by the King's subverting Dispensations, as the Letter said before; but if it was at an end by the Dispensing Power, then the Constitution might subsist in such a case for three months longer, as well as for three years before; and that the Govern∣ment (in respect of King James as Governor) did not cease by his departure, I appeal to the sense and practice of the generality of the Kingdom to confirm it, who by their constant Prayers owned him as supreme and rightfull Governor, untill the Convention met, and for some days after that time also; and very few thought o∣therwise of him, whatsoever some intended to attempt against him by some new-fashion'd charming expressions, and innovation words. Many did not think what would be done; some thought that im∣possible, which was afterwards done; and many were surprized at the opening of the design, and more were amazed to consider what was done, after the Abdication-Vote was enacted. Our Author, in his super abundant zeal to his Cause, doth posi∣tively affirm, that King James at his Cession made no provision for the Government; for the disproof of this, I refer the Reader to what I have already said; and if he did make provision, (such as he was able, and none can require more,) then, by the Author's concessi∣on, his Government was not at an end: He needed not to have put the case, Whether a Nation ought to continue without a Go∣vernment, till the Governor thinks of returning; for King James was as willing to return, if he could, as others were willing to prevent him, and industriously contrived to keep him out, when he was gone: And did he not send a Letter to the Convention a∣bout it? whether they would peruse the Letter, or not, disproves
not his willingness to return; but the refusal declares theirs, that he should not: His willingness to leave us for ten years, is far less tole∣rable, than to absent for two or three months, let our Author say what he will. To suppose that a Prince should be willing to leave his Kingdom for ten years, without taking care for the Government, is such a gross imagination, such a piece of Knight-errantry, so disagreeable to common sense and reason, of which certainly Kings have a share, that for common civility to a crowned Head, and for the honour of our Nation, we should wave such ungentile and unac∣countable surmises, especially when the King's actions evidently confute them. If the Kingdom had prepared for his return on a firm settlement of affairs, on the just and lasting foundations of Law and Equity, Conscience and Religion, our Reputation might have been better provided for than now it seems to be, and the less scandal would have been taken against our Principles, Professions, and Practices; our Peace would have been secur'd, and a much better prospect of Happiness, than at present many can pretend to. To conclude this Head of discourse: If King James hath not quitted the Right of Government, then he hath not quitted the Right to the Obligation of the Oaths: If he is willing to govern, I cannot sincerely think but that he is willing my Bond of Allegi∣ance should continue; and if he hath not releas'd me from it, I firmly believe, no humane power can. I am not bound, without sufficient proof, to believe what our Author doth; nor is his bare persuasion the proper foundation of another Man's judgment: He believes the King withdrew willingly; and therefore, he thinks, he may lawfully take the New Oath: Another is persuaded, that the King went away involuntarily; and therefore according to our Author's, and others concession, he ought not to swear. But what∣ever the Author's aim may sincerely be, certainly he never inten∣ded that any one Man should believe all his Letter: For if King James receded voluntarily from his Government, as he saith, and any one can and doth believe it, the same Man cannot believe that he went away involuntarily, through the force of a Con∣quest, (as the Author affirms also,) which is next to be consider'd. Page 18.
Of CONQUEST. COnquest supposeth a War; and all Wars are either offensive or defensive: but to which of these to reduce the War on which the pretended Conquest is grounded, I cannot easily de∣termine, considering some things and some sayings. A Man would think that the Invasion should make the War of∣fensive: but to this I dare not assent, because the Prince of Orange in his Declaration saith, he came over to defend himself; and de∣clares in the Dutch Abstract, that he came not with Intention to in∣vade. Now I can't think, that to defend, is to offend any more, than an offensive and defensive War to be the same. Neither do I know how to call it a defensive War, since none of King James's Forces invaded the Prince's Territories, nor any of his Allies, nor threatned nor annoyed in an hostile manner him, his Subjects, or his affairs; but all King James's endeavours were to defend his own Possessions, not to drive the Prince of Orange out of his. King James complain'd of no injuries from the Prince, re∣quired no reparations, nor threatned, nor declared any War. The Dutch, though in Alliance with King James, and knew the design of the Prince of Orange, and lent him Forces, and conceal'd and (as some say) disown'd the design when by King James's Mini∣ster pressed about the Preparations; yet never pretended any fears or troubles, or War from King James: I can't comprehend how it should be a Defensive War, where was no actual Enemy, or pre∣tended Adversary to defend themselves against: there can be no defence by force, where there is none with force to assault. But though we are at a stand, what Additional Title to bestow on the Prince's Enterprize; Certain it is, that the bloody and mi∣serable effects of it will enforce us now to call it a War; though we can't call the success of the Attempt in all its premises, ingredients, and concomitants, either a proper Conquest, or such an one as can free us from the Bond of Allegience, which we have sworn to King James, and his Heirs, and Lawfull Successors. We cannot acknowledge it a Conquest, for the ensuing Reasons, Instances, or Matters of fact. 1. It appears in the Abstract of the Dutch Resolutions, wherein the Prince of Orange declares, That in his going over into England,
it was not the least insight or intentions to invade or subdue that King∣dom, or remove the King from his Throne, much less to make himself Master thereof, or to invert or prejudice the lawfull Succession. To subdue and conquer, I take leave to think the same: and to make a Conquest without an Intention of subduing, I think it to be such a lucky chance, that was never heard of before; and if something had not happened since, a Man of reason might have doubted of it, because of its rarity, as well as unlikelihood. 2. The Prince in his Declaration, and in the Additional, and in his Letter to the English Army, saith, He came to defend and secure the Settlement of Religion, Liberties and Properties; that they who thought otherwise, had hard thoughts of him; he calls a Conquest a wicked attempt, a wicked design, and appeals to the English Nobility and Gentry that accompanied him, to cover him from all such mali∣cious Insinuations of those that gave out he came to conquer the Nations. He then (though it be our Author himself, for I can't help him out of the Condemnation) who asserts the Prince came to make a Conquest, is guilty of malicious Insinuations against King William; and if a King condemns a Man for Lying, who shall dare to con∣tradict him? If the Author pleads a Conquest, then he makes the Prince of Orange guilty of wicked designs and attempts: and this is to be as civil to the present King, as he was true and faithfull to the former. If he thinks to evade this by his fine distinction of a Conquest of the King, and not of the Kingdom; the vanity of that distinction shall be expos'd, before I part with the Subject of Con∣quest. 3. The third reason for which we can't take it for a Conquest, and so not take the Oath on that soundation, is gather'd from the proceedings of the Convention in the Instrument of Government, and their Act of Settlement, wherein Conquest is not so much as mention'd; which is something less than a bare waving of that Ti∣tle: but they insist upon the point of Abdication, upon which they found their Votes of vacating the Throne, and on the account of both transfer the Crown on King William and Queen Mary: Ac∣cordingly King William thankfully accepts what they offer'd. Now to Vindicate the present Settlement, (as the Author of the Letter doth,) and to contradict the very foundation-work thereof; what is it, but to remove his very Basis, and alter his Corner-stone, and an intimation of no great deference of honour to those, who are called the Wisdom of the Nation? Neither is it very comprehensi∣ble,
how the Prince of Orange could thankfully receive that as a gift, which was his own before by right of Conquest, and the title of Possession; for if it was his by the right of Conquest, the Conven∣tion had no right to give it: and if the Crown was a deed of gift and by the Election of the Convention he was made and declared to be King, and by the acceptance own'd it to be their Gift, (or Offer, call it which you please,) then he had it not by Conquest. If it be said, that he remitted his pretence of Conquest, and relied on the Donation of the People: then his Plea of Conquest falls, and neither the Old Oaths cease, nor the New one to be admitted on that consideration. For since by the consent of all, the Oath is to be taken in the Imposer's sense, and founded on their own grounds; and since by their own Overt-acts they have disclaimed Conquest, it can be no security to a Conscientious man to renounce his former Oaths on that consideration. 4. We cannot acknowledge it a proper Conquest of a Foreign Prince; but are verily persuaded, it was a down right Rebellion of the Subjects at home: For though the Prince of Orange was a Fo∣reign Prince, and independent of the Crown of England, and there∣by could not incur the guilt of a proper Rebellion: yet 'tis to be observed he invaded the Kingdom, not as a principal Aggressor; but as an Assistant, brought his Auxiliary Forces to help the En∣glish Subjects against their Natural Leige Lord and Sovereign, and to maintain their Religion, Laws, and Liberties; to the doing of which, the Prince of Orange in his Declaration expresly saith, That he was invited by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Gentlemen, and other Subjects; and more plainly in his Speech to the Gentlemen of Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, Nov. 15.—88. he saith, [You see we are come, according to your Invitation, and our Promise, &c.] 'Tis evident then, that he was invited, and at the Instance of the English Sub∣jects he invaded England to free them from what they loudly com∣plain'd of. And in the Declaration the Prince says, He could not ex∣cuse himself from espousing the Interest of the English Nation. Indeed the Prince tells those Countrey Gentlemen, that he wanted not their Military assistance so much as their Countenance and Presence; but withall he publishes in his Additional Declaration, That the Forces which he brought along with him, were disproportioned to that wicked design of conquering the Nation. And certainly how zealous soever the English Nation seem'd for their Religion, Laws, Liberty and Pro∣perties against the late Illegal Usurpations; yet they enter'd into
no Conspiracy, nor Combination to conquer, nor dethrone their King; nor talked of any Conquest, or vacating, before King James had (in their expression) Abdicated the Government: neither would the English endure the Expression of a Conquest, if the Dutch Soldiers would have dared to term it so: And Dr. Burnet, in his Sermon before the Prince of Orange, Dec. 23. 1688. hath these words; [Our Deliverer—came, detesting the Imputation of Conquest that was cast upon him.] To all this it may be added, That after the pretended Conquest King James was own'd to be our King, Lord, and Sovereign in all Churches, and in St. James's Chapel too. So that a Conquest is no more reconcileable to the publick acts and honour of this Nation, than to the Practices and Declara∣tions of the Prince of Orange. And after all our Author acknow∣ledgeth, that the Prince's business was not to conquer here, Page 21. but to pre∣serve his and his Princess's right, and the Government in Church and State: And might not this be done without a War, or a Con∣quest? But it seems it was our Author's business to make a Con∣quest, which was not the Prince's design nor business; and by his Assertions to create a greater Victory than the Prince's Arms pre∣tended to. 5. The fifth reason is taken from the usual acceptation of a Con∣quest, which cannot properly be so styled, so long as there is a Con∣testation for the Throne, and an actual War between the Compe∣titors of the Crown: And this is evident from the State of Ireland, and not a little from Scotland. The subduing of one Province, and of one Kingdom, entitles not the Conqueror to all the rest: And if King James was conquer'd in England, it follows not as yet, nei∣ther in facto nor jure, that he is totally vanquished in Ireland. That is a fair Conquest, when the Conqueror is peaceably secured in the Government, and the conquered incapacitated to make any probable, or hopefull attempt for a recovery. If it be objected, that this affects not an English Man, in respect of the Conquest, or in relation to his Oaths: I answer, it doth very much; for the swore Allegiance to King James's Right in all his Dominions and Countries, and Ireland is in that number: And he that swears to King William, swears to him as made, and declared King; and that is of Ireland, as well as of England; and the Procla∣mation, and the War, and Taxes import no less. To salve all which, and much more that might be said, our Au∣thor has a superfine distinction, and refined Evasion of conquering
the King, but not the Kingdom; than which, neither the School∣men, nor the Jesuits ever invented a more nice decision But be∣ing more curiously subtle, than truly solid, it may perchance, to serve a turn, please a Logical Disputant; but will never weigh much in the present Case of Conscience, which is of so vast a con∣cern. 1. If the Kingdom is not conquer'd with the King, then the Peo∣ple have not lost their Rights, though King James did his: And then why should the Oath be enforced on the consideration of Conquest, whereby the Conqueror gains no Right over the Peo∣ple, nor the People lose any Right by the Conquest? If he gained any Right over the People by the Conquest of the King, then the People are conquer'd: or else how came he by that Right? If he hath no Right to the Service and Duty of the former King's Sub∣jects, then it is unrighteous to impose that to which he hath no Right. If it be replied, that the Representatives (let them be as legal, as in truth they ought to be,) gave the Rights of the Crown to the present King; the Question will recur, How came they to be Masters of those Royal Rights? how came they to be Legal Proprietors of those Rights, which they had sworn to be invested in some body else? The Oath of Allegiance is the King's Right, and so saith the Law. If then the Right was in them, (and except it was, I don't know how they could transfer it,) they might have continued it in, and to themselves for ever: and then what advan∣tage would have accrued to King William by the Victory of a single King? But if it be demanded how the Representatives came by this Royal Right, it must be answer'd by one of these two ways, (for I can't think of any other in the present case,) either by Con∣quest, or by a Demise: not by Conquest, for to this the Represen∣tatives pretend not for themselves; 'twas false if they did; and if 'twas true, then the Conquest was theirs, and not King William's: if by a Demise, then the Allegation of Conquest falls to the ground. 2. If the King was conquer'd, and not the Nation; the Enqui∣ry will deserve a satisfactory answer, of what the King was con∣quer'd, and what he lost by the Conquest: Certainly it must be said of his Kingdom, and this I take to comprehend the People as well as the terra firma: without those a Kingdom cannot be; and without this, at least the Right to it, (nec nomen Regis constabit,) the Title of a King can't subsist. Will our Author adventure to say,
that King James's Right to the Kingdom continues? If he doth, this will effectually answer and spoil all his Book: Or that King James was conquer'd from the Kingdom, and not the Kingdom from him? Why then it continues his still; and I heartily wish our Au∣thor may never be forced to the Experiment of distinguishing of being taken from his Estate, and his Estate being taken from him: And I assure the Reader hereby, that I don't pretend to that sa∣gacity of knowing the great difference between losing my Money by being robbed, and by being robbed to lose the Money. 3. Were the Dutch Soldiers like the Syrian Captains, to sight nei∣ther with small nor great, but only with the King? Were there no Papists, nor Evil Counsellors to be subdued? Against these King William came. Were there no Skirmishes, no Soldiers slain? Did none fly from King James to King William? And did none of the People submit? A flight and submission gives a Victory, as well as a battle and a slaughter in the Field. A Fortress is overcome, as well by a Surrender, as by a Storm. There are but few that engage in a Field-Combate, in comparison of vaster numbers that willingly submit: these are said to be conquer'd, when the others are overcome. 4. Had the Subjects no Right in their King, nor to his Protecti∣on, nor to the Laws whereby he was inviolably invested with Kingly Power and Rights? If he then was conquer'd, and our fundamental Laws of hereditary Succession, in which we had a legal Right, diverted: How can our Author say, that the People's Rights were preserved, when the King lost his? Is not King Wil∣liam declared to be a King regnant, and not only a nominative one, as King Philip was in the words of the Lord Coke? 5. If a King may be conquer'd, and not his Kingdom; might it not be replied, that King William the First conquer'd Harold, but not the Nation? But you'll say, there was a Battle fought, and ma∣ny Soldiers and much people slain. What then? by the help of his own distinction I will undertake to prove, that 'twas not the Nation, but Harold and his Army was conquer'd. And if the di∣stinction would hold in any case, it might be something more use∣fully applied here, than in his own Case: For King James ne∣ver fought here in his own Person. But forasmuch as Con∣quest is a harsh term, and not very savoury in England; lest it should comprehend as much as it doth signifie, the Distinction was usefully and commodiously invented, and applied to secure
our Titles, which we were willing to continue; and to null the King's, which we were not ever dutifull to preserve: For our Authour knew well enough what the Prince of Orange sug∣gested in his Additional Declaration, that the Conquest of the Na∣tion doth void all lawfull Titles to Honours, Estates, and Interest; so to preserve these 'twas cautiously resolv'd, to distinguish between the Conquest of the King and the Nation: for if our Conquest had been involved in the Conquest of King James, more must have been inferr'd than many were willing to grant. But since we are now on Mysteries of State, it would not be unacceptable, if the Author would turn the Tables, and resolve this inquisitive Age, how a Kingdom may be conquer'd, and yet the King lose none of his Rights. For suppose a King of England, Rich. 1. or Edw. 1. to be in the Holy Land, and the French or Scots in the interim to have invaded and conquered the Kingdom, just as the Prince of Orange hath now conquered the King: Would they not have been as much out of the Condition of Subjection, as now King James is out of a Condition of Protecting? and, Would his Rights (to apply his very words) have been secure and entirely preser∣ved, though they had lost theirs? Perchance this side of the Que∣stion will be as intricate and obscure to our Author, as his is im∣perceptible and incongruous to us. And since Relatives and Reci∣procals are now so much in vogue, this Correlative would deserve its consideration, with the rest of the like stamp. Our Author saith, That King William pretends not to a Conquest over the Nation. If this be a good Plea, then King James is not conquer'd, as far as we know; because the Prince of Orange pre∣tends to no Conquest over him, but recognized him in the publick Prayer Sovereign Lord and King in this Kingdom, after the preten∣ded Conquest was made by him, and to which he is now entitled. But supposing it be a Conquest, (which we don't believe, and why should we, when the Prince of Orange declared against it, and the Convention did not grant it, but something else that was incon∣sistent with it; as it appears by the Instrument of Government, which if our Author thinks a good Law, why should he distrust their Wisdoms, and oppose his own to theirs, and do that which Sages have condemned, when they said, Neminem oportet esse Legi∣bus sapientiorem?) Supposing it a Conquest, I say; yet the Con∣quest might not be founded on the Rules of Justice, nor confer a Righteous Title: so that, if we were certain of the Conquest, yet
we might still distrust the Equity of the War; and if there be a failure in this latter, there can be but little reason to rely on the former by our Author's Concession. I shall not enlarge on that Title which Conquest can give: for this I refer the Reader to a late printed Abstract of a Learned Per∣son who wrote on this Subject, when the Insolent Usurpers over Charles the First pretended a Title to Conquest, but shall only and barely propose some Requisites to a Just Conquest, and leave the full examination of them to others, whether they were punc∣tually observed in the present Case, and celebrated Victory or no. I mean not hereby the usual and just Rules in the very Exercise of Arms, and Management of the War: but the constant Prelimina∣ries which Just and Generous Warriers, and the Learned Civilians require, before the Contest is begun, and violent Acts of an open Hostility attempted. To a Just War are required. 1. That an Injustice or Injury be done and committed. 2. That a Complaint be made by the Sufferer, to the Aggressor or Vi∣olator. 3. That no Complaint, Redress and Reparation for the Injuries be denied. 4. That after such a Denial, there be a solemn and publick Denuncia∣tion of War made. This was thought so sacred a Condition by the Romans, that without it a Conquest was but sneakingly and shame∣fully stoln, nor fairly or gloriously won; and that such Conquerors were as great Delinquents in the manner of executing Justice, as the conquered Enemies were to provoke and deserve it. And how truly, or how punctually these Conditions were observed in our Case, I need not tell the World. The usual Reasons to justifie the present Attempt are, 1. To correct Male-administration, and remove evil Counsellors, and to preserve the Government, the Subjects Rights, Laws and Liberties. But who, or what Law hath made the Prince of Orange a Judge in our Israel? How came he by the Right of Appeals from England, or to be a Superiour Sovereign to our Supreme Governour? Doth our Law make him in time of Complaints and Grievances our Dicta∣tor and Regulator? or, Doth God and Nature impower Children to chastise their Parents? Will any indifferent person justifie such Proceedings? or, Were such, in all Circumstances, ever heard of before to be acted by Religious Protestants? What King can long
be secure? or, What Peace firmly preserved and enjoyed? Where such Allegations are sufficient to justifie any unnatural War, may not the next Pretenders to the Crown practise the same methods, and be as innocent? Thanks be to God, our Condition was not so deplorable, that we were under a Ruin or utter Desperation: and I pray God the present Revolution may not hasten what we feared; and effectually accomplish what we only dreaded. The Sword is drawn, and the War begun; and who may live to see that sheathed, and this ended? Omne bellum facile sumitur, sed aegerrime desinit: non cujus potestatis initium est, ejus & finis, said the Great Caesar: or, Who knows what bitterness will be in the End? We may live to be chastisee with our own Scorpions, and in the close perish by our own unhappy methods. Certainly those days must be evil, when those of our own houses are the most im∣bitter'd Enemies, and implacable Foes. If the Justice of a War could have been founded on K. James his personal Misdemeanors, it would have been but equitable to have drawn up the particular Charge of all those Crimes for which he deserved to have a War proclaimed against him. But in all the Prince's Declarations, I find not one single Crime imputed to him, but all the ill Administrations are changed on the Evil Counsellors. Now to punish and conquer one Man for the sins of another, seems not very agreeable to the Rules of common Equity. And if these Evil Counsellors contracted a greater degree of guilt, by endea∣vouring to alienate King James more and more from the Prince and Princess of Orange: what black and unnatural Character must they deserve, who attempt to alienate the Prince and Princess from King James their Father? I wish the Event had never given the unhappy Occasion of quoting this part of the Declaration. Whatever Interest or Right the Prince hath to the Succession; We, who have taken the old Oaths, have sworn to defend it: and in Justice 'tis wished, that he may never deprived of it. But yet a future Expectancy giveth not a perfect title to the actual Possessi∣on of it. What is future, is onely contingent: and none can be certain to enjoy it any more, than he can be certain to survive the regnant Prince. 'Tis Injustice to despoil any one of his future Right and just Inheritance; and 'tis more to dispossess another of his actual due. To do one certain Act of Injustice, is an impro∣per Course to prevent a less, because altogether uncertain: and and this is to put a pretender and heir into better circumstances than the Rightfull Possessor.
2. The second pretence to justifie the Prince's attempt is, The setting up a spurious Prince of Wales, to postpone the just Rights of others, and of himself in particular. The Consideration of this is of so vast importance to the Honour, Justice, Oaths and Religion of the Nation; and deserves the most serious, calm, wary and strict debate and examination. For if the Prince of Wales was the true Child of King James and his Queen Mary, he then is lawfull Heir of these Kingdoms, and we are inviolably sworn to his Right; Why should an Infant Prince be injured, and multitudes involved in Perjury? The same Plea of Succession which justifies the Prince of Orange will justifie the Prince of Wales if true born. Much more, if this is an Imposture, the matter deserves the severest Scrutiny, and the most impartial Manifestation to expose the Cheat to shame, to vindicate our Reputations, and satisfie our Conscien∣ces. To struggle for an Impostor against the rightfull Heir would be Perjury; and to neglect our sworn duty to the rightfull Heir would be no less. Presumptions, Suspicions and vulgar Reports, are not weighty Arguments to convince, nor true Reasons to satisfie; they are too weak to govern Prudence, and too shallow to direct the Con∣science; they change not the nature of things; nor make them true or false. 'Tis not what is said, but what is a proved Truth, that should be the Rule to guide us in this great and consciencious Affair. One Man's doubt doth not deserve another's full and firm assent; and some mens distrust is not a sufficient ground for ano∣ther's peremptory disbelief. Whatever aversness there was in the Court, to satisfie many before, or at the Birth; there was a multi∣tude of Testimonies to confirm it afterwards; and now 'tis con∣firmed the more, because nothing done since to disprove it, or them. The whole matter deserved to be re-examined; and the manage∣ment enquired into by a legal Parliament, according to Promise; that so the Representatives might have acquired the full knowledge of this grand Affair, that thereby they might be prepared to satis∣fie the whole Nation, who have infinite reason to desire it. How many Scruples would be resolv'd? How many Doubts removed? How many minds would be eased, if it could be fairly proved whose Child this Imposture was? how, and by whom 'twas sur∣reptitiously brought in; how the Plot was laid; and how the In∣trigue carried on; who were the Contrivers and Managers; what Artifices were used to amuse some and delude others; what Im∣provements
of Art, and Impositions on Nature, were used to pro∣duce such a Fatherless and Motherless Child; what golden Show∣ers essected such a miraculous Birth; what sort of Aboriginal Na∣tive this Insant is; who, according to some popular Oracles, is like to be the Wonder of Ages, without beginning or ending of days? We are concern'd by Oath for the rightfull Heir; and by Oath let it be determin'd who the Heir is. We are told by many late Writers, that 'tis not our duty, nor is it required of us, to exa∣mine Titles; but undoubtedly we are to resolve, and enquire, in order to keep our Oaths; and since by Oath we are engaged to the right Heir, 'tis necessary to be satisfied who this Heir is that hath the Title, which we must own, and to whom our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are to be paid. An implicit Swearing is no more commendable than an implicit Romish faith, and a blind Pepish Obedience; since the Oath is taken, 'tis our concern, and ought to be our enquiry and business, how it may and ought to be kept. How easie and usual it is to cry up, and clamour down what suits with our designs, and is agreeable to our purposes; and to change the Judgment for no other reason, but because the scene of Assairs is altered. Bless the Prince of Wales was the Prayer for one day; and, hang up the Cheat was the Sentence of the next. 'Twas interest then, to bless; and now 'tis Interest, and something worse, to curse the very same Person. But how ignoble, unmanly and unchristian such methods and changes are, a little honesty may suffice to convince. What Prayers, and what Solemnities were express'd here in En∣gland! What Formalities and Trasports of joy in foreign Courts! Addresses were made at home, and Congratulations came from abroad; and such seeming acquiescence in the general, that to pray for the Prince of Wales was not onely enjoyn'd, but the Nation was contented to own him before God himself. Did not the Prince of Orange send a Congratulation for the Birth of the Prince of Wales, and was not the Prince prayed for in the Princess of Orange's Chapel? Did ever the P. of Orange complain of any Imposture of Fraud in this Affair, before the Declaration came forth? and in the Decla∣ration a vehement Suspicion is the Summ Total; and upon that ground, the Birth of the Prince of Wales was reserr'd to the Enqui∣ry of a Legal Parliament: which certainly the wise P. of Orange
would never have done, if it had been a certain Imposture, and thereby expose his own indisputable Right and Title to an hazar∣dous Dispute. This momentous Point calls for a most deliberate and impartial Tryal: every pious and tenderly just mind, can but desire to be satisfied herein; that the Nation may not hereafter halt between two Pretenders, and continue doubtful where to pay their duty, and shew their sidelity, being entangled with the doubts and diffi∣culties of Conscience, the Aims of Princes, involved in the miseries of a bloudy Civil War. Was there no way to satisfie the Prince of Orange but by ow∣ning a forgery in the Prince of Wales? Was there Inspectio Ventris solemnly desired? and if desired, Was it refused? King James is not charged in the Prince's Declaration for denying one thing which ever the Prince of Orange formally and publickly required of him. And our Author confesses, that the Affair of the Prince of Wales is not strictly to be insisted on: which others think should ne∣cessarily be done, whether the Birth be true or false. The Memo∣rial hath collected a great number of Allegations and popular invi∣dious Surmises; but hitherto they want the honest and legal evi∣dence of sufficient Witnesses to prove them. And if the Birth is not strictly to be enquired into; why was it promis'd in the Decla∣ration? why were Calumnies raised from thence to blacken King James, and Surmises and Arguments to alienate his Subjects from him, and promote the Cause, and provoke the minds of his Adver∣saries against him? Doth not that deserve a strict Inquisition, where∣in the Oaths, Honour, and Justice of the Nation; and the Right and the Happiness of our Constitution and Government doth con∣sist? It seems, and so 'tis believed; that what cannot be proved, is not strictly to be insisted on, according to our Author. Notwithstanding all that hath been said; if it should prove true, what some have suggested, that the Design of the Invasion was laid and carried on before the time of the Queen's pretended Deli∣very of the Prince of Wales, how decently would the pretence of the War, from that pretended Prince's Birth, be committed to its honest grave of oblivion? What other pretences others may have to justifie the Prince of Orange's War and Conquest, I know not: this I know, that the Author of the Letter to a Bishop insists on no more: and whether the Objections or Answers are most satisfactory, is lest to the Rea∣der's
Judgment to determine what he pleaseth; for 'tis out of my power to make him think otherwise than he resolves to think. Yet after all, I cannot but observe how cautious our Author is, not to lay too much stress on Conquest, lest that sole Plea should fail: and therefore he twists two more pretences with it to com∣plete a Title; and saith, The Prince and Princess of Orange are in pos∣session partly by Conquest, partly by Inheritance, and partly by the Con∣sent of the Nation. Without all these together it seems the Title would not be whole and complete; for where a part is wanting, the whole is not intire: but how all these are consistent or exact∣ly true, 'tis not easie to comprehend; if only the various passages of the Letter be truly compared, much less if the Acts of the Convention and the Instrument of Government are but cursorily con∣sidered, and a little compared. And it seems to me, whatever the Author pretends, Page 19. he fairly quits them all, by saying, that the un∣doubted Right of Succession of the Prince and Princess of Orange was after the death of King James. If then King James be not dead, it is not their undoubted Right to succeed. The last Argument that is insisted on to persuade us to believe, that our Oaths to King James do cease, is, because be ceaseth to pro∣tect us; whereby, and according to which our Author, and other Writers, would have actual Allegiance and Protection so naturally reciprocal, that this failing, the other must do so too. To evince the Falshood of this Doctrine, I shall propose two things, 1. Ar∣gument; 2. Example; having first observed, that the Oaths of Al∣legiance and Supremacy are not taken on the condition of actual Protection. In the Oaths there are no Conditions or Reservations made or expressed: and 'tis to be remembred, that the Oaths are given to secure the Subjects duty to the King, not the King's duty to the Subject; which is obvious to him that reads the Oaths. And I dare appeal to our Author, whether he took the Oaths with a Condition of Protection the first time after King Charles the Se∣cond's Restoration. 1. The Argument shall be taken from, and in the very words of the University of Oxford's Reasons concerning the Covenant, &c. drawn up by that great Casuist Dr. Sanderson, Sect. 7. of the Salvo's, Wherein the Zealots of that time, pretending to satisfie the Scru∣ples of Loyal Persons, arising from the Sovereignty of the King, and the Duty of Subjects Allegiance, are brought in
By saying, Which (seemeth to us a piece of unreasonable and strange Divinity) that Protection and Subjection standing in Relation to each other; the King being now disabled to give us Protection, we are there∣by freed from our Bond of Subjection: Whereas, 1. The Subject's Obligation (Jus Subjectionis) doth not spring from, or relate unto the Actual exercise of Kingly Protection; but from, and unto the Prince's Obligation to protect, (Jus Protectionis,) which Obligation lying upon him as a Duty, which he is bound in Conscience to perform, when it is in his power so to do: the Relative obligation ly∣eth upon us as a duty, which we are bound in Conscience to perform, when it is in our power so to do. His Inability therefore to perform his duty, doth not discharge us from the necessity of performing ours, so long as we are able to do it. 2. If the King should not protect us, but neglect his part, though ha∣ving power and ability to perform it; his voluntary neglect ought not to free us from the faithfull performances of what is to be done on our part: How much less then ought we to think our selves disobliged from our Subjection, when the Non-protection on his part is not from the want of Will, but of Power? It is most certain, that actual Protection, and actual Subjection, do not mutually infer each other; for all that are actually pro∣rected, do not pay actual Subjection, as is evident from the many Traitors and Felons, and other Criminals in peaceable times; and though many pay actual Subjection, yet are they not actually pro∣tected, as, amongst others, the Society of Magdalen-Colledge can abundantly testifie. If any one in a plainer Phrase shall say, That he that is actually protected, ought to pay Subjection, (including the Oath of Allegiance herein,) I must say, that this will open an entrance for all Villany, Falshood, Treason, and Usurpation what∣ever; and being admitted, will patronize all Disloyalty, Unfaithful∣ness, and Perjury. If a Massianello shall seditiously seize a whole City, and the strength of it; will any one say, that Allegiance presently becomes his due, because the true Lord of the City is not capable at pre∣sent to protect the Inhabitants? Or if a Company of Night-Rob∣bers seize the House, and the Inhabitants; and for the present de∣fend them from the assault of some other Thieves: is therefore their faithfull Obedience become due to the Robbers? and ought they for this present defence to swear themselves Liege Servants for ever?
Our Author tells us, that King James is altogether incapacita∣ted to protect us; and are we therefore incapacitated to be faith∣full to him? Because he can't do what he would; must we there∣fore do what we should not? Allegiance may be Suspended; but without the King's consent it cannot totally be Abrogated: For having passed over my Faith to him as his due, and he accordingly having accepted it, and continues to demand it as his due; I can't without Injustice take from him, what is his due to have, and will not part with. The Author is very wary herein; for though he says King James is altogether incapacitated, he doth not add for ever; for of this he can't be sure, and so here may be room for a future Apology, and to return to a future Allegiance, because of future Protection; which I heartily wish him on all occasions and mutations. The case of the Frontier Towns in Germany and Flanders, is not parallel to ours; if it was, a Foreign Example is no persect rule to direct our Consciences. Is there not such a tacit Condition in their Oaths, confirm'd by the acknowledged practice of all Parties, and the consent of their Governing Lords? Is their Oath the same with ours? Do their outed Governors require Allegiance from them, as King James insists to demand ours? If they are re-taken by force, or a permissive surrender, are they ever treated as Traitors, but rather govern'd as a new acquired Conquest? They do what they can for their old Masters; and when that is done, these release them to pass their Fidelity on another. But are we released by King James? or can we our selves discharge our Obligations? Now though they change their Faith with their Lords, yet I un∣derstand not how they are necessitated thereunto, as our Author ex∣presseth it. But if Protection confers a good Right, doth not the Principality of Orange belong as much to the French King, as En∣gland to King William? and how incongruous to our Author's principles must it be, to proclaim the Irish, Rebels and Traitors, for not being protected? To the Argument, I shall add, 2dly, Some Examples to convince us, that actual Protection in∣fers not actual Subjection. When King Richard the First in his re∣turn from Palestine was taken by the Duke of Austria, and made a Prisoner by the German Emperor for fifteen months; his Right to England did not cease, nor did the Subject's Fealty fall, though he was then (in our Author's words) incapacitated to govern; and
something more in respect of his Person, than King James is at pre∣sent. The Imprisonment of King Charles the First, (and Conquest, and the Original Contract, and the People's Rights were then pre∣tended, as now they are,) and the Conquest, and long Banish∣ment of King Charles the Second, when he had not one Hold in his three Kingdoms, did not vacate the Oaths; nor would all sorts of rigour enforce the true Loyalists to quit their Faith, and forego their Allegiance. I believe our Author was once of that opinion, however there was as fair a Plea for Protection then, as can be pretended now. The last Instance shall be in David and Absalom; a Case more parallel to our present Circumstance, than I could wish, though I cannot help it. The Laws were too grosly and notoriously broken by David; and so much the worse was he, be∣cause the Laws were appointed by God himself: He committed the most injurious Sins, that one Man can be guilty of against ano∣ther, which were Adultery and Murther; and so, according to our Author's Doctrine, he ceased to be a King, because he ceased to govern according to Law. Absalom complain'd of Grievances, and promised Reformation and Justice, when he should be made Judge in Israel: by which pretences he stole the Peoples hearts, and gather'd a numerous and formidable Army: He is proclaimed King; he seizeth the Royal Palace; and the People were as ready to serve him, as they had been to be commanded by his Father. David flies, because he had not Forces enough left to fight, and de∣fend himself, (so here is a Conquest too) leaves no Viceroy to go∣vern the People at Jerusalem; flies over the River Jordan, and so Abdicates the nine Tribes and a half: and so not being able to pro∣tect them, their Faith became due to Absalom. Now here is a Scripture-Case too parallel to these days, and in every particular almost correspondent to our Author's arguments and allegations; like Elijah to the Child, Nose to Nose, Eyes to Eyes, Hands to Hands, &c. and so like is the Child, that the difference can scarce be discern'd. I will make no other Application, but desire the Au∣thor of the Letter to satisfie the World, if David did not Abdicate, and was not truly dethron'd or dispossess'd of the Crown; and Ab∣salom partly by Conquest, partly by hereditary Right, and partly by the consent of the Nation, was not in full possession of the Government, and in a capacity to protect the People: It matters not, in our Author's determination, whether a month or ten years? and whe∣ther the Oath of Obedience, in consideration of Protection, was
not due to Absalom? and such an Oath he hath found out, Eccles. 8.2. For if it was in Solomon's time, 'tis no unreasonable supposition to imagine it to be in use in the Reigns of David and Absalom; since our Author saith, Page 30. it was the manner of the Subjects of Israel and Judah to take Oaths of Allegiance to their Kings. Having now consider'd every Argument, and Allegation of every thing of moment, pertinent to the present case, as they occur in our Author; whereby he endeavours to prove, that our Oaths to King James do cease to bind us any longer: and having, as I think, given a full and sufficient Answer to every particular, I now proceed to consider 2. The second grand Point of transferring the Oath of Allegi∣ance on King William and Queen Mary, our new Lord and Lady; but how they came to be so, when the Nation was not conquer'd, let the Author tell. He saith there was a Contract between the Prince and the Nation. There was a Contract indeed between some of this Nation to change our Governor and Government too. That we are better protected now than formerly, Ireland can prove; the encrease of Taxes, the failure of Trade, Free Quar∣tering of Soldiers in private Houses, the loss of Places, the suspen∣sion of Persons do more than enough convince, though not satisfie us, that our Laws are preserv'd, and all of us govern'd according to Law, is as true; Witness the Laws relating to the Crown and the Parliament. Had we no other Motives to transfer our Alle∣giance, these would not contribute the best encouragements, nor be very amiable inducements: but Motives are not the things we hunt after, but satisfactory Reasons to inform our Understandings, guide our Judgments, and preserve our Consciences. If King James truly and really, to all intents and purposes, did cease to be King, and the Oaths as to him were truly and altoge∣ther fall'n; yet that part, which relates to his Heirs, continues va∣lid and still to oblige us. Now if there was no pretended Prince of Wales, or if he could be proved as spurious as some proclaim that he is; yet the Prince of Orange is not the next Heir in the usual course of Descent, according to the English Laws and Customs, and as we have sworn; and so the Oath, as we think, can't be honestly transferr'd on him, which by right belongs to another.
