C2437 [ocm]12258690 197430
A MESSAGE SENT From the Kings Majesty, with certaine propositions to the Major and Aldermen, and other the Inhabitants of the Towne of Boston, by Sir Iohn Mounson Knight and Barronet. Iuly 30. 1642. for the forbidding them the exercise of the MILITIA. Likewise the Answer of the Major and Aldermen with the in∣habitants of the said County to the Kings Message and Propositions. Together with the Resolutions of divers of the Gentry of Nottingham, subscribed to a Letter sent to Sir Thomas Hutchinson Knight, and Robert Sutton Esquire, Knights of the County of Nottingham. Printed at London, for Tho. Banks and Will. Ley. 1642.
The message and propositions brought to the Major and Aldermen, and other inhabitants of the Towne of Boston from our Soveraigne Lord the Kings Majesty by Sir Iohn Mounson Knight and Baronet, the 30. of Iuly. 1642. HIs Majesty considering the importance of this place, as it may be an inlet of much mischief up∣on the inhabitants, and bring many sad effects upon this County, have just cause for the safety of  god Subjects, and prevention of such dangerous consequences, to secure it from any imposition from a∣broad, or tumults within by his owne power; and the ra∣ther because hee hath heard of undutifull Actions from a few taffected amongst you, in mustering & trayning con∣trary to the Lawes of his Proclamation, yet his Majesty is graciously pleased to lay aside these thoughts, and by en∣deavouring the assurance himself of your loyalty and affe∣ctions, to assure the Towne and County by them of a con∣tinued peace and prosperity, if you shall propose a way that his Mjesty may upon good grounds be invited to that confidence, and as a preparation to it. First, his Majesty requires that yu suffer not any fur∣ther mustering and training of men, countenanced by any authority whatsoever contrary to his Commands. Secondly, that you declare your unanimous resolution, to resist the landing or taking in of any Forces without his Majesties allowance, and if any such thing should be at∣tempted, that you doe desire the contribution of his power and this Countries Forces to assist you in so great and ne∣cessary,
and publike duty tending to the preservation of the publike Peace, and his Majesty will be forbearing to send any Forces amongst you. The answer of the said Major, and Aldermen, and in∣habitants to the Message and Propo∣sitions aforesaid. THe said Major, Aldermen and other principall inhabi∣tants answere, That they were not in feare of any Forces comming to this Towne in opposition to his Ma∣jesty, and therefore did not conceive neede of any to be sent hither, but thought it would be of ill consequence to these parts, and would fill the minds of his peaceable and quiet subjects with new feares and jealousies, and they de∣clare themselves that they would not receive any Forces under the command of any against his Majesty, and the peace of the Kingdome, but will resist the same to their powers. And touching the mustering of men within this Borough contrary to his Majesties Command, they con∣ceive the Major and Aldermen of this Borough have al∣ready satisfied his Majesty concerning the same; and the said Major and Aldermen will endeavour to make good what they have therein already sent to his Majesty.
To our much Honoured Friends, Sir Thomas Hutchinson Knight, and Robert Sutton Esq; Knights of the Shire for the County of Nottingham. Gentlemen. FInding, to our great griefe (by divers printed Decla∣rations) the unhappy difference btwixt his Majesty and his Parliament, and from thence apprehending great fear of further distractions, we have thought sit to impart our hearts freely unto you as men chosen by us, and intrusted for us, to represent us, and our desires in Your Honourable House of Commons: Where in the first place, upon all occasions, we desire you to tender the acknowledgment of our humble and hearty thanks for those many good Lawes, which by their Care annd Wisedome, toge∣ther with His Majesties Grace and Favour, have beene obtained for us, both for the securing us in the point of our property, and also for the freeing us from the unlimited power of Arbitrary governement: And herein His Majestie: having concurred with you in all rhat Wee could expect or can desire both for our Persons and Estates, and at severall times promised to joyne with his Parliament for the Reforming and Reducing both the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church to the best and purest times since the Reformation; And if this were done, what others would expect wee know not, wee desire no more And now Wee cannot but stand amazed, to see the King, the Lords and Commons agree in all that wee can thinke necessary for Refor∣mation, and for securing Us hereafter to bee governed according to the good Lawes of the Land in force, and yet such great Distra∣ction amongst those thre Estates. Wee heard long since reports, and saw printed Papers of the great dangers of Papists, and that even in our owne nty, but beleeve there was no trueth nor ground of any sh. Wee heard great Rumours of Forraigne Force from France and marke; but, thankes be to God, wee see no such dan∣ger:
And yet under these pretences, there is great preparation of putting us in a posture of Defence, and a great necessity preten∣ded of setling the Miltia: But Wee see more cause to feare the remedy, then the disease; For this posture (as you call it) of De∣fence doth carry a face of War with it, even amongst our selves and concerning it we are distracted with contrary commands; the Houses of Parliament command one thing, the King forbids that command; the King commands, and the Houses of Parliament for∣bids that command, and we are at a stand, and yet wee are ever ready to yeeld obedience to all the knowe Laws of the Land: and we have ever been taught, That all those Lawes made in Parlia∣ment, consist of three Estates, the Commons, Lords, and King, and wee thinke it dangerous to untwist that triple Cord; and wee hold it our greatest Priviledge. That the King and Lords, whom we have heard sometime joyned in Counsell, could not make a Law to binde us without our consent in Parliament; and by the same reason, we cannot expect that the Commons, with the Lords, should make a Law or an Ordinance, of the force of a Law, to binde without the King, especially against the King. And as we doe no yeeld any Act of Obedience to the King's Command simply, but as it is warranted by Law, made by His Authority, with the Consent of both Houses; so we shall not conceive our selves bound to obey one or both Houses without the King, but in such things as are according to the known Lawes of the Land. When the King by his Writte gave us power to chuse you, it was to treate De quibusdam arduis, &c. Wee nexe conceived your only Votes should bee our Law, nor conceived Wee had such a power to conferre upon you: And Wee require you not to consent to lay any such command upon us, nor to ingage us in any Civill war for the maintenance of such Votes, under colour of riviledges against our lawfull King, to whom many of us, by the appointment of the Law, have taken the Oath of supremacy, and Allegance to which all of us are bound. And beside we have at the command of both Houses taken the late protestation, wherein wee have vowed to maintaine the Doctrine of the Church of England, His Majesties Royall Person, Honour, and Estate, the Priviledges of Parlia∣met, and the Liberties of the Subject: and Wee shall endeavour to maintaine every part and clause thereof respectively with our
lives and fortunes. And we conceive our best directions therein to be the knowne Lawes, the maintenance whereof wee account our onely liberty and defence. And we account the surest way to enjoy the bene∣fit of these Lawes, is to joyne and comply with his Majesty, under whose protection, next under God, wee can onely hope to enjoy the benefit thereof; especially his Majesty having ever since this Parlia∣ment joyned in the making of as good Lawes as ever any King hath done; and made so gracious promises of his future Government accor∣ding to the Lawes, and given aboundant satisfaction for some unhappy accidents in his past Government, that we conceive great cause to re∣turne him cheerefull thankfulnesse for these Lawes, and to yeeld a faith∣full obedience, and to confide in him for the future. This is the cleare expression of our hearts; this is that we desire you to consent in for us. And we shall heartily pray, that we might be an example to many o∣thers to make the like expressions: And then wee should not doubt but this would bring a right understanding betwixt the King and his peo∣ple, and take away all feares and jealousies, and settle a firme peace a∣mongst us. We should gladly, with all humility, have petitioned your Honourable House, but still to this purpose. And we understand some Countries have done so, which hath bin displeasing unto them, be∣cause they contrary to sense; and we, perhaps through ignorance might fall into the same errour. Yet wee hope it will not be displeasing unto you, that we give you our sence freely, for you are us, and we hope you will not be unwilling to follow our sence, so far as you conceive it to be the sence of your County whose you are, and for whom you serve. And so we rest your very loving Friends and Country-men. IOhn Digby, High Sheriffe. Iohn Byron. Richard Parkins. William Aploton. Robert Pilson. George Lascells. Matthew Palmer. Roger Cooper. Isham Parkins. Io. Wood. G. Hollis. Richard Byron. Io. Nevile. Edmund Hastings. Edward Andrewes. Thomas Blackwall. William Sandes. Thomas Longford. Iervas Sanford. Rich. Harper.
Gabriel Arme-strong. Acton Burnell. Sam. Bolles. Rowland Pand. Iohn Odingsells. Anthony Gilby. Robert Eyre. Parke Cresly. Thomas Houlder. Robert Saunderson. Iohn Walker. Thomas Fox. I. Bolles. Gri. Dwall. William Smyths. Nich. Stoyt. Tho. Hollwell. Rich. Draper. Tho. Athinson. Lancelot Rolston. Tho. Newton. William Wild. Rerbert Leek. Tho. Browne. William Smythsn. Io. Gosling. William Oglethorpe. Geo. Lascells. Iohn Clay. Geo. Milford. William Needham. Rich. Brough. Iohn Butterworth. Tho. Poole. Iohn Lee. Io. Worsdale. William Shipman. Charles Leek. William Apsley. Francis Cavindish. Charles North. Matthew Palmer. Rich. Holliwell. Roger Iackson. Iohn Leeke. Rich. Simman. Stephen Broome. William Colby. Iohn Newport. Hen. Caldecott. Edw. Holland. Hen. Broome. William Hacker. Iames Forbeny. Iob Holden. Rich. Boyer. William Poclington. Hen. Green. Walter Garrington. Iohn Grundy. G. Flower. FINIS.
