C2953 T.100*[94] R35920 99890095 186061
His Majesties DECLARATION AGAINST THE States Generall OF THE UNITED PROVINCES Of the LOW-COUNTREYS. Published by the Advice of His Privy Council. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Chri∣pher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1671,/2. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
His Majesties DECLARATION Against the States-General of the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces of the Low-Countreys. WE have been always so zea∣lous for the Quiet of Christendom, and so careful not to Invade any other Kingdom or State, that We hope the World will doe Us the Justice to believe, that it is nothing but inevitable necessity forceth Us to the resolution of taking up Arms. Immediately upon Our Restauration to Our Crown, the first work We undertook, was the establishing of Peace, and the setling a good correspondence between Us and Our Neigh∣bours; and in particular, Our care was, to con∣clude a strict League with the States General of the United Provinces, upon such equal Terms,
as would certainly not have been broken, if any obligations could have kept them within the bounds of Friendship or Justice. This League was maintained inviolable on Our part. But in the year 1664. We were stirred up by the complaints of Our People, and the unanimous Vote of Both Our Houses of Parliament, finding it a vain attempt to endea∣vour the prosperity of Our Kingdoms by peace∣able ways at home, whilst Our Subjects were still exposed to the injuries and oppressions of those States abroad. That whole Summer was spent in Negotia∣tions and endeavours on Our side, to bring them to reasonable terms, which notwithstanding all We could do, proved at length ineffectual; for the more We pursued them with friendly Propo∣sitions, the more obstinately they kept off from agreeing with us. Upon this ensued the War in the year 1665. and continued to the year 1667. in all which time Our Victories and their Losses were me∣morable enough to put them in mind of being more faithful to their Leagues for the future. But in stead of that, the Peace was no sooner made, but they returned to their usual custom of breaking Articles, and supplanting our Trade. For instance, The States were particularly en∣gaged in an Article of the Treaty at Breda, to send Commissioners to Us at London, about the Regulation of Our Trade in the East-Indies; but they were so far from doing it upon that obligation, that when we sent over Our Ambas∣sadour to put them in mnd of it, he could not int hree years time get from them any satis∣faction
in the material Points, nor a forbearance of the Wrongs which Our Subjects received in those parts. In the West-Indies they went a little farther; For by an Article in the same Treaty, we were to re∣store Surinam into their hands, and by Articles upon the place confirmed by that Treaty, they were to give Liberty to all Our Sub∣jects in that Colony, to Transport themselves and their Estates into any other of Our Plantations. In pursuance of this Agreement, We delivered up the Place, and yet they detained all Our Men in it; onely Major Banister they sent away Prisoner, for but desiring to remove according to the Articles. Our Ambassadour complaining of this behaviour, after two years sollicitation, obtained an Order for the performance of those Articles: But when We sent Commissioners, and two Ships to bring Our Men away, the Hollanders (according to their for∣mer practice in the business of Poleroon for above fourty years together) sent private Orders contra∣dictory to those they had owned to Us in publick; and so the onely effect of Our Commissioners journey thither, was to bring away some few of the poorest of Our Subjects, and the Prayers and Crys of the most considerable and wealthiest of them, for relief out of that Captivity. After this, We made Our Complaints by Our Letter in Au∣gust last to the States General, wherein We desi∣ted an Order to their Governours there, for the full observance of those Articles; yet to this time We could never receive one word of answer or sa∣tisfaction. But it is no wonder that they venture at these Outrages upon Our Subjects in remote parts, when they dare be so bold with Our Royal Per∣son, and the Honour of this Nation so near Us, as
in their own Countrey, there being scarce a Town within their Territories that is not filled with abusive Pictures, and false Historical Medals and Pillars; some of which have been exposed to the publick view by command of the States them∣selves, and in the very time when we were joyned with them in united Councels for the support of the Triple League, and the Peace of Christendom. This alone were cause sufficient for Our displea∣sure, and the resentment of all Our Subjects. But we are urged to it by considerations yet nearer to Us, then what onely relates to Our Self; the Safe∣ty of Our Trade, upon which the wealth and pro∣sperity of Our People depends, the preservation of them abroad from violence and oppression, and the Hollanders daring to affront us almost within Our very Ports, are the things which move Our just Indignation against them. The Right of the Flagg is so ancient, that it was one of the first Prerogatives of Our Royal Predecessors, and ought to be the last from which this Kingdom should ever depart. It was never questioned, and it was expresly acknowledged in the Treaty at Breda; and yet this last Summer it was not only violated by their Commanders at Sea, and that violation afterwards justified at the Hague, but it was also represented by them in most Courts of Christendom as ridiculous for Us to de∣mand. An ungrateful Insolence! That they should contend with Us about the Dominion of these Seas, who even in the Reign of Our Royal Father, In the years 1635. 1636. 1637. thought it an Obligation to be permitted to Fish in them, by taking of Licenses, and for a Tribute; & who owe their being now in a condition of making this Dispute, to the Protection of Our Ancestors, and the Valour and Bloud of their Subjects. Notwithstanding all these provocations, We
patiently expected Satisfaction, not being willing to expose the Peace of Christendom for Our parti∣cular resentments, whilest they ceased not on their parts to endeavour to provoke the most Christian King against Us; of which they thought themselves so secure, that for above these Twelve months their Ministers here have threatned Us with it. At length, hearing nothing from them, We sent another Ambassador to them, who after several pressing Memorials in Our Name, could receive no Answer, til after he had declared his Revocation. Then they offered a Paper to this effect, That in this Conjuncture they would condescend to Strike to Us, if We would assist them against the French; but upon condition, that it should never be taken for a President hereafter to their prejudice. Since the return of Our said Ambassador, They have sent an Extraordinary One to Us, who in a most extraordinary manner has given Us to under∣stand, That he can offer us no Satisfaction till he hath sent back to his Masters. Wherefore, despairing now of any good effect of a farther Treaty, We are compelled to take up Arms in defence of the Antient Prerogative of Our Crowns, & the Glory and Safety of Our Kingdoms; And We put Our Trust in God, that He will give Us His Assistance in this Our Just Undertaking, since We had no way left to defend Our People from the Artifice of that Nation in Peace, but by the Valour of Our Subjects in Warre. We have therefore thought fit to Declare, and do hereby Declare, That We will prosecute Warr both by Sea and Land against the States Generall of the Ʋnited Provinces, and all their Subjects and In∣habitants; Hereby enjoyning Our most dear & most entirely beloved Brother the Duke of York our High Admiral, Our Lieutenants of Our several Coun∣ties,
Governors of Our Forts and Garrisons, and all other Officers and Soldiers under them by Sea and Land, to oppose all the attempts of the States Ge∣nerall of the Vnited Provinces, or their Subjects, and to do, and execute all Acts of hostility in the pro∣secution of this Warr against the said States Gene∣rall of the Vnited Provinces, their Vassals, Subjects, and Inhabitants; Willing and Requiring all Our Subjects to take notice of the same, Whom We henceforth straightly forbid, on pain of Death, to hold any Correspondence or Communication with the said States General, or their Subjects, (those on∣ly excepted who are necessitated thereunto for the withdrawing their Persons and Estates out of the Ʋnited Provinces.) And because there are remain∣ing in our Kingdoms many Subjects of the States Generall of the Ʋnited Provinces, We do Declare, and give Our Royal Word, that all such of the Dutch Nation, as shall demean themselves dutifully towards Us, and not correspond with Our Enemies shall be safe in their Persons and Estates, and free from all molestation and trouble of any kind. And further We do Declare, That if any of the Low-Countrey Subjects, either out of Affection to Us, or Our Government, or because of the Oppres∣sion they meet with at home, shall come into Our Kingdoms, they shall be by Us protected in their Persons and Estates. And whereas We are engaged by a Treaty to support the Peace made at Aix la Chappelle, We do finally Declare, That notwithstanding the prose∣cution of this War, We will maintain the true In∣tent and Scope of the said Treaty, and that in all the Alliances, which We have or shall make in the progress of this War, We have and will take care, to preserve the Ends thereof inviolable, unless pro∣voked to the contrary. FINIS.
