1030.7 19999272 23599
NEWES Out of France for the Gentlemen of England. A Stratagem most ventrously attempted, and va∣liantly atchiued by the French King, the 27. day of Iuly. Anno Domini 1591. Wherein is desciphered, what trust his royall Maiestie reposeth on the valour of the English, and their duetifull seruice vnto him at all assayes. Newes also touching 16. Shippes taken nigh the Hauen of Deepe, and the discomfiture of the Popes Forces transported into France towards the ayde of the Leaguers, both concurring on the 28. of Iuly last past. VVith a report of the princely meeting, and honorable conioyning of the whole power of the French King the sixt day of this present Moneth of August, consisting of English, Germane, and his owne people. Deuteronomie. 1. 30. The Lord your God, who goeth before you he shall fight for you, according to all that he did vnto you in Egypt before your eyes. Imprinted at London for Iohn Kid and are to be
In laudem Angliae charissimae suae Patriae decasticon. ANglia cincta mari' est, Anglis mare commoda mille, Vt{que} alter globus est Anglia cincta mari: Anglia cincta mari' est, sacris quià virgo gubernat Regibus, hinc foelix Anglia cincta mari: Anglia cincta mari' est, homines quià moenia tanquam, Quos amor vnit, abhinc Anglia cincta mari: Anglia cincta mari' est, quòd fert Satrapásque, Ducósque Inuictos Marti', hinc Anglia cincta mari: Anglia psalle Deo, quòd Terra, fretum{que} beârunt Te ante' alias gentes, Anglia psalle Deo. Cato. Pugna pro patria.
To his friends, the Gentlemen Readers of England, health. GEntlemen, whereas the old world admired Ha∣nibal for but scaling the Alpes, Caesar for build∣ing a bridg ouer Rheyne, Pompey for subduing a few barbarous Territo∣ries, leaue now to mar∣uaile at the strategems, the world affordes you greater maruailes. Looke on the experienced prowesse of your owne Countreymen, farre exceeding the puissance of base Pa∣gans, who as they bee presidents most ho∣norable: so are they by your steps, and plau∣dities to be honoured. Imitate the vertues of your Ancestours, that all the world may ring of your noble acts, of your Ancestours said I, nay of our Caualiers yet liuing, who as they be equall in valour to the best of any time; so are they before al other to be followed of your persons at this time. Remember the fortitude
of Norris neuer quailed, consider the magnani∣mitie of Williams neuer daunted, and worthie Yorkes forwardnes neuer impeached: But what should I compile a catalogue of them, whose valours and vertues are best knowne vnto you: onely this our Soueraigne, and the whole commonwealth intreates you, that as whilom your politique Predecessours, & now these your martiall Progenitours by their ex∣ploytes haue attayned the heigth of renowne in the world; so yee like renowned Children of so renowned Parents, would by your couragious enterprises brandish your names and fames throughout the world: facite, & valete. Yours to commande in all curtesie. G. B. M.of Arte.
A Poem touching the credit of this Newes, with an item to them, that takes felicitie in publishing Lies. NOthing (saith Quintilian) so much commēdeth the per∣son of the writer, as the truth of the subiect, he proposeth to write: And certes nothing aduaunced so highly Iulius Caesars historie, as truth po∣lished with Eloquence dis∣creetely: for as in the iudge∣ment of the wise the one without the other had argued great imperfection: so both intermingled sauour of won∣derfull discretion, and so much the rather, because the Author seemeth estranged from Philautie, & Ambi∣tion. I cannot but praise them of ancient time, & touch some in these dayes, who either for that they know not, or care not for truth, or wil not inquire after the truth, wil be sure to publish nothing but vntruth, mispending their time, misdemeaning their braine, and misusing their pen, no lesse foes to themselues, then back friends to the welminded. I speake this (Gentlemen) for that this Pamphlet had many dayes sithence come to your view, had not these apish Pamphleters neither left waie for themselues, nor other, any further to thrust out their heads: But whereas this obortiue Pygmey dare peepe out, and shew his face to the world, vnderstand that it is but vnder sureties, on conditiō, that he neither mut∣ter,
speake, nor write any thing but truth, or at the least that whereof he can alleadge sufficient authoritie: who although hee hath been staied, but not brought to a blancke, therein taketh so much the more heartie grace, because he knoweth some of these counterfeites will bee driuen to a Nonplus: And thus much I will saye, and and in saying truly auouch (being priuie to all his pro∣ceedings) that at this time he will not, (nay if he would he may not) neither would hee if hee might speake any more than truth, or that hath been credibly informed, or that commonly among the best passeth for truth, wherein if peraduenture hee speake not so much, as some of you knowe; or write so much, as others heare, thinke, that neither his eares, nor his eyes are so large, as to heare and see all things done in his owne countrey, much lesse ouer Sea in a forrayne climate: but accept his Newes fauourably, as he giues it friendly, and if in any iot hee shall offend you, hee most humbly craues your pardon, euer remayning courteously at your commande. G. B. Magna' est veritas, ét preualet.
A Stratagem most venterous∣ly attempted, and valiantly atchieued by the French King, the 27. day of Iuly Anno Domini, 1591. THe French King (who for his singular wisedome de∣serueth to be reckoned a se∣con Solomon, and inuin∣cible fortitude an other Sampson) hauing drawen his forces downe into Pi∣cardie, presented his armes before the town of Noyan, & begirt the same, where hauing continued the siege some few dayes, no daye frée from some hard skir∣mish, hot incounter, or daungerous assault, the losse for the most part falling on the enemies, whereby the said towne was in ieopardie to haue reuolted (which was practised by some) to the King his part, in so much they stoode on tearmes of yeelding, but that they had some small hope of succour, and supply of victualles to be sent them from Roan for the conuoy∣ing whereof (as they vnderstoode) should bée sent Mounsier Tauanas late commaunder of Roan, whose forses consisted of 400. Horse, and 5000. footemen e∣uery way well fitted for such a seruice, carrying mindes resolutely determined (as appeared by the insuing conflict) by some sudden surprise to haue rai∣sed
the siege, yea and indaungered the Kinges owne person, if God (who hath promised to defend his ser∣uant Iosua, that is his faithfull magistrates, & bring the counsailes of the wicked to naught) had not by straunge meanes miraculously discouered their ma∣licious treacherie, making his verie enimies his willing friendes at such an exigent. For Monsier Iean de Primadian, Registerer to the Bishoppe of Roan priuie to their intentions, although (as they tearme him) a Catholique, yet mooued in conscience to crosse by what meanes possible hée could any wic∣ked action, or attempt that might touch the safetie of the King his soueraigne person, manifested by let∣ters the day before, the whole plot of treason inten∣ded toward his Maiestie. Whereupon the King no lesse desirous to take the opportunitie, then carefull to preuent the euil, immediatly that night commaun∣ded a Cornet of horse, conducted by a braue French Captaine to discouer the Enimie, who by the breake of day approched the walles of Roan, where estsoones they had spied issuing forth, the foresaid companies in martch toward Noyan, whereupon they present∣ly retired, till by some meanes, and in some conue∣niēt place for the purpose happily they might charge them, or at the least discry their determinations: ther∣of to certify his Maiesty, which (as God would) they performed luckely: for hauing ambushe themselues in the skirt of a wood, on the sudden charged the eni∣mies vauncurriers, ledde by a hardie gentleman (as it seemed.) For notwithstanding our sudden char∣ging them (which was done to the proofe,) whereby they were well nigh discomfited, and that the said leader hardly escaped himselfe, with some few in his companie by his retreate, yet loth to receiue so great a wound to his reputation, as to be mated, or rather vanquished by so small a troupe, as was ours, secon∣ded
ye rest of his followers, yet fighting: but though he performed resolutely his part therein, yet was it his fortune to be taken hardly with life, by one May∣ster Thomas Robartes an English gentleman, the rest were all chased and taken prisoners, euen at the front of the enimies battalious, with little losse on our side, to the number of some 23. men, hurt, taken, and slaine: But the foresaid Prisoner being with ex∣pedition conuaied to the King, confirmed all that be∣fore by letters his maiestie had intelligence of, and disclosed also, what wayes, and meanes they had layd downe to surprise his Maiesties forces. The K. supposing it not necessarie to suffer them make their approach in sight of Noyan, forthwith consulted to incounter them further of, sending foorth scouces to barre the newes of their comming from the towne, determining himselfe to follow (as he might) with part of his armie (for hée thought it altogether trou∣blesome, and vnméete to dislodge the whole.) And in regarde of the resolute English (for so hée tearmeth them) whom he ment most to imploy in this seruice, of whom also he had good experience, for such like ser∣uices heretofore by them performed, his Maiestie de∣crees to vse the fewer of his owne Nation, and there∣fore sending secretly for his approued champion Sir Roger Williams, imparted vnto him both what had bin performed, as also his intention: of which the re∣doubted Cheualier was verie ioyful, & as forward as valiant, greedily thirsted for the incounter, & thought euery minute an hower, til they were marching. All things being put in readines for the iourney, sudden∣ly the espialles returned with newes of the enemies approach, and their order: which Sir Roger Wil∣liams vnderstanding, euer like himselfe, and hauing now (as he thought) found a danger equall to his heart) which heart through his good fortune hath got∣ten
a courage to despise al dangers) earnestly desired his Maiestie doo him the honour of the first incoun∣ter, in regarde of the safetie of his Maiesties owne person; which the King through intreatie graun∣ted. This request obtayned, and our Vauncurriers in view of the Enemie, worde was brought the King thereof, and being (as God would) in a place situate by nature for the purpose, his Maiestie caused a squa∣dr on of pikes to march forward strongly armed, and in the Reregard of them vndiscouered certaine com∣panies of Musquetters on the left side, in manner of an ambush (yet as a wing to the mayne Squadron) was Sir Roger Williams, and with him certaine Cornets of horse, and some companies of Musquet∣ters, to second those of ours, that the Enemie had sight of, and were now readie to incounter: on the right wing was the King with most of the horse in the fielde, as well shot as other, somewhat behinde Sir Roger lying also in ambuscado, to answere the hope of the other, if néede required: But in such sort▪ as when occasion was offered, ye sayd Horsmen with those of Sir Roger Williams, answered his Maie∣sties expectation, and suddenly pursuing the oppor∣tunitie (while 300. of their horse were charging our mayne Battaile, (which strongly indured the shock) inclosed the Enemie, and happily at the first incoun∣ter, being hotly maintained, discomfited them, and very vigorously pursued the victorie, which (by the omnipotent power of GOD especially, and trium∣phant valour of the English) being gotten, as ha∣uing chased, and slaughtered them almost the space of two leagues, the retreict sounded, the dead were ouerlooked, and prisoners numbred: The dead were many, and captiues some fewe, all for the most part men of name, worth raunsoming, amongst whome
was the Generall himselfe, Monsieur Tauanas Leiu∣tenant of Roan, sore hurt, and likewise his Nephew Commaunder of the Fort of S. Katharins taken prisoner: which glorie was renownedly atchieued on all parts the 27. day of Iuly, Anno Domini 1591. The Lord the giuer of victorie bee praysed therefore. This one thing remayneth yet in this report vn∣touched, which I cannot any way omit, and all true hearted Englishmen may bée ioyfull to record. For the French King both in this pettie battaile, and at all times els, perceiuing the hearts of the English readie prest to doo him seruice, and their haughtie mindes prompt to attempt any graund enterprise, (whereby either glorie, or gaine may he purchased) as also the swift forwardnes, and forward swiftnes of his Eagle Sir Roger Williams, to soare ouer and detallant the Martiall foes of so Martiall a field, his Maiestie well noting it, and in noting it scanning what was best to bee done, called them before him, where yéelding first his royall Sister, and them all immortall and most heartie thankes for their payne∣full, and no lesse powerfull seruice, vttered many gracious words to the euerlasting commendation of all England. Thus farre concerning this heroi∣call Stratagem, and wonderfull, and no lesse wor∣thie exployte, effected by the flower of Chiualrie, and mirrour of Curtesie the French King now raign∣ing. Newes is also brought to the French Ledger of the taking of 16. Ships of the Leaguers without any perill, all well laden with commodious Mar∣chandize, and prouision for warre, right against and nigh the Hauen of Deepe the 28. day of Iuly last past, which were fraught for Roan, (some say for
Newhauen) but by diuine prouidence brought the∣ther. The mightie GOD of Israel neuer send vs worse newes. Newes also from the Dukedome of Sauoy, how Monsieur de Eguidiers Gouernour of his Maie∣sties Forces in those parts, incountred the troupes of horse, that were sent into France by the Pope to∣wards the strengthning of the Leaguers, and ouer∣threwe foure hundred of them a little belowe the Alpes; the rest miserably escaping by flight, the 28. day of Iuly also: Some say the remnaut is retur∣ned into Italie: others that they yet houer and liu∣ger in the Countrey. But howsoeuer it be, it is to be hoped they shall haue as infortunate successe, as they haue had hetherto: no other reason I can assigne thereof, but this, that God now in these letter times vouchsafeth to bring things to speedie euen▪ there by to hasten the comming of his Sonne to iudge∣ment, for that hee hath promised to shorten those dayes; and we knowe by all accompts that they are both likely to bee shortened, and drawe to an ende. For who doubteth but as that butcherly Citie, (Rome I meane) and bloudie Nation was first founded in bloud, (the one Brother bathing his hands in the bloud of the other) so shee shall ende in bloud and abominable desolation, as her stiffenecked Sister Ierusalem did before her. And to beleeue this I am so much ye rather incited, because I both heare and see daily by the omnipotent power, and out∣stretched arme of GOD, that both that Citie, that Kingdome, and all the friends and adherents of the same, doo come to perpetuall ruine, and vtter destruc∣tion, as is now exemplifled by the noble Rebels, and rebellious Nobles of France: for who estéemeth that euer the Duke de Mayne, or those noble perso∣nages,
that irreligiously resist their God, and proud∣ly rebell against their Soueraigne, could haue béen brought to so extreame miserie, and grieuous cala∣mitie, as to flye from Citie to Citie, from Coast to Coast, from Countrey to Countrey, and finde no sa∣fetie, eyther in inward Conscience, or outward con∣uersation, if they were not euen those, on whom God predestinated to powre his dreadfull and execrable vengeance, permitting them like castaway Cayne, no place of safegard, but to become runnagates ouer all the fare of the earth. A second reason also forcible enough I haue to perswade me, that euen now the kingdome of Anti∣christ is falling, and shortly (the Lorde of hostes knowes how soone) will fall, for that another piller of his chayre, or rather a mayne proppe of his paui∣li begins to shrink, his golden Metropolis (Spaine I meane) who hauing now many hundred yeares maintained his Religion, fostred his sucklings, pani∣pred his shauelings, defended his Inquisition, and furthered his proceedings, in part ereth and is wearie of hir burden, a burden in deede no lesse bur∣den some, then combersome both to bodie and soule. For within these fewe dayes, not a moneth sithence, variance hapning betweene the chiefe Masters of the Inquisition, and the Kings Arch-secretarie, Sa∣rogosa, a citie of Aragon (wherin the saide Secreta∣rie was borne (began to take armes against the In∣quisition, and approoue unexpected, and vntrue posi∣tions (as they tearmed them) contrarie to their De∣cretalls, their Doctours, their Diuines, and diuells. A Kingdome (saith our Sauiour) deuided in itselfe, cannot stand: certes then the kingdome of Sathan deuided, must needes be ruinated: for as by concord small things come to perfection: so by discorde the
greatest powers, puissantes, and principalities, that euer haue béen in the Worlde, bend to destruction. Weigh the state of the 4. Monarchies both flouri∣shing and declining, the cause of their establishment, and originall of their decaye, and yee shall finde con∣cord a meane to the one, and discord a mother of the other: bath bringing foorth strange effects. But to come nigher, what was the first cause of planting the Gospell (for which so many haue, and yet spend their dearest bloud in France) but their first supplan∣ting of common quiet, their vnspeakeable butche∣ries, horrible martyrdonies, and execrable massa∣kers, all doubtles begon, and practised by the suffe∣rance of God to none other end, but to raise vp fresh feedes, and nourish the increase of the Gospell, cal∣ling home thousands of soules elected to his king∣dome. This did France, and wee are daily to hope, and howerly to pray for the like of Spayne: The Lord open their eyes to discerne white from black, light from darkenes, truth from errour in due time according to his good will and pleasure. But leauing Spayne, let vs returne agayne to France, from wherlie euery day (the Lord for his merries sake increase it) are heard blissefull and most happie notes, his Maiesties affayres successiuely prospering an all sides. For sithence the departine of our Souldiers from London, which was on the 23. 24. 25. and 26. dayes of Iuly last, vnto this 12. of August, besides the Newes already set downe, many matters of great importance haue chaunced, the veritie whereof (for that I cannot attayne, and learne the circumstances directly) I passe them ouer in silence, onely of this passell insuing, I haue recei∣ued credible information, that on the sixt day of this moneth, being the 16. after their computation at
Bloys, his Maiesties Forces all met, and royally co∣united themselues together, at what time the braue worthies and warlike Gallants of Germany appea∣ring on horsebacke in Martiall order, euery one throughly furnished with all habiliments necessarie, were first welcomed by his Maiestie, and entertay∣ned of the Campe with a peale of ordinance ioyful∣ly. But whereas in the letter (from whence I cop∣pied out this Newes) all his Forces be named, and yet no mention made of the English, I suppose hée meant it by the forces of the Almaygnes onely, and those his own subiects that were sent out of Brytain to ioyne with his Maiesties hoast there, and none o∣therwise. For there is newes come lately, that the Earle with his companies remaine yet about Deipe, there staying a while on weightie considera∣tions, till they heare further. But how euer it bee, this is most certaine, that his Maiestie hath a good∣lie armie, besides those warlike troupes the right Honorable Earle of Essex is to come with, who how they were appointed, is knowne to al England, and I neede not now discourse. Thus farre concerning the prosperous successe, and fortunate progresse of this mighty Prince, whom the Lorde hath preserued from time to time, from yeare to yeare, day to day, hower to hower, so many times, yeares, dayes, and howers most miraculoufly from all the furious inuasions, and cancared conspi∣racies of all his enemies, and made him to triumphe ouer them, outliuing the most part, reclayming by his vertues the better sort, and taming by policie the peruerse and obstinate, being snatched from the chawes of the Lyons, deliuered from the gates of Death, and reserued from infinite perills (as the wide world confesseth) by diuine prouidence, to none
other end, but to declare the wonderous workes of the Lorde, and shew forth his mightie acts vnto the Princes of the earth, and especially that Man of sin, and strumpet of Babylon, foster-father of brauls and battayles among Christian Princes, and generally the Bloudsucker, Butcher, and tormentour of all Europe, whome God in due time at his good plea∣sure will by the hand of this his annoynted (as hee did by Dauid fighting against the vncircumcised, Philistin,) terrifie, torment, scourge, and confound, which he hath begon by his English Debora first, and wil finish in this his Champion, (making them both mirrours for all Potentates) that all the world, and especially the kingdome of Antichrist may acknow∣ledge, that there is a God that ruleth in Israel, and protecteth the house of Iaacob, making his enemies his footestooles. The Lord in mercy graunt it, to the comfort of his little flock, the abolishment of sinne, confusion of his enemies, and establishment of his owne glorie in Sion, and let all faithfull Soldiers, and loyall subiects say, Amen, and crie in feruent zeale of spirit, Lord Iesus come quickely, euen so. Amen.
Epilogus. GEntlemen Readers, thus though rude∣lie, and vntimelie, yet truly and suffi∣cientlie, yee haue heard the tenour of this newes, or at the least so much, as I could well fish out, for it is a thing al∣together impossible, and may passe for a paradox, to reach vnto euerie particular accidēt. For the newes be∣ing not inacted in our own Countrey, comming from farre, as also wee our selues not present, or oculati testes, but relying on letters, bare reportes, and heresay, like testes auriti, wee must needes misse of much of the matter, & sometimes happily, (or rather vnhap∣pily) either in too much, or too little cōmit an absurditie; But (as I said be∣fore) assure your selues, wee swarue not wittingly one tittle from truth, but haue inquired diligently thereaf∣ter, & offred vnto your view nothing
but that we haue seen in the letters of credible persons, or been instructed of at the hands of men of account, or that commonly passeth for trueth at the Exchange, or hath been preached to the French congregation, or is tos∣sed vp & down at the Ambassadours house in the mouthes of the best; which al in my opinion may serue for a certificate autentique. But leauing these ambages, and cleauing to your curtesie, I beseech you in courtesie be not too curious, but more willing to lep ouer a block, than wilfull to stum∣ble at a strawe, considering the finest Veluet hath his brack, and nothing is fo currantly writtē, but admitts some crabbed imperfection, & may captiously bee miscon∣stred. Macte vertu∣te sitis.
Precatio ad coelestem nostrum Patrem miseris hisce temporibus. O Tater patrum rutilas Olimpi Qui sedes sedes super, ét potenti Diriges verbo, tua quae creauit Cuncta potestas: Da tuis seruis placidam quietem, Dirimas tristeis (precibus precamur Feruidis) lites, refluás{que} caedes Sanguine sedes; Arma flaccescant, timor esto nullus Martis, armorum sonus asperorum Dirus abscedat, valeat{que} pugnae Saeua cupido: Quid iuuat bellum, (ratio modus{que} Si procul cedant)? amor iste campi Pessimus vadat, propere{que} coeli Quaerite regnum:
Charitas crescat, probit ás{que} morum Regnet occultis hominum medullis, Faxit, vt dignos fidei feramus Ʋndique fructus: Túnc tuum nomen (Deus ô supreme) Sempèr extollet precibus, triumphis, Laudibus, psalmis, modulis, choraeis Anglia parua. Angli quasi angeli.
