10641 99853535 18920
THE NECESSITIE AND ANTIQVITIE OF CATECHIZING. BY I. F. PRO, Cap. 22. Ver. 6. Traine vp a Childe in the way hee should goe, and when hee is olde, he will not depart from it. LONDON, Imprinted for R. M. 1617.
DEI VERITAS FILIA VE∣RB∣VM DEI
OF THE NECES∣SITIE AND ANTI∣quitie of Cate∣chising. Question I. WHat is a Cate∣chisme. Answere. It is an instru∣ction in the Prin∣ciples of true reli∣gien, which the su∣periour teacheth the inferiour. Questeon 2. Whether is catechising necessary. Answere. Yea, for these two reasons. First, because otherwise no man could cy∣ther know or worship GOD aright: Secondly, because it is Gods ordi∣nance,
as hereafter it shall appeare. Question 3. Of what antiquitie is the doctrine and practise of catechising? Answere. It is of great antiquitie, as it may appeare by a briete and orderly nar∣ration thereof in these thrée distinct times. First, from the creation of the world vnto the dayes of Moses. Secondly, from Moses to Christ. Thirdly, from Christ to this pre∣sent. The first time. Question 4. WAs it practised from the Creation to Moses? Answere. Yea. First, God instructed Adam. Secondly, Adam and the religious Patriatres in the Church instructed
their potterity from age to age. Question 5. Did God instruct Adam? Answere. Yea, both before, and after his fall. Question 6. Shew that God instructed Adam before his fall. Answere. This may be the men two dayes. First, by reason. Secondly, by the particular in∣structions which he gave to Adam. Question 7. By what reason can you shew that God instructed Adam before his fall. Answere. By these two. First, as no man knoweth the thinges of man, saue the spirit of mā which is in him: euen so the thinges of God knoweth no man, but the spirite of God, 1. Cor. 2.11. and ther∣fore if God had not instructed Adam he could not haue knowne nor done the will of God.
Secondly, where no Law is, there is no transgrassion, Rom. 4.15. Therefore if God had not instruc∣ted Adam, and giuen him lawes, hée could not haue sinned; for sinne is nothing el but the transgression of the Law, 1. Iohn. 2.4. Question 8. What then bee the particular in∣structions which God gaue to A∣dam before his fall? Answere. They are diuers, and namely, these fiue. First, that mankind should bee multiplied in the holy estate of mari∣age,Matth. 9.5. Gen. 2.24. therefore shall a man leaue his father and his mother, and shall cleaue to his wife, and they shal be one flesh, and all other multiplica∣tion of mankind out of the holy e∣state of marriage, is ordinarily ac∣companied with some iudgement of God. Secondly, that hee should haue au∣thority and dominion ouer the fishes of the Sea, and ouer the soules of the
heauen, and ouer euery beat that moueth vpon the earth. Gen. 1.28. Thirdly, that his meate should bee the hearbes of the earth, and the fruit of the trées, Gen. 1.29. for man lineth not by bread onely, but by eue∣ry word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God, Matth. 4.4. Fourthly, that he should not liue iely, but dresse and keepe the garden of Eden. Gen. 2.15. Fiftly, that hee should not eate of the fruite of the tree of knowledge of god and euill, vpon paine of death. Gen. 2.17. for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye. Question 9. Shew me now also what instruc∣tions God gaue to Adam after his fall. Answere. God gaue Adam these fiue in∣structions after his fall. First, he instructed Adam in the mistery of redemption, Gen. 3.15. when God speaking to that old Ser∣pent (called the Diuell and Sathan.
Apoc. 12.9.) sayeth thus. I will put enmitie betweene thee and the wo∣man, and betweene thy seed and her seed, it shall breake thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heele: when he sayeth, it shall breake thy head, his meaneth the seede of the woman, that is, Christ, the seede of the Virgine Mary, who at his first comming con∣queted Sathan, and deliuered the faithfull out of his thraldome. Hebrewes 2.14. For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himselfe like wise tooke part of the same, that through deatly he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Deuill, and deliuer them, who through seare of death, wereall their life time subiect to bondage. Secondly, he instructed Adam to offer sacrifices, which were types and shadowes of the sartifice of Christs body to be offced to make satisfaction to God for the sins of all the faith full. Thirdly, he taught Adam that in offering of sacrifices, hee must by
faith apprehend Christ, who was shadowed and prefigured in those sa∣cufices, or else he could not be accep∣table to God: whereupon it is writ∣ten, Heb. 11.4. that by faith Abell offered vnto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain. Fourthly, he taught Adam, that those were acceptable to God which beleeuedin the promised seede of the woman, that is, in Christ, who was to come, and that those were not ac∣ceptable to God which beleeued not in Christ to come, and so it was knowne euer since the fall of Adam that some beleeued in Christ, and mere saued, and some did not beleeue in Christ, and there sore were reiected of God. Fiftly, when men beganne to bée multiplyed vpon the earth, the Lord forbade the faithfull to make maria∣ges with the vnbelauers, as it appea∣reth by the teproofe of such marriages Gen. 6.2. and this is confirmed in the new Testament, which disagraeth not from the old. 2. Cor. 6.14. Bee
yee not vnequally yoked together with vnbeleeuers. Question 10. Seeing these instructions giuen to Adam presently after his fall, are fundamental points of true religion, and the fourth instruction is the ef∣fect of the three former, declare the same more euidently, that it being better knowne, may make a deeper impression in our mindes. Answere. This may bee plainely declared foure wayes. First, by the examples of Cain and Abel, because Abell by faith was ac∣cepted, Heb. 11.4. and Cain for his infidelity was reiected, 1. Iohn. 3.12. for it was faith that made Abels worke, that is his sacrifice accepta∣ble, Heb. 11.4. and it was want of faith, that made Kaines worke, that is, his sacrifice vnacceptable to God, because without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Secondly, the faithfull though de∣clining, are called the sonnes of God,
and the posterity of vnbelécuers, are called the daughters of men. Genes. 6.2. Thirdly, this difference of belée∣uers and vnbeleeuers, was typically shadowed out in the distinction of cleane and vncleane beasts, Gen. 7.2. where Noah is commaunded to take into the Arke of euery cleane beast se∣uen, and of vnclean two. And a plain interpretation hereof wee haue, Act. 10.15. where the Lord forbiddeth Peter to count those Gentiles vn∣cleane, whose hearts God had purifi∣ed by faith, Acts. 15.9. Fourthly, since the fall of Adam, there was no saluation to any but by faith in Christ; for all the promises of God are yea and Amen in Christ: 2. Cor. 1.20. and therefore the faith∣full Patriarkes that liued before and after the flond, are commended, Heb. 11.5. and the vnbeleeuers of those times are omitted. Question 11. You haue shewed that God in∣structed Adam both before and af∣ter
his fall. shew me now that the faithfull haue instructed their poste∣rity from age to age. Answere. This may be shewed by an orderly rehearsall of some special faithfull per∣sons from generation to generation. First, Adam instructed his childri in the mestery of redemption, other wise they could not haue offered sa∣crifice as they did, Gen. 4.3. Secondly those patriarkes men∣tioned, Gen. 5. were Instructors of others, as the commendation of their faith. Heb. 11.5. may perswade vs. And it is particularly written of E∣noch in the Epistle of Iude, ver. 14. and of Noah, 2. Pet. 2.5. that they mere teachers of others. Thirdly, Abraham instructed his family: for when Lor was taken and tarried away captiue, hee tooke out of his owne family 318. persons, which he had instructed in religion, and fol∣lowed after the foure kings vnto Dan put them to flight, and brought again Lot, Gen. 14.14. Also the Lord min∣ding
to destroy Sodom reuealed his purpose to Abraham, and sayd thus: Gen. 18.19. For I know him that he will commaund his children and his hou shold after him, that they kape the way of the Lord. Fourthly, the commendation of Lot, 2. Pet 2.7. Witnesseth his rali∣gious care in this point. Fiftly, Isaak was carefull for his sonnes, that they should be religious, and was grieued for the profanenes of Esau. Gen. 26.35. Sixthly, Iacob was religious him∣selfe, and therefore carefull for the in∣struction of his children. Seuenthly, Iob liuing in the daies of Iaakob, or neere that time, was carefull that his children should feare God, as it appeareth, in that he offe∣red satrifice for them whiles they were feasting. Iob. 1.5. Eightly, and lastly, when the Israe∣lites were trady to depart out of E∣gypt, the Lord commaunded them, that when their children should aske them why they keepe the Passeouer
yearely, they should teach them the reason thereof. Exod. 12.26. The second time. Question 1. You haue shewed that instructi∣on in religion was vsed from the creation to Moses, shew mee now the continuance thereof from Moses to Christ. Answere. This may be shewed two wayes: First, by the commandement of God. Secondly, by the continuall practise. Question 2. What commandement hath God giuen for instruction of youth? Answere. If may suffice to mention two. The first is written, Deut. 6 6. All these words which I commaund thée this day shall bee in thine heart, and thou shalt rehearse them continu∣ally vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them when thou tarriest in thine
house, & as thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest down, and when thou risest vp. The second is written, Psal. 78. v. 5 Heestablished a testimony in Iaacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which be commaunden out Fathers, that they should make them knowne to their children. Verse 6. That the generation to come might know them, sucn the children which should be horne, who should arise and declare them to theyr children. Verse 7. That they might set their hope in God, art net forget the workes of God, but kéepe his commandemen's. Question 3. Shew mee also the continuall practise. Answere. This may bee shewed by these ex∣amples following. First, Ioshua the Captaine and gouernour of Israel sayth thus, I and mine house wilserue the Lord, Ioshua 24.15. professing both for himselfe &
also for his Familie, that they will serue the Lord, though others decline and fall a way. Secondly, King Dauid instructed Salomon his sonne, as Salomon con∣fesseth, Prou. 4.3. for I was my Fathers Sonne, tender and deare in the sight of my mother, when he taught mée and sayde vnto me: Let thine heart hold fast my wordes, koope my commaundements, and thou shalt liue, &c. Also Dauid prouided that his chil∣dren were instructed by others besides himselfe, for it is thus written, 1 Chr. 37.32. Iehiel the sonne of Hachmony mas with the Kings sonnes. Thirdly, Queene Bathsheba the mother of Salomon, admonished her sonne of thrée thinges, as Salomon himselfe confesseth, Prou. 32.2. First, that hee should not giue his strength to women, ver. 3. Secondly, that hee should not giu himselfe to drinke wine, ver. 4. Thirdly, that he should defend the afflicted, and the poore, ver. 8.
Fourthly, Salomon instructed his children, as it appeareth, Prou, 4. vers. 1: Heare yée children the instruction of a Father, and attend to know vnder∣standing, ver. 2. for I giue you good doctrine, forsake you not my Law. Ver. 10. Heare D my Sonne, and receyue my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many. Ver. 11. I haue taught thée in the way of wisdome, I haue ledde thee in right pathes, &c. Fiftly, Obadiah the Gouernour of Ababs house, sayth thus to Eliah: 1. King. 18.12. But I thy seruant feare the Lord from my youth, where∣by it is euident, that he was instruc∣ted in his younger yeares. Sixtly, Iosephus in his fourth ooke, and eight Chapter of antiquity and his second booke against Appion, hat the children of the Iewes could nswere as readily to euery point of he Law, as to their owne names.
The third time. Question 1. YOu haue shewde the continuall practise of catechising or instru∣cting of the younger sort from the creation to Moses, and from Mo∣ses to Christ, shew me now the con∣tinuance thereof vnder the Gospell from Christ to this present day. Answere. This may bee shewed thrée wayes First, by reasons grounded vpper Scripture. Secondly, by the commandement of God. Thirdly, by some examples. Question 2. What be the reasons which proue the continuance thereof vnder the Gospell. Answere. They are fine. First, the thrée reasons renderen
Psal, 78. Why youth should bee in∣structed vnder the Law, holde also vn∣der the Gospell. First, that the generations to come might know the commandements of God, Psal. 78.6. Secondly, that the generations to come might declare the same to theyr children, Psal. 78.6. Thirdly, that all generations to come might set their hope on God. Ps. 78, 7. Secondly, the instruction of youth is part of the morall law, euen of the fift commandement, and therefore con∣tinueth vnder the Gospell. Thirdly, the couenant betweena God and his Church (which is per∣petuall, Esai 54.10. Ierem. 32.32, & 33.20.) cannot continue, except youth be instructed. Fourthly, the doctrine of Bap∣tisme is continued vnder the Gospell, and therefore the instruction of youth is continued. Fiftly, there is vnder the Gospel as well milke, that is, the first principles
of religion, giuen to yong Christians as stronger meate to the elder sor according to the Apostles spéech an practise,Heb. 5.15. 2. Pet. 2.2. 1. Cor. 3.2. I haue fedde yo with milke, and not with stronge meate, for you were not hitherto a to be are it. Question 3. What commandement then ha God giuen in the new Testament? Answere. Two commandements specially. The frist is Ephs. 6.4. And yée fa∣thers prenoke not your children  wrath, but bring them vp in the instru∣ction, and information of the Lord. The second is, Galat. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communi∣cate to him that teacheth in all goo things. Question 4. What examples can you alledge Answere. These. First, Iohn the Baptist preache repentance, Matth. 3.2. and fait in Christ, Acts. 29.4. and als
baptized young Christians, Matth. 3.6. Secondly, Christ preached the same doctrine, saying Mark. 1.15. Re∣pent and beleeue the Gospell. Also he baptized. Iohn 3.22. By his Dis∣ciples, Iohn 4.2. Thirdly the twelue Apostles were commaunded to preach the same Do∣ctrine, Matth. 10.7. Fourthly, the seuenty Disciples were also commaunded to preach the same Doctrine Luk: 10.9. Fiftly, Peter preached the same doctrine and baptized, Act. 2.3.8. Sixtly, Philip preached to the Sa∣maritans, and baptized them. Act. 8. vers. 5.12. Also her instructed and bap∣tized the Eunuch, Act. 8.26. Seuenthly, Paul at Philippi con∣uerted and baptized both Lydia, Act. 26.14. And also the Kéeper of ye prison, Act. 16.30. And at Corinthus, hee baptized Crispus and Cains: 2. Cor. 1.14. and the houshold of Stephanus, 1. Cor. 1.16. Eightly, Timotheus was caterhi∣zed
by his mother Eunice, & by Lois his Grandmother, 1. Tim. 2.5. Ninthly, the principall heades of the Christian Catechizing, set down Heb. 6.2. Witnesse the prctise of catechizing in al churches, and may serue in stead of all ex∣amples. FINIS.
