1075 99855685 21187
THE MANER TO DYE WELL. An Introduction most compendiouslie shewinge the fruytfill re∣membrance of the last fowre things: That is to say, Death, Hel, Iudgement, and The ioyes of Heauen. Gathered out of manye good Authors, both comfortable and profitable to the dili∣gent Reader. Learnedly instructing howe to prouide for Death. ¶ Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones. 1578.
¶ To the Reader. TO stirre vp a more diligence of the inwardena in vs, our Lorde Iesus putteth foorth this similitud: knowe you that if the houshold Fa∣ther knew at what time the Theefe would inuade his house, he would surely watche, and woulde not suffer his house to bee bro∣ken. By this Household is vnderstanded the thoughtes of man, and also the invvarde and outward motions and deedes. VVhich hous∣holde vvoulde be to lasciuious and vvanton, if by the diligence of the Father they vvere not corrected and repressed. For if the father be vvearie of his care, vvho coulde be able to shevve hovve proude and insolent the thou∣ghtes, eyes, tongue, eares, and other mem∣bers vvoulde become. This house is the con∣science, vvherein this Father dvvelleth, and gathereth together the treasure of vertues, for vvhich he doth vvatche diligentlie, least the house should be broken vp▪ And it is not one, but many Theeues that vvould com∣mit this buglary and robbery. For euery ver∣e hath a ice incident vnto it. The cheefe
Theefe is taken to bee the Deuell, againste whom and all his atmie the saide father (if he be not negligent) doth watche and warde his house: appointing Prudence in the firste warde, who vnderstandeth what is to be ad∣mitted, and what is to be kept out. Next vn∣to her is placed Fortitude, to withstand suche enemies as by her warning he seeth to come neere. And Iustice sitteth in the middest, to geue to euerie one his owne. And euerie houre is to bee feared, for it is not know∣en in what houre the theefe wil come. VVe oughte alvvaies to watche, least the sleepe of sinne do vnwares creepe vpon vs. Now these thinges beeing thus ordered, the Memorie of death desireth to come, in and is suffered to enter, who being demaunded to say what he was, and from whence he commeth. Hee an∣swered that he would say nothing except all were commaunded to silence. VVho obtey∣ning his request, began in this order: My name (saith he) is Memorie of death, and I foretel you that death is comming. Prudence speaking for al, putteth the question, saying, VVher is death? Memory ansvvereth, I know where he is, for he draweth very nere, but the houre of his comming I knowe not. Prud.
VVho commeth with him? Mem. A num∣ber of Deuilles bringing with them greate bookes, in which are written the offences of man, and they claime those whose sinnes are written therein, and they will violentlie draw with them both their soules and bodies to hel. Prudence. VVhat thing is hell? Mem. Hel is a place of vnmesurable sorowes, mise∣rie, and darknes, there is eternal horror, there is no hope of goodnes nor seperation from euyl. Euery man that is there hateth himselfe and al others. There is weping and gnashing of teeth. There is no voyce there heard but Alas, Alas, Alas, they haue no vvord but A∣las. The deuelishe tormentors doo tormente and are tormented, and of them there shall neuer be ende nor remedie. Suche a place is Hel, and a thousande times worse. Prudence. O God what shall wee doo? My brethren, heare mine aduise, and geue me yours. Be ye faithful, watche and pray, doo good, not on∣ly in the sighte of men, but in the sighte of God. Temperaunce. Let vs goo before his face with harty repentaunce, and let vs prayse him in Psalmes. Bee you sober and watche. Fortitud. Vpō whom do you stay? Be strong in fayth, Comfort your selues in our Lorde,
Arme your selues with the armour of God, Take vppon you the harneys of Iustice, the target of Faith, and the sworde of the holie Ghost, which is the word of God. Iustice. Let vs lyue sober, iust, and godlie. Sober to our selues, iust to our neighbours, and godlie to God. Let vs not do that to others, vvhich vve vvould not haue done vnto our selues. Prud. Behold another Messenger verie comelie and pleasaunt, vvho seemeth to bring some good newes. Iustice. Let him come in, peraduen∣ture he wyl make vs mery: for this first mes∣senger hath terrified vs. Prudence. I vvill ad∣mit him. Come in. VVho art thour Messen∣ger. I am called, The loue of eternal lyfe. Keepe silence, for I can not be heard vvhere tumult is. Iustice. Yf vve did keepe silence vvhilst the Memory of death spake, of iustice we ought to be silent when thou speakest. Desire of eternal lyfe. I haue seene such thinges as no man is vvorthy to speake of. I sawe God, the ma∣iestie of the vndeuided Trinitie, but yet as it vvere through a glasse: that brightnes vvas so cleare, that mine eyes dasled to beholde that clearenes vvhich passeth all vnderstan∣ding. Yet notwithstanding I behelde a litle vvhyle our Lorde Iesus sitting on the right
hande of his father, who did so farre excel all creaturs, that the Angels themselues desire to beholde and looke vpon him. And I sawe vppon his bodye the woundes of his passion, wherewith he redeemed vs. But not being a∣ble any long time to looke vpon this bright∣nes of the sonne of God, I turned mine eyes vpon the orders of Angels, that stand before God. I behelde also the Prophets, the Apo∣stles, and Martirs, and an innumerable com∣panie of blessed Soules, from whose eyes God hath wasshed awaie all teares: they doo see the king in his Maiestie, and were all appareled in long white garmentes, lyuing a lyfe without ende. W. B.
Of the fall of man, and the punishment by death for the same, and of the vncertaine howre of death. BY shine against the lyning Lorde, olde Adam our first Sire, Death to him selfe and al his séede hath gayned for his hyre. Mortalitie and temporal death this gift our Parents wonne, In Paradise the fruite forbyd, to eate when they begonne. First sinne began, and after death in haste dydit ensue: By whome ech man must passe herehence, as sure as God is true. Lest some men would them selues extol, too farre aboue the rest, If that they shoulde in freedome quite, escape this feareful blast. Then Death nothing more certen is, no doubt thereof we see, But no man knoweth the houre ne place, nor what his ende shal bee. Whether by dint of edged sword, or heate of flaming fyre,
Or roaring wanes of raging seas, pale Death shall paye his byre. No place nor time there is, but Death in watche and wayte doth lye, Man to intrappe, if that he can vnarmed him espie. No shadowe darke on massie corps, more duely doth attende, Then lurking death, who alway séekes, Man to confounde and ende. What man is he that standeth sure, tyll night to drawe his breath? Our life beeing the open way that straight doth leade to death. The wise therefore remembring oft, that once he needes must dye, His lyfe at euerie howre to yeelde prepareth wyllingly. Death at the gates of olde men is, and prest to youth also: But neither knoweth the certen howre, when they away must go. Let vs therfore, not knowing when God shall vpon vs call, Prepare our selues in readinesse, both soule, minde, harte and all: Yeelding our selues vnto the Lorde, whylst we our health enioy,
Not wasting time by posting off, least we our selues annoy. Euen like as death doth finde the man, so man the death shal finde, For perfect men in safetie do dye with ioyfull minde. With hope of blysse the iust doth ende their lyfe in quiet rest, And wicked men full desperate, doo ende in cares opprest. Therefore to auoide these dangers all, keepe thou these verses in minde, Which I amongst the learned workes, of godlie men doo finde. ¶ Of Death, Iudgement, Hell, and Heauen. EChe thing returnes to massie earth, and endes where it begunne: Fresh flowres and all that beareth breath, as shades away doth runne. Nothing for long accompted is, that must in time decay: To morrowe next perhaps shal be my death and dying day.
This present day may likewise be, the last day of my dayes, Wherein appoynted is that I. must dye without delayes. No hope of dooing wel is left, after that deadful day: That day in ioy without al greefe, To passe God sende I may, It is great folly to accompt, long time here to endure, Séeing that none one day to liue, himselfe can wel assure. Oft to accompt or mencion make, of dayes, it is but vayne, Since restful day, or quiet houre, none hath, without great paine. Haue thou as long a time and race, as thou doth lust to runne, As ought of nought was made in fine, so ought to nought must turne. A thousand thousand men haue bene, and thousand of thousands eke. VVhose bones in earth consumed are, whose fame is nowe to seeke, A iust rewarde for their desertes, doth onely nowe remayne, And for their déedes by iudgment iust, they suffer ioy or payne.
Beholde that feareful iudgement iust, for one shal geue the dome, VVho doth appoynte that trembling day, when he thereto wyl come. Dread, feare, and cast thy count therfore, prepare thy harte, I say: Liue thou as though death present were, thy due preparde to pay. ¶ Of the houre of death worthye of often repetition. REmember oft, O mortal man, consider in thy minde, VVhat soden feare and terror great, thy soule is like to fynde: VVhat pinching wormes begin to fret, the hart on euery side, VVhen soule from flesh, & life from man, begins away to slide. Ten thousand griefs begins to paine, the wicked soule with woe, VVhen from the prison of the fleshe, away it needes must goe, It doth bewayle with streames of teares, the vayne bestowed time, VVherein it might ful leasurely, repent eche sinful crime:
And bitterlie with scryching cryes, it makes a rufull mone: To see the time of strict reuenge, that drawes so hardlie on. It seekes a whyle then to remaine, in hope some mendes to make: No sute maye then preuayle, but that the fleshe it must forsake. Full fayne it would recouer againe the ioye which it hath lost, All is in vaine, it wyll not be, away the soule must post. But looking backe it séeth againe, when it was wald with bones, The whole full course of passed lyfe all presentlie at once. And taking yet more earnest viewe, it séeth, not farre beside, The infinite Eternitie, that neuer away wyl slide: Then trikling teares by watred leares, in floudes for gréefe doth runne, For losing al the heauenly ioyes, that easly mought bene wonne: Intisementes fowle of filthy fleshe iust cause of greefe then brings, For that by them the swéete delight of heauen and heauenlie thinges:
From sinfull soule for euer, alas, remediles is reft, And endles paines by iust desart, by God to it is left. It blusheth for that the sinfull flesh it dyd so much set by, The foode of gréedie scrauling wormes in graue when it doth lye: Forgetting quite it selfe, alas, which if it had done wel, To Angels might compared be, that in the heauens doo dwel. O howe the soule confounded is, when it doth sée with eyes, The perfect glée that was and is aboue the starrie Skies: With fléeting stoudes of cares, I saye, the doleful soule is tost, When it doth see the heauenly health, that it hath vainely lost. For vading glorie of the worlde in this poore mortall lyfe, Wherein we see nothing is had without debate and strife. When the blacke vale of miserie it doth from farre beholde, It wondreth at the shyning light of heauen, more pure then golde:
It doth then sée the wauering worlde that séemde to it most bright. To be none other but a clowde more darke then drowpy night. How godly, harde, and strict a life, the soule woulde vndertake, What fastings great, what promise large what holy vowes would make: To get by grace some space of tyme, wherein it might repent The vaine surpassed course of life, that earst in sinne was spent. But when the dasled eyes begins to loose their wonted sight, And holo we chest yet feble pants, and loosing neare his might. The ratling throte doth faintly breath the téeth waxe blacke and rust, The lippes becommeth pale and wan, the toung is thicke and thurst, And euerie lym neare styffe and colde: when these doo play their parte, As verie signes and tokens true of Death his pearsing darte. Then al his wicked works and thoughts, as witnesse forth are brought, And strongest euidence they geue gainst him that them haue wrought,
He no where then can fire his eyes, but there they present are, And as his strongest enimies, they worke his greatest care. Huge routes of vgly dreadfull douyls on thoe side standeth nre, The vertues all on thother side, with Angels passing cleare: And in the midst betwixt them both by iust and vpright dome, Its clearely iudged to whether side the wanding soule shall come. If in the pathe of vertue true, the soule did runne her race, Then do the Angels euery one craue that it maye haue grace. With pleasaunt heauenly harmonie, full sweete they do allure, The soule with them in heauen to go, they earnestly procure, But if the soule all blurred be, with blottes of filthy sinne, Then war like troupes of hateful deuils, agaynst the soule doo iune: And sodenly in boyrous wise, alheadlong downe doth cast, The guyltie soule eternally, to he they pul at last.
In ambushe they in priuie wise the waye doo al beset, Thereby the soule to stop and stay, and it from heauen to let. By calling these and such like thinges, to minde with inwarde thought, Al raging fleshlie lust we shal despise and set at nought: And weigh as thinges of litle weight al worldlie pleasures vaine. Forsaking quite thentisements sweete, of hoores and hoorishe traine. Applying our studies by stedfast faith to God in godlinesse, VVe shal (I trust) by Christ at last be plast with Saintes in bliffe. Praise be to God our Sauiour, and to his name also, VVho graunt that to his glory we, all thinges by him may do.
¶ A redie Instruction, and godly exercise for an happy death, spo∣ken as it were in the person of Christ vnto the Soule. Translated out of the Booke called, Pharetra diuini amoris. O Thou soule, as nothing maketh the loue of the worlde to seeme more folishe, and sooner pro∣uoketh vnto thee, the happy contempt of al things which are created, then the true considera∣tion of this short lyfe, & due regarde of temporal death, by which death al worldly endeuours, all earthly ho∣nour, all vading pleasures, all vaine thoughts, al hurtful desires, & tran∣sitorie ioye doth perish: So nothing doth more reioyce the louing soule, then that it beleueth & hopeth to be associated vnto me, & to be altoge∣ther drowned in me. Where hence∣forward there shalbe no euyl, no sin,
no seperation, no daunger, no feare, nor griefe, where in perfect charitie the soule shal continuallie praise, al∣waies magnifie, stedfastly obey, and perfectlie please me. And lykewise it shal continuallie be with me, where it shall neither requyre, loue, or af∣fect any thing besides me, but I shall be the sole possessor of it. And for so much as these things cānot perfeet∣lie happen vnto thee in this lyfe, tyll such time as thou shalt be plast with me in my kingdome, where al thy desyre shal be satisfied in louing and praising me, where I shal be al in al: Therefore thou dost iustly require, & with al thy hart mayst lawfully de∣sire, yt which is contained in ye praier which I haue left with thee, which peticion is, Let thy kingdome come. Therefore (my Daughter) if thou dost entirely loue me, if strōglie thou affectest to come to heauen, if feruēt∣lie thou requyrest to see thy king∣dome, which is this estate whereof
I do speake: then in this maner with signes praye thou, that my kingdom maye come. Wherein thou shalt be vnited vnto me in perfect charitie, and altogether drowned in me. And for that (as I haue sayde) this can not be, but after death, which cau∣sed my Sainctes in patience of lyfe, to wyshe for death, which is the ve∣rie porte or entrie vnto life. Wherby thou mayst see that the soule which perfectlie loueth mee, feareth not death. For what doth the soule loose by departing out of this vnhappye life? surely nothing but the waye to offende, snares of sinne, occasions of ruine, deceiptes of enimies, hir owne proper fragilitie and feare▪ and such like innumerable daungers, which do blinde, weakē, and chafe the soule (passing ouer the labors of the body) which are alwayes changeable and vnstable. The soule in this worlde wisheth for many thinges that should not be
obtained, not knowing that which it would haue. It coueteth & desy∣reth many things which can not be. The soule being ignoraunt & blinde in many things, walketh in daūger and darknesse, not knowing howe it may be ridde from them. Why then should not the soule willingly wish, and hartelie reioyce, to see it selfe de∣liuered from these innumerable sor∣rowes and heapes of daungers? O thou soule, what doest thou feare? Why wyshest not thou for death? Seeing thou art not hurt by death, nor yet canst loose any thing by death, if thou haue forsaken ye loue of al worldly things. Wherfore I tel thee, it is daungerous to loue any earthly thing. For to tel thee truely, I say that by louing them, thou im∣bracest very daunger it selfe. Ther∣fore I as one that tedreth thy welth, do admonish thee, that thou before thy death wilt quite forget al earth∣ly loue, and feare not death if I be he
whome thou doest onely loue in this life. Reioyce then that thou doest die, for that is the onely meane wherby thou mayst come to me. But perad∣uenture thou fearest somewhat els, as ye losse of worldly goodes, or some other like thing: Knowe thou then, that there is nothing in this world, whatsoeuer it bee that thou doest possesse (be it neuer so greeuous vn∣to thee) but needes thou must forgoe the same. Thou art likewise in ex∣treme feare, and standest in great doubt, whether thou arte worthy to be beloued or hated of me. Thou knowest not how I wyl accept thee, neither whether I shal receyue thee to peace or paine. O my daughter, the knowldge of these things belō∣geth not vnto thee. Wherfore stay & holde thy selfe contented for a while. For although thou doest all thy lyfe tyme and at the verie howre of thy death continue in my faith, & fearst, & hopest in me: yet canst thou not for
al this of thee selfe either liue a per∣fect life, or dye a godly death. For only by me thou dost attayne & come to eyther of these. Howe thinkest thou then, if I geue thee grace to liue well, am I not likewise able to graunt that thou shalt dye a happie death? Seeing then that thou haste and gettest al thinges by mee, why doest thou assure thee selfe of thone doubting and dispairing in thother? for thou canste not of thee selfe, ney∣ther liue nor dye wel. Trust there∣fore in me, cast al thy care vpon me, turne al thy greefe vpon mee, for as in thy life time, so neither at ye howre of thy death canst thou of thee selfe withstande anye temptation, nor es∣cape any offence. If in thy lyfe tyme I did not forsake thee. If in time of temptation I did strōgly assist thee, and strengthned and enabled thee a∣gainst thine aduersaries: I wil like∣wise doe the same for thee at the ve∣ry last houre.
Thou doest neuer go armed with thine owne armour into the feelde, but alwayes presumest vppon mee. If thou wilte leane and staye thee selfe vpon me, I wyll fight for thee, and I beeing thy champyon and de∣fendour, what shouldest thou then neede to feare, whiche (in respecte of thy selfe) art of no value? And for the manner and order of thy death take thou no care, for no kinde of tempo∣ral death can hinder the Iuste. Care thou not therefore after what sorte thou dyest, whether in thy bedde, or in the feelde, for that ought not to be feared. After what sorte soeuer thy life is bereft irō thee, eyther by vio∣lence or otherwise, care thou not se∣ing it is natural to dye. If there bee one kind of temporal death happier then another, then were my Saints vnhappie, of whome, the greatest number (in the sighte of the worlde, and to the iudgement of men) ended their liues with moste vylest death.
Which of my holye Martyres hath past ouer his full course, & ended his lyfe by natural death? Which of the Martyrs is there yt hath bene done to death, eyther vpon the painefull crosse or by force of wylde beastes, or by rage of flaming fyre, or by dint of cruell Tirauntes sworde? Not one truely. It hindreth not therefore any whit, whether thou diest, eyther by the raging pestylence, or by the sencelesse disease of Apoplexa, or any other death, eyther in thy bedde at home or in the feelde abroade. Be∣ware and watche thou onely, that thou maist be found in perfect fayth, hope, and charitie, and then no kinde of death nor funeral can hinder thee. Although I speake to thee (O be∣loued soule) I do meane and speake these thinges also to those which are as yet vnperfect, aduising and coun∣sayling you al to loue innocēcie, and hate euyl. What soule soeuer thou be that offendest, be sory and repent,
and so repent (if thou doest meane to reape the fruites of true repētance) that thou doo not returne to thine olde sinnes, nor to ye occasions ther∣of. Looke alwayes for death, and so prepare thee selfe for it, as though euerie howre should be the instaunt therof. And lest weake soules should lacke any kinde of godlie instruction, whereby they might the better pro∣uide them selues to dye; I wyl adde more to this which I haue sayde: Marke well the wordes of mine A∣postle (which thing the matter it self doeth plainely shewe.) You haue no stedfast dwelling, nor permanent cit∣tie, sayth he, in this trāsitory world: for such a cittie is onely to be looked for in the worlde to come, vnto the which this world is nought but the way and pilgrimage, which iourney and pilgrimage is ended when your life is determined. Death is the end of al men, that boundeth and leadeth directly from ye pilgrimage wherein
you now are, vnto the region wher∣vnto you cast your course, in suche dyrect sorte, that there is none other way or gate, through which you cā enter or departe out of this Pylgri∣mage into your countrey, but onelie by death. As there is no assuraunce of lyfe, so there is an assured certenty of death: but this indyfferent betweene the good and the euyll, that being mixt in this perigrination, they be al but straungers, and they al do long to come to ye blessed kingdom, although they al walke not in the ryght path. Al you so lōg as you are in this iour∣ney, although you stray, you may re∣turne to the ryght way againe. And when you come to the ende of your iourney, euē at the very gates ther∣of, & at the extreme instant of death, some go from eryle to lyfe, and other some go to myserable and eternall death. You ought not therfore lightly to
esteeme, nor forcelesse with a negly∣gent conscience to consider in what sort you shoulde come to death. For then must you forgoe & leaue behind you al thinges, whatsoeuer you put any trust or confidence in, whether it be riches, honour, friendes, or any other vanitie whatsoeuer, for at the howre of death they shal profite no∣thing but must be al left behind, and you fellowlesse without companye shal goe alone before the tribunall seate of almightie God, thereto re∣ceyue accordinge to your workes. What greater blindnesse & madnesse maye there be, then to take pleasure or reioyce in any thing yt may happē vnto you whylst you trauaile in this iourney, or to loue any transitorie thing yt neither auaileth or profiteth the soule. And as it were cast into a certayne sodaine madnesse, with a drye wythered conscience (without God) to seeke for such things as are altogether fleshly, and rashly to rush
and thrust foorthe after externall thinges onely, neglecting slouthful∣ly tyme and godly occasions, wher∣by they might amend their liues, ta∣king no regarde nor heede to the spi∣ritual estate, of their inwarde man. And in this maner you doe runne headlong vnto death. O how many are in this very point deceyued. Loe here how they are intraped, wrapt vp, and taken in the deceytful nettes and priuie snares of this transitorie and miserable worlde. See howe vnhappilie they are taken captiues, and compelled to drawe: the yoke of the diuell, that thus vnaduisedlye come to death, with blinde and hard hartes. O howe vnhappie bee their liues, that neglecting death, prepare not for their owne health. They whiche hinder the soule, and with pleasure pamper theyr fleshe, forgo∣ing althinges behouefull and neces∣sarie for theyr saluation, are worthy to be cut of an cast away.
Euerie man ought so to liue at e∣uery howre, as though ye same were the last howre of his life, wherein he should go to heare the iudgement of God. And right now (if not oftner & alwaies) he ought to cal present be∣fore his eyes ye dreadful houre of his departure from ye fleshe: for the soule shalbe iudged for euery word, work and thought. Alwaies and presently thou oughtest so to rule thy self, that by thy nowe doing thou shouldest be found in such a readinesse, as in tyme to come thou wouldest wyshe thou shouldest be found in, when vndoub∣ted death shal appeare. It is there∣fore the parte of a foolish and madde harte, to deferre the correction of life vnto that time wherein the ende of lyfe appeareth, and when there is no further hope of life: At what time we ought not neede to be amended, but rather being amēded, we ought to meete our God. Departing out of this life, thy soule forgoeth not on∣lie
al offences, but also leaueth al o∣ther thinges behinde it. And yet art thou not sayde then to forsake sinne, whē thou canst sinne no more. Ther∣fore whilst thou hast power to sinne, forsake it, seeing that true repentāce can neuer be to late: notwithstan∣ding that such repentance as is de∣ferred to ye last howre, is much doub∣ted whether it maye be called true repentance, or not. If ye feare of dam∣nation do so much trouble thee at ye howre of thy death, take heede then yt thou prepare what remedie thou canst to preuent the same. I feare me, thy feare groweth not by chari∣ty (for that thou didst offence me thy Lord God) but that it commeth on∣ly of the proper loue thou bearest to thee selfe. Thy onely cause of griefe is, for that by thine owne offences thou hast gained death and eternall damnation: whereas if thou hadst truely repented, thy chiefest cause of sorowe shoulde be, in that thou wast
vnobedient, stubborne, vnthankfull, reprocheful, and that thou yeeldedst not due honour vnto me. This ouer great lamēting of thine owne cause, doth iustly argue, yt if there had bene no daunger, or if sinne should freelie escape vnpunished, thou wouldest neuer bewayle thy sinfull estate, al∣though yu hadst continued therein a thousand yeres. The true repentāce, whereby the soule is reconciled vnto me, is grounded only vpon charity, & doth continually lament and repent, that it hath so often despised me, the best, the greatest, & faithfullest Lord God, Creator & redemer: And that it hath exalted it self so hyely, so proud∣lie, so arrogantlie and vnobedientlie against me, it being but dust and of no value. Whosoeuer he be that meaneth to dye well, let him (as mine Apostle teacheth) lyue soberlie, iustlie, and godly. For after a good and iust life, foloweth an happy death. For the
death of my Saints are precious in my sight, by what death soeuer they doe depart out of this life, whether it be by water, or by fyre, or in their beddes, And for a preparation ther∣vnto (in the meditation whereof a wyse man spēdeth the whole course of his natural lyfe) take here this short exercise, whereby euery Chri∣stian may in suche sorte admonishe and direct himselfe in such order, as he needeth not to feare death, so as hee be founde according to this in∣struction, it shal suffice. ¶ Wholsome admonitions to dye. WHatsoener things at the howre of thy death thou wouldest haue to bee done, doe thou the same presently: and whatsoeuer thou arte by duety bound to doe, commit not the charge thereof vnto others. For if thou thy selfe wast negligent and carelesse of thine owne wealth and busines, howe thinkest thou that o∣thers
wyl take any heede or regarde to thy health? Beleeue not vncerten thinges and vaine promises, neither commit thyselfe to doubtful chaun∣ces. Liue & so behaue thee selfe, that thou mayst be so quieted in thy con∣science, as though this were thy dy∣ing daye. Neuer go vnto thy bedde, before thou hast accoumpted with thy selfe the maner & state of thy life. Examine thy selfe, calling thy harte with al thy sences to iudgement, and knowe whether thou be the better or the worse for this daye. Neuer go thou to bedde with such a cōscience, wherein thou fearest to dye. If thou doest finde thee selfe in such state as thou doest feare to die, search out the cause therof: for peraduenture there be some sinnes, of the which as yet thou hast not perfectlie repented thy self, or else thou forsakest to acknow∣ledge & confesse them, or peraduen∣ture thou doest refuse to abstaine frō the occasions thereof: or thou liuest
vnder the daunger or obedience of some man: or as a peruerse mā thou dost continue in malice, or in the vniust withholding of other mennes goodes: or thou art too much addic∣ted & bent to the couetous desyre of worldly wealth & carnal sensualitie: or rauished with the vnlawful lust of some creature: or being so deepelie drowned in ye greedy desire of earth∣lie & visible thinges, in such sort as yu canst by no meanes be withdrawen from them, coueting for nothing of that which belongeth to the Soule, foolishly looking and lyking in al ex∣ternal things, lothing and vomiting out al heauenly thinges. The cause that mooueth thee to feare death, is, that thy guyltie conscience foretel∣leth thy feareful minde the torments whiche are prouided for thy sinneful soule after thy death. Which soeuer of these resteth and raygneth in thee, cutte them off, persecute them, and with all thyne endeuour doo what
lyeth in thee to deliuer thy selfe from them. Imbrace my crosse, and folow my footesteppes, and they shal be a great furtheraunce to thee in this thine attempte, and with rigour of minde & holy hatred against thy self, proclayme thou open warre against al vyces, with a determinate wyll not to sinne, renewing oftentymes this holy battayle without ceassing: And least thou shouldst be ouerthro∣wen for weaknesse and want of cou∣rage, contemplate and earnestly be∣holde the examples of me and of my Saints commending thy selfe to the prayers & exhortations of good mē, reposing thy selfe with inwarde and wholsome inspiration, be occupied in prayer and godlie reading, be neuer ydle, loue solitarinesse and sylence. These and such like driue away euyl thoughts frō the harte, & banish the feare of death. When thou cōmest to ye ende of euery day, say vnto thy self, Now my life is shortned by one day.
And when thou rysest in ye morning, saye: O God I am by one night nee∣rer to death then I was. ¶ An Exercise to be vsed in the Mor∣ning, or at other times when you thinke conuenient. ALmightie and eternall God, my Creator and louer, I praise, adore and blesse thee, for that in mine offē∣ces and vngratefulnesse thou hast so mercifullie and leysurelie forborne & suffred me to liue euen to this houre, wherunto by thy benefits thou hast brought me, geuing to me thine vn∣worthy & reprocheful seruaunt, both life & necessaries therunto belōging, appointing Angelles to be my kee∣pers. O good God, who knoweth whether tyll euening my life shal be prolonged, or what death is appoin∣ted forme. O merciful Lorde God & heauenly father, graunt that I may with harty repentaunce truly repēt y sinnes, & inwardly bewaile that et I offended thy godly maiestie.
Suffer not my soule to departe this body, before it be (through thy mer∣cie perfectlie reconciled and adopted vnto thee by thy grace) bedeckt with thy merites and vertues, inflamed with perfect charitie, and acceptable vnto thee, according vnto thy wyl. O mercifull Lorde Iesus Christe, if those thinges whiche I desyre doo stand with thy pleasure, graūt them I beseeche thee. although I be not worthy to be heard: yeelde and geue I beseech thee, of thine infinite mer∣cie, that by the merites of thy passiō I may be purged from al my sinnes. And that at the howre of my death I maye be striken with true and ve∣hement contrition, and being knitte with thee in perfect charity, I maye immediatly flit vnto thee my sweete Redeemer safelie and freelie from al dampnation. Neuerthelesse in al these my requestes, O best beloued Iesu, I do fully and wholy offer and resigne my selfe vnto thee, to be alto∣gether
disposed & ordered according to thy wyl, and to suffer for thy glo∣rious sake: desyring this one thing at thy hands, that thou wilt remem∣ber my fragilitie, vnworthinesse, vn∣stablenesse, & miseries, together with thine owne goodnesse and most cha∣ritable mercy, praying thee neuer to forsake or leaue me, but yt thou wylt alwaies possesse and gouerne me, ac∣cording to thy wyl, Amen. ¶ An oblation of Christ, and of his merites, vnto his Father. OMnipotent and benigne Father, al the paines, dolours, checkes, punishmentes, rebukes and labours of thy onelie begotten Sonne Iesus Christ, lambe immaculate, which he vpon his owne body hath suffred for my sake: his trauels, with the afflie∣tion of al his members for me: his bloudshed, and feete nayled for me: his most noble and godly soule seue∣red from his delicate body for mee: his infinite vertues and merites, the
strength also of his body & soule, and al thinges ye hare lyfe in him yeelded to death for my redemption: insepe∣rately notwithstāding vnited with ye Deitie. Christ also thy blessed sōne, God & man omnipotent, both weak∣ned looking downe, & glorious wor∣king myracles, and hanging vpō the Crosse: I do here offer vnto thee in exaction & satisfaction of my synnes & al the worldes, and in mortifying & extinguishing of al my passions, e∣uil affections, & sinful vices, in steede and supply of al my negligēce, and in the laude and prayse of al thy graces & benefites. O heauenly father, haue cōpassion vpon me for his sake, haue thou mercie vpon me for the loue of thy beloued sonne Iesus Christ. THere be which doe prefixe a cer∣taine kinde of exercise vnto them selues, as death were present, prepa∣ring themselues euerye fyue dayes continually, in suche sorte as though
they shoulde dye presently. The fyrst daye, they do remember death, the presidentes and horror thereof, to whom they do wyllingly yeelde. The seconde daye, they do thinke vpon theyr sinnes, and them so busie and diligently they do confesse, as though presently after theyr confes∣siō they should die, passing ouer that daye in sobbes and teares. The thyrde day, with the greatest deuotion they can, they do prepare themselues, comming to the holye Eucharist, and vittayle themselues therewith, for theyr reliefe in theyr iourney. The fowrth daye, they do continu∣ally pray vnto God for ye inspiration of the holy ghost, wherby they may lighten & soften the hardnes of theyr hartes: and thus they do continew al that day. The fift day, with feruent deuotiō they make theyr humble supplicati∣ons
vnto God, for a spyrituall death, wherby they may perfectlie mortify them selues, and yet continually liue to God. To ech of these dayes a man may applie fyt Psalmes and Prayers. And lastly they do giue harty thāks to almightie God for his innumera∣ble benefits bestowed vpon them at al times during theyr liues. ¶ Spirituall counsayles at the howre of death. MY Daughter, yu beeing brought to infyrmitie, prepare thy soule to God, taking such order for thy temporal goodes, that there be no strife nor cōplaint for them after thy death. Nothing profiteth the soule more then to leade a iust & innocent lyfe, and to do good to euery man in thine owne life tyme, & whatsoeuer thou wouldest that others should do for thee, be thou careful and diligent to do ye same thy selfe. If after death thou dost goe to euerlasting paine,
what doeth the fulfylling of thy Te∣stament, the pompe of thy Funeral, almes, or sacrifice auayle thee after thy death? Do these things thy selfe in thine owne life dayes, that thou maist be deliuered not only frō sinne, but also increased in my grace, thou mayst escape damnation: and I pre∣seruing thee from thine offēces, thou maist continue and perceuer in good workes vnto the ende. When death approcheth see thou do ridde thy self from al cares and worldlie labours, that with feruent desire thou mayst affect to come to me without spotte, beeing ful of fayth, not trusting any thing to thine owne workes, but let the hope of thy reliefe be onely plan∣ted in mine ineffable mercie. In this faith altogeather betaking thy selfe, and al other things which thou hast in this worlde, vnto my prouident wyl, humblie and deuoutlie receyue thou the Sacraments of my body & blood, which haue theyr vertue only
by my merites, and were by me ge∣uen vnto the Church as a treasure. Although that many men haue oftē times abused them, as they haue done many other good things: neuer thelesse, receiue thou them with a feruent zeale and a sure fayth, vnto thy euerlasting ioy. ¶ An Exercise, wherein the weake man may resigne himselfe. to God. O My saythful louer, O mercyfull Lorde Iesus Christ, graunt that with al my harte and minde I maye perfectly vnderstande that which I saye. As the Harte desireth to come to the fountaynes of freshe waters, so doeth my soule desire to come to thee, O Lorde. I haue chosen ra∣ther to bee an abiect and an vnder∣ling in the house of my god, then to dwel in the Tabernacles of sinners. Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, O Lord, they shal prayse thee for euer. By soule dothe thirse to
come to thee (O Lorde) when shal I appeare before thy face. O my soule why art thou heauy, why troublest thou me? Hope in the Lorde, for I wyl trust in him, the health of my countenaunce, and my God. Turne thy face vpon me thy seruaunt, saue me in thy mercie, O Lorde, that I be not confounded foreuer. I cal vpon thee, linger not from me my God. Looke backe and assist me, a poore man left vnto thee, for thou arte the releeuer of Orphantes, thou art the refuge of al my trouble that compas∣seth me. O my triumph, delyuer me from them that assault me. O thou Lorde God of my health, come and helpe me, for thou arte my strength, my helper and refuge, do not forsake me, nor despise me. O God salute me with welcome, beholde I come vnto thee my God, whome I haue neglec∣ted and despised, for all the earth is ful of thy mercy. I doe therefore flye vnto thee moste mercyfull God, re∣ceyue
me according to thy word, (by which thou saydest, I wyll not the death of a sinner) and I shal lyue, do not consounde me contrarie to mine expectation. My God, I craue not for this temporal life, but I do onely inuocate and call vpon thee with al my harte, which art the eternal life. Alas my best beloued. Alas my only Lord and God, that euer I offended thee, that euer I neglected thy inspi∣rations and counsayles, that euer I loued any thing besides thee, my Lorde God, this is it that repenteth me. I beseech thee therfore to graūt vnto me, that during my life I maye with al my hart truely & faithful lie repent and bewayle these mine offē∣ces. I woulde I coulde powre forth and vp before thee, al the droppes of my bloud and teares, in true repen∣taunce. Lorde Iesu I craue and loke neyther for death nor life, but onelie for thy good wyl. Let al thinges be done according to thy good wyl and
pleasure. Seeing it pleaseth thee that I must dye, O Iesu receyue my soule, graūt that I may haue eternal rest with thee. If it be thy pleasure, O Iesu, that my lyfe shal be prolon∣ged, I haue determined with al my harte to beseeche and aske, that thou wylt most graciously graunt it me, through the helpe of thy mercie and grace, & so to offer my selfe vnto thee as an offering to thy glorie & wyll. O best beloued Iesu, for that I haue past ouer my lyfe in contempt of thy glorious name, lyuing out of thine obedience, graunt nowe, I beseeche thee, that henceforward I may wyl∣lingly spēde al ye strength of my soule and body, and al the rest of my time graūted by thee, vnto thy glorie and wyl. O Mercyful Iesu, bee present with me, and mercifullye helpe mee in these my paynes and miseries, and if greeuouser paynes shall happen to oppresse me (which for mine offences
I knowe I haue deserued farre gre∣uouser & greater then these) graunt that I maye suffer and beare them paciently. Osweete Iesu, although I had neuer offended, nor deserued punishment in thy sighte, yet to thy glory and wyl, in these paynes, as in euerye other, I doe offer and resigne my selfe vnto thy Maiestie, not tru∣sting in mine owne vertue, but only in the multitude of thy merits, vpon which I doe presume, and doe inuo∣cate and call vppon thee, that thou mayst by thy vertue erect & streng∣then the weaknes and vnstedfastnes of my soule, and that thou wilt com∣fort it with strength, and strengthen it with patience, that I doe not fall downe, beeing vanquished with ad∣uersitie and temptation, nor weried with weaknes of minde: but beeing altogeather consumed in the flame of thy sweete fyre and loue, I maye onely long for thee, and that wyth a thirstie appetite I maye coole my
thirst in thee, that I may thinke vpō thee, and altogether long for thee, & that I may forsake, disdaine, and cō∣temne the world & al things therin, & that I may geue thee like thanks, both in ioye and sorowe. O Most louing Iesu, I haue chosen thee, I wishe and loke for thee, I runne to meete thee, and I doe re∣nounce all things that are not of thee. Whatsoeuer thou wilt I wyll: and whatsoeuer thou wylt not, the same I wyl forsake. Whatsoeuer thou doest detest, I doe refuse it: and whatsoeuer shal hereafter happen vnto me cōtrarie to this my present minde, I beseeche thee my God, not to impute the same vnto me, neither according vnto that, but accordyng to this present choyse of my soule iudge me. For al thinges whiche I ought not to doe, I doe here vtterly forsake them. And if at anye time hereafter I shall chaunce by any si∣nister
occasion to agree to any thing that may be a cause to withdraw thy n dyd from me, I do  this  vtterly  and dttlys satile. O Lorde I, if it please thre, or if if maye stande  thy gly, aūt I beeche thee, in this my present lyfe, hat I  and , wherein I hae onded, om al the pines  uedlie I ght to . And that th  of thy  ned farry afte  . Lorde Iesu  my . ¶  or lst  therto be saye,  to be ought  vp on at the howre   seath.  IN the name of the Father, and of the Some, and of the holie Ghost. I H a wretched synner, deemed
with the precious bloud of our Lord Iesus Christe, through his greate merry and loue, & not by my merites do confesse and knowledge openly, eyther by this wryting, or by these my wordes, before God omnipotent, and before you that are here as wit∣nesses (if there needeth any) that I ad doo dyethe true serunt of our Lorde Iesus Christe, as it be∣cometh a true Christian. I do be∣leeue and confesse generallie all and euerie parte and Article of the Chri∣stian fayth, wherein euery Christian beleeuer is de is beleeue. And chisie the viuersall  o∣teyned in the twelue Articles of the Christian faith, either openly expres∣sed, or by reason excluded. According as through the holye Ghoste by the twelue Apostles, and by the true gospel they were delyuered vnto vs. And to be shorte, I beleeue so muche as a true Christian ought. And I do with all my harte reioyce to dye in
this immoueable and fyrme Fayth, holding this scripture in my handes, and offering it vp, as a most defen∣sible and inuinsible shield against all the inuasions and deceiptes of the di∣uell. And if (which God forbyd, it come to passe, that by the temptati∣on of the diuell, or by the violence of my disease, I shall happen to thinke, speake, or do any thing contrarie to this pretestation: Or that I shall fal into any error, misbelefe, or dispaire: Yf any of these doo chaunce vnto me I do here in the presence of you al reuobe, & vtterly renounce the same, in such sorte as I woulde do if I had my perfect sences. For this I cal you al which are here present, & thee my good Angell vnto whose custodie I am cōmitted, that you as witnesses may testifie this my protestation and confession, before the omnipotent and righteous Iudge. As muche as in me lyeth, I doo here clearely forgeue and remit al in∣iuries
iuries whatsoeuer haue beene done vnto me: And the lyke I do aske  theyr handes, whoeit her by word or dee de I haue at any time lēded. And cheessie I do request to bee par∣taker of the bytter Passiō, and inno∣cent death of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that my natural and voluntarie death may, through thy grace, stande for al my sinnes. I do also intitely reque and desire you al that be here present, to say the Lordes prayer with me, and for me. Our Father which arte in Heauen, ho  be thy . Thy kingdom thing. Thy wyl be done in earth as it is in heauen. eue vs this day out yle breade. And forgeue vs our trespasses, as we forgeue them that trespasse against vs. And leade vs not into temptation. But deliuer vs from al euyl. For thine is ye king∣dome, the power, and the glorie, for euer and euer, Amen. Would to God I had neuer sinned
nor offēded against my God, nor my  periors  against my neigh∣bours, nor my selfe: Lastlie I ge thbes  tha∣ghty God, for al his  ∣swed vpon west. And I commde my body and soule into thy , that my soule may he saued through the bitter passion of our Lord  Christ, to whom be prayse , & glory for euer and euer, Amen. ¶ Howe feareful and bytter corpo∣ral death is of it selfe, and the mu causes thereof, AS man naturallie desyreth to be in this worlde, to lyue, and to re∣ioyce: So is it also natural for him to feare death, and the paines & presy∣dents thereof. Vertuous and perfect men (not withstanding) are accusto∣med to wysh for death, wroch as it is the ende of the myseties and of∣fences of this present lyfe, & the entry like wise into the felicitie and ioye to
come. They do therfore couet death, whiche loue no vnwall thing in this lyfe, and despiseth and settethat nought al the vanities, pleasutes, ti∣ches, homours, & prosperities of this world, with a most dent affection aspyring to the most blessed syght of theyr God, whome aboue al other thinges they do with al their hartes entirely loue, and inwardlie burne with the hartie desyre of heauenlie pleasures & eternall wealth, saying with the prophet Dauid, As ye Hart desireth to come to the fountaines of fresh waters, so doth my soule desire thee, O Lord. My soule hath thirsted to come vnto God the lyuing foun∣taine. When shal I come & appeare before the face of God? And to ye same effect sayth Paule, I vnhappie man, who wyll deliuer me from the body of this death? That is to saye, from this mortal & miserable body. Also, I desyre to be dissolued, & to be with Christ. Neuerthelesse, though ye con∣sideration
of death of it self be a most bytter paine, and that the losse of lyfe to a humaine  is naturale fearfull and hor, insomuch that our Lord Iesus Christ (death appro∣chig) by natural eae of death, whi∣che he tooke willingly vpon him, be∣gan to feare, to ware weerie, and to be heauy. Such weae  of death is proable, for it withdraw∣eth man from cau detectatiō, and from the vanities of this worlde. He that wyl wisely consider howe paw∣ful an ende, howe bytter a death, and howe greeuous a sorow doth dayly approche vnto him (and peraduēture is presentlie at hande) hee wyll re∣frayne him selfe from dyssolute and vaine secutitie, from sportes, games, and laughters: Saying with Sa∣lomon, I haue accompted laughing for errour: And to myrthe I haue sayde, Why doest thou deceyne in vayne? And that they be so in deede, the wyse Salomon doth in another
place witnesse the same. Better it is (sayeth he) to ge into a sorrowfull house: then into a hōueting house. Ithoue (that is the sorowful house) man is admonished of thede of all men, & lyuing he thinketh vpon that which shall happen, and is to come. As the Scripture sayth: Blessed is he that is alwayes fearefull. And by this the olde Doctours Hierome and Augustine  wryte that Plato (that excellent and moste noble Phi∣losopher) dyd forgoe the delicate and beautifull Cittie of Athens▪ with tayne of his Schollers, choosing rather to dwell in an olde thinous Vyllage, beeing often with Earth∣quakes and Tempestes wel neare ouerturned so that by the frace of daungers and death, they myght in themselues mortifie the vicas of the fleshe, & withdraw themselues from concupiscence and all other vices. For so muche as the Gentyles haue done this, howe much more (I praye
you) ought Christians to withdraw themselues from delectations, by remembring the daungers of death? And that by this (the preme ditation of death) there might growe in vs such an healthful feare. The disposi∣tion of him that dyeth is to be consy∣dered, & to behold the present howre of the separation of the soule from ye fleshe, whereof man hath a naturall feare, for then man altogeather wax∣eth pale, his feete waxeth colde, his weake hands becommeth blacke, his countenaunce chaungeth colour, his eyes becommeth dimme, and sinketh in, and for intollerable pangues of paynes they are turned vpwarde. See how his hart waxeth faynt, his forehead shrinketh, all his members waxeth flyffe, his chinne falleth, his pulses chaungeth theyr course, & his breath gathering it self from the in∣nermost bowels doo altogether for∣sake the body. The paines of death do then appeare, & deadly pangues,
stinging with the mortal stinges the very harte, which fyrst of al begyn∣neth to lyue, and last of al doth dye. And last of al there commeth & brea∣keth foorth a dead sweate, shewing that Nature is ouercome. And thus being vanquished by griefe the soule is cast out from hir dwelling place. If we wyl consyder this disposition of them that dye, and do dilygentlie imagine, that the lyke wyl short: lie happen vnto our selues, there is no doubte but we wyll consider the healthfull feare of death.
¶ THE MANER howe to dye well. Written in Latin by Petrus de Soto. AL men must nedes dye, a punishment assigned vn∣to vs for that sinne of our fyrst parentes. Mortali∣tie (that is euitable death) is test & cast vpon vs, for that Adam and Eua did eate of the forbid∣den fruit, wherby they sinned against the Lord. And as sinne was first com¦mited, so death presently folowed. By syn they lost life, & gained death. For as by doing well they shoulde haue obteyned immortality to themselues & their posterity: so by doing the con∣trarie they haue gained death & mor∣tality to them & vs for euer, from the general sentence whereof none shal escape, lest that any one shoulde haue cause to exalt himself aboue another, if he might freely escape the same.
The certentie of death, and the vn∣certayne howre thereof. NOthing is more certayne then death, but the howre, the place, and maner thereof, none knoweth. For who is he that knoweth when, where, and after what sorte he must dye? whether he shal dye a good, or a shamefull death? whether hee shall ende his lyfe by sword, fire, or water, or by any other kynde of death? No not one truely. For death (more dili∣gent then our shadows) at al times and places continuallye geueth his attendance, laying for vs his trappe, thinking at euerye houre vnwarely to intrap vs therein. Who is then so foolish, as to assure himselfe to lyue but tyl night, of what age soeuer hee be of? For what other thing is our life, but the verye beaten pathe, and straight way to death? Hee therefore that is wise, loketh, & prepareth him selfe for death, and at al tymes and in al places is continually ready to dye.
For death is at the gates of old men, and lyeth in a readines to oppresse & ouertake yong men: the houre when the Lorde reserueth and keepeth to himselfe, to the ende that we beeing vncertayne when to dye, shoulde the rather prepare our selues to dy. And whylst we haue our perfect health & memorie, we ought to acknowledge our redeemer, to cal vpon him, beta∣king our selues altogether vnto his clemencie & great mercye. And in no wise to detract the time to the laste houre and extreme instant of death. For death most commonlie assaulteth and oppresseth those whom he seethe most vnwilling and the worst proui∣ded. And as death findeth the man, so man shall finde death. The perfect man dyeth in securitie and gladnes, the iust manful of hope, fayth, and as∣sured confidence, and the vniust dy∣eth in stare and desperation.
VVhy Iust men doe wishe for death. WE do continually walk amongst innumerable dangers, that is the dangerous snares of our aunciente enimie the diuel, the bloody swordes of the wicked, the intollerable gree∣fes, paynes, and labours of the body: The habitation or dwelling place of the body wherein we dwel is rui∣nous, the worldely sea wherein wee fayle is ful of stormes & dangerous wrackes, no earthly thing wherein wee can delight our selues lacketh great perils, and that wherein wee thinke we finde great felicitie, therin alwayes consisteth our most miserie and calamities. But yet our benigne Sauiour doth not without heauen∣ly prouidence appoynte & suffer, that this our mortal life shoulde be so re∣plenished and fylled with those so great calamities, paynes and perils: And also doth (according to his pro∣founde wisedome) prouidentlye or∣deyne
and appoynte them (I meane those temporal paynes which we do abide (to the ende that wee shoulde repent vs of our former sinnes, and amend our present lyfe, and diligent∣ly to care for the lyfe to come, and that we shoulde willingly contemne the worlde, and set at noughte this transitorie life, erecting and lifting vppe our mindes, soules, and hartes vnto the almightie God▪ earnestlye affecting the glorious & euerlasting life, with feruent desire from the bot∣tome of our hartes. Our forefathers which in times past tasted but verye litle of this glorious and heauenlye sweetnes, did yet abandon al earthly vanities, abhorred the delight of the world, despised and quite forgot this transitorie life, most painfully labou∣ring with al diligence to obteine the vnspeakeable pleasures of heauen, greedely thirsting for ye eternal blisse, saying with the Apostle▪ O wret∣ched man, who shal deliuer me from
this mortal body. My desire is to be dissolued, & to be with thee, O christ. for as the Harte desireth to come to the foūtains of fresh water, so doth my soule, O Lorde, desire to come to hee. Although death bringeth vnto vs suche and so many pleares, and that through it the soule is carried thither where it shal eauy liue: y we ought not to dte nor ar∣gue of ye rest of our life, which is pre∣slbed by God, neyther ought wer bee the causes or procre of our owne death. For as we  not hi∣ther by  owne appoynment: so ought we not to be h rs of ou ende, before the ime appoynted vnto v by god. Hereby I iudge him to be altogether forgetful of himselfe, and litle to regarde his owne state, that thinketh his time in this world to be but short, seeing it is sufent to liue a short time and smal age, so that we spende the same in dooing well. For what matter is it wheth one dye
yong or olde, for so much as the num∣ber of yeeres, nor length of tyme, do make neyther blessed nor vnblessed, happy nor vnhappy. And that by cō∣ming to death (the ende of al humain kinde) we shal aryue in a safe porte & quiet harborowe, free and safe from al the daūgerous stormes & trouble∣some broyles of this worlde. The death of the iust man. NOthing ought to be more wished for, then to be in the handes of God▪ wherein the Soules of the iust quietly rest. Theyr death is accep∣table to the Lorde, if a man maye ca that death, which is the greatest pleasure yt can happen to good men, for it is to them the ende of labour & care, the winning of victory, the way of lyfe, the entrie into perfect securi∣tie, and ioyning of the soule to God ye thiefest goodnes, which is of al other the greatest rewarde that men can haue. The departing of the iust man
from this lyfe, is the vyage and pas∣sage from trouble to rest, frō paynes to glory, from pouerty to a kingdom, from feare to securitie, from griefe to ioye, & from death to that lyfe, which onelie ought to be called lyfe. And to conclude, death is nought else vnto him but an escape from prisonment, a returne from banishment, a finish∣ing of labours, an arriual to the port of rest, an ending of pylgrimage, a lyghtning of his burden, a delyue∣raunce from a ruinous house, an en∣ding of euylles, an escape from daun∣gers, and paying to nature hir due∣tie, and entrye into his countrey of euerlasting ioye and glorie: By meanes where of that daye wherein the Saintes departe hence, and are receyued into Heauen, is commonlie called their natall daye, for that when they departe hence, then doo they begynne to lyfe, and by dying in this worlde, they enter into a bet∣ter.
The death of the euyll. THe death of a sinner is most wret∣ched of al euyls, for there by he lo∣seth the worlde, the greatest aspect & familyer felowship of his best belo∣ued: also by it ye soule is seuered from the body, & is condempned to abide ye affliction of Hell fyre. For the paines of one cōdemened soule is farre worse & greeuouser then al ye tormentes of al the holy Martirs, yea though they were al gathered in one. For ye sinner hath horror & feare at his departing, griefe & sorow in his iourney, shame and confusion in the sight of God the vpright iudge, & incredible terror, & dreade in departing from this lyfe, & entring into an vnknowen Region, wherein feareful spyrites & wycked Angels meete the soule, and pul it to eternal paines. The goodes of the wycked are di∣uided into three: Fyrst, his soule to the diuel: his body to the wormes: & his temporal goodes to his heyres,
which are cōmonly vngratefull, and too prodigal. The daungers of death. THe diuel doth with al his engines and snares seeke to intrap mans Soule at the very howre of death (if God of his speciall goodnesse assyste him not) tempting him fyrste of the verity of his faith, & persuading him to forgo the same, putting him in re∣membraunce of his cōmitted offēces, thinking with the greatnes of them to driue him into dispayre. And at ye same instaunt, cōmonly a pang more painful then tongue can tel assayleth him, which is, the separation of the soule from the body. That paine is so great, that as then he can remem∣ber nought els but the deadly pāges of death only. Therfore it is written, In death (O Lorde) none remembreth thee. And Saint Augustine sayth, The sinner is stricken with such animad∣uersity, that dying he forgetteth him selfe, who whylst he lyued remem∣bred
not God. Saint Barnarde also treating of the hoe of death, Cur∣sed spyrites (sth he) watcheth at my doores, and rrible diuels at∣tende my comming, so that I dare not goe forth. S lie I am not able to escape theyr haudes, vnlesse the Lorde defende me. But he who tedeemed me wyll defende and faue me. Howe we shoulde comfort those▪ that be in daunger of death. To the end that euery mannight learne the ryght waye howe to dye, I haue gathered together these. sewe lynes folowing out of dyuers good Authors. Three exhortations to the sicke. 1. Consider good Brother that all men, of what condition or degree soeuer they bee, must once dye, some sooner, & some later, according to the tyme appoynted them by God, to whom we are al subiect (to paye vn∣to Nature hir fees) whensoeuer his
omnipotencie shal thinke good, who hath appointed this worlde vnto vs as a bayting Inne, and not to be our continual dwelling place. There is no cause therefore why you should so much affect this transitory life, for by how much the lōger your life is pro∣longed, by so much y• more your syns are increased. And y• elder you grow in age, the more your offences are multiplied for euery day vice increa∣seth, and vertue decayeth. We ought therefore to be the more wylling to dye, for ye by flytting from this poore mortal life, we shal come to the euer∣lasting and blessed lyfe. 2. Acknowledge good brother most thankfully▪ Gods bountiful goodnes towardes thee, in that that hytherto of his vnspeakeable mercie he hath permitted thee to lyue, yea & for that at this present extremitie of death, his hyghnesse hath graunted thee thy perfect senses, reason, and vnder∣standing, whereby thou mayst ac∣knowledge
thy bounden duety vnto his heauenly Maiestie. And in that he hath not oppressed, not preuented thee with sodaine death: and for that also he hath of his merciful goodnes called thee vnto his true and vnfaig∣ned faith, through which by his help thou shall be brought to his euerla∣sting kingdome and eternal inheri∣taunce. For this and al other his in∣numerable benefites, geue vnto his highnesse most hartie thankes, and altogether betake thy selfe vnto his endles mercie, humblie crauing par∣don of him for thine offences. 3. Consider that God the Father hath geuen and yeelded his welbelo∣ued sonne, in whome he tooke great delyght, to be crucifyed and tormen∣ted with innumerable tribulations, tortures, and paynes, and to suffer most vyle & bitter death for vs most wretched sinners. Seeing therefore thou hast in this transitorie life com∣mytted & done innumerable synnes
and haynous offences, which deser∣ueth farre greeuouser and greater paynes and punishmentes then bee assigned vnto thee. Thou oughtest therfore patientlie to beare ye paines and panges of this thy deserued dis∣ease and death. Christ for thine offences most wil∣lynglie and patientlie suffred death, and the holy Martyrs and Apostles with al theyr minde moste wyllingly imbraced death for his names sake. Knowe thou therefore, that what maner of death soeuer thou suffrest, is muche lesse painefull then theyrs, for wyl thou, nyl thou, die thou must, therefore in the name of Christ good brother take it patiently. Questions to bee asked of him that lyeth sicke, by the Minister or any other godly person. 1 Wylte thou lyue and dye in the true fayth of Iesus Christe, as a true Christian? I wyl.
2 Wylt thou aske forgeuenes of him for all thine offēces cōmitted against his holy maiesty, & for that thou hast not worthily honoured him? I doo aske. 3 Hast thou not determyned with thy selfe to alter thy trade of lyfe into a better, if it shal please Gods good∣nes yt thou shalt escape this disease? I haue determined. 4 Dost thou not humblie craue and beseech him to graūt thee grace not to decline from this thy good intent, that thou mayest repentauntlye be∣wayle thy former faultes, and that thou mayst henceforwarde continue in al goodnes? I doo requyre. 5 Dost thou not hartely forgeue all offences committed against thee? I doo forgeue. 6 Wylt thou not earnestly aske for∣geuenes of al them whom thou hast in any wyse offended? I doo aske.
7 Doste thou not clearely caste out of thy hart al enuie, malice, & hatred, whatsoeuer thou bearest to any cre∣ature, and willingly be reconciled in perfect charitie to euery man? I am willing. 8 Wilt thou willingly restore what soeuer thou hast wrongfully taken or withholden from any man? I wyl. 9 Dost thou not paciently take in good woorth these paynes for the name of God? I doo. ¶ Prayers to be sayde at the howre of death. INto thy handes (O Lorde) I commende my soule, thou haste redeemed me, O Lorde God of trueth. Iesus Christe the Father of mer∣cy, make mee one of thy seruauntes, helpe mee in my extreme necessitie, Succour my needeful and desolate
soule, O Lord my god, that it be not deuoured by helhoundes. For the honour and vertue of thy bytter Passion, most mightie Lorde Iesus Christe, commaunde that my name may bee registred among the number of thine elect. O my Creator & redeemer Iesus Christe, I yeelde my selfe vnto thee, forsake me not, be holde I flye vnto thee, succor me, and reproue me not. O Lorde Iesus Christe the sonne of the liuing God, put thy Passion, Crosse and death, betwixt my soule and thy iudgement. Nowe, O Lorde, according vnto thy wyl haue mercy vppon mee, and commaunde that my soule be recey∣ued into thy peace. Let that sweete voyce, O Lorde, sound in the eares of my soule, This day thou shalt be with mee in Para∣dise.
The maner howe Howe to foresee that thinges goe rightly with anye when he dyeth. IF the sicke man doe wauer, stray, or doubt any thing of the veritie of his fayth, put him in remembraunce of the Apostles and holy Martyrs, which for the defence of this true fayth haue suffered all kindes of tormentes and paines. If hee be in dispayre, then tell him, that although his offences bee neuer so great and many, yet the goodnes of our mercyful Lord is much more, for his mercies do exceede the quan∣titie of all our effences, which hee of his goodnes offereth in common to euery man, lest hee himselfe doe wyl∣fully refuse the same: for his mercye is infinite and without number. Al the offences that euer were commit∣ted since the beginning of the worlde may be numbred, al which are clerly washed awaye with the least drop of the blood of our lord Iesus Christ,
which he shed at the time of his byt∣ter passion. Our Lorde God of his great clemencie was redy to cal vn∣to his mercy Iudas, the wickedst man that euer lyued, when he sayde vnto him, My freende. Yet for that he dyd dispayre, he was condemned, and so sinned more by falling into dispayre, then by betraying of his maister our Sauiour Iesus Christ, the immacu∣late Lambe, and onely begotten sonne of God the Father. And lastlye put in thy minde, that the forgiuenes of sinnes is an Article of our faith, by which is signified vnto vs, that how often and howe greeuous soeuer our offences are, yee by true repentance of our sinnes yet shal obteine true re∣mission for them: wherof, whosoeuer doubteth, he is no true Christian. If you see that hee do not pre∣sently yelde vp the Ghost, then reade to him the hystorie of the Passion, or some other good and Godly hy∣storie (wherein hee delighted most
when he was in health (or the com∣maundementes of God, to the ende that hee maye with more perfectnes repent him selfe, if hee haue oughte committed agaynst them, If for lacke of speache hee bee not able to aunswere with woordes, then let hym aunswere in mynde, and with outwarde signes expresse his conscience, for they are (through Gods mercye) sufficient to obteyne grace. Put him no wise in remembraunce of his wife, children, freends, or tem∣poral wealth, vnlesse it bee necessary for his spiritual health: Put him not in ouermuche hope of bodyly health, lest by that meanes he might withdraw his minde from the spirituall care that hee hath of his soule: For by the health of the soule hee shoulde seeke for the health of the bodye, onelye requiringe it at Gods hande, if his goodnesse shall thinke it most meete and beste for his
soule. For God is a furtherer of the pacient and wel disposed, and cor∣poral diseases bring for the moste parte langour and grefe to the soule. We should therefore first prouide for our soule, and repent vs of our sinnes, before we take any care of our bodi∣ly health. ¶ Heereafter followeth a breefe Dialogue touching the day of Iudgement. Betweene Raymundus, and Dominicus. I Haue (my Raymundus) all this long time since our laste com∣munication bene very desirous to knowe howe our mercyful Sa∣uiour Chryst wyl in thende rewarde euery man. Wherefore I praye you of your curtesie shew me somewhat touching this poynte. Raym: My
freende Dominicus, I graunte to thy request, for it is not conueniente that we leaue man (of whom hither∣to wee haue conferred) vnfinished. Seeing wee haue treated of hys creation, and seeing wee haue spo∣ken of hys reparation: wee wyll nowe talke somewhat touchinge his final iudgement. God worketh three wayes concerning man, that is to saye, in creation, reformation, and in iudging him moste iustlye ac∣cording to his workes. Seeing then man is the liuely and magnificente worke of God, and aboue al crea∣tures moste lyke vnto his Maker, he oughte not therefore to bee leste vnfinished and vnpertected. And for that he can not come to the verie laste ende of perfection before his life bee examined and iudged, that ac∣cording to the quality of it hee maye receyue rewarde at the last retribu∣tion, eyther to eternal payne, or to e∣uerlasting glory. Therefore it is ne∣cessary
to conferre in few wordes, of this last and general iudgement, and by certaine natural reasons to shew taa is to come. Domi. I beseech you so to do, for I am determined with al my hart to heare you. Raym. We wil proue that the iudgemēt is to come, by the very nature of ioy & gladnesse them selues. It must needes be, that the iust manne for his iustice shal so magnifycently reioyce, that he can∣not reioyce more perfectly. And that the wickedman for his iniquitie be cast into heauinesse, as there may be noreater. And that this may be do, the general iudgement must of  sh be pronoūced, wherin good men may receiue al gladnesse and be praised of all men: and Reprobates condemned of all men, maye receiue eternall heauinesse. There are but two things iudicable, that is, a good life, and an euill life. And for that contrary things being put together, each of them geueth better light to
the other. Therfore the general sub∣ment is to come, wherin the good in comparison of the euil, shal most glo∣crously shine. And the euil in compa∣rison of the good, shal be contamina∣ted with vtter confusiō. Domi. This which you say is terrible, and ought to moue the hartes of wicked men. But is this the last retribution of al, or shall this be done to the soule of man onelye, or vnto it altoge alther with the flesh. The general iudgement of the dead re∣quireth an vniuersall resurrection. RAym. I haue saide in the fomer Chapter, that the generall iudge∣ment appertaineth to mankind, and to humaine nature belongeth both a body & soule. For as there is a cor∣porall nature and a spiritual nature distinetly: so there is a corporall and a spirituall nature vnited. And for that this nature is both iuditable & rewardable: it is therfore necessary that it be iudged both in bodye and
soule. And yt this may be done, there must be a resurrection of al bodies, ye as the foule with ye body, & in the bo∣dy, hath eyther sinned or done iustly: so it may like wise with the body re∣ceiue that that is adioyned vnto it. And because that this last iudgemēt is the fynal retribution of all bodies, there must therfore be a generall re∣surrection of all the deade, and the vniuersall iudgement and the resur∣rection of ye dead are inseperably lin∣ked together in one chaine. Moreo∣uer, the resurrection of the deade is necessary for the accomplishment of al. The very children which of them selues haue not offended, for the ac∣complyshment of all, must needes rise with others. Furthermore, eyther none, or all shall ryse againe: But Christ ve∣ry man already from death hath ry∣sen: Therefore all men shall ryse a∣gayne. For resurrection is incident to humaine nature. Neyther is it
impossible to do that thing which is once done. As a graine of come fal∣ling into the earth, being dead and growing againe, bryngeth fruicte manyfolde: So Christ beeing dead and rysen agayne, worketh an in∣merable resurrection of bodies. As that resurrection was not wrought in Christ by vertue of hu∣manity: so neither shal it be wrought in vs, out by power diuine. The vn∣faithfull men thinke that God is not able to raise vp liuing fleshe out of dead consumed ashes. As God was able to bring foorth innumerable kindes of thinges out of the earth at one: so may hee now easilye rayse a∣gaine the same bodies which alrea∣dy hath bene, out of their own ashes. As the iustice of God requireth the same, so the maiesty of his vertue is able to do the same. Moreouer, seing God was able to make so many bo∣dies which were not at all, is he not like wise able to repaire the bodies
which are perished? Furthermore, if God hath with his mightys hande made some incorruptible: bodies whefore then should he not be able to repaire our corporall bodies, and to make the iortal? I think I shal greatly further thee, if I can by reason of the power and honour of God, proue the geuerall iudgement to come. For seeing that God of his owne free will, without the request or compulsiō of any hath created humaine nature, when there was none: and seeing the finall re∣tribution is a worke to ye honor one∣ly of God, proceding from himselfe, & whatsoeuer God worketh of him∣self: he worketh the same to his on honor, and  use the iudgement of this small retribution is the last and perfect worke of God touching man∣kinde: God wil openly wke therin, by manifesting the great power and honor of his wisedome, & of his iust∣ice. His power shal appeare in ye rai∣sing
of many bodies, his wisedome in examining of consciences, and his iustice in bestowing rewards. This iudgement requireth an vprightnes to be shewed in the Iudge, authority of excellent maiesty in his irreuoca∣ble sentences, and fulnesse of iustice & goodnesse in bestowing of gifts, or of punishmentes. Seeing also this Iudgement is of great honor & ma∣iesty, it is requisite that it be done wt great solemnity and magnifycence, ye Thrones and powers geing theyr attendaunce. It becommeth such a Iudge to vse inye maiesty: and it behoueth this Iudical power, that God do appeare and shewe him selfe to al , a dreadful threatning,  fearful Iudge, and that h orth this terror according to his eerent Maiesty. All safety wylbe thfor the iust, and yet they will receiue him with great vene∣ration and reuerence, in beholding his most excellēt Mansty, his wise∣dome,
vertue, and dignity. As this worke of iudgement is the last of all workes: so likewise the same will he aboue all his handye, workes, most pure, most excellent, most solemne, and most honorable. Domi. But who is he that shall be the Iudge of all? I knowe it is God, but is it God verye man, that shal be both Iudge and rewar∣der, which fyrst was the repayrer of all? Raym. Euen the same Iesus Christ the onely Sonne of God, to whome the Father hath geuen all Iudgement, for that he is the Son of man, he shall iudge man, seeing he is man, the repayrer & redemer of man. ❧ Of the excellencie of this day aboue all other dayes. I Wyl say some what of the mag∣nificency of the last day. In this day the workes of all the dayes before shall be gathered togeather, and shall receiue their rewarde. In this day God wil worke more mag∣neficiently
then he hath wrought in other dayes, as in aysing the be dead, and aing hem inoran, and in rewarding ther h eternall re∣wards. In this day God worketh, & in the other daies men haue wrou∣ght al their works: In this day God will shew the workes of his power, will doe, iice, eritie and good∣nesse, compleeting all his workes in most hiest renowne glory & honor. This day wil be the day of feare,  r∣buions, & dread vnto the wicked, but a day of ioy & glory vnto the iust and goodman. This day ought to be alwaies in our remembraunce. And we ought to direct the workes of all our daies vnto this day, and to geue our selues so far forth as we may vnto iustice & vertue, least at ye day before so great a Iudge, and in the light and meeting of all men and Angelles, we be confounded. Where as there is no memorye of this day, there remaineth incōstancie, malice,
and al wicked and peruerse workes. And because that this most magni∣ficent Iudge cannot erre, neither be corrupted nor deceaued, for that he searcheth the reines and harts of all men, who seeth althinges & neglec∣teth nothing Therfore remembring these things alwaies, & putting this day before our eyes, we ought to do that which is good. Raim. We haue gathered out of yt which you haue saide, that there shalbe a perpetual seperation of the good and the euil, thone frō thother. Those which haue takē themselues to Lucifer. his wic∣ked will, makings themselues his members, shalbe wt him condemned to euerlasting fyre. And those which haue folowed Christ our lord, shalbe wt him takē vp to euerlasting glory. The reprobates shalbe plunged in a moste deepe bottomlesse pitte: and the chosen shalbe lifted vp to ye high∣est heauen. They shalbe geuen to the fyre, and those to pleasures. They
shall haue deuils to their fellowes, & these shalbe accompanied with An∣gels. They for extreme tribulation shall ace, & these for the greatnes of their ioyes shal geue harty thāks. A most thicke and eternall darkenes shalbe alwaies cast vpon them, & to these God shalbe an euerlastinge light, & the lambe shalbe their light. Now you haue that which you re∣quired. Gather therefore by these the full and last finishing of man: for if he be adiudged good, the best of all shalbe allotted vnto him, that is, to be with Angels in ye kingdom of hea∣uen: But if he be adiudged euil: then shal he continually possesse the worst place of all with the deuils in Hel. Dom. Nowe, seeing that I am come to thende of all these thinges which I sought for, and to the very last re∣tribution, I geue you moste hartye thankes, for that you haue vouched∣safe to graunt to my requeste, and for your laboure and industry, whereby
you haue most effectually instructed me, duringe my lyfe, I wil alwayes remēber this most wholsom instruc∣tions, remembringe my selfe to bee made by my redeemer, and farre ex∣alted aboue other creatures. And I being through mine owne pride and disobedience, slidden and falne down & with a thousand other calamities intercepted, am redeemed & restored againe by Christ hauing compassion vpon me, and by him reserued to re∣ceyue eternall rewarde. FINIS. The thirde thinge worthy to be remembred is, the payns of hel. CHriste hath his fan in his hand, & he vle his barn flower, and gather his wheat corne in∣to the same: and  burne the chaffe with vnquenchable fyre. By the fanne of our Lorde Iesus Christ, is vnderstoode his iudiciall power and iust iudgement. And by this Barne flower is vnderstoode
the Churche, or humaine kinde: By the Wheate is signified his elete: By the Chae the reprobates: & by the Bae is vnderstoode the kings dome relestiall. The sence of these wordes is, that as by the Fame the corne is made cleane, & as the chast, is women away, & the corne left? so the son of God wil purge his church, wherein (amongest the chosen & the iust) the reprobates, and wickedare mingled: but in the day of iudgemēt they shalbe seuered one frō another, in place & rewards, as now they dif∣fer in conuersatiō. The vngodly are rightly called the chaff, because they are vaine & light & follow the conti∣ons of their mindes. The vertuous are compared to the wheat, for they are ye fruite of Christ, borne in ye field of ye Church, yt is, regenerate of wa∣ter and the holy ghost spiritually, li∣uing in charitye, bdet with diuine grace & heauenlye giftes. They are transferred from ye barn flower of ye
Church militant vnto ye barne of the triumphant church. And the wicked being the childrē of Babilon (which is of confusiō) they are hurled head∣long into a fornace of burning fyre, and eternall damnation. And for yt hetherto we haue trea∣ted of death & iudgement, I mene to set forth a sdowe of the paynes of hel, whereby the heauēly Ierusalem maye appence the excellenter. ¶ Of Hell. WHoe is able to expresse the tor∣mentes appointed for the vn∣godly and euill liuers, in that deadly place called Hel? What other thinge can be there but continual flames of fyre, eternal tribulatiō, & infinite ca∣lamities of al euils? Burning flouds that run from stinking fens fil vp all places therein. There dwelleth wic∣ked and vglye Angels, headed and winged like dragons, with flaming eyes, casting of fierye dartes, whose teeth are more long & sharpe thē the
Elephants, wherwithal they pinch, gnaw, and torment, more greeuous thē doeth the Dragons taile, whose lookes bringeth sodaine feare, gree∣uous paynes, and feareful death. Oh, I woulde to God that death might ende these painefull extremi∣ties. But alas, se yet another torture greuouser then this: The soule shal stil liue, & he alwayes vnder the rule & gouernance of cruel tormentors: And further, beinge gnawen with Serpentes, changinge their holdes, they do with new bitinges a freshe from time to time torment and tears ye soule in peeces. Dragons shal ther deuoure the lips of the blasphemers, & the Cockatrice with greedy teeth shal sunder & teare in peeces ye bow∣els of the wicked. Al kinde of horri∣ble beastes wil there torment wtout ceassing, the soules of ye misbeleues. Howling & be wailing, lamentation & rearing do ther continually sound, fearful scriches, and confused cries
are there in al places sodenly raysed. Which crye is procured by the cruel force of tortures, and is thruste forth by the strength of burninge flames. The same tribulations whervnto ye soules are receued be without al end and measure. For the soules are con∣tinually consumed with the broiling heate of fierye flames, and beeing throughly burned, are againe and a∣gaine tormented in new kindled fy∣res. There are wormes that neuer dye, fire that neuer quencheth, and continuall gnashing of teeth. There is in hell deadly colde, conti∣nual Ise, cruel hunger, vnme asura∣ble thirste, perpetual sorowe, raging pestilence, vnceassable punishments, continual darkenesse, and nightes of horrible obscurenes. The miserable soule findeth there no rest, but is tor∣mented with al kinde of tormentes. There is mortall death, defectiue lacke, & endlesse ende. What faythful man can then but tremble to heare
and knowe of such paynes. Deliuer vs we beseeche thee good Lorde from that lake of miserie. ob∣scure place, and darke world couered with the deadlye cloude of death, wher no order is obserued, but an e∣uerlastinge horronre, Stir vp oure hartes, moste merciful God, vnto ye true fruites of repentance. We hum∣blye beseeche thy Maiesty, to deliuer vs from these eternal paines. See here, how great, how in com∣parable, how vnmeasurable, & how perpetual, the miseries, paines & in∣felicities of the condemned are. He which wil not be terrified by these descriptions is blind & hard harted, neither hath he anye spiritual sence, but is rather altogether deade: Let him notwithstandinge looke aboute him, and rise from the depth of his sinne, lifting vp the eyes of his hart, to consider these thinges. And euerye man which as yet de∣lighteth in sinne, let him impresse the
consideration of these thinges in his minde, that at the least, by the horror of them, hee maye bee withdrawen from vice, and directed to vertue. He also which already hath begun to enter into the way of vertue, let him by the due consideration of these thinges cast off all vnstablenesse and vnbeliefe. And let al true beleeue us cast out and vomite foorth with hor∣ror and hatefulnes, all the delectati∣ons of the fleshe, and vanties of the world, through which they come to so great calamities in hell. FINIS. ¶ Hereafter followeth cer∣tayne meditations of the Heauenlye kingdome or the ioyes of Heauen. WE oughte so to liue in this worlde, that when our bodies beginne to become subiectes to wormes in the Sepulture, then our soules should beginne to be glad with Saintes in
heauen, directing of spyrites thither whither it continually aspyreth. We ought to hasten our selues thither, where wee shall alwayes lyue, and where we shalle are death no more. If we do any thing at al affect this vding and transitory life, which at no time is void of cares and labors: and that by eating, drinking, slee∣ping, or any other recreation, scarce can we at any time satisly the neces∣sity of the flesh. By how much the more ought we to desyre and wishe for eternal life, wherein we shal abide nor suffer no lobor or payne, where there is con∣tinual health, eternal felicity, hap∣py lyberty and perfect blysse, where men shalbe like vnto the Angels of God, and iust men shal shine as the Sun, in the kingdom of their father. How thinkest thou then? of what brightnes wil the soule be, when the body shal possesse the light of ye Sun? In that place there is no heauinesse,
no sorrow, no griefe, no feare no la∣bor, no death, but a perpetual health and euerlasting blisse. In which eternal kingdome, there is no malice nor misery of the fleshe, no disease, no lack, no hūger, no thrist no colde nor heate, no weries of fas∣ting nor temptation of the enemy, no will to sinne, nor power to do euyl, but a quiet harborough of pleasur & crumph, where men in the society of Angels shal continually dwel with∣out any infyrmity of the flesh. There is infinite ioy, eternal blisse, from whence none shalbe remoued that once can enter therein. Ther is the rest from labours, peace frō the enemy, a new kinde of pleasure, a se∣curitie of eternity, taking a meruai∣ldus delite and exceeding plesure, in the beholding of God. Who is he thē that wil not seeke and desyre by all means possible to be a dweller there both for the desire of peace, ioye, and eternity, & for ye perfect sight of god?
The desire the soule hath to the Heauenly iudgement. O Spirituall Hierusalem the holye citie of God, happy wer my soule, if I might obteine to behold thy glo∣rie, thy gates, thy wale thy streetes, thy innumerable habitations, thy most noble citizens, and thy omni∣potent king, in his maiesty & glory. For thy walles are made of preti∣ous stones, thy gates of excellent margarites, thy stretes of most pure golde, wherein that sweete song Al∣leluy a is incessantly songe. Thy ma∣nifolde mansions are founded vpon square stones, and builded with S∣phyres, couered with golden Tiles, wherin no wicked man entreth, nor sinner dwelleth. O heauenly Hieru∣salem, thou art sweete & bewtiful in al thy peasures and delights. There are no such miseries in thee, as wee feele, abid & suffer in this poore & mi∣serable life. Ther is in thee no dark∣nes, no night, nor chaunge of time. The shining of ye Moon, the twink∣ling
brightnesse of the stars geueth not light in thee, but only the God of God, the light of light, and the Sun of iustice geueth light in thee. The white & inunaculate Lambe, a most beutiful light is thy light: thy right¦nes & goodnes is an endles contem∣plation and beholding of thy moste ewtiful king? The king of ngs is in the middest of thee, inu on ech  with his beloued h. In thee are legions of Angels sging of sweete ies, in thee are ye felow¦ship of heauenly Citizens, there rest∣eth the sweete solēnity of al such as returne from this miserable pilgri∣mage vnto thy glory, ye prouident cō∣pany of the prophetes dwel in thee, there are ye whole nūbet of ye twelue Apostles, and there is the victorious army of innumerable martirs, there are true, perfect & holy men and wo∣men, which haue vanquished ye plea∣sures of ye world, and the infirmity of the flesh. Ther are yong childrē and
maidēs which haue passed ouer their yeres in holines of life, ther are they that haue escaped ye snares & nets of pleasure and sensuality: Euerye one reioiceth in his degree, though not e¦qual in glorye, yet lyke in ioyes and gladnes: For there reigneth perfect charity; and God is al in al, whom without d they  cōtinually, and stil in  olding him theyr loue incre¦seth, they loue & prise him al theyr wor to the prayse of God with∣out ende intermission, or labour. Happye were I, yea, most happye, if I could obteine after my departure from this life, to beare ye song of hea∣uenly melody, which is song by these heuēly Citizens, & happy companies of blessed spirites in the laud & praise of the eternal king. Most fortunate and blessed wer I, if I my selfe could come to sing that sweete song, and to stand neere my kinge, my God and captain, & to behold him in his glory and maiesty, as he himself hath vou∣chedsafe
to promise, saying: father I wil that those which thou hast geuē me, be with me, ye they may see that excellēt purenes yt I haue with thee, before the constitution of the world. Let him who ministreth vnto me, fol¦lowe me, & where I am he shly seruāt be. And again: e that loueth me, is beloued of my father, & Iil loue him, and shew my self vnto him. Howe plentifull of al goodnes, and how spare of all euill, the hea∣uenly Hierusalem is. O My soule, let vs returne vnto the heauenly citie, wherin we are re∣gistred & appointed to be dwellers, as the felowes of Saints, and hous∣holde seruances of our Lord, heires of God, and coheires with Christe our Sauiour. Let vs consider so far as possible we can, of these licitye of that holy Citie, saying with the pro∣phete, O what glorious thinges are sayde of thee (O thou Citie of God) for thou art the habitacle of al those
that reioice and be glad. For ye art fil∣led with ioye. There is no olde age, nor miserye of age in thee. There is none maimed, lame, crookebact, nor deformed in thee, for in thee al men grow to ful strength and perfectnes, yea, vnto the very yeres of our Saui or Christ. What life is happier then that life, where there is no feare of pouerty, nor weakenesse by desease. Ther is no anger, hurt nor enuy, no couetousnes nor ambitious aspiring to honor, nor power, pricketh ye mind of any that dwel in that holy Citie. The feare of the deuil & his daūgers, and the terror of hel is far absent frō thee. The death neither of body nor soule is feared in thee: but a pleasant life rewarded with inortalitye. Ther wil be then no euil; peace shal∣be there proclaymed in euery place, and al discorde shalbe quyte forgot∣ten: for the concorde of the holye Saintes is one. Althinges shalbe repie at with peace and gladnes, trā∣quilitie,
rest, and a continual excel∣lent brightnes, farre vnlike to this whiche nowe we see: Adn by howe much the better ech one liued in this world, he shal in that world be by so much the more the cleerer. For it is read, that that Citie needeth not the light of the Sun nor of the Moone, for there the Lambe is their lampe, and the omnipotent Lorde geueth them light. There Saintes dosh me like Starres in perpetual eternitie, as the purenesse of the heauens that geueth light to many. Wherfore, ther is no night nor dark∣nes, there is no contracy meeting of clowdes, no extremity of coulde nor heat, but a wonderful temperatenes of al things, which no eie can see, no eare cā heare, nor heart imagine, sa∣uing only those who enioy the same, whose names are writtē in ye booke of life. And yt which excelleth this, is the felowship of Angels, Archāgels, and al the vertues of heauen. To be∣hold
the Apostles, Martirs and pro∣phetes, and to see our forefathers, al these are glorious. But, to behold ye perfect countenaunce of God and to see his incomprehensible lighte, is a far excellenter glorie. For when we shall see God in himself, then shal we see & haue in our selues that which continuallye without ende we shall contemplate and beholde. ¶ A supposed description of the hea∣uenly Hierusalem. O Beloued countrey, O heuenly ci∣tie, what can be sufficiently writ∣tē or beleued of thee, for that in thēe is that goodnes, ioy and solace, that eyes see not, that eares here not, nor minde of man can so-muche as once coniecture, for which so many Legi∣ons of Martirs haue moste willing∣ly suffered death. Thy gates do glis∣ter with chosē stones most precious, thy streetes are paued with burni∣shed golde, thy walles are made of most precious stones, in thee are in∣estimable
pleasāt gardens, alwaies greener then the fields of Thessalie, wherin fresh flowres, & dainty vio∣let do continually bud & grow. In thee vnspeakeable sweete odours of Cinamon & Balme do alwaies ple∣santly breath and smel. The beautie of althings do increase in thee with∣out lake, remaine without fading, abide without corruptiō, & without chaunge do eternally continue. In thee is al temperatenes & purenes of ayre, farre exceeding the capacitie of mā. In thee peace & rest surpas∣sng measure. In thee is euerlasting day, & one spirit of althings. In thee is certain assurance, assured eternity eternal quietnes quiet happines, hap¦py pleasure, & pleasaunt mirth. Iust men do shine in thee as the sun. No∣thing can be wished, loued or sought for, but it is in thee to be founde, & in thee one lye is conteined yt which no wher els can be had. O what glad∣nes wtout offence, what flouds of sin∣cere plesure, wt bottomles plesure of
sweete delectatiō is it, to behold the God of Gods in Sion, to looke vpon the incōprehensible glory of the holy trinity, & to taste of ye perfect sweece∣nes, from which cōmeth al goodnes to humaine kinde? What a pleasure is it to behold the maiestly of God, to be in ye perpetual company of ye bles∣sed troupes of Angels, with ye sancti∣fied Apostles and Martirs, with holy and blessed virgins, to know al the Citizens of heauen, and alwaye to reioyce in eternal felicitie? O my soule, loue this blessed palace, and in¦wardly affect the same, which with fleshly eyes cannot be seene, but one∣ly with the eies of thy faith. Beleeue that which thou seest not, to the ende that thou maiest sometime obteine that which thou beleeuest. ❧ Of the perfect and absolute ioy of eternall lyfe. MY God, my Lord, my heartes de∣lyght, tel vnto my soule, if this be the ioy that thou hast spoken of vnto
vs by thy sonne. For yu saidest: Aske, & you shal haue, to the ende that your ioies may be perfect. I haue found a certaine kinde of ioy, yea, more then perfect: & yet, although man hath a perfect hart, a perfect mind, a perfect soule, and that man is al replenished with ioy. There resteth yet another ioy, that aboue measure passeth this, for al ioyes: cannot be contemed in him that reioyseth, but al those that reioyce, shal emer in the ioye of our Lord. (But truely that ioy, wherein thine elect reioyce, cannot bee seene, heard, nor be cōpassed within the ca∣pacity of man.) Therfore, O Lord, in al these my sayinges, I haue not so much as once thought vpō any part of the ioyes of thine elect. They shal in al places so much reioyce as they loued thee: and so much loue thee, as they acknowledge thee their Lorde. No eie cā see, no toung cā tel, no eare can heare, nor hart can think (in this life) how much they acknowledge &
loue thee in the life to come. I besech thee O Lord, yt I may loue thee & re∣ioyce in thee. And though I cannot come to that perfectne in this lyfe, yet graunt, that I may from day to day so increase therein, that I maye after this life, come to the ful perfect¦nes thereof. Let me so profite in this knowledge, that in time to come I maye be perfectly instructed therin. Let thy loue good Lord, so increase & grow in me that I may be therin perfectly groūded in the life to come. Graunt, I beseech thee, yt I maye so reioyce in hope, as that I maye per∣fectly reioice in ioy after this world. O true & euerliuing God, graunt, I beseeche thee, yt I may receaue that which thou hast promise dme, that is that my ioye maye be perfecte in the world of worlds, & that in the meane time, my minde may remēber ye same my tongue may speak therof, my hart may loue it, & yt my mouth may talk thereof. Let my soule hunger for it,
my flesh desyre it, and all my bodilye substaunce feruentlye require it, tyl such time as I do enter into the ioies of my Lord my God, where I shal remaine for euer. A prayer whereby thou maiest be stirred vp vnto the desire of heauenly thinges. O My God, O the sweete life of my soule, O my true health, O my sal¦uation, O my onely, eternal, vnchan∣geable, and chiefest goodnes, what other thing besydes thee ought I to looke or aske fore What, haue I not al thinges, if I do possesse thee, who hast created al things? There is no∣thing of anye estimation, but onelye such thinges as thou hast made. Be∣holde the bewty of the Aungels, of blessed soules, of mortal bodies, of brutish beastes, the brightnes of the heauens, Statees, Sunne, Fyre, and Ayre, the Sea, Earth, Planets, the flowers, precious stones, metals and colours, sweetenes of al soundes
and odours, and the delicate taste of al sweete thinges proceedeth onely frō thee, O Lord. Whatsoeuer grace of comlines, plesātnes, sinenes, sweet¦nes, vertue, dignity, or ritches, consi∣steth in any creature, the same pro∣ceedeth from thee, O God, and al thinges aboundantly flowe in thee without any lacke. Thou art the chiefest bewty, ye chie∣fest pleasure, & chiefest desyre. Thou most abūdantly dost conteine in thee al bewty, goodnesse and pleasure al∣waies greene & florishing, & al good∣nes is far more excellent in thee, thē mē may see or proue in any of thy cre¦atures. O Creator most excellent, yu art ye pleasure of althings, thou art the abundantfulnes of perfect ioy, & the vnmesurable sea of holy delights & pleasures, thou art yt light of incre∣dible cleerenes & passing brightnes, O be wtiful, eternal, & incomprehen∣lible light. That which they do see, heare, taste, smell, or feele, which are
inwardly ioyned vnto thee, through exceeding pucenesse of hear (whst they yet remain in this present ) can with no ouing be expressed. The louing imbracementes, the daintye kisses of the moth, wherwith she appeaseth the weepg of her tont childe, no, nor the we wordes  pleasant countennce of the hsba towares hi loui wise, are  shadowes and  vaue in respet and conde  f the sweete im∣braemtes, wherewith thou, O Lorde, dost ae  of thse that oue thee. But if poore banished men can be so blessed and happy, and that they can see such inexplicable & incomparable goodnesse, whoe see thee but in a darke, had owed glasse: how much more happyer then ought we to iudge of thy holy citizens who see thee face to face, from whom flow¦eth riuers of pleasure more sweeter then honey, who are perfectly vnited vnto thee, drowned in a bottomelesse
of ternal delightes. Those thy lbeloed dldren doo nowe most nifestly knowe and in the se lues diaisest lyefe ele howe muche (O meciful father) thou dost fauur and u them: and from the be giuning haste lod them. Thou, O Lorde, rofie willingly, sinnerest and belpest ema Tudighten al menne moste pleasaunlye with the light of thy brigh tes. Thou dost comial∣ly moste same y and offe ally, talke in thefeoreete ho we of euery man. Thddest drawe the etes and  of al men vnto thee with an inmorehensible sweet mes and feruert affetion of charitye. Thou dost qualify, gladden; refreshe, and fatissye, with a delicate desyrf enioying thy companye, the he artes and willes of all men. And to saye al, O eternal God, thou art all in al, in that moste holy Citie of newe Hie∣rusalem. That is the happy day, and the singuler day, the onely true daie,
whereof thou, O Lorde Iesus, haste thus spoken vnto thy disciples. (In that day you shal knowe that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you.) O daye so much wished for, with most harty desire, wherein the holy soules shalbe vnited vnto thee, O God, and shalbe inspyred with a meruailous light of wisedome, and transformed into the brightnes of e∣ternal glory. O Iesus, graunt, I be∣seeche thee, that so longe as I am in the darkenesse of this perigrination, that the eyes of my minde maye be∣holde and contemplate the most shi∣ning light and brightnesse of thee, O God, and that I may alwaies please thee my Lord and God. Man wisheth for tribulations of this worlde, to the ende, that he may the more earnestly desire the kingdome of heauen. O My soule, if wee must euery daye suffer torments, yea, and a longe
time abyde the vexations of this worlde, to the ende that wee myght see Christ in his glory, and be ioyned in the felowship of his Saintes? Is it not conuenient that we should pa∣cientlye suffer al kynde of paines, to thende that we myght be partakers of so great goodnesse and glory? Let wicked spirites prepare theyr snares and temptations, let sickenesse wea∣ken the bodye, let apparel trouble the fleshe, lette laboures oppresse it, lette longe wakinges fore watche it, let this manne exclaime against me, let that manne disturbe me, let colde benumme me, let heate burne me, let my conscience prycke me, let the head ake, let the heart broyle, let the sto∣mack be ouercome with superfluous humors, let the visage waxe pale and wanne, let al the body be weakned, let my lyfe be ended in sorowe, let my yeres be consumed in sighes, let cor∣ruption enter into my bones, and let my bowels gushe out vnder me:
What care I though al these come to passe, so that I may in thende and day of trybulation, come to reste, and ascende into the felowshippe of those that are already preferred vnto glo∣ry. How great wil the glorye of the iust be, what exceeding gladuesse wil be amongst them, when theyr faces shal shine as the Sunne, and the Lorde in the kingdome of his father beginneth to place his people, eache one in his degree, and rewardeth e∣uerye one according to his merytes, geuyng them in steede of carthly thinges, heauenly goodnesse: for tem∣poral thinges, eternal rewards: and for smal things, great & ample gifts. Truely, it wyl be a heape of felicity, when the Lord shal lead his Saints into the glory of his father, and cause them to sit in celestial seates, where God is al in al. O what a pleasaunt happines is it to see the Saintes, to be with Saintes, and to be Saintes our selues, to see God, and to enioye
God him selfe for euer and euer. Let vs therefore thinke vpon these thinges with al our heartes, affecte them with feruent desyre, that wee may be the better able with speede to come to them. If thou my soule per∣aduenture wilt aske, by what helpe, or by whose merites maye this be done? Christ yelded himselfe to death, to the ende to winne thee vnto the kingdome of God his father, Yelde thy selfe therfore vnto him, that ther∣by thou maiest bee of his kingdome. And let not synne haue dominion, nor reigne ouer thy mortal body, but let the soule be occupied in searching for euerlasting life. ¶ A prayer that we shoulde repose our selues in God aboue all thinges. O Iesus, graunt, I beseeche thee, that I maye rest and repose my self in thee before any creature, before al glory, honour, power, dignitie, and consolation, ouer and aboue al hope
and promise, yea, and aboue all the Angels, Archangels, and about all the hoste of heauen, aboue al thinges visible and inuisible, and chiefy, for that thou art my God, yea, thou at ne onely God, excelling al other thinges. For thou at the highest, the moste mightie, thou onely art the ful∣lest and pectest. O when shall it be fullye gted vnto me, that I shal forsake my selfe, and see howe sweete and pleasantly thou art, O Lord my God. O Iesu, the brightnes of eter∣nal glory, the comfort of the wande∣ringe soule, my mouthe is bent to∣wards thee without speaking, and silence speaketh vnto thee. How long wyl my Lord my God withdrawe himselfe from commings vnto thee come vnto me thy seruant, comforte me O Lorde: thrust foorth  ∣pinge hande, O God, and del me thy seruaunte from these troubles. Come, come, for without thee there can be o restful day, nor quiet houre,
Thou art my ioye, and without thee I am vnfurnished. Beholde a poore wretche howe. I am imprysoned, and my selfe loaden with Gyues, tyl thou deliuer mee, and refresh mee with the light of thy presence. Thou∣ghe others searche thee at leysure whensoeuer it shal please them: Yet continuallye nothing shall please mee but thou my Lorde and GOD, my hope and eternal health. Blessed he thou, O Lords, which haste done this goodnesse vnto thy seruaunt ac∣cording to the multitude of thy mer∣cye. What can thy seruant saye more vnto thee, O Lord, but humble him∣selfe in thy sight, & be alwayes mind∣ful of his iniquitye and vnwoorthy∣nes? For in al the wonderful thinges of heauen and earth, there is none like vnto thee. Thy workes are excel¦lent, thy iudgementes are vpright, & by thy prouidence al thinges are go∣uerned. O father of wisedome, laude and praise be vnto thee. My mouth,
my soule, and al my powers shall prayse thee without ceassing. ¶ The soule feruently wisheth to be in the house of the Lorde. O Moste bright and bewtifull house of the Lord, I am delyghted with thy comelinesse, the habitation of the glory of my Lord, ye owner and buil∣der of thee. Al my wandring perigri∣nation tendeth towardes thee, both night and daye, my heart coueteth to come vnto thee, my mynde is fullye bent towardes thee, my soule doeth feruently desire to come into thy bles∣sed company. I speake this vnto him who made mee, and possesseth me in thee: for he created both thee and me. I do not aske thy companye and the syght of thy wonderful purenesse, through mine own merites, but tho∣rough the bloud of him that hath re∣deemed mee, whereof. I doe not dis∣payre. I haue erred (I confesse) like a straied sheepe, and my dwelling is
prolonged. I am caste from the face of thee, O Lorde, in blyndnes of exile, wherin I am expulsed from the ioies of Paradise. I doo with sorrowfull verse and vnmesurable lamentati∣ons, daily bewaile the miseries of y captiuitie, when I doo call thee to re∣membraunce, O spirituall Hierusa∣lem, and whilest my feete stande in the excellent and beautiful Sion, not yet able openlye to see the innermost partes of thee: but yet I hope to be caried into thee vpō the shoulders of my Redeemer, the verye builder of thee, that I maye reioyce with thee in that venerable glory, wherin they delight that are with thee in the pre∣sence of God him selfe our redeemer, who hath dissolued al enmitye that was betweene God and man with his owne fleshe, and hath with his precious bloud pacifyed al thinges in heauen and earth. He is our peace, who hath made al things alone, who ioyning two walles in one in him
selfe which before were disagreeing, euerlastingly to continue in the fe∣licitie of his blessednesse. The same thinge hath hee promised vnto vs, saying. They shall be equall with the Angels of God in Heauen. Let me reioyce and be glad in thee, Let the sweete memorye of thy blessed name be a releeuing of my sorow and wee∣rinesse. ¶ An earnest prayer, that thou, being as∣sisted by the grace of God, maiest be alwaies bent to heauenly thinges. I Would to God, that that daye might once shine, in the which I might see my redeemer, and al these temporal daies would ende. In thee (O heauenly kingdome) the sain¦tes doo shine in perpetual and cleere charitie, which we can not see whilst we wander here on earth. The hea∣uenlye Citizens knowe how muche they them selues reioice: and the bani¦shed sonnes of the Eua lament & feele
how bitter, werie, and tedious this worlde is. The dayes of this worlde are few, shorte, ful of euill and sorow, where mā is defiled with many sins, oppressed with grefes, troubled with cares, disturbed wt thoughtes, wrapt in vanities, compassed with erroures molested with temptation, drowned in sensualitie, and crucified with po∣uertie. O when shal there be an ende of these manifolde and miserable la∣bours? when shal I be deliuered frō the miserable bondage of wickednes? When shall I onelye remember thee O Lorde? When shal I fullye and perfectly reioyce in thee? When shal I be out of al danger, deliuered from al griefe of bodye and soule, and come to true libertye? When shal I rest in that quiete, secure and vndisturbed peace? When shal I come thyther, where peace is both within & with∣out in althinges. O Lorde Iesus, when shal I stande vp to see thee, when shal I behold the glorye of thy
kingdome which thou hast prepared for thine elect frō the beginning? A poore wretche, I am left banished in the lande of mine enemies, where there is dayly warres, and continu∣al misfortune. Comfort me in my ba∣nishment, mitigate my sorowes, I do moste feruentlye with all my heart require to come vnto thee: For wher¦soeuer pleasure is offered vnto me in this worlde, I thinke it noysome. I doo inwardly require thy companie, but I cannot obteine it. I doo wishe to be ioyned to heauenly thinges, but temporal pleasures and mortal pas∣sions keepeth me backe from them. In minde I woulde faine vanquishe al wickednes and vice, but yet I am constrained to be subiecte to the fro∣warde fleshe. And I vnhappye man am at controuersy with my selfe, and am become odious vnto my selfe: for whilest my soule aspireth vpwarde, my fleshe draweth downe warde. O what passions doo I inwardlye suf∣fer:
For when my soule beginneth to contemplate of heauenly things, thē presently heapes of carnall thoughts withdraweth me from prayers. O my God, doo not linger from me, de∣part not in anger from thy seruaunt. Thunder forth thy lightning bolts, & isperse my worldly thoughts abrod, shoote thine arowes amongest them, & driue away all the temptations of mine enemies. Turne my senses vnto the make me forget al earthly things graunt, I beseeche thee, that I may caste off all sinfull thoughtes and phantasies. O eternall veritie, succor me, to thend that no vanity, do tempt or remoue me from thee. O heauenly father helpe me, for al vanitie and im∣purenes melteth before thy face. An ardent desire of the soule to the blessed and immortal life. AS the Hart desireth to come to the fountaines of freshe waters, so doth my soule desire to come to thee,
O Lorde. When shal I come and ap∣pere before thy face, O wel spryng of louing water? When shal I come to the water of thy sweetenes, frō this desert, pathlesse and barraine lande: that I may see thy vertue and glory, and coole my thirst with ye water of thy mercye. O Lorde the wel of lyfe, satisfye me, I thirste for thee, O Lord God of life. When shal I come, O Lorde, and appeare before thy face? O moste cleere and excellent daye without night, without ende, wher∣in I shal heare these wordes: Enter into the ioyes of the Lorde thy God. Enter in eternal glory into the house of thomnipotent God, where there is great and wonderful ioyes with∣out number. Enter into the glory, which is without sorrowe, contey∣ning eternal gladnesse, where all goodnesse and no euyl is, where the sweete amiable way of life is, where is no controuersy, neyther flickering intisements, where there is a perfect
and certaine assuraunce, an assured quietnes, a quiet pleasantnes, a ple∣saunt happines, a happy eternity, an eternal blessednes, the blessed Trini∣tie, and vnity of Trinitie, deitie of v∣nitie, and a blessed syght of the deitie, which is the ioyes of thy Lord God. O ioye vpon ioy, and ioy aboue ioye, without whiche there is no ioye, when shal I enter into thee, that I maye see my God, who dwelleth in thee? I wyl go thither, and I wil see this most excellent syght. What is it that stayeth me? Wo be vnto me, for my daies are prolonged: wo be vnto mee, howe long shal it be sayde vnto me, where is the Lord thy God? O my soule, attende a while, and expect that which I looke for. Shal not we attende the comming of our redee∣mer, our Lorde Iesus Christ who hath brought our bodies to their an∣cient humility and obedience, confi∣guted and formed vnto the bright∣nes of his owne body? Let vs abide
the returne of our Lorde from the mariage feaste, to the ende hee maye leade vs vnto his mariage. Come, O Lorde, and stay not, come, O Lorde Iesus Christe, come and visite vs in peare, come and deliuer vs that he fettered out of prison, that we maye reioyce before thee in perfectnesse of hart. Come, our sauiour, the wished hope of al people, shewe thy face, and we shalbe saued. Come my light, my redeer, deliuer my foule out of this prison, that it may confesse and glori∣fye thy holy name. Howe longe shall I bee toste in the surging waues of this my mortal life, crying vnto thee and thou wilt not heare me. Heare me, O Lorde, calling vnto thee from this large, troublesome and daunge∣tous Sea, and bring mee vnto thy safe porte of eternal felicities. O hap∣pye are they that haue through thy goodnes ariued from al the dangers of this Sea, in that most safe porte and harborough of rest. O most hap∣py
are they which haue escaped this surging Seas, and are safely landed vpon the shores, escaped this pryson, and come to thy Palace, returned from exile, and entred into thy king∣dome. The blessed doo moste quickly enioye that they wished for. Happy are they that haue obteined the re∣ware of eternal glorye, and that which here they haue won in tribu∣lation they do nowe ioyfully brooe in happy myrth and perpetual glory. Most blessed & thrise fouretimes bles∣sed are they whiche haue obteyned throughe his aboundante glorye to come to his gracious kingdome. O eternal kingdome, and kingdome of all worldes, where there is conty∣nual lyght, and where the peace of God is, which doeth farre exceede at vnderstanding, wherin the soules of the elect do rest, replete with eternal gladnesse. Oglorious is thy kyng∣dome, wherein al the saints do reigne appareled with white garmentes,
hauing crownes vpon theyr heades. O kingdome of eternal blisse. O hap∣pye kingdome, where thou, O Lord, the Diadem of glorye shalt be seene face to face, reioycing them in thy peace, whiche passeth al capacitye. Happy are they therefore that haue escaped from the shipwracke of this life, and haue obteyned to come into so great ioy and gladnes. Vnhappye (alas) are wee poore wretches, that do row our ship through the deuou∣ring waues of this large raging sea∣not knowing when we shal come to that hauen of health. Vnhappy (I say) are they who leade theyr lyues in exile and daunger, whose ende is doubtful. For we knowe not what shal become of vs, for al things which are to come, are vnknowē vn∣to vs. We as yet sayling in the wa∣ues of the Sea, doo hope and looke to come to the happy porte and hauē of ourcountrey. O safe countrey, we see thee a farre off, we salute thee frō
the Seas, we doo sigh and wishe to come to thee out of this vale, and we doo endenour our selues, yea, with teares, to see, if by anye meanes wee may come vnto thee. O Christe, the God of Gods, and hope of humaine kind, our refuge and strength, whose lyght our eyes doo beholde through the thicke clouds aboue, through the boysterous stormes of this trouble∣some Seas (as the bright beames of the careful shipmans starre) ende ou∣ring out selues thereby to direct our course vnto thy hauen and safe har∣borough, O Lord, gouerne our ship in thy right hande with the nailes of thy crosse, that we do not perishe in the roaring waues, nor tempest drowne vs, nor be sunke downe in the deepe: but fasten the anker of thy crosse vnto our ship, and draw vs out of this sea vnto thy selfe, our onely comfort and consolation. He holde vs whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious bloud, and nowe banished
from thee, we do cal vpon thee, heare vs O God our Sauiour, the onelye hope of al those that dwel in al the corners of the earth, we are toste in the troublesome seas, and thou on the shore dost see our daunger. Saue vs for thy names sake, and graunt vnto vs O Lord, I beseech thee, that we which saile betweene Silla and Charibdin, may so sterne and go∣uerne our Sip vnto thee, that es∣caping both the daungers, we may be preserued both Sippe and wares, safely ariuing vnto thy Porte and hauen of rest. FJNJS.
❧ A breefe Table of the thinges conteyned in this Booke, wishing the Reader to peruse it throughly. OF the fall of mán, and the punishment by death for the same, and of the uncer∣taine hower of death. Fol. 1 Of Death. Iudgement, Hell, & Heauen. Fol. 2 Of the hower of Death worthy of often repetition. Fol. 3 A ready instruction and godly exercise for an happy death, spoken as it were in the per¦son of Christ to the soule. Fol. 6 Holsome admonitions to dye. Fol. 13 An exercise to be vsed in the morning, or al other times when you thinke good. Fol. 15 Counsailes at the hower of death. Fol. 18 An exercise wherin the weake man may restane him selfe vnto God Fol. 19 A Christian protestation or last testament not vnprofitable to be sayd or to be thought vppon. Fol. 22 How feareful and bitter corporal death is of it selfe, and the naturall causes thereof. Fol. 24
The manner to dye well. Fol. 17 The certentye of Death, and the vncer∣tayne hower thereof. Fol. 27 Why the iust men do wish for death. Fol. 28 The death of the iust man Fol. 30 The death of the euill. Fol. 31 The daungers of death. Fol. 31 How we should comforte those that be in daunger of death. Fol. 32 Three exhortations to the sicke. Fol. 33 Questions to be asked him that lyeth sick, by ye minister, or some other godly persō. Fol. 33 Praiers to be said at ye hower of death. Fol. 34 Howe to foresee that thinges go rightlye with any when be dyeth. Fol. 35 A briefe Dialogue touthing the daye of iudgement. Fol. 37 A general iudgement of the dead▪ re∣quireth an vniuersall resurrection. Fol. 38 Of the excellencie of the iudgement days aboue al other dayes. Fol. 41 Of the paines of hell. Fol. 43 Of hel. Fol. 44 Meditations of the heauenly kingdome. Fol. 46 The defyre the soule hath to the heauenly Hierusalem. Fol. 47 How plentifull of all goodnesse, and howe spare of al euil the heauēly Ierusalem is. Fol. 49
A supposed description of the heauénlye Hierusalem. Fol. 50 Of the perfect and absolute ioy of eternal lyfe. Fol. 51 A prayer whereby thou maist be fryred vp vnto the desyre of heauenly thinges. Fol. 53 Man wisheth for the trybulations of this world, to the end that he may the more ear∣nestly desyre the kingdome of heauen. Fol. 55 A prayer that we should depose our selues in God aboue al thinges. Fol. 56 The soule feruently wisheth to be in the house of the Lord. Fol. 58 An earnest prayer, that being assisted by the grace of God, we may be alwayes bent to heauenly thinges. Fol. 59 An ardent desire of the soule to the blessed and immortall lyfe. Fol. 60 FINIS.
