10910 99854878 20333
¶ The Copy of a Letter Describing the wonderful woorke of God in deliuering a Mayden within the City of Che∣ster, from an horrible kinde of torment and sicknes 16. of February 1564. O England thou behold a fact most Shewed forth by God in this thy natiue land Sithe by gods woord thou setst so lytle care. God. God I say, begyns to stretch his hande. As in this booke thou mayest wel vnderstand. A Mayd but young, late with great ill But now by God she is agayne reest. ¶ Imprinted at Londō by John Awdely, dewllyng in litle Britayne streete, beyonde Al∣dersgate. 23. of March. 1564.
¶ To his very friend Maister J. D. AFter harty salutacions letting al other matters passe, these chiefly are to sig¦nifye vnto you: That here of late hath hapned a won∣derful cure of a Mayd with in this Citye, wrought by Gods power in his faithful Minister & Preacher of Je∣sus Christ, Mayster Lane, to the auancement of Gods glory, and to the great mar¦ueiling of all those inhabi∣ting in these partes. And least the same should be mis¦reported, or the wicked suf∣fred
to wrest thinges, to a∣buse Gods Preachers, & for that the thyng is so rare & notable that it shoulde not be kept from the posteritye, I haue therfore sēt you the whole tru discourse therof, described with the hande of Syr Wyllyam Caluerley knight, Richard Hurleston Esquire, and myne own. I could haue had euerye man here to haue done the lyke, but cōsidering we haue had good profe the one with the other, I thought this shall suffice, praying you to put the same in print. From the City of Chester the .xv. of March. 1564. Your friend J. F.
¶ The copy of a letter des∣cribing the wonderful worke of God, in deliuering a Maiden within the City of Chester, from an hor¦rible kinde of torment and sickenes, 16. of Febru∣ary. Anno. 1564. HAuing receiued your letter, & therby vnderstanding aswel what brute hath lately hap∣pened in your partes, concernyng the deliuery of a womā here with∣in the City of Chester, from a most monstrous and horrible kynde of torment and disease, as also howe desirous you are to learn the truth therof: I am contented in gratefi∣eng this your request, to signifye herein as is for truth knowen and accepted. The storye therfore was thys: Anne Mylner a Mayden of the age of .xviii. yeres, daughter to Rā∣dulphe Mylner, and broughte vp
in her Fathers house, wythin the bridge strete of the same City, wēt the .xviii. daye of October last, to bring her Fathers Kyne into the fieldes. And at her returne, com∣ming in the high way neare to the City, was sodaynlye taken wyth great feare, and thoughte that she saw a whyte thing compassing her round about, and so amased, came to her fathers house, & in the nexte morning felt her selfe greued, & ve∣ry sore in al the partes of her body, which so increased, that thereupon she was enforced to keepe her bed, beyng verye sicke. And during the space of fyue dayes then next ensu∣ing, did not take anye kynde of bo∣dely sustenance, as her Parentes hath sundry tymes declared. She had her fyt and traunce almost frō houre to houre, and had neuer a∣boue three houres rest in the day &
night. Neyther did eate during the time of her sycknes, but once in ech xxiiii. houres, and then most com∣monly a litle quantitye of breade and cheese, which notwithstāding was done with wonderfull snat∣ching and rashnes. The maner of her disease and sycknes was suche (as here after, touching the time of her cure, shall be more perticularly described) that vnto her out of al partes of the ci∣tye, repayre of verye manye was made. Yea, insomuche that after Maister John Pierce, one of the Canons of the Cathedrall churche of Chester, and Reader of the Di∣dinity Lecture there, with diuers persons of reputacion had sene the Mayden, he with his Auditorye in December last, at the ende of hys Lecture, kneling vpon their knees made speciall prayers vnto God,
for her deliuerace. After this it chaunced Mayster John Lane, late fellow of Christs Colledge in the Uniuersity of Cā∣bridge, & now a famous and godly Preacher of the Gospell of Jesus Christ, within the County of Che∣ster, preaching at Torperley, at the request of Raufe Done Esouyer, a¦bout the xxi. of Januarye last, met∣ther with two men of the sayd Ci∣ty, the one being a nere neyghbour to this woful woman: who then a¦mong other talke, demaunded of Maister Lane, whether ther were not some possessed wyth spirits as in times past, and for confirmacion hereof spake of the sayd Mayden, & alledged the horryblenes of her torment to be suche, at the time of her traunce, that it could argue no∣thing els, but that she was posses∣sed with some spirite. And further
said, that she had remayned in that miserable plight .xv. or. xvi. wekes, and (as I suppose, hauing hearde howe it is well knowen to diuers credible persons in these partes, what rare and syngular remedye god hath wrought by M. Lane, to some that sustained of late no smal decay of minde and memory, or els being of that religion, as in theese dayes seeke myracles to confirme Gods woorde) desyred him at his next comming to the City of Che∣ster, to see the tormented May∣den, and they would bring him vn∣to her. Maister Lane then condecen∣ding to their request, & at his next repayre vnto the sayd City, lodged in the house of Syr William Cal∣uerly Knight, wheron Friday be∣ing the .xvi. of Februarye laste (at which time the Assise was hloden
in Chester) met agayne by occasion with the sayd two men: who after they had put hym in remembrance of hys promise, & had disclosed the maner of the Maydens torment to Syr William Caluerley, syr Wyl∣liam Sneyd Knightes, and my La¦dye Caluerley, with diuers other then desirous to see the Mayden, went al together, and brought mai¦ster Lane vnto the sayd Mylners house (to see the Mayden, and thē to hym vnknowen) about two of the clocke in the after noone of the same .xvi. day of February, & there finding the Mayden in her traunce after her accustomed maner, lying in a bed within the haule, her eyes halfe shut, shalfe open, looking as she had bene agast, neuer mouyng either eye or eye lyd, her teeth som∣thing open, with her toung doub∣lyng betwene, her face somewhat
red, her head as heauy as leade to lift at, she lay stil as a stone, and fee¦ling her pulce, it beat with as good measure, as if she had bene in per∣fite health. And in this sort behol∣ding her, almost during the fourth part of an houre, her bellye began to moue, swelling vp & down, som∣time beneath her chest, sometyme vp to the throte, in suche vehemen∣ry, that a man would haue thought she would haue burst. Then soden∣ly she lifteth her self vp in her bed, bending backwards in such order, that almost her head and fete met, falling downe somtime on the one syde, somtime on the other, but ry∣syng againe so sodenly, that the be∣holders could not imagine howe if might bee possible so quicklye shee coulde without ayde of hande, cast her selfe (her belly being vpwarde) into the fourme of a hoope.
Maister Lane demaunded of her that kepte this cruell handled creature, whether shee coulde not keepe her downe? Who answered no, and sayd that she had once try∣ed it, and then was almost cast into the fyre. Then desired he that she woulde permitte him to assay if hee coulde holde this dolefull wo∣man downe. Shee aunswered yea, but yet sayd it woulde not pre∣uaile. Wl said Maister Lane, by the grace of God it may preuayle. And therupon after that this piti∣ful Maydē had lifted her self. 4. or v. times in such wonderful maner as before is noted, hee tooke her in hād, & with much ado pluckt down her feete, and wyth more ado kept them downe, holdinge her handes, sytting vpon her legs, in whom he found such strength and vehement panges, that he was fully perswa∣ded
she was possessed. The people present, seing hym so to continue with her, and her paines encrease, some thought best he should let her alone, saying that it woulde haue the course. Whom maister Lane desired to be quyet, and let God woorke, willing them to pray to God for her, for asmuche as in him onely consisteth her deli∣uerance from that payne, and that god was as strōg as euer he was. And when she was in the vehemēt panges the beholders called vpon god for her, maister Lane secretly sayd the fifty Psalm, & oftē desired God, through the bloud of his sōne Jesus Christ, to ease the Maiden, not doubting of his mercye in that behalfe. And when he had thus striued with her the space of two houres, that the drope trickled downe hys
face, he had thought to haue com∣mended her vnto God: but then a∣gaine it came to mynde to tary the end, and so began a freshe to striue with her, euer secretly praying & cal¦ling vpō the bloud of Christ, & whē her belly was pressed downe wt as much weight & strēgth as could be, by those yt wer present, she stryued more thē before, and diuers times with the vehement swelling of her bellye, shee was verye like to haue throwne them ouer, that so helde downe her body. At the last Maister Lane cal∣led for viniger, wherat the stāders by marueiled, saying, that yt thing with muche more had bene often tymes attempted, but to no pur∣pose. Notwithstanding he ceased not to call styll for it, saying, that God might do that then, which he did not before, and so receiued vini¦ger,
put it into his mouth & blewe it into the Maydēs nostrels, wher∣at she cryed a Lady, Lady. He thē willed her to cal vpō God, and the bloud of Christ, & in these doinges she being astonied▪ he called againe for more viniger. Wherat she cried: No, no, no more for Gods sake. Thē maister Lane willed her to speake & say after him, & so he & all thē present, said the Lords prayer & Te deum, she saying after them. After this her deliueraunce, she then continually called vpon God, and by the appointment of maister Lane, she had her clothes put on, & meate brought, wherof she did eat a little. This done, maister Lane willed to try whether she could go. Whereunto, albeit that those then present answered that it was not possible, for that shee had not gone in al the time of .xvii. weekes then
last past, yet master Lane affirmed that the same God which gaue her speche, could geue her strength also to go: and so departing the place, vntill the women had gotten on her hosen, and then comming in a∣gaine, wyled her in the name of God to come to him, standing in th other syde of the house, whych she did. And thereupon after talke had wyth her of the maner of her taking, & admonishing her to haue a stedfast faith in Christ, and to oc∣cupy her selfe in praier, left her. My Lady Caluerley, maistres Erauenor, wyfe to John Eraue∣nor, with diuers other credible per so as wer present, during such time as mayster Lane was wyth the mayden, and are eye wytnesses to these his doinges. The next day following, may∣ster Lane preached at saynt Ma∣ries
within the sayde Citye, before John Chrogmarton Esquier, the Quenes maiesties high Justice in the Countye of Chester, at whych sermon the late recouered Maiden was present. Upon this so wonderful a cure great talke was had in eche com∣pany within the City, that therup¦on the Mayden was not onelye brought vnto the said Justice, and maister Lane afterwardes vppon earnest request by som of hys frien¦des, halfe constrayned, dyd wryte hys whole doinges therin: but al∣so maister Rogers. Archdeacon of Chester, in his sermon made in the Cathedrall Church of Chester, the iiii of this instāt month of March, before the Maior of the Citye, the Bishops of Chester and of Saynt Assaphats, with a great multitude of the Citizens besides, hauing oc∣casion
offered by the wordes of the then present Gospel, touched thys fact: Alledging that what so euer was the originall cause of so great and straūge a disease, yet was the cure wonderfull, and wrought by God, either to the great commodi∣ty, or els for the great plague of the City of Chester, and the countrye adioyning. The Mayden remay∣neth at this presēt (praysed be god) in perfit good health and lyking. Thus truly, and as briefly as I myght, you haue the effect of your request. Writtē at the City of Che∣ster,the .viii. of March. An. 1564. ¶ The names of the wytnesses here∣of, which also dyd set to their handes. ¶ Sir William Caluerley knight, ¶ Richard Hurlestone Esquier. ¶ John Fisher Gentleman.
