11695 99838755 3143
A BOOKE OF SVNDRY DRAVGHTES, Principaly serving for Glasiers: And not Impertinent for Plasterers, and Gardiners▪ be sides sundry other professions. WHEREVNTO IS AN∣nexed the manner how to anniel in Glas: And also the true forme of the Fornace, and the se∣cretes thereof. LONDON Printed in Shoolane, at the signe of the Faulcon by Walter Dight, 1615.
The Authour to the willing practisers of glazeing, and anneiling in Glasse. AS the principall beautie, and countenaunce of Architecture, consistes in outward ornament of lights, so the inward partes are ever opposite to the eies of the beholder, taking more delight in the beauty therof, being cūningly wrought, then in any other garnishing within the same. To which purpose, is set downe in this, variety of draughts, some, ordinary and plaine, others, curious & pleasant, and although, it may seeme to those that are expert in glazeing, that some of these draughts are needlesse, being so plaine and in vse, not deseruing in this sort to be published, yet notwithstanding here I doe in friendly cour∣tesie admonish, that it is most needefull, giuing choice to the builder, both for price, and draught of worke, which by no vnderstanding can the Glazier so sencibly demonstrate his freat, as by showing his examples of draught, for by such show, the builders shall vnderstand, what to make choice off, for whose ease & furtherance only, I haue published this prac∣tise of glazeing, knowing the expert maister is not vnfurnished of these v∣suall draughts, though each workeman haue not all of them. And for the further benefit of the practiser, there is herevnto annexed dy∣apring on each draught, either to be wrought or left, as it shall please the builder, most pleasant to all that are willing to haue the same: Therefore haue it not in light regard▪ for the vse thereof, will giue you great delight, and worthy to be practised, as a speciall ornament to building, and will beautifie the Glaziers worke, be they neuer so expert. So by obseruing the order and rules here set downe, the maister or worke∣man shall not only see a plaine way, to imitate and follow those draughts, in glazeing and painting on glasse: but the simplest, and vnskild prentice, shall reape full and perfect vnderstanding thereby: praying the Almighty, to blesse your labours in following the same. Wa: Gedde.
THE MANNER TO DRAWE THE SQVARE.
Directions how to make your Square. First then concerning the square, which although it be cōmon to sundry artificers, each one hauing his owne forme and de∣vise, in drawing of it, some by devision of halfe circle, some by o∣ther rules: there is herefore set downe a more perfect and readier way for any worke in draught, and also if neede be, to try the square rule thereby: for certainely, glasse worke of all others▪ re∣quires most an exact square, for the distance, of one haire out of square, will deface the whole worke, and bring it out of all frame. The ordering of the square. To drawe this square: First you must drawe your line draught so long as your worke requireth, marking right theron with your compasse, three points of alike distance, next, devide your compasse larger, setting the one point on the figure 2. & with the other drawe a quarter circle betwixt 4. and 5. after, remoue your compasse to the figure 3. and drawe a crosse circle ouer betwixt 6. and 7. and wheresoever the iust middle of the crosse appeareth, marke the same with the point of the compasse, as you may per∣ceiue in the character, by the figure 8. lastly, drawe a draught, be∣twixt the figure 1. and the crosse point by the figure 8. and thou shalt find a perfect square to conduct thee all thy draughts. As on the former side is shewed.
The devision of measures, in glasse draughts▪ To make this more plaine to the practiser, the square draugh for the most part passes on three severall devisions, the first, on a declining, or collaterall square, others, on even squares, and the third, interlaced with both: This declining devision and set∣ting this worke thereon, must begin after the forme you perceiue here on his devision, and may be extended, in any quantity you please: the perfect draught of this worke, and how it shall stande in glasse, you shall finde it in fol. 38. & other draughts also agree∣able to the same measure, in sundry other places, as in fol: 16. 27. 47. and others. It is also to be vnderstood, that the shadowing, and darkning, set downe in all those freats and draughts, demonstrates the di∣apring, which is for the vse of those that desire to haue their worke beautified with the same, and the plaine draught, is the convoy, and course of the lead, which dyapring, must only be in gray, or blew colour, as is largely set downe amongst the rules of colour.
Begin this at the figure 3.
Of even square devision. There be a number of draughts, wrought by this even dire square, which is most perfect of any; to set this worke right, ye must begin your first losing, at the figure 4. and so runne out i any quantity you will, as this devision will shew you: the perfect, and full draught hereof, as it must stand in glasse-worke, you shall finde in fol: 43. with sundry other draughts of the same measure, as in fol: 40. and in other places.
Begin at the figure 4.
Of even crosse devision. This sheweth a plaine draught with a double circle, and even over crosse measure, beginniug his sett at the figure 7. This whole perfect draught, as it is to be wrought in glasse, you shall finde in fol: 72. with sundry other draughts also of the same devi∣sion, as in fol: 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82▪ and others.
Begin at the figure 5.
Of a declining crosse draught. This Interlaced double circle, with double declining crosse de∣vision, must begin his setting, at the figure 8. and his whole draught standeth in fol: 86. and also others of the same devision, with double circle, as in fol: 83. 82. 80. 76. & other places as may be perceiued.
Begin at the figure 6.
Of interlaced devision. This interlaced devision, yeildeth very pleasant draughts, ex∣ceeding close, & strong: the setting of this worke on his de∣vision, must begin at the figure 5. and from thence to follow out to the full quantity that your glasse-worke requireth: the principal draught hereof, you shall finde in fol: 47. with sundry other of the same measure, as in fol: 12. 27. 32. Some other square draughts are here set downe of greater diffi∣culty, but as they are somewhat more painefull in working, so are they more pleasant, & will make a delectable show: which workes must haue his right devision, on the glasse table drawen with blacke, which will conduct the setting perfectly, making the most curious draught in this booke, easie, & plaine to be wrought in glasse.
Begin at the figure 7.
Of compasse workes, or draughts. These draughts following, with their devision, are differing from the other: some there be of single compasse draught, others double: some be square, & cōpas declīing crosse draughts, and euen crosse and withall interlaced. First then this single circle of this devision, as you see here set downe, is a very fine draught in glasse-worke, & the setting thereof, must begin at the figure 6. and the whole draught as it must show in glasse-worke, you shall finde in fol: 74. and in sun∣dry other draughts of the like devision, as in fol: 87. very easie to be wrought, making exceeding pleasant worke.
Begin at the figure 8.
Interlaced crosse draught. This as you perceiue is even crosse and declining draught, in∣termixed, exceeding pleasant in glasse-worke: hi begīning of setting of your worke is at the figure 9. & the principall whole draught is to be found in fol: 71. as also a great many moe of the same devision, in divers other places. Other sorts there be of these circle workes, of greater difficul∣ty, but the devision thereof on thy glasse table, must be thy helpe to make it easy, as is before mētioned in the square draughts
Begin at the figure 9.
HERE BEGINNETH The first part of square draughtes Formed vppon direct, and collat∣terall lines: which fitly may be applied to sundrie vses. And now newly published BY WALTER GIDDE. 1615.
1.
2.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
HEERE Foloweth Sundrie sortes, of Circuler, or Compas Draughtes for Glazing: And will fitly serue for divers vses. Newly Published by Walter Gidde▪
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
THE MANNER, Howe to Anneile, or Paint in Glas: THE true receptes of the cullors, The ordering of the Furnace, and all the secretes there vnto belonging. 1616
THE TRVE FORME, OF THE Furnace, for the Anneiling in Glasse, withall the Instruments belonging therevnto.
THE MANNER HOWE to erect the Fornace. TAKE free-stone, or Bricke, and proportion it fower foote square, and three foote high and two foote and halfe in eache square: And at ei∣ther corner which is marked with the letter A. leaue an open hole, to let oute the smoake, when neede shall require: which holes you shall cover, with peeces of bricke-bats. And in the midle of the toppe of the Fornace, around hole made, fower inches over as ye see it markt with letter B. which hole you must alwayes keepe coverd with a turffe or Charcole, & renew it so often as the fire doth con∣sume it away: And note that this hole doth serue to giue vent to the smoake, and to keepe in the heate: for this hole is right over the mouth of the Pan where the glasse lieth. This Pan, marked with the letter C. must be made of fine clay, fit to indure the fire and placed on an Iron trevet, in the middest of the Fornace, so that the fire may haue place to giue heat, both vnder and aboue the pan. This Pan wherein the glas is put, must haue an open square in the side, fiue inches high, and three inches broad, as you see marked with the letter D. and the like open place must be made in the side of the fornace, right opposite to the open square in the side of the pan, where the peeces of glas do lie, called the proofe peces, which peeces, are to be taken in & oute at your pleasure, whereby you may knowe when your wrought glasse is thorowly enameled, and of a faire coullour.
How you ought to prepare and put your Glas into the Furnace. TAKE Chalke that is cleane, and beate it small in a Morter, or else grind it well on a painters stone: then sprinkle some of it in the bottom of the Pan, before the fire be put in the Furnace: then lay a plye, or laine of glasse that is wrought thereō, thē sift on more chalk and then laye another tyre, or laine of glasse: So by beds of chalke & glasse, you may lay on as much prepared glas as the Pan will hold one rewe aboue another, but remēber that betwene every rewe of glasse you do sifte on chalke, that the wrought glass may not touch one another. Then take litle peeces of glasse, and touche thē with the same coullour that your wrought glasse is of, & put them in at the passag, at the side of the Furnace, betwixt the beds of wrought glasse, & then begin to make a reasonable fire vnder and aboute the Pan vntill you thinke, that the glasse hath taken a faire coullour. Now to knowe when your glas is perfectly ready; take a paire of tonges, and drawe oute one of those little peeces of glasse, called the prooffe peece, and hold it betwext you and the light: if the cullor showe faire, and stick fast vppon the glasse, then you may be sure that the worke vnder is well and perfectly anneiled, because it hath had the greatest strength of the fire: But if you doubt that the cullours be not sure, then rubbe with a rough stone or a knife, one of the proofe peeces, and then if the cullor come of, then you must let it continew longer in the fire, while you put the next peece to the proofe. Note further that the proofe hole in the side of the Furnace, marked with the letter D. must haue a stone that will abide the fire fitted to it, such a one as you see marked with the let∣ter F. which stone serveth to take of, and put on so often as you make triall of the proofe peeces. Also yov must haue an earthen pot, such as ye see marked with the letter E. wherein you must haue a readines some soft clay to fasten the stone againe, so often as you shall haue occasion to re∣moue it? But the holes in the toppe of the furnace you must not stoppe with clay, but only with peeces of brick bats so that the smoake may haue vent oute.
THE RECEIPETS, FOR THE true making of Collours for Glasse. To make a faire Blacke. TAKE the Scales of Iron & Copper, of each a like waight, & put it in a cleane vessell that will indure the fire, till they be red hotte, then take halfe as much Ieate, and stamp them into smal pouder, then mix them with Gumwater, & grind them fine vpon a painters stone and so drawe with it vpon your glasse. To make a Greene coullour. TAKE Vertegrease, and grind it very well with Turpen∣tine then put it in a cleane pot, and when you would vse it warme it at the fire. To make a faire red. TAKE Sanguis draconis and beate it well in a Morter, & after straine it thorough a linning cloth, with a little Aquavi∣tie, and so vse it. Carnation. TAKE two oūces of Tyn-glas, and six ovnces of Ieat, half an ounce of gum, ten ounces of red Ocker, and grind them very well togeather, and so vse it.
Blew. TAKE beades of blew glas, and beat them into poulder, in a brasen morter, and halfe as much of goldsmithes blew amaling that shines through, & grind them together with gum-water, and so vse it. Yellow. TAKE a quantitie of fine silver, and cut it in smale peeces, and put therto a little Antimonium beaten to poulder, and put them to-geather in a melting-pot, and set them on the fire well covered round about with hotte embers the space of an hower, then take it from the fire, and poure it into the bottom of a cleane earthen vessell that will abide the heate thereof: after it is cold beat it into fine poulder, and grind it on a Painters stone, and when it is well ground, take sixe times as much Ocker as the Silver weighes, and seven times as much old earth that hath bin scraped off from enamaled worke: after that, let it be well ground, then put all this together in apot with gume-water, and stirre it well aboute and so vse it. To make a Grey couller. TAKE Iron scales, alittle Cristall, and sum smale quantitie of Ieate, grind these well together vpon a painters stone, the more Ieate ye take, the sadder the coullour will be, &like∣wise the more christall you put to it the lighter.
To Diaper vppon glas. TAKE Cristall, beaten to poulder, and grind it well vppon a painters stone with Gumwater, and so vse it: It will apeare a prettie light coullour, different from the glas: Keepe this coullour in a little Potte, and when you will vse it, stirre it well aboute. Another faire red Cullour. TAKE a quātitie of red glasse beades, and halfe as much of Goldsmithes red Enamaling, and prepare it as you did the blew coullour before. FINIS
