13246 99854241 19650
POPISH PIETIE, OR The first part of the Hi∣storie of that horrible and barba∣rous conspiracie, commonly called the Powder-treason: Nefariously plotted against Iames King of great Britaine, Prince Henrie, and the whole state of that Realme assem∣bled in Parliament; and happily discered, disappointed, and frustrated, by the power∣full and sole arme of the Almightie, the fifth of Nouember, Anno 1605. Written first in Latin verse by F.H.  in Physicke: and translated into ¦glish by . P. LONDON, Printed for William Ione 1610.
TO THE ILLV∣STRIOVS AND MOST VERTVOVS PRINCESSE, THE LADY Elizabeth, onely daughter of the Kings most excellent Maiestie. I Haue presumed to offer vnto your Grace (most gracious Princesse) an old Historie clad in a new English coate. But why do I call that old, which ought to be alwayes new, and fresh in euery true English heart, while the world lasteth? We haue a vulgar saying, that fish and guests are stale in a few dayes. And who seeth not, that the greatest and strangest workes of God wrought a∣mongst vs, are but wonders of nine dayes? Our English nation is iustly taxed, as too A∣thenian-like, euer eagerly and curiously li∣stening after nouelties, and ouer slightly and lightly passing by the most remarkable and
memorable accidents and occurrents. This is a generall, and (as I may terme it) a natio∣nall fault, which ought to be acknowledged and amended. Now howsoeuer many passa∣ges may without any great dishonour vnto God or detriment to the State, be buried in the darke pit of obliuion, yet the Powder-treason, that monstrous birth of the Romish harlot, cannot be forgotten without great impietie, and iniurie to our selues. The Israe∣lites were commanded to celebrate yearely the memoriall of their deliuerance from E∣gypt, & often to inculcate vnto their childrē t  workes which the Lord wrought f  in drying the red sea, in deuiding t  of Iordan, in subduing the Canaa∣n  expelling them before their faces. Ts in the time of Hester by a solemne  dained an annuall remembrance of  ance from the cruell designe of Haman  Agagite. The like course hath bene honorably taken in the Powder-Conspi∣racie, by the great Counsell of our State, and  on most iust and weightie considera∣  For this hellish plot, being as it were  nt-essence of Sathans policie, the fur∣  th and straine of humane malice and  not to be paralleld among the sauage
Turks, the barbarous Indians, nor (as I am perswaded) among the more then brutish Cannibals; & the deliuerance being wrought without any humane helpe, by the great watchman of Israel, who neither slumbreth nor sleepeth, so as our enemies must needs acknowledge with the Egyptian sorcerers, Certè hic Dei digitus est: we shall be guiltie of horrible ingratitude, the foulest of all vi∣ces, if we do not embrace all meanes of per∣petuating the memory of so great, so graci∣ous, and wonderfull a preseruation: Nunquam nimis inculcatur quod non satis discitur. Besides, we cannot forget this maruellous deliuerāce, without apparent danger vnto our selues and our posteritie. Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui bis naufragium fecerit. We haue had many faire warnings from these Romish Amale∣kites; if we hereafter fall into their hands, we shall not be pitied, but laughed at, by a or neighbour nations. I hope therefore your Grace, who should haue acted a wofull and yet principall part in the catastrophé of this Tragedie, will vouchsafe the acceptance and perusing of this short Poeme, written by my selfe in Latine, and translated into English by a friend of mine: wherein you may be old as in a cristall glasse, the irefull faces of your
greatest enemies, and the gracious and amia∣ble countenance of the Almightie watching ouer the King your father, the Queene your mother, that Prince of admirable hope, your brother, and your selfe, for your deliuerance from those snares and nets which were so se∣cretly and craftily laid, to haue entangled all your selues together, and to haue put out and quite extinguished the lights of Israel in one day. The same almightie Lord grant, that as he hath bene the sole author of your preseruation and reseruation (as we all hope) for some excellent worke which he hath to accomplish by your hands, so you may be worthy instruments in your places of the aduancement of his Gospell here in earth, to his glorie, and your owne eternall happinesse in the life to come. Your Graces to be commanded in all dutifull seruices, Fr. Hering.
POPISH PIETY, OR The first part of the historie of that horrible and barbarous con∣spiracie, commonly called the Powder treason. 1 A Rise my Muse, to studies quite forlorne, And intermitted ouermuch, retire; The wals with hang'd vp armes no more adorne, But snatch them thence, herein to shew desire; If thou refuse, the posts and stones will scorne, Nature in them should silence still require: Each thing that's void of sense (if thou wilt not) Will to the world resound this barbarous plot. 2 This barbarous plot, then which th'al-seeing Sunne, A more outragious fact did ne're behold, Not to be matcht since the first age begun, In marble records fit to be inrold: O thou whose dole of grace is neuer done, Vnworthy vs that doest aliue vphold: O grant vs life to celebrate thy praise, Almightie Father fauour our iust layes.
3 I sing a strange blacke monster, rude and fell, Late on that Whore which doth the world besot, In grosse thicke darknesse, vtmost caues of hell, In cursed coupling Lucifer begot A fearfull monster, all our world to quell: The purple strumpet soone againe he got, Sent backe to Lerney lake, where with close mirth She was deliuered of her monstrous birth. 4 Which she nurst vp with Romish milke a space: This Snake, the prodigie of humane kind, More dangerous then Hydra waxt apace: Whom when the damme did well perceiue in mind, To swell in deadly venime, and to outface In divellish guile all others, and did find Instructed fully in all hellish arts, Thus she bespake, and thus to him imparts. 5 There is a people that are Brittons hight, (If elsewhere any) they to me do beare No goodwill: thy great Father too they spight, And haue much damage done to Peters chaire, And Peters kingdome, once a Realme of might, (Nor lesser yet) they go about I feare. What rich rewards? O how great reuenues This wealthy nation yearely once did vse
6 To pay the Sea Apostolicke? how trim? How gallantly it made our chimneys smoke? (For which our greatest zeale hath alwayes bin, The truth to thee, my sonne, I list not cloke, What ere we did pretend, their eyes to dim) What swarmes of Friers linkt in holy yoke Did it maintaine? what stately monastries' What goodly Temples, menacing the skies, 7 Did that same nation build, and consecrate Vnto the Virgine, that diuinely bred? And to some other heauenly ones, of late Whom we among the starres haue saintified? There was no place as then (behold our fate) Where our colonies not inhabited, No place of wealth, of honor or renowne, Were it in citie, countrey, field or towne. 8 Through the whole Iland did mine honours ring, This wealthie Prouince England of it selfe (Although but small) by dayly suites did bring The Romane treasury more store of pelfe Then any else. France though a greater thing, Or Germanie though large, not like this elfe: Short tale to make, the profits got thereby, Did farre exceed the kings owne treasury.
9 Perhaps tis strange I speake, but tis most true: And doest thou thinke that I can patiently Endure so rich a prey by Luthers crew Should be bereft me? Ile not easily Pocket this wrong; lo, Ile reuenge pursue; Reuenge that onely sweetens iniurie: After that Luther that vile run-agate, That Church-robber, that spoiler of our State: 10 Our battels and campes Catholicke forsooke, O with what troubles, with what sodaine stormes, The gorgeous triple mitred kingdome shooke! Saint Peters holy body he deformes And rends; for with himselfe away he tooke Germaines and Frenchmen many; and reformes Almost all those that liue in Brittons Ile, English and Scots, now Brittains both in style. 11 I am a mightie Queene, I once did say, No alteration shall I euer find: No times shall see my Monarchie decay, My state shall haue no period assign'd, No age to come shall euer see the day, When desolation makes me come behind: But haste, with too long speech I weary thee, Now come I to the point, my sonne, quoth slie.
12 Our state declining dayly, doth compell Vs to aske counsell, and to hammer out On Platoes anvill some new wiles of hell, To weaue some plots with riddles wrapt about: Mine onely hope's in thee, thou knowest well Thy fathers lore, and all my purpose stout: Go to faire England, luckily reduce That rebel kingdome to our Scepters vse. 13 He takes his iourney onward, and with speed He went about his cursed mothers will, And to the Brittons comes with equall heed, The Brittons who a second world do fill, Diuided from the other: by his weed A Catholicke: 't hath bene the custome still Of Satan, that being clad in truths attire, Closer he might deceiue, and play the lier. 14 Here he was called Fawkes or False, I find Elsewhere his names were Ionston, Foster, Browne, A second Proteus, that could easly wind And turne himselfe to all the shapes i'th towne: Fitting the place, he to himselfe assign'd New names, in each new coast the old laid downe: But still the selfe same wicked mind he keepes, His harmfull heart still wakes and neuer sleepes.
15 He euery where solicites many men, In loue to Rome too seruent and too bold, Who in their secret murmurings long agen For Egypts flesh pots, and the cups of gold, Of her that was a mightie Empresse then, When by her selfe she rul'd the world of old: Such male-contents she stirreth vp amaine, And sets their hopes on cockhorse, though in vaine. 16 And tels them how th'ineuitable time, And fatall dayes do now post on apace, Wherein the Caluinists no more shall clime, Nor those whom Beza brought to state of grace: And that the time's at hand, and in full prime, When they may build Romes wals without disgrace, Punish their foes, and Catholicke faith restore To th'ancient splendor that it had before. 17 These men receiue with gaping greedinesse, The hony words that this false Sinon spake, And hid them in their minds with ioyfulnesse, And of their owne free will for Romes sweet sake, Promise themselues, and all the readinesse That they or theirs by any meanes can make: Yea they will pray, and that with feruencie, For iust euent to this his prophecie.
18 Thus being proud of this his good successe, He doth inuade the Princes royall place, Where ioyfully he walkes amid the presse Of Englands Peeres, and gentlemen of race; Where Iames the mightie monarch, with no lesse Powerfull hand doth sway the Scepters mace. Iames who with one applause and full consent, Sits on that throne God his Ancestors lent. 19 Whose clemencie at his first entrance here, Did spread it selfe to all of euery kind: This noble Prince by such meanes thought it cleare, That he could supple their rebellious mind, And bow their stiffe neckes that hold Rome so deare; But now farre otherwise he doth it find: For they abusing his most princely grace, Began herein t'aduance their combes apace. 20 And euery where to swell with such disdaine, As was outragious; and to lay a plot For new garboiles, and then to spread amaine Amongst th'vnstable commons, who knew not The course of state, some odious speeches vaine, Tending to set Seditions barke on flote, And openly to take offensiue armes, Euermore thirsting after others harmes.
21 First Watson an old craftie Popish sage, Dared to trouble this our peacefull state: Fond Lancashire, I know not with what rage Blinded, did second him; Wales after that: But better tis to come to that slie page, That subtill Sinon, whom we lest of late, Walking along the stately sumptuous court, Where all the gallants of the land resort. 22 Who hauing pondred in his plotting mind, The subtill stratagemes that there were fram'd, He meets with Percie, Percie most vnkind, Who by his style a Pensioner was nam'd, Yet a firme vassall to the Pope combin'd: To him he vtters all, and neuer sham'd, Euen all the businesse he had in charge, With hels commission thereunto at large. 23 Percie both man and message doth embrace, And with affection entertaines them both, Though he nor Percie had nor  nor grace, Yet each to other gaue their  troth, Not to disclose what spee at place Had past betweene the  unto an oath Was added, and  ng hand in hand, They sweare th  erate league for ay should stand.
24 Marke how you cherish in your laps (great States) Fell vipers, whilest the Papists ye admit, Though but within the entries of your gates: Vnder their faire shew doth a serpent sit: Infamous treason with her hellish mates, Damned rebellion, murders most vnfit Once to be nam'd, with poysonous dregs that smell, And sauour all of the deceits of hell. 25 These are the studies of the Romish traine, Publisht abroad for all the world to view; And these the lasting monuments of fame, Erected by the Catholicke Sect and crew. These are their holy merites; by these same They clime to heauen, and claime it as their due: Hereby they thinke they shall supply a roame In heauens Starre chamber, free from other doe. 26 Eftsoones this shifter Faulkes hath chang'd his name, Commonly taken to be Percies man, And in that forme vnknowne, himselfe doth frame To belch out deadly venime all he can, Securely, void of feare, bereft of shame; And by degrees he afterwards began To draw on many, who with full consent Consorted with him in his leud intent.
27 Beyond sea then he closely packes againe, And to his holy Mother doth relate, Both what, and how, and all in order plaine. She likes it well; and straight, at any rate, Wils them go on, and spare nor cost, nor paine, To make the end, and issue fortunate. So well apaid, and well rewarded too, She sends him backe, with new charge what to do. 28 Hee's quicke enough in speeding his retire, And bawkes not old acquaintance by the way, But visits Austria's court, where that graue Sire Is Lord and ruler, who, 'tis hard to say, Whether he be a Priest of holy quire, Or souldier fierce in fight, his foes to fray: He straight assembles th'English vagrants there, Who wish for change, and harme to this land here. 29 Monsters of men, that take delight to fish In troubled waters and tempestuous seas, They see him forward, answering to their wish, They spurre and pricke him on; and each of these Giues his aduice, though all not worth a rish. They lode him home (such lode he thought an ease) With new inuentions, trickes, and subtill wiles, And teach him knauery, cloakt by knauish guiles.
30 He backe returnes, serues his old master still, And tels him all that hapned; and withall They must make hast, their purpose to fulfill; For hee's prepar'd, and ready at a call, With all the weapons that the wit and skill Of Italy for fraud renown'd of all, Or yet the kingdome of that fiend of hell Could yeeld, he knew them all exceeding well. 31 Now settle they to worke, and to begin, Among their wicked conforts counsell take, Each man in order giues his verdit in, Which way may most for their aduantage make. Go, kill the King (saith one) passe not a pin, To thrust him thorough for thy countries sake, Brasutus-like, let nothing hinder thee, Vntill thy purpose fully acted be. 32 Another thinkes it best, in subtill shew Of friendly entertainment of the King, To watch a time when he should weary grow By heate or hunting sport, and then to bring Him to the place where he to rest should go, And there then act this cruell cursed thing, When sweet sound sleepe possest him, as he lay To throttle him, and take his life away.
33 It strikes a horror to my very heart, To tell the storie of their diuellish plot, My tongue as loth herein to beare a part, Cleaues to my iawes, and willing opens not, And do these country-killers neuer start, Nor feare at all, that haue these things begot? Nay act, at least intend; these cursed deeds, Fit fruites to come from such accursed weeds. 34 A hotchpot they, and mingle mangle make Of things diuine and humane, all is one, They make no difference: yea, the oathes they take, And leagues of friendship, which not those alone, That Christians were, but heathens neuer brake, But alwayes kept inuiolate; yet none Of these, these wicked monsters care to keepe, Though oathes and faith be sounded ne'er so deepe. 35 heard each mans tale, and hearing all, You misse the marke (said he,) for all your skill; To pettie matters, fits not vs to fall, But roote and branches at one blow to spill: Say that we kill the King, yet after shall His noble heire Prince Henry reigne, who will Sharply (no doubt) reuenge himselfe on those, By whom his fathers death vntimely growes.
36 We know he is a Prince of vertue great, Exceeding toward, of great forwardnesse: Therefore if he enioy his fathers seate, Our danger will be rather more then lesse: And therefore we must cast to worke a feate, To helpe our selues this matter to redresse: For if we suffer him to liue and grow, His life will worke our dismall ouerthrow. 37 So vse small seeds to rise to great increase, The litle Hart at first vnweaponed, Small sprigs at first sprouts out, and doth not cease Till he grow captaine, all the rest to leade His fellowes like himselfe horne-headed beasts: Small sparks of fire haue much endangered Whole cities by neglect of carefull heed, Suffering one fire another fire to feed. 38 This litle Henry makes me call to mind Henry the eight, that mightie potent King, Who first our holy Father (as we find) With deadly wounds, so mightily did sting: Henry that fatall name to all our kind, I do abhorre as an vnhappie thing: Thus stands my mind, this stocke hereticall Plucke vp at once, that all at once may fall.
39 This may be thus; neare Percies lodging stands That ancient house, where Englands Nobles all, And all the chiefe estates of Brittaines lands Do sit in counsell, when the King doth call, That haue the kingdomes causes in their hands, And order all things that in question fall, And the first day of custome vsually The States meete there in great solemnitie. 40 The King, the Queene, the Prince, will all be there With mightie pompe, attended royally, All in their robes, all glittering, bright and cleare, Their garments all beset most sumptuously With gold and precious stones; and farre and neare The people throng and flocke exceedingly, And fill the streets, to see the gallant show; All these at once 'twere braue to ouerthrow. 41 This may be easly done; for tis not hard Vnder that ancient house of Parliament To place a fier, which with good regard Set for the purpose whereunto tis bent, Will send both them and th'house to heauenward, For fire to mercie will no whit relent: So while the King is speaking, Nobles still One blast of powder all at once shall kill:
42 And make them flie aloft into the skie. Here Catesby ends: the rest applauded well What he had said, and praisd it mightily, Of all their plots this plot did beare the bell: Then Faulkes thus seconds him, Surely (quoth he). Thy counsel's good, and doth the rest excell: So shall the house which wrought the Pope such woe, Be well rewarded with this worthy blow. 43 So shall we counted be in time to come, The men that did the Catholicke cause restore: So by our holy mother Church at home, As Saints we shall be canoniz'd therefore; So shall they beare the iust reuenge and doome, Their sinnes deserue by making lawes so sort▪ (Vniustly too) brewing their hands in bloud Of holy men, religious Saints, and good. 44 They by our wealth and spoiles are growne too gre And proud withall; tis time they had a fall; And neuer was inuented such a feate, To worke their vtter ouerthrow withall. Henceforth some choice yong men to worke are set, And sworne by oath, both ioynt and seuerall: Some dig and delue the earth and wals of stone, To vndermine at last the royall throne.
45 Some flie abroad, and get more companie To ioyne with them, and wish them at the day, That should amongst themselues appointed be To be all readie arm'd, that so they may Vpon a sodaine spoile their enemie, And vnawares may sweepe them all away, And rid the land cleane of this hatefull kind, That not so much as one be left behind. 46 In Percies house the diggers first begin, Which bordred neare the house of Parliament, And there they dig deepe hollow trenches in, Vntill by mining caues so farre they went, That they at last such ground thereby did win, That they vnbared (to fit their leud intent) The maine foundation of that sacred place, Which they so leudly labour'd to deface. 47 ercie meane while a celler doth espie, More fitting for their vse, because indeed Right ouer it, that ancient house did lie, With hope of spoile whereof themselues they feed: This for his mony he did hire or buy, And therein laid what should their purpose speed; But made a shew that he the same did hire, To lay in beere, and wood, and coales for fire.
48 These things thus happening to their minds so fit, They make no doubt but all will well succeed; The close of all to False they do commit, For hee's the man that vndertakes the deed: Mans name's too good, for he deserues not it, But Diuell should I call this hellish weed, Night-walking goblin, master of his skill, Falshood and fearfull mischiefe working still. 49 Gun-powder store this fellow closely brought Into their hired celler; and the same In powder barrels fully stuft and fraught, Some here, some there, he placed as it came. This did not serue his turne, but still he sought Which way he might some new-found mischiefe frame; Two barrels more he brought, full fraught likewise, With cables, ropes, and such like merchandise. 50 These things he puts right vnderneath the throne, Whereas the King himselfe in state should sit; Next, many barres of iron he layes thereon, And piles of wod againe layes ouer it: Of diuellish meanes be slips not any one, That might their diuellish cursed purpose fit; But all things e with like deuice and skill. He did contriue to worke their wicked will.
51 These things in their disorderd order done, This fellow thus possest with harmfull heart, Nouembers fift (when Parliament begun). With longing lookes for, readie for his part To act such mischiefe as ne'er saw the Sun: The thought whereof would make a good man start: Old Romes bad member wicked Catiline, And Iewish Haman may to these resigne. 52 They neuer thought on such a villanie, Nay tosse and turne the monuments of old, All bookes that write of any crueltie, Yea looke to Barbarie, yet Ile be bold Thus much to say, and to assure it thee, That all these histories will not vnfold So great, so horrible, so vile a fact, Nor such as odious, hatefull, cruell act. 53 The King, Queene, Prince, and royall progenie, The gallant Lords and Nobles of estate, The buds and branches of Nobilitie, Graue Fathers of the Law, that sit in seate Of iustice, and the reuerend Clergie, The flower of English gentrie, and that great And famous Senate-house, yea all the land Had perisht all with turning of a hand.
54 From Percies house, one cruell piercing blow Should spoile them all: euen as the silly Hare Securely sitting in her forme so low, One with his club doth kill her vnaware; The name and nation of the Brittons, so This cruell Dragon sodainly prepares Quite to suppresse; and English Christians all To swallow vp at once, both great and small. 55 Such huge wide swallowes, throates insatiate, Haue these Italian monsters: and admit They had at once both vs and all our State Brought to confusion, as they purposd it; Who should haue told the storie, or relate That dayes destruction? who could once befit Amid those ruffling ruffians, to bewray. The cities ruines, and the Realmes decay? 56 Had I an hundreth tongues, they all would faile, And to my tongues an hundreth wits withall, All would not serue to tell the dolefull tale Of all the sorrowes that on vs should fall By this their enterprise; that worke would quaile Homer himselfe the Prince of Poets all, If now he lift'd, his worke he much would feare To take in hand, as ouer-hard to beare.
57 For now me thinkes I once againe behold That famous Troy in flaming fier burne, And there where earst were pleasures manifold, All to tumultuous noise and horror turne, And gallant London gay and rich in gold, Me thinkes I see all sad, and set to mourne: London the Empires seate, and Europes mart, Of furious flames, me thinkes, doth feele the smart. 58 Me thinkes the wals are broke and battred sore, The streets with armed angry souldiers fild; Dead corps disperst abroad, all rent and tore, Streames running full of bloud vntimely spild, Streets, Churches, houses (neuer like before) Such fierce laments, nor can, nor will be stild: No place me thinkes is free, but all resound Sighes, sobs, and teares, for losses lately found. 59 Poore wofull mothers, by their houses gay, Wonder, me thinks, embracing in their armes Their tender babes, with woe and well a day, Wailing their owne, and all the cities harmes; Giuing their babes sweet kisses, but by th' way Salt teares among, as thicke as Bees in swarmes: The houses they in gentle sympathie, Suite womens moanes with mournfull melodie.
60 Me thinkes the fire consumes and burnes vp all The ancient seates of iudgement, where of old Graue reuerend Iudges sate; Westminster hall, The tombes where former kings lie clad in mold, Those tombes me thinkes by fire to ruine fall; And stately monuments bedeckt with gold, Which in that famous Church and Chappell be, And many yeares haue stood vntoucht and free. 61 Nay more, the funerall and buriall day Of countrey, citie, London, now the seate Of English Kings that Brittish Scepter sway, (So politicke their plot, their gall so great) They meant not one behind aliue should stay To celebrate the same, or mourne thereat: The King, the States, and court of Parliament, Once being gone, thus was their mischiefe bent. 62 Their purpose was the fault themselues had done, To turne the same vpon their enemie, And with the Puritanes to haue begun, To make them authors of the villanie; And to proclaime that they were those had spun The wicked we or that vile treacherie; And so to banish, kill, and roote them out, By fire and sword through all the Realme about.
63 These be the diuels arts and cunning sleight, No mans deuice, but forg'd in fire of hell, An odious fact that dare not bide the light; To hide and couer with a fact more fell, To trouble and traduce the harmlesse wight, And him by what he may to ouerquell, Whole kingdomes to subuert, and glut his throate With guiltlesse bloud, by him vntimely sought. 64 Either blacke Plutoes darke affrighting cell, Is voide of ghosts, or this is Satans deed, Plotted by man, though sprung and nurst in hell, In humane forme and shape of Adams seed: But great Iehoua, who on's throne doth dwell, Hath care of his, and from their foes hath freed; His watchfull eye each corner doth vnfold, His neuer winking lampe the seas behold. 65 The blindest corner cannot him bereaue Of piercing sight, who doth the waues make still, To whom a guilefull heart, thoughts to deceiue, Are knowne, and eke disclosed by his will. To him are rebels hatefull, that do weaue We be to destroy poore infants free from ill; But God approues of all things iust and right, And seeing our King now in a dangerous plight:
66 Our State in danger; from his throne aloft, With such like words our perill did relate: See, see, how Satan with his guilefull craft, With hellish falshood, and vnheard of hate, Hath couertly prepar'd a deadly shaft, To ouerthrow faire Englands royall state, To place mute images and gods of corne, And marble pictures, as the Gospels scorne. 67 If these his plots should take a wisht successe, The triple crowned beast of Italie, Babel the Queene of riot and excesse, The worlds illuder, full of villanie, Would soone repaire her ruinous state doubtlesse, And so frustrate the sacred prophecie, Which hath diuin'd and told so long before, The certaine ruine of that Romish whore. 68 Let's turne from England what their foes intend, To bring vpon them to their vtter fall, Destruction, thine, and a dismall end, With cruell slaughter to destroy them all: Wee see whereto their cruell plots they bend, At once to massacre both great and small: Let's therefore now their plots withstand and stay, Which they so fiercely gainst the English lay.
69 Though their defaults haue merited this ill, Though they be worthy of much punishment, Because they haue abusde our fauours still, Abusde our benefites that we haue sent To them and theirs; yet all at once to kill By their vnworthy hand we are not bent: Better it is these flames so fierce and fell, Now readie thus to burne, to quench and quell. 70 With that a swift wing'd messenger he cals, And bids him quickly tread on English ground, Warning the King by dreame, what cruell thrals Hang ore his head; what vipers do abound, Nurst in his bosome; vp and downe they crals; And now of late these vipers we haue found To haue prepar'd a bloudie treacherous gin, To snare the King, and all his kingdome in. 71 And with aduice bid him beware the place, Wherein great Romane Iulius once did fall; Then to the Lord Mounteagle hie apace, For hee's forewarn'd to keepe him from the hall▪ A friend concealing both his name and face, By letter sent, admonisht him of all, For why? (forsooth) both God and men consent To giue this wicked age due punishment.
72 Into the countrie he was will'd retire, There to expect th'euent that should ensue, And told that once the paper cast i'th fire, No further perill could to him accrew; Call to his mind, and so his heart inspire, What from the subiect, is the Princes due; Warne him that now his loue he must not hide, Nor from his country, nor his countries guide. 73 Bid him reueale the writing to the King, Which was to him so secretly directed, Without a name, but yet a happie thing, That so the plot thereby might be detected. Swiftly the legate with his featherd wing, Makes hast to England, as he was directed; And there perform'd, and acted faithfully. What was to him enioyn'd by God  high. 74 He straight inspires in noble Morleys heart, A due regard of King and countries weale; The King he lightens with a wondrous art, Obscure darke riddles easly to reueale, Like Oedipus to open euery part, And loose the knots, and tell it euery deale. One of the Priuie Councell Morley chose, To whom in order he did all disclose.
75 One whom he knew, Vlysses match to be For iudgement sound, and sharpe quickwittednesse: He tels the rest; and then both they and he Go shew the king with great amazednesse. The letter's brought; and (as in doubts we see) Each seuerall man doth giue a seuerall gesse, Our prudent King in's mind well pondring all, Brake forth at last, and let these speeches fall. 76 What points out perill may not be despised, I well remember how a litle smoke Doth shew huge flaming fires therein comprised, In straw foule tades do oft he hid and croke. I call to mind (or I am misaduised) Speeches of late haue euery where bene spoke Of busie Papists stirr'd by diuellish hate, Threatning soe mischiefe to our Realme and State. 77 Preuenting care did neuer preiudice Monarchs, whose liues with foes are set about. Perhaps their purpose is some new deuice, Some Troian horse or some seditious rout▪ Some Iacobite to make an orifice By stabbing me, to make my bloud gush out. Assure your selues they haue some plots in hand, Some monstrous mischiefe to subuert the land.
78 These are no rouings of a crazed braine, The writing sauours of some hainous plot; Hee's earnest with his friend, he should refraine, And keepe him absent out of dangers shot: Some great, some sodaine blow, some cruell baine, As fierce as lightning it doth seeme to note: Gun-powder sure he meanes so fierce and cruell, Hels damned ofspring, and destructions fuell. 79 Perhaps they meane this powder to abuse To our destruction: gladly would I know, Who dwell in houses neare, or cellers vse Vnder the hall, gainst which they bend this blow▪ Of these things would I haue the certaine newes, Ere we to any other matter go: Make carefull search therefore and what you find, Returne with speed, to satisfie my mind. 80 He that did keepe the house of Parliament, Made search forthwith, and viewed all things well, Carefull of's charge, in's dutie diligent: And what he found, he to the King did tell, That Percie in the roomes next adiacent, Vnto that house did at that in slam dwell; And that the cellers, vaults, and vnder holes, Were stuft and fraught with store of wood and coles.
81 Hence more and more suspitions did arise; And so Nouembers fourth, a worthy Knight, An ancient Courtier, trustie, graue and wise, Kneuet by name, in mids of that same night Was sent to search each thing with good aduise, And euery corner, to bring all to light; Feigning stolne garments of the Queenes he sought, Taking few with him, for suspecting ought. 82 First False he finds, the diuell of the vault, Alone, cloth'd, booted, standing at the doore: Fire-spitting Aetna he had lately fraught Fit for his purpose, with prouision store, Whereby with flashing sulphur flames, he sought To bring his country to destruction sore: Poore England now within some twelue houres after, Neare to a deadly wound and bloudy slaughter. 83 First him they fastned on, and by and by Entring the vault, the wood-piles ouerthrow; Forthwith in great amazement one did crie, Some cruell treason, here be things do show, Here's powder hid, one barrell found haue I, No doubt here's more lies hidden here below, Vnder this wood; let's search it carefully, For sure there is some monstrous villanie.
84 Treason, ah treason great, they crie amaine, And plucke out powder barrels more and more; In all they spied and disclosed plaine, Gunpowder pipes in number thirtie foure. Two barrels more the celler did containe, To furnish vp this diuellish wicked store; All fild with hellish powder, darke and blacke, Prepar'd for Englands fatall spoile and wracke. 85 In searching Faux, about his necke they spie A crucifixe, which he had hanging there, His bodie cloth'd with sackcloth inwardly, And in his clothes match hidden did he beare, Whereby he might fire to this heape apply, To make it burne, and all before it teare, And so faire Brittains Empire, English nation, Euen in a moment bring to desolation. 86 The fault it selfe was plaine and manifest, He could not hide, nor colour, nor deny't, Nor was this mind, but shamelesly confest, And voucht the fact, and said, that all the spite, And all the griefe his spitefull mind opprest, Was that the thing was disappointed quite; He blusht not to affirme himselfe distracted, Onely because the thing remain'd vnacted.
87 All in an vprore straight exclaime and crie, O heauens, O earth, O monstrous wickednesse! O new-found plot! that sauage Barbarie, Or Turkie (cruell be it) nerethelesse They cannot this foule fact exemplifie; The bloudie French massacre we confesse For bloudshed is the staine of this our age, Yet cannot march with this in equipage. 88 The rumor straight is blaz'd abroad, and spred Through citie, court, and euery countrey towne Both  and wide, on wings of fame it fled Through all the land, each village vp and downe: And euery where, where it was published, This great deliuerance of so great renowne, Wrought wondrous ioy to them, to God great praise, With hands lift vp to him with holy layes. 89 O thou that sway'st and rul'st the heauens aboue, That rul'st the earth, and mak'st the thunder cracke, That keep'st thy couenant alwayes, and thy loue, That art to anger slow, to vengeance flacke: How shall we do (as well doth vs behoue) To sound thy praises, and keepe nothing backe: What vowes shall we poore soules repay to thee, That thus from direfull slaughter setst vs free?
90 Thou didst preserue vs when we were appointed To bloudie sword, and fearfull flames of fire, To haue our bodies euery lim disiointed, By cruell slaughter and destruction dire; Thou safely keepest Sion thine annointed, And wak'st for vs though we gainst thee conspire: Thou keep'st vs from the Beares deuouring iawes, From hellish harmes, and out of Satans clawes. 91 Thy hand O Lord, twas thy right hand alone Kept and preserued vs (vnworthy we;) Twas Lord thy loue, desert in vs was none, Whereby to challenge any good from thee: When we like rebels had against thee gone, Stiffe necked, vicious, leud as leud may be, Contemning still thy worship and thy name, Scorning the Prophets that declare the same. 92 To liue vpright we hold it a disgrace, And hee's most blamed that doth no man wrong, As madmen vse, when as there comes in place A quiet, sober minded man among Such mad companions, him they will outface, And make of him their laughing stocke, their song; They thinke him mad, because he is not mad; So him that doth least harme, we thinke most bad.
93 Thy bounteous goodnesse Lord doth farre exceed, That carest for such a people so vnworthy, And that at such a time, a time of need, So carest for them that care so little for thee; For thee or thine so small their care indeed, As rather might to wrath and vengeance stirre thee; For, honour, pleasure, gaine, is all their aime, To get themselues a great and glorious name. 94 Lord let thy bountie soften at the last, And mollifie our hard and stonie heart, Dissolue vs all to teares for follies past, Rou v our slouth with thy all-piercing dart, Shake off our drowzinesse hangs on so fast, So old, so strong, that we can hardly part: Lighten our eyes, our sinnes fore past to see; Seene, to bewaile with teares (O Lord) to thee. 95 O Lord we know and must acknowledge it, Thy holy word to be the onely treasure, The whole worlds compasse cannot sample it With equall worth, or neare in any measure; Lord let vs liue worthy the light of it, To make thy word our onely ioy and pleasure: Lord let not vs that Christ his name do beare, Liue heathen-like, voide of thy holy feare.
96 That yeare of late of great mortalitie, Did thousands of our brethren sweepe away, When that great Plague did rage so cruelly, And euery where vpon so many pray; And now these hellish snares full narrowly We haue escaped in this happie day: The sword now readie to haue cut our throte, Thou hast pull'd backe, so that it hurt vs not. 97 These things (O Lord) crie out, and crie amaine, That thou for sinne art angry with our land; Threatnest, although to strike thou doest refer Thou shewst the rod, and with a gentle hand Thou shak'st it ouer vs, and layst it downe againe: Euen as we may conceiue a mother stand With trembling hands, offring to beate her sonne, But yet relents before the deed be done. 98 And if words, warnings, threatnings ferly, Will nought preuaile, nor do vs any good; (For all of these we haue had formerly, And nothing now remaines but pes and bloud) We may expect thy great seueritie, That haue so long against thy patience stood: Now looke that thou to punish wilt begin And burne vs vp like stubble for our sin.
99 But Lord let vs (so often warn'd by thee) Learne now at last thy iudgements to beware, Learne to adore thy sacred Maiestie, Learne of thy word and Gospell greater care, To bring forth fruite in more sinceritie; But after Babylon that Romish chaire, That seate of Antichrist, all goodmens foe, That sinke of sinne, Lord let vs neuer go. 100 Grant rather (Lord) those Prophecies of yore, May now by vs be fully complished, That we may burne that great, that purple Whore, That hath so long with bloud of Saints bene fed; And race those Romaine towers, which heretofore Were built by bloud, and to that glory spred: Grant Lord this glory to our worthy King, Let him and his, Romes pompe to ruine bring. 101 Lord, as his life was precious in thy sight, So let thy glorie be to him most deare, Still to aduance thy glorious Gospels light, Throng hall his Realmes, and kingdoms farre and heare; Know and auoide his foes, and by his might To punish those that hatefull minds do beare: To pitie those that faithfull are and true, And  rebellious subiects to subdue.
102 Lord make his zeales of righteousnesse so great, That he may make it runne like water-streames, Through all the coasts of his Imperiall seate; Each citie, countrey, corner of his Realmes, So let him rule, so gouerne and intreate His mightie people by his princely beames, That liuing, loued; after death his name May euer liue in euerlasting fame. 103 Those Worthy Peeres and Nobles of the land, And that great Senate of the Parliament, For so great bountie from thy gracious hand, So great deliuerance to her countrey sent, Lord let them euer for thy glorie stand, That still so graciously to them art bt: There, let good lawes by them enacted be, For Church and kingdomes safe prosperitie. 104 Euen there I say, where they appointed like harmlesse sheepe to slaught  to fire, There let their care and wisedom  appeals, To giue their foes their due desered hire; Those Cananites, that Rome such loue do beare, And nor aduancement do so much desire, Let them by law be rooted out from hence, That haue  long bene cause of much esce.
105 These many yeares to vs and to our State, They haue bene pricks and thornes; and now they meant This stratageme which they deuisde of late, Should to this land a fatall blow haue lent; All at one blow (as they had laid their baite) To cut their countries throate was their intent, That so the acting of their tragedie, To Neroes wishes might compared be. 106 Such miscreants that breathe out nought but blood, Slaughter of innocents, murders of kings, Stealth, rapine, incest, nothing that is good; Most filthy whoredomes are but trifling things With them that are of this accursed brood, Distast to them no sinne or mischiefe brings; No, not those sins, whereof the very name, True Christians do abhorre, detest, and shame. 107 A filthy see, and yearely rent they take, Of common whores, and neuer blush withall: Of heauen and earth they do a mixture make, A viperous generall  are they all, That in their countries bowels loue to rake, All full of poison, full of bitter gall. And shall we harbour in our bosomes then Such monsters, odious both to God and men?
108 Which care not to deface, and quite blot out Euen natures lawes, ingrauen in our hearts From heauen aboue; which daily go about To breake the sinewes and the strongest parts Of humane life; a cruell sauage rout, Which still delight in shooting deadly darts; Which act such things, as Turke or Africane, The Indian or Barbarian would disdaine. 109 Lord of this people and their wickednesse, Long triall, many warnings haue we had, Our selues against our selues are witnesses, If still we foster them so beastly bad, Worthy we are to fall (remedilesse) Into those pits that they for vs haue laid: And thou (Lord) counted iust in after ages, If thus thou leaue vs to their cruell rages. 110 Let's rather Lord, with all our force and mights, The vigour of our spirits and our wits, Th  lots selfe and all her subtill sleights, audid and shun, as well bests, ll befits vs poore vnworthy wights, by thee freed from their dangerous pits: ord let vs henceforth neuer entertaine endship or fellowship with them againe.
111 Thou mightie Father, our eternall God, Our portion, and the shield of our defence, Which still hast kept vs from our enemies rod, Vnder the wings of thy omnipotence. As hitherto thou hast out foes downe trod, So keepe them vnder still, still keepe them hence, Still scatter and disperse their Romish wiles, Their subtill sleights and Babylonish guiles. 112 That so they may be taught and learne thereby No more to fight gainst heauen and heauenly powers, No more to glut themselues so greedily With bloud of holy ones; as this land of ours By wofull triall well may testifie, Hauing from them bid many stormie showers: Lord teach them by thy iudgements to surcease Their plots, so farre from pietie and peace. 113 o we thy power and mightie Maiestie, With thankfull minds shall euermore record, With chearfull vere and solemne melodie, Thy name, thine nor, and thy praise O Lor temple, house, et, towne, and coloure, Of English nation aye shall be ador'd: Thy worship there shall spring; and neuer die, While glittering Sunne circles the starrie skie. FINIS
