1376 S108235 99843907 8672
¶A Dolorous discourse, of a most terrible and bloudy Battel, fought in Barbarie, the fowrth day of August, last past. 1578. ƲƲherein were slaine, two Kings, (but as most then say) three, be∣syde many  mous persona∣ges: with  umber of Captains, and  Souldiers that were ine on both sides. Whereunto is also annexed, a note of the names of diuerse that were taken prisoners at the same time. printer's device of John Charlwood, consisting of the arms of the city of Geneva (divided vertically into two equal parts and showing the left half of the imperial eagle and a key of St. Peter) first used by Rowland Hall in Geneva in 1562-53 and passed to John Charlwood at an unknown date (McKerrow) POST TENEBRAS LVX abonde.
❧ To the Reader. IT was not with∣out great reason, (gen∣tle Reader,) that the auncient Poets in old time; fained Phaeton to fal from heauen, and to be drowned in the deapth of the Sea: because not con∣tented with his calling, he woulde of a prowde ambicious minde, presume to take vppon him the gouernement of his Father Phaebus Chariot, being a thing farre beyond his skil to compas. For surely there is not in the whole world, a more pestilent euil, or a thing that breedeth so much mischife, as doth the cankred and most accursed vice of ambition, which not onely worketh the ruine of the partye therewith pos∣cessed: but often times causeth the con∣fusion of many mighty Monark and
e vtter ouerthrovv of whole Coun∣treyes and common weales. Wherewith the words of Cornelius rus do verry aptly agree, who saith that after the desier of principallytie had longe continued in the mindes of men vndiscouered: when Princes be∣an to enlarge their Limittes, and to make their dominions greater: when they began to conquer kingdomes, and enuying the felicitie of common weales, desired the confusion and vtter ouerthrowe one of another. Then be∣gan this ambition first of all to breake out, which as (Saint Barnard saieth) pleaseth and delighteth euery man, and yet is there nothinge that doth more cruelly crucifie or breede more vnqui∣etnes, then it doth. For from whence springeth bloody warres so much, as from this roote of Ambition. What causeth so manye to endure the extremitie of the coulde Winter nightes, by lying abroade in the open
Feeldes without any harbour, and to abide the heate of the whot Sommer season being clogged with the carry∣age of their vnweldye armoure: but onelye ambicion? Is it ought els but this greedy ambi∣tion, that maketh men to trauell so many intemperate countryes, and des∣perately to runne into so many doubt∣full daingers as they do? In conclusion, there is nothing that more breaketh the bandes of beneuo∣lence, abateth the obedience of childrē towardes their Parentes: the loue of Parentes, towardes their Children: the dutye of subiectes, towardes their Princes, and the care of Countryes commoditye, from al men, as doth this abominable vice of ambicion. Whereof dyuers historyes aswell of auncient time, as examples daylye shewed amongst vs, is a most perfect testimony. By the greedye ambition of Scilla Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Pompeius, and Caesar,
there were more slaine amongst the Romaines, then in conquering to them the kingdome of the whole world. Silla condempned & caused to be exe∣cuted 80000. Romaines, besydes many ore that were slaine in the ciuil wars, betweene him and both the Marius. Also Pompeius and Iulius Caesar, the one suffring no peere, the other no su∣periour, by their insasiable ambition, caused innumerable people to be slaine betweene them, and subuerted the best and most renowmed publique weale, in the whole world: and finally, enioy∣ing little time to reioyce them in theyr vnlawfull desires, Pompeius shamefullye flyinge, had his head stroken off, by the commaundement of Ptolome Kinge of Egipt: vnto whom as to his frende he fled for succour, and Caesar that was the vanquisher, was shortlye after cruellye murdred in the Senate, with daggers, by them whom he best trusted, and most specially fauowred. It would require much time, and a
verye large volume, to make mencion of all those that heretofore, by coueting to encrease their credit and estimation in the worlde, and to aduaunce them∣selues to high dignities, haue brought both themselues and their countryes to extreame daunger. But I will leaue heere to rehearse any more of such antiquitye, and shew a more liuely & lamentable example, of three renowmed Princes: who not longe since by their ambicious desires, did not onely procure their owne vn∣timely death: but also the destruction of many thousandes of their people, in the maintenaunce of their vniust quar∣rels, as by that which followeth shall more manifestly appeare. But before I proceede to the matter, I haue here thought good, for the rea∣ders better instruction, breflye to discribe the country of Barbary, and the customes thereof. (∵)
❧ A discription of the orders and customes of Barbary. BArbary, is a country scituate in Affrica, in∣habited with a bar∣barous people obseruinge the lawes of Mahomet, geuen (for the most part) to idle∣nes, & sundry supersticions. In this Countrye are manie Iewes enhabiting, in whose handes consisteth the most parte of the tra∣fique of the Country, being the onelye Marchantes of Sugers, Mallasses, and other ritche marchandize which the same yeldeth: for the which, they paye great sums of money to the king. And now to the matter.
¶A Dolorous discourse of a most terrible blouddy Battell fought in Barbarie the. 4. of August. 1578. VNderstande, that not long synce, there raygned ouer the countrey of Barbary, a King named Mully Hamet Shek▪ who had diuers Sons by sun∣dry his Wiues and Concubines: for there they maye haue as manye wiues as they wyll. The King passing on a tyme from Moroccus, the chiefe City of his coū∣trey, towards another Countrey of his, called Sus, was in the mydway, at a place called Bibon, murdred by his owne men. After him raigned one of his Sons called Mulla Abdula: by whose mea∣nes a Noble man of yt countrey, cal∣led Alcatho Alley, caused the throtes of eleuen of the Kinges Brethren, to be cutte in one morning.
Two other of his brethren fled for feare into Turky, and were there brought vp in the Turks warres. One other of his Brethren named Mulla Hamet, remayned styll in Bar∣bary, without any violence offered vnto him, and was well beloued of his wicked brother: so that he grew verye rytch, and was in great estimation throughout the whole countrey. And as cruel murder can neuer lōg rest vnrewarded. This Alkatho Al∣ley, the onely minister of the Kinges mischieuous deuise, was in the ende measured with such a lyke measure, as he had before meat to the Kings brethren. Now the cruel king Mulla Abdula: amongst manye other, taking to his wife a bond woman, that was a Blacke Negro, had by her a sonne, called Mulla Sheriffa: who for that he was of his Mothers complection, as cōmonly called the Black King,
to whome Mulla Abdula his Father commytted the kingdome after his death, as to his onely heyre. Mulla Hamet, after the death of his brother Abdula, fearing the tyranny of his Blacke Neuew that succeded him, fled incontinently with all his substaunce and treasure, to Argere, a Towne belonging to y• Turke, wher he remayned in good safetie. Mulla Sheriffa, hauing for a whyle peaceably possessed the Crowne, be∣came in the ende so cruel a tyrant, as his people therfore hating him, mur¦mured in their mindes at his great seuerity, and in the ende burst out in plaine speches, saying: that the sonne of a bond woman should not raigne ouer them. Mulla Hamet, his Vncle, remaining all this whyle at Argere, & vnderstā∣ding how the people were enclined, by the procurement of the most part of the Nobility of the Realme: sent to his Brother Mulla Maluca, that
remayned with the Turke, wylling him with all expedition, to procure such forces as he coulde, & to returne therwith into the coūtry of Barbary, where he certifyed him yt he shoulde be sure to finde such friendes as hee might easely attaine to ye Crowne. With this good hope, Mulla Malu∣ca, hauing obtayned of the Turke (in recompence of his long seruice with him) a band of. 10000. Turks. He en∣tred with them into Barbary, where hee was wyllingly receyued by his friends and fauourers, and greatlie succoured, aswel by them, as with ye substaunce of his brother Mulla Ha∣mer, who spared nothing to plea∣sure him with all, or to further his present enterprise. Mulla Sheriffa, his Black Nephew, vnderstanding of his comming: Le∣uied a huge Army, to make respstāce against him: but yet although his power farre surmounted the nūber of his enemies, yea: though hee had
ten to one, more thē his Vncle Mu¦la Maluca: Yet what through his owne valliancie, and the good wyll that he knewe the common people bare to him. Mulla Maluca, dyd in short tyme so preuaile against the sayd Sheriffa, as dryuing him to the Mountaynes of the countrey, he obteyned possession of the Crowne, and euer synce hath continued king of Barbary: where he was well beloued of his people, be∣ing a man very actyue, and of great agillitie, skylfull in warres, wherein from his youth he had alwayes ben trayned vp: and as men report, mi∣nistred Iustice with equitie, much fauouring Christians, and specialie our Nation. The Blacke king, when he fled in∣to the Mountaynes, carryed with him a great parte of the Treasure of the Countrey, and dayly dystur∣bed the quyet possession of his Vncle Maluca. Who slepte not in the
meane space: but prepared by all meanes to preuent whatsoeuer his Blacke Nephew myght doo to his preiudice. And in the ende, draue him to so great extremitie, that he was forced to craue ayde of the king of Portingale: who hath certayne holdes in that countrey. The Kinge of Portingale being a lusty young Gentleman, about. xxiij. yeares of age, peraduenture pricked forwarde by a vaine hope and am∣bitious desire of gaine and glory, not respecting the perril yt depēded ther vppon: promised the sayd Sheriffa to performe his desyre therein. And thereupon leuied an Armye, to the number of. 40000. in all: to wete 16000. Portingale footemenne, and 4000. horsemen. 10000. footemen of Spaniards, high Almaines and Ita∣lians, and. 10000. that were Pages, Seruauntes, Purueiours, and such lyke continuallye accompaning the Campe. With this power the king
of Portingale in his owne person accompanied with a great number of his Nobillitie, departed out of his owne countrey on the .xiiii. day of Iuly. 1578. and with his whole fleete first ariued at a town in Spaine called Calez: where he made his a∣bode for ye space of. viij. whole dayes together, the occasion whereof was, (as some suppose) to furninsh his Ar¦mye with all such things, as should be needefull for the prosecution of his pretensed purpose. And on the. 22. daye of the foresayd month of Iuly, he gathered his men together, and with all expedition passed frō Calez, to another Towne lying within the bordrs of Barba∣ry, called Tanos: where hee mett with the Blacke Kings, who had with him, fyue hundreth Mores Horsemen. And after he had also so∣iourned therefor a seasō, he departed from thence to Argele: Which is a certayne Houlde that the sayde king
of Portingale hath in Barbary, and after his departure from thence. The fyrst daye, which was the. 29 day of the sayd Iuly: the sayd king of Portingale with his whole power, marched forward one League far∣der, which is three of our Englishe miles, & pitched his Tents in a place called Sweete Riuer. The second day, he went forward one League more, and in that place remained for the space of two whole dayes. In which tyme there was discouered on the toppe of a verye high hil, a troope of Horsemen of the Mores, which wereby estimation, not aboue the number of. 400. in the whole, and the cause of their com∣ming, as it might very well be ima∣gined, was onelye to take a view of the king of Portingales Campe, to know of what power he was: whi∣che indeede standeth greatlye with reason, for that after their appea∣raunce, they departed againe so sud∣dainlye
without  or making any other The third day of y  proceeding, he marche  Leagues farder, and  ¦stance quietly pitched hi  vnto a Ryuer called Qu, remayned all that night. The. 4. day he also m  furder, & arriued at a City of the oes, called Alcasar Kiber, bten ich City & them, ran the great  ∣sa: and the bridge therof was ∣lye garded by. 2000. Mores en: that the king of Portingale perg it to be impossible without  to passe that way: because he w re his men tyl more meet  ght be offred for the prosecution of his pre∣sent enterprise: he ced the contrey to finde out some otherwaye moe ft for his purpose. And at th lengt me to a lytle Foorde whee he  o∣r his whole Army his Ordinance, & carriages, without any dnr o fi∣culty t al, which
worke, he was constrayned to harbor there all that night. The next daye the king of Portingale called all his most wyse & best experien∣ced Captaines to counsell, & asked theyr aduise: whether it were better for him with his whole power to martche to∣warde Alcasany: which being a drye Towne, though there were in it about the nūber of. 7000. housholds, yet was it but weake, vnmeete to make any great encounter, and not able long to stand in resystaunce. Or else to proceede forewarde on his waye towards the Towne Alcasar Ki∣ber, before named. This being long debated betweene them, euerie man alleadging what he lysted: After they had all particularly expressed their opinions therin, som one way, and some another way: in the end it was concluded with a general consēt that he should keepe his course toward lcasar Kiber, which he performed c∣dingly. He had not passed very farre before he
discouered Mulla Maluca, that was king of Barbary, martching towords him with a great power of men, which were valued to be in number. 70000. Horsemen, &. 40000. Footemen, wher∣of. 20000. were Horsemen shotte, and 10000. Footemen gunners, besydes o∣ther followers of the campe: whose nū∣ber I haue not heard, and therfore can∣not make a true report thereof. But because the day was quite spent before the two Armyes could com y thing neere together, they both ncāped them selues there that night, in syght the one of the other. The next daye, being the fowrth of August. 1578. the King of Portingale de∣uided his battel into fowre squdrons: whereof he appoynted to Don Duere Mennesses, Generall of the Army, the leading of the Vautgrde. The second Squadron, the king Portingale himself tooke charge off. Vpon the right hande was the Blacke king Sheriffa, with his Horsemen: And vpon the left hande; the Duke Dauerro, the eldest sonne of the
Duke of Bargansy, with the. 4. Squa∣on. King Maluca, dyd also vse the lyke other in the deuision of his Army. All thinges being thus prepared on both sydes, the two Kinges purposyng to put themselues to the hazarde of that hich shoulde happen, adressed them¦selues to fight. King Maluca, fyrst gaue the Onfette vpon the Horsemen of the Portingales Armye, but they vallyauntly defended them selues, and in the ende forced Ma∣a and his Mores, to retyre with the loise of many of them. But Maluca herewith nothing dys∣couraged, bringing his men agayne in good order of Battell: gaue such a fresh charge vppon the Kyng of Portingales Horsemen, as he constrained them to re∣tyre vnto the mayne battell. But the Portingales Horsemen, being ncontinently gathered againe together n good order, they gaue the Mores such  sharpe charge, that they flewe a great
number of them. The Mores agayne returned freshly vppon the forces of the Portingale horse∣men, forcing them to ioygne with theyr footemen. Which done, the sayde Portyngales gaue a newe chardge vpon the Mores: But theyr best Souldiors beyng slayne before, and hauing no newe succourers, to supplye theyr wantes: for that they were farre from theyr friendes, and in a forrayne countrey, amongst theyr mortall enemyes: whose power great∣lye surpassed theyrs, they were not able to doe any good at all. But the Mores styll remayning verye stronge, with the force of their Horse∣men shotte, and footemen Gunners, so brake the arrayes of the Portingale Horsemen, as they ouerthrewe, kylled, and tooke Captyue, the whole Ar∣mye, excepte. 80. or. 100. personnes at the most, that saued them selues by flight.
In this conflicte were slaine. 3000. Almaines. 700. Italians, and. 2000. Spa∣rds. whereof Don Allonso Dageler night of Cordua was one. In this last battel, it is supposed that  the three Kinges were slaine. he names of the Portingale Nobility, that were slaine. Don Sabastian, Kinge of Portingale. Don Lewis, de Cordua. on Diego de Mennesses. eorge de Silua Gouernoure and Iustice of Portingale. Don Francisco de Portingale. Don Francisco, sonne to the Countye of Sortelha. Don Constantino. Don Ferdinando de Silua. Don Allonso de Almado. Don Christopher, and Don Auero Peeres of Trauora. Don Aluaro de Silua. More. Sheriffa the black Kinge.
¶The names of such as were taken, and are knowen to reaine  in Barbary. THe Duke of Bargansas Sonne. Don Duart de Mennesses, great ¦ster of the Campe, and Generall of the Tangere. Don Farnando de Castra▪ Controwler of the Fenances. Don Diego de Silua. Don Piedro de Mennesss. ¶Diuerse other Lordes and noble men there are missing, but whether they be slaine, or taken Captiues, it is not yet certainelye knowen. The dead body of the Kinge of Por∣tingale is reported to remn in Alcr Kiber, for ye delyuery wherof the Moes require in raunsome the townes
Fues and Arsylla, with the Munition therein. There is offered for the raunsome of the Duke of Bargansa his sonne. 10000. Duccats: but it is refused. The King of Portingale lost by this Battell. 22. peeces of Ordinaunce. 700. Chariottes, with Mules and Oxen: be∣sydes many other thinges of very great vallue. There were slayne of the Barbarians about the number of. 40. or. 50. thou∣sand one with another, whereof the King is supposed to be one. The Portingales haue chosen for their King, a Cardinall, that was great Uncle to their late King desceased. FINIS.
The Conclusion. BEholde here, (gentle Read)  ende that greedy ambicion ( breedeth so many bloudy broyl  bringeth them vnto, that imbrace Let the pittyfull spectacle here downe to thy view: of the woful ad¦ture that happened to the Princes ¦fore spoken off, by the confusion of t people, and losse of theyr owne ly serue thee as an exāple, (of what de so euer thou bee,) when thou feelest ¦selfe prycked forward to the lyke en prise: by reason, to remoue frō thee,  deuyllish desyre, which so greatly b¦deth the vnderstanding of many re¦nable creatures, alluring them thro a conceyued hope of yt which can n be compassed, to cōmyt things contr to all order & honesty: not regarding  rewarde yt ryghtfully belongeth to  aspyring mindes, nor the mserabl  of them that are so ambiusly If Mulla Sheryffa, the  Kynge here spoken off
was in quiet possession of his kingdom, coulde haue gouerned his people with ety, & had not of a prowde ambici∣o mind, (to make his power appeare th greater) So greuously oppressed thē  tyrany as he did: theyr loue towards him would haue ben such, as his vncles r shoulde neuer haue so preuayled nst him, as it dyd. the sayde Maluca coulde haue con∣te him with the good estate he was  and had not lefte the seruice of the , (where he lyued peaceably, in eat honour and estimation,) to make himselfe king of Barbary, by dispossessing his Nephew of his ryghtfull enhery∣tance: ye king of Portingale would neuer hae bene prouoked to make warres upon him, and to worke his confusion, as he dyd. Finally, if the king of Portingale, had not of an ambicious minde, bene moued to enlarge his Dominions, with ano∣thers losse, and to encrease his Fame by his rashnes: in waging warres with th sayde king Maluca, he shoulde not
haue brought himselfe, & so many  Gentlemen, to that myserable ende yt he dyd, in a barborous countrey, amongst a sort of brutishe Infydelles: but might haue lyued in peace and great prosperi∣tie in his owne countrey, and haue styll continued that commendatiō which by his vertues and vallure he had woon & well deserued: whose lyke for wisdome, courage, and good qualities (in such young yeares) Portingale was neuer possessed withall before. And therefore all Chrinstendome, but especially the poore widdowes, and fa∣therles chyldren, in Portingale, maye well with most pittifull complayntes, & lamentable cryes, accompanied with floods of teares: be wayle, though all to late, the vnlucky lot of that vnfortunate Prince, and the dolefull daye, wherin vnaduisedly, he fyrst began this his vn∣happy enterprise. O myserable man, borne to woe and callamitie: was it not sufficient that a thousande thousande mischiefes, wher∣vnto thou wast borne, shoulde fall vpon
thee, and ouerwhelme thee in this vale of mysery: but that thou must by thyne owne vnkindly inclination, adde there∣vnto murder, discorde, and deuision be∣twene countrey & countrey, so carelesly: as thou dost, contrary to the custome of ll other earthly creatures of Gods cre∣ating. What pleasure hast thou in the spoyle of thy people, O thou prowd and ambi∣cions Prince? that to purchase to thy self such things as thou must leaue behynde thee, when God calleth thee away, out of this transitory worlde: wylt put so many in peryll of theyr life. When thou has attayned to thy insatiable desyre, thy mynde is neuer satisfyed therwith, vnyll thou thy selfe arte also become a pray to the woormes of the earth, or the es of the ayre. And what shall then remayne vnto thee, of all the spoyles and vyctories, that with the bloudshed of many thou∣sande men, thou hast acquyred in thy whole lyfe tyme: surely nothing else but a syllye wynding sheete, and peraduen∣ture
want that too,  chaunce  not the better. O Christian Princes, imbrace peace, seeke to haue loue and amytie one with another, to the strengthening, estably∣shing, and enlarginge of Christendome: least the Infydelles, for the synnes of you and your people, be a scourge to you all. Hath not God by his infynite, and incomprehensyble wisedome, wonder∣fullye wrought in the placing of your Prouinces: euerye one with such sun∣drye commodityes, as the one shoulde alwayes haue neede of the other, to the ende that you shoulde lynke in Loue, and lyue in contynuall concorde, one wyth another? Yes verelye: And wherefore doo ye then alter the decree, and determynation of the Almyghtye: Who hath appoynted all these thynges for the benefyte of his people? O ye Subiectes,  your hartye prayers, for peace and quietnes, and th continuance therof: that you with you wiues, chyldren, friend, and
maye lyue quietly and peaceably toge∣ther, mayntayning with your necessary trauayl, your countreys fertillitie, to the auoyding of penury, and the preuenting of such lyke mischeuous murders, and stly blouddy broyles, as are before spen of. O ye Prelates, Prophets, and Prea∣chers, if you be the Messengers and Ministers of our Sauior Iesus Christ: Preach to your Princes, and as Christ dyd, so do ye perswade youthfull Prin∣ces from seeking such bloudy battels: so shall ye be knowne to be the Disciples of that heauenly Messias. But if any perswade Princes to the shedding of blood, murdring of Inno∣centes, and to make spoyle of the people, whome God hath onely created to his glory. They are not the seruauntes of Iesus of Iesus Christ: but in deede the very schoollers of Antichrist, & the mes∣sengers of mischiefe. To conclude, I woulde councell all men▪ of what calling so euer they be, as
well Princes, as priuate  ¦tistie: them selues with that whiche t shall please God to inte vnto the: not seeking by vnlawful meanes, to en∣haunce them selues higher then GOD hath appointed, least for their great vn∣thankfulnes, he do not onely disapoynt them of their pretensed purpose: but al∣so bereaue them of those benefits, which before he had bountifully be stowed vpō them, which is the iust rewarde belon∣ging to such vngratefull persons. Surely if men woulde call to remem∣braunce, the care, trouble, feare, & conti∣nuall daunger, that alwayes accompa∣nieth those that be aduaunced to highe dignities, and woulde aye with all, what assured safetie, coneth in the meane estate: I am full swaded yt they would not thē so pre for promo∣tion as they dayly doo, nor seeke with such incessaunt payne and peryll, to pur∣chase a thing so vnprofytable: but ra∣ther to shunne it as a most pestelent e∣uyl, being ye only corrupter of good ma∣ners, & vanquisher of vertue, esteeming
to lyue contented with a lytle:  seeking by dishonest meanes to hase great abundance, to put both  nd body in daunger, the one of  ation, the other of destruction. which enormities, the Lord for  mercies sake delyuer vs: and make  ndfull of his manifold benefytes,  bstowed vpon vs: farre more ly∣▪ then we can eyther desyre, or , Amen. FINIS. x super omnia prodest. printed at London by ohn Charlewood, and Tho∣mas Man.
