15097 99843844 8603
THE BLESSEDNES OF BRYTAINE, OR A Celebration of the Queenes Holyday. Wherein is briefly discoursed the most happy Regiment of her Highnes. Newly set foorth vvith a Nevv Addition Containing the late Accidents and Occur∣rents of this yeere 88. being the Thirtieth of hir Maiesties Raigne. By M. Kyffin. 1. Pet. 2.17. Deum timete: Regem Honorate. 1. Tim. 2.2. Fiant preces pro Regibus & Principibus, vt tranquillam & quietam vitam degamus cum omni pietate & honestate. Published with Authoritie. LONDON Printed by John VVolfe. 1588.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣rable Sir Robert Devreux Knight, Erle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount Hereford, and Bourgchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartleigh, Bourgchier and Lovain, and Maister of her Maiesties Horse. THE faythfull loue, and duetie, (Right honorable) long since deseruedly born, by my deceased Father, both to your lordships Noble Graundfather, and likewise to the famous and woorthie Erle your Father, (vnto whom for diuers respects, hee was much bounden being aliue, and being dead, left the like Bond of dutie, in vs his Children towards your Lordship) hath the more emboldened me, (presuming on your Lordships great Courtesies) to publish under your fauorable protecti∣on, these my vnpolished verses, of hir Maiesties: wherein, though I haue but showen my leaden skill, in a Golden Cause, yet hath the same pro∣ceeded from such ardent desire, and deuotion in mee, as thereby it may seeme, in some meane, to merite Tolleration, especially, sith it carrieth a dutifull remembrance, of hir Maiesties most prosperous and peacea∣ble raigne ouer vs: which hauing run the full, and Blessed Course, of Nyne and Twenty yeeres; doth now, begin the Thirtieth, to the great ioy, and inspeakeable comfort of this hir royall Kingdome; In reuerend regard whereof, this poore Poem is most chiefly intended: I humbly therefore, present it to the Courteous acceptation of your most Honorable Lordship: Whom I beseech the Highest to blesse, and enriche, with increase of all perfect Honour, long life, and euer during felicitie. Most humble at your good Lordships commandment. M. K.
D. P. To the Reader. TWo things make blisfull Realmes, Religion pure and Peace: Which Two our England hath enioyd, long time with large increase. The God of peace be praisd, who graunts our Birth and Being. In this same Realme, with this Rare Prince, these gladsome Seasons seeing. And pray wee God likewise, this State still to defend: Preseruing it in perfect Peace, til that the worlde take end. The Author of this booke, deserues a during fame, Who chose a good Groūd for his work, & wrought well on the same. T. LL. In praise of this booke, and the Author. WHo list to see her Noble deeds displaid, Whose golden gifts, eche creature doth adore, Whose Vertues Rare, haue hauty hearts dismaid, Whose Name, and Fame, encreaseth more and more: Let them peruse this Poem, with Aduise, By Kyffins pen, put down in perfect wise. A work of woorth, beseeming well his Arte, So fitly framd, and fraught with tryed Truthe, As may Reioyce, eche loyall subiects heart, To heare, and see; which hidden had bin Ruthe. Our Queenes long Raigne, to our still during ioy, The King of Kings, preserue free from Annoy. I. H. In commendation of this worke, and the writer. THe Persian Cyrus, Xenophons penne, Achilles, Homersfound: King Alexanders valure great, did Curtius stile resound, Their worthie fame, those worthie wittes, to skies aloft doo send, Those worthie wits, cake by their fame themselues to fame commend. Though skilfull Muses notes come short to sound this Princesse prayse, Her Princely gifts, her Iustice mylde, her Peacefull lasting dayes: Yet Kyffins Muse in stately stile, hath shot: so neare the same. That by resounding worthie praise, himselfe deserueth fame. R. Cooke. In commendation of his friend M. Kyffin. THe frutefull Muses seeme, to haue conspird, with full assent, Vplifting Kyffins lore, with weightie woords to work Content: The subiect of his Verse, is sacred, firme, and full of grace, Whereon his Web is wrought, whose learned skill, none can deface, Momus the carping God, to Cauill heere can finde no cause, And Zoylus spitefull wretch, hath heere wherewith to stop his iawes.
THE BLESSEDNES OF BRYTAINE. PEarce Clio Muse, my weake, vnwoorthie wit: Caliope, set foorth my stile with strength, Ʋnfold her Fame (with words foorth sounding fit,) Whom Kings adore, and Lords in worldly length: Whose Sacred Hands the Stately Scepters hold, And Royall, Rules her Realmes in Crowned gold. A Monarch Maiden Queene adorned rare, VVith Regall Heauenly dowres, of diuers kinde: In whom, who list dame Natures Woorkes compare, VVith those rich Thewes, & Vertues of her Minde, Shall much admire, at such a Myrrour sheene, At such a Prince, at such a Peereles Queene.
The Starre of VVomen Sex, Graue Wisdoms store: Sententious, speaking Tongs in filed phraze, Profoundly learnd, and Perfect in eche Lore, Her Fame, no Rav'ning Time shall euer Raze: Hater of Wrong, high Refuge eke for Right, Concord, and Peace, continuing by her Might. Besides that such maner of Reciting strange and Hethenish Names, were here altoge∣ther incōue∣nient. The author doth also of very purpose, somewhat shun that beaten high way, to fill paper with pestring Names of fained Gods, Goddesses: Nymphs, Per¦sians, Greci∣ans, Romans, &c. Being a thing of some som∣times vsed, too, too much & to litle effect.VVhat should J Nymphs, or Goddesses Recount? Or Aegypt Queenes, or Romane Ladies name? Sith as Supreme, our Sov'raigne dooth surmount, In choice of Good, the cheefe of all those same? For to compare the Great, with simple small, Is thereby, not to praise the BEST at all. Elizabeth, Large Light of Sov'raigne Seat, VVhose Iustice, Prudence, Temprance, Fortitude, Ingrafted yong, are grown foorth spreading Great, Throughout the world, mong Nations wise & rude: No land, but laudes this right Resplendant Rose, Tutor to Frends, and Terror vnto Foes.
As Shining Sunne recleeres the darkned Skye,The reesta∣blishing of the Gospell, by her Ma∣iestie, a work of inestima∣ble worth, e∣uerlastingly famous for e∣uer and euer. Primaria Principis Curia, Reli∣gio. Da∣uid. 1. . 13. Asa. 2. par. 14 Icho. 2. P. 17 Ioash. 2. p. 23 Iosias, 2. Reg. 22. Hez. 2. p. 29. And foorth recalles eche thing, from shiv'ring Shrowds, So hath our Second Sunne, both farre and nye, By brightning Beames, outcleerd erronious Clouds: A pow'rfull Prop of Christes Euangell pure, On whose Support, it rests Reposed sure. Our Currant Coyne, was Mettall base and meane,Argentum tuū Scoria. Isaiah. 1.22. Till her most princely Grace, the same put out, By perfect Gold, and pured Siluer cleane,Base Coynes abolished by her highnes. Which passe for cōmon Coynes, her Realms throughout. A Deede, deseruing her Perpetuall Praise, And Publik Profit, to this Land alwaies. Ad hereto Armour, and Artillerie,The royal in∣crease of Ar∣mour, & Ar∣tillery, by her Maiestie for the defence of the Realm. Foelix est ea Resp. quae tē pore pacis, Bella tra∣ctat. Laur. Grimal. de optimo Sena∣tore. fol. 71. Of her most Royall Charges cheefely found; As store of Arming steele defensiuely, And Roring Gunnes, far rendring fired sound; A furd'ring Strength for Peace, and safe Repose: And Meanes, resisting Rage, of Warring foes.
J may not heere omit in Silent sorte,The incompa¦rable Nauie. Royall, built & maintained by her Maie∣stie. Pericles A∣then, ait: V∣nā pecuniae parādae rati∣onem putā∣dam, Naues quā∣plurimas ha bere, alias ve¦ro extra eam rationes, nul lius momēti existimādas. Her Royall Ships strong wrought for stearnfull war, (ƲƲhereof all worldly Realmes doe raise Report) Through raging Seas discouering Regions farre: A Scowre-sea Nauy all bright & brauely burnisht, Foorth spowting fire, faire, huge, and fully furnisht. ƲƲhen floorisht Learning to such Type of hight? Or purefull Preaching,Plentifull ex∣ercise of Reli∣gion: perfecti∣on in al Kinde of learning, & right whol∣some lawes, enioyed by her Maiesties mostgratious meanes. when had It more place? ƲƲhen was Gods worde so knowne to euery wight, ƲƲhich heretofore, did suffer such Deface? ƲƲhen raignd Religion so deuoide of eryme? Or Rightfull Lawes, as in her Royall time? The Realme wonderfully enriched with Gold & Siluer. The earth most abundantly blessed with fertility. And euery man quietly en∣ioying his owne, vnder her highnes prosperous gouernment.ƲƲhen was this Realme so rich of glittring Gold, Of plated Siluer, pearle, and precious stones? ƲƲhen was more Tillage on this fertile Mold? Or more riche streaming Graces growne at ones? Or more Concordant life, in Country and Towne, Then since her Regall Highnes came to Crowne?
The vigilant Care and in∣cessant trauel of her Maie∣sties most ho∣norable pri∣ny Councell.Her sacred Senate by their graue foresight, Prouide for Publik Good and Ev'ls preuent, Conseruing Common weale, from Perils plight, In Rightfull Ruling, Concord, & Concent: A Senate well besitting such a Charge; Prudent, & prompt in Lore and Wisdome large. The most blessed and peaceable state of her Maiesties sub¦iects in com∣parison of o∣ther Nations round about them. Strangers gra¦ciously recei∣ued, and re∣leeued by hir Highnes. within hir own king∣dom.From Wrathfull Warre, her People rest in Peace: From wasting Woes, her Subiects liue Secure: And yet our Neighbour Nations Warres not cease, Their dire distresse, and wailfull Woes still dure; The Most of Might, eke makes her Realm a towr Strangers to shield, from many a balefull Showr. A Mightie Queene, pure with Compassion prest,Her Maiesties gratious aidg vnto hir di∣stressed neigh¦bors abroad. Regia (crede¦mthi) res est succurrere lapsis, Cōue∣nit vt tante quantus es¦ipse viro. Ouid. lib. 2. de Pon. Rendring Reliefe, to Neighbour freends forlorn: Her helping Hand, holds vp the weake distrest, And hath the haughtie, dreadfull, oft downborn: VVhereof Records, full rife remaining store, Note Scotland,Low Coun∣tries. Belgia, and many places more.
Her Highnes bountifull li∣beralitie. Her Mercy towardes of fenders. Imperia du bus potissimū continētur, Nempe, Proemio & Paena, teste Solone. Iusticia sine Misericor∣dia Crudelitas. Mise∣ricordia sine Iustitia fa∣tuitas.Lib'rall Rewarder of Heroicall Acts; Ritch in Reward, large giuing Gwerdons great; Prone eke to pardon, many offending facts, Yea though the same, concern her Regall Seate; Rigor of Iustice, in Reuenging Lawes, Mylde by her Mercy, wreaks not eche Cause. A Blessed Branch of Brutus Royall Race; Her Maiestie Princesse of Wales, wher the Inhabi∣tants enioy Gods woord in their own language, through the meere grace and goodnes of hirhigh∣nesse.To Brytish wightes a Blisfull worldly ioy, Puissant Princesse of Their Natiue place, To shield their Earthly liues from all annoy: And to their Sickly Soules, a Sov'raigne Leche, Granting Christs Gospel, in their Country speche. Princely Possessor of this Realme full Right, And Heire apparant to the Heav'nly Crowne: Assign'd to serue Gods Truth, with Maine & Might Ʋp-raising Vertue; Vice depressing downe: Frutefull in Faith, though frutelesse, wanting feere: Such brings sheA perpetu∣al memory of her manifold goodnes, in steede of Sounes and daughters. Praeferre pa∣triam liberis Regēdecet. Sence in Tr. Frute, insteade of Children heere.
Omnis laus virtutis in Actione con∣sistit. Arist.Such Rare, Renowmed Deeds, our Queene hath don And more than my poore powre may well expresse: Violenta nemo Impe∣ria cōtinuit diu. Sen. in Tr.Long hath her Raigne, this Glorious Race foorth run Long may it last, foorth bringing frutes no lesse: Great is the Good, thus grown foorth, frō her Grace: Great good shal grow, through hir like lēgthned space A reproofe vnto Tray∣tors.O wretched Wights, that would this Queene enharme, By close contryuing of her Cruell Death; They rewar∣ded me Euill for Good: for they haue priuily layde their Net to destroy me without cause. Psal. 35.VVhat cursed Circes, coulde their mindes so charme, As not to recke, to reaue their Liege of breath? Fell Raging Rome, all this is long of thee, From whom, no Troubling Treasons, here are free. Our kingly Rooted Rose, fresh flowring stands; Garded by Gods great Powre, and Prouidence: Amasing much, all Traitours trembling hands, VVhich plye to pluck this Plant by violence: YeaMags est veritas, & Praualet. Esdras. 3. c. 4. Truthe downe treading Treason vnto shame, Ʋictor suruiues, by vanquishing the same.
Thrise happie Land, whose Sov'raigne Ladies life, The Lord enlengthning, saues from sodein haps; Though Ciuile Bronds, and forrain Furies rife, Conioyning erst, haue threatned Thunder claps, Yet Maugre Malice, Foes are put to foyle,Si Deusno∣biscum quit contra nos. Pau. 8. Ro. And safe remaines, our Sov'raigne, & our Soyle. The Angel of the Lord ta∣rieth about them that feare him, & that put their trust in him. Psal. 34. There is no king that can be saued by the multitude of an Hoste. &c. Behold the Eye of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, & that put their trust in his Mercy. Psal. 33.Thrise happy Queene, acknown of God so deere, Gainst whom, what secret Mischeefs haue bin sought, But that the same, would presently appeere, By meanes Miraculous, as yet vnwrought? A Sured Signe, whom God protects to Ioy, No lurking Ev'l, can thereto worke Annoy. O Glorious Ruler of the glistring Heav'n, Prolong her Health, with Heaps of happy Yeeres, The praier & wish of all good Sub∣iects.That as her Rule hath Raignd twise Lev'n & Sev'n So may shee still, surpas all Potent Peeres, To liue, and long time wield the Ciuile swoord, As far, as course of Nature can affoord.
Far Forrain lands, beare witnesse of her Name; Far surging Seas, haue felt her warlik Ships; Both Seas, & Lands, foorth thunder out her Fame,Pama ma∣net facti po∣sito velami∣ne, currunt: Et memorē Famam, qui bene gessit habet. Ouid. lib. Fast. Through force of flowring Acts, free from Ecclips: Elizabeths due praise shall neuer dye, In Earth, nor Seas, nor in the starry Skye. Right Rev'rend Princesse, rare is thy Renown, Though Spitefull Enuie, spue foorth poysned gall; Naught shall it crase, thine Acts Eternall Crown, Nor minish much, thy sound successe at all: No BEST may shunne fell Enuies sowrfull stench,Arsprim Regni, est posse Inuidi∣am pati. Se∣nec. in Herc. fur. VVhom Kezars, Kings, & Queenes, haue faild to quench. As Highest Hils, bide fiercest force of VVeather, And Tall Trees tops, beare greatest stresse of VVinde, As finest Black, yeelds showe of smallest feather, And in pure White, the least black Mote wee finde: So Envies shaft, is shot atSūma pe∣tit liuor, perflant al∣tissima venti. Ouid. Highest Mark; And pries in Purest Things, whereat to bark.
No Ruler Such hath weld this Realme of yore, Fewe Realmes haue ioy'd, so long aIniqua nunquam regna, per∣petuò ma∣nent. Sen. in Med. Peacefull Rule: No Realme is read, t'haue Rul'de bin heretofore, By such a Queene, safe quelling Ciuile Brule; Who raigning still, a Prince withouten peere; Her highnes now, holds on her Thirtieth yeere. Adore Nouembers sacredMore fit to be solemni∣zed, then many other daies noted in the Ka∣linder. Sev'nteenth Day, Wherein our Second Sunne began her Shine: Ring out lowd sounding Bels; on Organs play; To Musiks Mirth, let all Estates incline: Sound Drūmes, & Trūpets, renting Ayre & Groūd Stringd Jnstruments, strike with Melodious sound. Yee Mighty Men of Mars ennobled Knights, Aduaunce your selues, on fiery foming steedes: Reuiue This Times Remembrance, with all Rights, Jn Armour bright, and gorgeous warlik weedes: At Tylt, & Turnay, trying Martiall Might; And Battring strokes, at Barriers forcefull fight.
Yee Country folke, foorth stalking in your feeldes, Lowd Carols sing, to celebrate This Tyme; Show Signes of ioy (as Country manner yeeldes,) Jn Sporting Games, with Daunce, and rurall Ryme: Eche Swayne, and Shepheard, soūd his piping Reede, For ioy, enioying Feelds, & Flocks to feede. Yee Bryttish Poets, Repeate in Royall Song, (With waighty woords, vsde in King Arthurs daies) Th'Imperiall Stock, from whence your Queene hath sprong Enstall in verse your Princesse lasting praies: Maisters in the Science of Musick. Pencerddiaid, play on Auncient Harp, and Crowd: Expert men in singing.Atceiniaid, sing her praises pearcing lowd. Let Hilles, and Rocks, rebounding Ecchoes yeeld, Of Queene Elizabeths long lasting Fame; Let woody Groaues, and VVatry Streames be fild, And Creekes, and Caues, with sounding of the same: O Cambria, stretch, and straine thy vtmost breth, To praise, and pray for Queene Elyzabeth.
Her Third time Ten yeeres Raign, we now possesse; Let euery faithfull sub∣iect say, Amen.Thrise three times Ten, God graūt hir Grace may raign To this her Realmes long wisht for wealfulnesse, VVhereby, eche long erst Losse, it may Regain: And so Redound, the happiest Realme for ay, Ʋnturn'd from Truth, ev'n till the Latter Day. God preserue Queene Elizabeth.
ILLVSTRISSIMO CLARISSIMOQVE D. ROBERTO D'EVREVX, COMITI ESSEXIAE ET EWIAE, VICECOMITI HERE∣FORDIAE AC BOVRCHIER, DO∣MINO DE FERRARIIS DE CHARTLEIGH, BOVRCHI∣ER ET LOVAIN. GEORGIANI ORDINIS EQVITI AVRATO ALIISQVE MVLTIS NOMINIBVS HONORATISSI∣MO VIRO: MAVRICIVS KYFFINVS ACCES∣SIONEM HANC SVI LIBRI FOE∣LICITATIS BRYTANIAE, HO∣NORIS SVMMAEQVE OB∣SERVANTIAE ERGO DEDICAT.
blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE SEMPER EADEM
A CONTINVATION OF the Blessednes of Brytain, Comprehen∣ding the Thirtieth yeere of her Maiesties Raigne. 1588. MOst sacred Muses, lend me of your light, To driue foorth darknes from my dull conceat: Jmpart your Powrs, to sharp my dimned sight, That perfect things, by pen I may repeat; To honour her, with yeerely Fames encrease, Who houlds the Helm, of our long lastingIustitia Regis, Pax est Populo∣rum. Cypr. Peace. Who Rules by Right, and liues in loue of all:Iustitia fir∣matur so∣lium. Pro. 16. Who wisely works the Sauegard of her Land: ƲƲho both preuides, and eke preuents our fall: Who gards, and guydes, her Realms frō Hostile hand: Who hath theInexpug∣nabile mu∣nimentum, Amor Giui∣um. Seneca. harts, of her leege folk in hold: And whome Iehoue, hath blest ten Thousand fold.
Such is our Sacred Sov'raigne, and our Queene: Such is her Care, to shield her Subiects still: Such be their Faithfull Harts, to herwards seene; Such are the guifts,Tuta est Cō∣ditio subie∣ctorū vbi vi uitur sub Aequitate Regnātium. Cass. li. 3. Ep. of Gods most gracious will: Such is the Life we lead with her in blisse; Such is the Queene we may by no meanes misse. Adore we God who lends vs still her lyfe: Adore we her, whom God hath plas'd in Powre: Adore we him in her that Stints our Strife: Adore we Both, Respectiuelie, eche howre: The one in Heav'n Directs vs by his Grace: The other here on Earth, supplieth his place. Time was whē Popes through-pold this Royal Ream, Plato asse∣rit, Tyrannt dē esse, cum vi compulsi Ciue Iugū seruitutis violenter subeunt: RegReauing eche Right, fowle Might Misruling all: And as stearn Rage of strong and sturdy stream, Down-bearing Banks and Bridges forst to fall; Euen so by will they wrought the Peoples wrack, Lust was their Law, the Ruefull land to Rack.
Time is, when Iustice houlds the Regall Throne;Regnū aūt, cum vltro parēt parē∣{que} Dimēsio∣nē Iustitiae & Officiorū expectant. Fr. patr. De Regno & Re∣gis institutio∣ne. Firmabitur Iustitia Thronus. Pro. 15. From whence as from a sure, and sacred Spring, Furth flowes the flood of Royal Right alone, ƲƲhich mastreth Might, and still withstāds his sting: Compare Times past with this our present Age: VVe Rul'd by Right: They, wrōgd by Cruel Rage. Time shalbe, when our murding Malecontents,Qui contra suprapositā sibi potestatē murmurat: Liquet quòd illum redar∣guit qui eā∣dē Homini potestatem dedit. Greg. in Mor. ƲƲhich Murmur, and Malign this shining State; Shall, to their Shame, acknow with full Consents, The Truth they tread in wrongfull harbourd hate: Then shall appeere, in playne and publick sight, The diffrent works of wrong and eke of Right. Nullatam modesta foe∣licitas est vt Malignita∣tis dētes vi∣tare possit. Senec.Some muddy Mindes no Cleernes can content, But euer thickning thirst for Troubled Change: Hanging their Hopes on future false euent, VVhereby they seek some Alteration strange: Huiusmo∣di Artes nu∣gatoriae vel noxiae Super∣slitionis ex quadā pesti∣fera societa∣te hominum & Demonū cōstituta, pe nitus sunt Repudiandae & sugienda Christiano. Aug.Others do Calk, and cast Constellations; And yet be deceyv'd by deepe Diuinations.
The fatall yeere of fearefull Eighty Eight, Forethreatning falls of Empires, Realms, & Kings: Out-breathing Bale, to euery Earthly wight, By pestring Plagues, and Dreadfull drery things: Is Now nigh spent, and yet our Realm & Queene, Through Gods great Pow'r, secure in Saftie seene. Whereby appeeres, Mens prophesies be vaine, When God decreeth a Contrarie Successe:That which the Lord of Hosts hath dtermined, who is able resist? Esay. 14. Fraud is the frute of Mans vnstable braine Out-strayd from Truth, in Errors wide excesse: Who trusts Vntroth must needs downslip and slide: Men are but Men, God is the certaine Guide. This was the yeere, wherein by Fire and Sword, Our Foes forethought, to woork this Kingdoms wrack: Accipe nunc Danum Insidias & crimine ab vno. Disce omnes.Against which Time, much Malice hid in hoord, And now descride, discovreth all their Pack: Long erst were laide foregrounds for our Regreete Ere Fame was furth isprad of Spanish fleete.
VVhich hugie Fleete, full fraught with Murdring Mindes Such a fleet, as the like was neuer known or read of be∣fore.Meaning Massacre to our Natiue Soyle: Being furnisht furth with Ships of sundry kindes, To geue the Fall: Receiv'd them selues the Foyle: The Prays be His who still protects our Cause: Foulding his Flock from Rauening Wooluish Iawes. Strange was the Stroke wherewith they went to wrack, On diuers Coasts of Countries round about:God scatte∣reth the De∣vices of the Crasty: So that their hands cānot accomplish that which they doe en∣terprise. Iob. 5. Before which Fall, their Liues susteind much lack, Of Needfull things, vnable to hould out: Then drery Drowning, stopt their staruen breath, By heapes of hundreds haald to dole full Death. A Miracle of mightie Magnitude, Don by the Dreadfull Powre of Gods Right hand:This was the Lords doing, And it is marueilous in our eyes. Psal. 118. ƲƲherein our Might and Meanes he did exclude, That so himself most Gloriously may stand: Jt is beyond the Reache of Humane thought, To think the Things he for our sakes hath wrought.
By hideous stormes, their Ships constraynd to stray, The Times whē: The pla∣ces where: And the ma∣ner how: Is particularly declared in the late Ad∣uertisments thereof sent from Ireland.Rusht some on Rocks, and some on Sholles and Sands, Betottred, torn, and Rent in Wrackt array: Much of their mē, dead strowd on Shoares & Strāds: Others Deuourd in Depth of Surging Seas, Both Men and Ships, the waters wrath t'appeas. So Pharaos hoast was drencht in Drowning fluds, As he pursude poore Israel folk amayne, From Pharaos stock, furth bloamd these balefull buds, Which in like sort, for like Attempt are slayne. Fierce Pharao found Due guerdon for his guylt: The like Due Doome, their Spanish Pomp hath spilt. The furious Foe enthralld in thirst of Blood, Furor Tyrā∣norū mex∣tinguibilis, quem Regni furiosa Cu∣pido accen∣dit.Whos Rauenous Rore, outreacheth Seas and Lands, Still Raging, seeks Subuersion of the Good, By Mighty Meanes of stearnfull Armed Bands: But God Regarding his true Peoples plight; Preuēts their wrong, & makes preuail their Right
No Councels, or Complots of Men, may stand: Or Stratagems, of strange inuented Jll: Or Strength by Sea, or Puissant Powre by Land, To striue with God, or straine beyond his will. God fights for vs, & shields our Liues from Thrall:If God bee with vs, who can be a∣gainst vs? Paul. 8. Rom. VVhat skills it than, who be our Foes at all? The Prosprous plight, and Peace of this our Land:Acrius Di∣uitibus quā Pauperibus inuidetur: & non In∣opes, sed Lo∣cupletes, in∣quietat In∣festatio sae∣ua Latro∣num. Aug. (A heauy hart-sore to our Fuming foes) Ʋp-mooues their Mindes, with grudging to gainstand: ƲƲishing our weale, were turnd to wailing woes. The Bronds of Enuie, burn so in their brest, As still they Rage to Reaue our Liues of Rest. Fowl Tyrannie, pursues with pearcing hate, Such as abhorre the Cruell shead of blood: For herein cheefly stands the Tyran state,Tyrannus infensus est Omnibus qui Virtuti student. Fr. Patr. de Reg. &c. To shrowd the Bad, and seeke to shread the Good. Lo here the sink of Machiauels lewd Lore; ƲƲhere Tyrants turn them selues to bloody gore.
Wo woorth the wretch that wrote those Rules of Rage:N. Machiauel las Florēt. per niciosiss. Au∣thor: qui in suo Libro de principe nihil fere tradidit praeter Tyrā: nidis institu∣endae Prae∣cepta: quorū pauca sunt hac. viz. Principē Sae∣uitiae famā negligere debere. Vtilius esse Principt metui quā amari. Crudelitatē qua laudabi lem finē sibi propont, re∣prehēdi non deberi. Principem Peierare, Fallere, & Dissimulare sine vlla du∣bitatione li∣cere. Principem prudentē fi∣dem seruare non debere, si dāno ei est Fidem, Cle∣mētiam, Li∣beralitatem Virtutes es∣se damnosas principi. Wo woorth the Peeres, which practise them in life: Ʋile Machiauell, thy pen depaints Outrage, To plunge a Prince, in streames of bloody strife, The Feends infernall, fraught thy Reaching brain With wiles to work thy Follwers endles Payn. Those be our Foes, whom Machiauel hath schoold; With whom are ioynd, fals Iudas faith-lorn Crew: But Ioue the iust Iudge, their courage hath coold, Who made them drink the Draught they for vs drew. Thus Tyrānie, and Treason, Trauaild with hate, To seege and subuert this Peacefull Estate. And Trans-pakt Traytors, bragging made their boast, Of Lands,Magis Insi∣dijs nostrorū quam Alio∣rum pericli∣tamur. Isid. Caueamus igitur perfi∣dum, Caue∣amus Pro∣dorem. Ambr. and Lordships, here to hould by Spoyl: But as they Reckend wyde without their Oast, So must they trye much Terror, Teene, and Toyle, And loose their Liues, (Defilde with fowle Defect) Ere that their VVreakfull Willes do work effect.
Hi trifor∣mes Canes ora proter∣ua habent intonancia ingenti La∣tratu.These are the Treble Treason-headed whelps: Their sire is Cerberus huge hound of Hell; Whos threefold throat, still yeelds thē yallping helps, To Bark, and Bawle, with hideous sounding yell,Treble, Traitors. viz. To God: To their Prince: To their Country. Gainst God, their Prince, and Cuntry, at a breath: Trusting by Treason, to see True mens death. All Faithfull Subiects, serue your Royall Queene,Nemo enim Bello laces∣sere aut fa∣cere audet Iniuriam Regno vel populo, quē expeditū & promptū ad resistēdum vindican∣dum{que} ag∣noscit. Veg. lib. 4. cap. 13. VVith wonted Might, and Magnitude of Harts: Such let your powr, and Puissance be seene, As may forefaint your Foes with grislie smarts: Euen so besits it woorthy warlik wights, To Fight in Fēce of Queene and Cuntry Rights. ƲƲho will not Fight against a Cruell Foe? How can we Ioyne in Iuster Cause of fight? Than to Conserue our selues from slaughtring woe, ƲƲith Courage fierce, and forcefull Manly Might? Lands Liberties, and Liues, lye on the stake; VVhereof eche priuate person dooth partake.
For wicked Machiauel saith: Principē in Prouincia nuper victa, oēs quibus mutatio gra¦ui damno est subuertere debere: At{que} eorū qui pri∣us in ea do∣minaban∣tur famili∣am ac sobe∣lem ab stirpe tollere.VVhere Tyrants triumph, Mischeefs must ensue: No spare of hoary Age, or Infants small: Matrons, & Mayds, their shameful Rape shal Rue: Slaughter and Slav'ry, shalbe servd on all: Huge Stormes, & streames, of wastful wrack & woe, The Cities, Townes, and Fields, shall ouer-floe. And againe: Principem si quidin Reli∣gione falsi est, Id cōfir∣mare debereBesides their Rage, and Rancour, raught at full, On Lim, & Life, where losse hath wrought their gaine; And in ano∣ther place preferring the Pagans Religion be∣fore Christs, he saith: Religionem Ethnicorum Animos illis excelsos & ad magnas res fortitersuscipiendas audaces fecisse: Christianorū verò Religionē mentes in ni∣miam humilitatē deprimere: Indolē oēm debilitare, eos{que} Iniuriae ac praedae opportunos facere.The Pillers pure of faith, they will down pull, Trāpling Christs truth, with mōstrous might & main Rightfull Religion, shall to Ruin Ronne; Gainst which, no fowle Despite shall faile vndonne. These be the Things,Diu adpārā dum est Bel∣lum vt vin∣cas celerius: quia longa belli praepa∣ratio celerē facit Victo∣riam. Sen. in Epi. 15 our Enimies forethreat: These be the frutes, and furies of our foes: These be the Men, we must in Time back-beat. These be the Clouds, whence all fowle weather growes: Then Arme,Plurimū. n. Terroris Ho∣stibus Armo∣rū Splendor importat. Veg. lib. 2. with Alarm, their slights we do see: Once warnd, Euer Armd, henceforth we should bee.
For though their Late Attempt Returnd them Losse, Whereas they weend to winne and wreak their hate,Mala Ment, Malus Ani∣mus. And thereby sore susteind a Deadly Crosse: Yet doth their murdring Malice, naught abate; But will Retrye their Trechrous Mischeefs ment; VVhom to Resist we must be Ready bent. Conioyne all in strength of hearts, and strong hands;Quum tē∣pus Necessi∣tas{que} postu∣lat, decer∣tandum. est manu, & Mors Serui∣tuti Turpi∣tudinique anteponēda. Cicero. Donabit Certanti Victoriam qui certan∣di dedit Au∣daciam, Aug. As warriours and wreakers, of vnbrooked wrongs: In Ire, all on fire, like wilde burning brands; Skattring, and battring, our foes thickest throngs: God will furth guyde vs with victorie and Fame: Downfelling our foes with Infamy and shame. And thank we highlyIn somuch as God hath deliuered vs from great perrills, wee thank him highly. 2. Mackab. 1.11. Him that held vs vp, From plunging Pits, of grislie Perrils past, VVhere others sank, and (sorrows forst to sup) ƲƲith huge consuming Cares were ouercast: Our Neerest Neighbours, neuer Ioyd theTale Bonū est bonum Pacis vt in rebus crea∣tis nil gra∣tiosius sole∣at audiri: nil delecta∣bilius cōcu∣pisci: & ni∣hil vtilius possidert. Aug. diu. Det. Rest VVhich we whole Thirtie yeeres haue here possest.
No, nor this Land, had euer earst the like, In all the Princes dayes that Rulde the same: But often goard with Push of warring Pike, It bare the brunt of Famin, Sword, and Flame: Saue in our Queenes, bright shyning Days of Peace, That Heav'nly health, and worldly welth increase. Vaeduplici corde suo, partem fa∣ciunt Deo, & partem Diabolo. Aug.VVho than can Doubt, or deeme in Double Harte, But God hath wroght great wonders by our Queene? ƲƲhereof (All partiall Censures, put a parte:) Abundant Proofs and Precedents be seene. ƲƲhereon, a sure Conclusion sound doth sort, That God will still her Royall State support. Full Thirty yeeres her Gouernment hath dur'de; Wherby what precious Frutes her Realmes haue reapt All Subiects in their Conscience are assur'de, On whom the goulden grayn thereof is heapt: The Eternall God prolong her Ruling dayes, His Glorious Name, to further furth alwayes.
Powre Prayres, and Prayses, to the King of Kings, ƲƲho makes the world a witnes of our weale,Who so offe¦reth me prays and thanks, hee honoreth me. Psalm. 50. By perfect Peace, and Plenty of all things: VVhose guift it is, our Foes to fore-reueale. Els Lack, War, & wrack, wold work al our woes: Our Liues, Lands, & wiues subiected to Foes. Her Highnes One and Thirtieth yeere succeedes, Renewing Now, Nouembers Sev'nteenth day: On which, she first tyme ware th' Imperiall weedes; A Royall making to this Realme alway. Long may Her Grace Renew her Raigning yeeres: And Lyue a Patern to all Princely Peeres. Psalm. 147. O Hierusalem praise the Lord: Praise thy God, o Sion. For he hath strengthned the Barres of thy Gates: And hath blessed thy Children within thee. Hee hath made all thy Borders Peace: And with the good Nutriment of VVheate doth satisfie thee, &c. Hee hath not don thus to euery Nation els: Praise wee all the Lord therefore. Amen. FINIS.
A Monsieur M. Kyffin Poëte: Sonet. O Que ie te connois, Poëte digne d'vn Laurier, Gentil Kyffin, chantre d'vn Heröique vers Figuré, court, limé, rich en langage diuers Pour le parler Anglois, Poëte bon-ouurier. Ta Muse est arriueé à vn august port, La sacreé Deess', à la Royalle Grace, Fille d'vn Sire-Souuerain, la prudente Pallas, ELIZABETH la Grande, Claire Perle du Nort. Princesse redoutée de toute la Machine ronde, Aiant pour son Guidon le plus grand Roy des Rois Defiers Hespaignols rembarre lesfiers arrois, Et combatte, guerriere, leur Armée vagabonde. A beaux coups de Cannons l'enfonce, force au naufrage, Fend l'Ost Hespaignol & le prent en pillage Par son Armée Royalle, voyant que tel bagage N'estoit vogué sur mer sinon en brigandage. O que c'est vn grand heur de viure sous tel Prince. Heureux, Anglois heureux viuant où droit & Loy Venerable fleurit auec la blanche Foy Sous la Royne Paisible, qui gouuerne ta Prouince. Hola ma Muse, tay-toy. Kyffin a bien chanté De sa Iustice, Bonté, Prudence & pieté Et ses autres vertus, dont il fait vn meslange, Donc mon gentil Kyffin Poëte braue en ton langage. Sois premier en honneur, bien que dernier en age, Encor tu chanteras maint annees sa louange, Seruant d'vn Virgil à celle qui promet rendre Egaux ses Laurien, aux Lauriers d' Alexandre, ELIZABETH la Grande, terrestre Royne & Ange. VIVE LA ROYNE ELIZABETH. I. Eliote.
