15433 99844096 8882
THE TEARES OR LA∣MENTATIONS OF a sorrowfull Soule. SET FOORTH BY SIR William Leighton Knight, one of his Maiesties Honorable Band of Pentioners. AT LONDON Printed by Ralph Blower. Anno Dom. 1613.
A Declaration by the Au∣thor to the religious and deuoute. I Haue published these Himnes and spirituall Sonnets, not in vaine affectation or osten∣tation of my owne skill, which ingeniously I confesse to be but small and mediocrious: but onely in an vnfeigned affection & earnest de∣sire that the humbled hearts (together with mine) may reape profit and consolation by singing or reading of them. If thou art not skillfull in Musicke, then mayest thou read them or sing them in the common and ordi∣narie tunes beseeming such a subiect: But for them who either delight in Melodious Har∣monies, or else are themselues skillfull in Pricksong, I intend (God willing) likewise to divuldge very speadely in print, some sweete Musicall Ayres and Tunable Ac∣cents, whereof some of the plainest sort are mine owne Ayres and the rest are done by expert and famous learned men in that science and facultie, as hereafter in the same booke appertayning to this shalbe expressed, to which tunes all or the most part of all thiese songs, Hymnes or Sonnets are at the pleasure of all those that delight in Musique, to be sung or plaid, as shalbe most pleasing vnto them.
LECTORIE IN LI∣brum egregij Militis Gulielim Leighton. Thomas Burt. Verbi sacri Concionator. Hiliad's of Bookes, and Iliad's full of paines, In Riming royot spent in this age quicknes, (Neglecting grace, respecting Godles gaines) Ar Symptoms of this worlds most deadly sicknes What wittie spirits, their spirits haue euen exhausted In lustfull layes? and pretious time haue wasted? But heare behold (against the common course) A bird of Paradice heauenly Hymnes doth carpe, By sence of sinne and conscience true remorse, This Knight in Keye of grace tunes Dauids harpe: And (though in lowly and submissiue verse) With his laments the highest Heauens doth pierce. Teares, prayers, plaints, may draw, moue, mollifie The ruthles most relentles, hardest heart, Teares, prayers plaints, heart, soule and minde, with cryes Here offer, sacrifice and still impart. Hear's fainting, falling, dying, and reuiuing, Hear's death on death, and yet life euerliuing. Gainst all temptations hear's th'apologie, Heare is a stay against all desperation▪ Gainst all soules sicknes heare giues learn'd Theologie,
Cure, comforts, cordialls, preseruation. Yea in this booke (a Paradice diuine) Are all hearbes for soules, meate and Medicine. The matter meeter, manner, man and muse, Do shew zeale, loue, faith, hope and true deuotion: Sad Elegies and Enargies to vse, (Euen as God's spirit in vs shall make the motion) To conquer sinne, flesh, world, death, Diuell and Hell, Through Christ. And bid this wicked world farewell. FINIS. Thomas Burt.
¶ A Farewell to the world. SAd soule (my forme infus'd by my Creator, must sigh out groanes, & grieues cause cannnot speake: And since it long, hath bin ye worlds spectator, It must reueale things seene else heart will breake. And cause she findeth by experience, That best is worst that all the world can doe. I world renounce and all the confidence: I put therein or ought that longs thereto. And Mundane, men whom this worlds God, bewitches. That hold your selues incircled with all pleasure, Of honor, fame, renowne & all earths riches, Shall see t'is nought but drosse, her gold & treasures: Leaue of for shame, yea in your soules behalfe, To fall downe & adore this golden Calfe. Is not that gon before time that is past? That that is present pleaseth but a moment: Thou know'st not what will come nor how t'will last: Thinges present of thinges past are but a Comment. Wee soonest loose the thinges of greatest price. Age, weakenes, strength that we in youth assumed: That soonest killeth, soonest doth intice, What seemes most durable is soon'st consumed, The thinges wee most do hate, we most doe vse, And what wee most do loue, wee most do lacke: What wee should doe, to doe that wee refuse: Through worldes allurements, thus we worke our wracke. So that an hundred yeares though God doth giue, Wee may not say of them wee one doe liue.
Hit takes from vs our good, no good bestowes; Hit stealth our time, and no time can restroe: Hit makes vs sad, but cannot helpe our woes: Hit makes vs ritch, in grace to make vs poore: Hit doth accuse before complaint be made: Hit Iudgement giues ere parties both be hard, Begins to flourish and forthwith doth fade. His ioyes are gone, ere any ioyes appeard: Hit bids vs spare to spend, and spend to thriue: Hit fawning faînes, when most it seekes to kill, Hit bids vs ioy, yet vs of ioyes depriue. Hit falshood proues, yet most seemes to fullfill, Thus doth it take, yet seemes still to be giuing, Hit makes vs winne to loose, and saue to spill. Vs killes and buries whiles we are yet liuing Pure ioy hast none (vaine world) tis mixt with sorrow, Thou hast no peace, with discord thine is mixt, Thou hast no loue, suspition doth it worrow: Thou hast no rest, thy rest to feare is fixt: Thou hast no plentie, for thine's penurie, Thy plentie is exhaust by penurie. Thou hast none houour tis killed by vaineglory, Thou hast no wealth thy wealth is iniurie: Hast no staid state for all is transitory. Possessions impeachment doth disturbe, Lordships haue care and loue hath iealousie: Estate his greatnes, Prince and people curbe. Religion pure is counted heresie: So that thou hast no good, nor peace at all, To rise to thee, It is to rise to fall. Vnto th'ambitious honours thou dost offer, To innouatours thou wilt giue the change: To turblent spirits thou dost office proffer.
To men irregular thou giu'st leaue to range. Thou wealth bestowest vpon the couetous, Malicious men haue vengeance for their will, And dainty fare giuest to the gluttenous: Vnto the wrathfull minde and power to kill: And aged men thou fillest full of Choller, To young for ill giu'st oportunitie Thou fillest the bones of grieued men with dolor, Lust, ire, and vice, in superfluitie, Are thy chiefe instruments and working tooles, Vaine hope's the bite by which dost catch vaine fooles. Falshood's thy doctrine, mak'st men promise much, But nought performe (thou call'st it pollicie) To laugh and bite, to giue and yet to grudge, To right pretend when t'is but fallicie: To help, to hurt, to lend, to gaine, to pray, And to blaspheame, to pardon, not forgiue: To seeme and not to be, nor do as say. One way professe, an other way to liue: To cull and kill, to kisse and to betray, Thou hang'st our harpes of ioy vpon thy Willowes, First mak'st vs sinne, and first do'st vs bewray: Thou calm'st our sea, then drown'st vs with the billowes. So diametricall is th'opposition, Hast in thy selfe, in each state and condition. Peace makers hateing strife they most are hated, Rich men wax rich by makeing poore their pray: Vniust gain'st iust, by th'uniust animated. The blessed soule's deba st by cursed clay, The curteous minde by all men is surcharged, The Innocents, poore wretches are condempned: Monsters of mischiefe are by thee enlarged, Fooles are receaued, wisemen are contempned,
So that preposterous all thine order is, And all things are done, not as don should bee, T'is thou that lead'st all mortalls to their misse: Thou ruld'st the roast, all must be rul'd by thee, And as thy waies are all prepostrous, So all their Issues shalbe prou'd disastrous. Nay further in thy delectations, No man doth hould his fit and rightfull name: But by strange change of Appellations. Thou would'st them change, they should not be the same, (Vaine world) rash Roisters thou call'st valliant, The fearefull foole thou nam'st him patient: Thou sai'st hee's secret that is ignorant. The busie body thou call'st diligente, The suttle, wise, the vnthrift liberall, The meeke a moane, the babler eloquent. Vaine glorious gallants & bloud suckers, tall. And so turnst right to wrong, and wrong to right. Turnst sweete to sower, and day thou turnst to night, In thee therefore is no securitie, Thou subiect art to maledictionn: What though that worldlings praise thy puritie, Yet I must giue thee valediction, Farewell vaine world thou art the common Cheator, Of all that trust thee, topsie turuy turning, All states and people euery liuing Creature. Thou shalt at length consumed be by burning: I purpose so to liue as I shall die, Ile die to liue yea while I yet draw breath: Though I liue in thee, of thee liue not I, To liue from thee tis life, in thee t'is death: Ile carry nothing with mee that is thine: Nor leaue behind mee, ought that I call mine. Finis.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince CHARLES, Sonne to our Soueraigne Lord the King WHen I had written these Lamentati∣ons (most worthy Prince) for my ex∣ercise and content∣ment, for which I had likewise made sundry notes & ayres, I was desiered by some of my best friends to publish my whole indeauours therein, and being very willing to giue such men as delight in Musicke perfect content∣ment:
some of the most excellent Musi∣tions this Age can afford, haue in their loue to me composed (for the better grace of my poore labours) most full and Melodious Musicke; which I Purpose by Gods assistance, to Dedicate with all conuenient expedition vnto your High∣nes: and if these my Lamentations, shall any way merrit your Princely regard, I shall all waies vowe my future seruices vnto your Highnes, and will not cease to pray that your high vnderstanding, ad∣mired by all men in these your tender yeares, may increase and beauti∣fie your dayes, with all pietie, and Godlines. Your Highnes. Most humble seruant. William Leighton.
TO ALL THAT ARE IN A∣ny distresse, Affliction, in Crosses, im∣prisonments, troubles of minde or body. Peace, and Saluation, in Christ Iesus. To the Reader. I Vide, lege, Tace. GEntle Reader, the vn∣fained zeale, and dutie I owe vnto the most free, and honorable seruice, and glory of almighty God, hath bred a restles desire, & doubtfull dilemma in my troubled thought, so that euery sence stands a mazed with doubt, whe∣ther I were better to make knowne the least part of my vnfained and true, repentance, and mine experience, of afflictions in rude, and vnpol∣lisht lines: or else lay open the plaine demostrati∣ons of my weakenes in this my rash presumption. But the deepe affection I haue, wishing the good of all the Faithfull: And chiefely the praysing, & magnifying of the mercy of Almighty God, hath ouercome all difficillities. I confes my too-too much insufficiencie to attempt to shew mine owne in∣firmities in matters of so great consequence, and of so high a nature. yet I hope the gratiousnes of
your mindes will answere the goodnes of my mea∣ning, and that you will rather blame the want of Art, then want of heart. A further motiue that sets forward mine attempts in this busines, was the due consideration of afflictions, and whence they came, I wayed that God may finde sufficient cause in all men (because all men are sinners) yet doth he worke in his punishments, by a geometricall & not an Arithmeticll proportion: laying vppon the strong, the heauier burthen, and on the weake the lighter, and on no man more then he can well beare, I considered the end wherefore the Lord did the same. And I found that they were for in∣structions, not distructions, and that he doth often try vs by the crosse to make vs true to his crowne. And from this, by reflection, looking backe to my selfe, who haue had a wofull, large, and long ex∣perience of imprisonment, troubles, crosses, sicknes, and afflictions, and haue past euen the Alphabet of Calamities, to make good vse of them, and to lenifie my griefe, I composed thiese swanlike songs. And because Bonum quod Communius eo melius, & euery good guift is of it selfe difusine I thought it the dutie of brotherly loue to make common to all that was comfortable to me, being assured that my rudenes, and rashnes in thiese my willing laboures, can not spot or staine the richnes of beautie and Gods most pretioas and blessed workes: on which I haue endeuoured to imploy my meane capacity in this mine exercise, where the foundation of building is good, the fault is in the Artificer, if the worke want vniformitie, or Co∣respondencie.
For his erring in proportions can no way impeach, or derogate from the true sub∣stance, and sound ground worke, of a sure founda∣tion. A little or smale spring from the first head cannot stop the curraunts of great floods, or the maine waues of the Ocean Sea. These Cantons are but drops taken out of the fountaines of Israell, though the booke be but as a wooden dish, it will serue the poore mans turne to drinke in, & quench his thirst. The rest I leaue to the flowing streames of the graue Diuines, as fragant flowers out of a pleasant garden, being grosely gathered, and vnorderly placed, yet retaine their beautie, and sauour, and the fault in vnorderly placeing is to be found not in the flowers, but in the ga∣therer: lay the fault of any errour herein to the man, the manner and meeter, no to the matter, In loue is no labour, therefore my labour is no∣thing, and yet wy labour exceedes my learning, & my will my skill Paynting is fit for ragged wales, not for fine Marble. And often times smoth filed tongues are ioyned to defiled hearts: God knowes, towards him my soules sinceritie, and to∣wards you mine hearts integritie. If thou art curious, be curteous, and doe not discourage: if learned though thou seest the fault be many, let thy louo be more: In all giue God glory, to whom be all glory for euer, and euer, Amen. Tibi et mihi, quod bonum tibi, quod malum mihi, laus Deo. Thine in perfect loue, and vnperfect labour William Leighton.
¶ To the true deuoted Reader. ALL curious quaint, abiliments exil'd, In humblest habit, now my verse compil'd Like a poore Pilgrim all alone I stand, Taking my iourney to the holy land: And faine would haue, since thus thransported hether, All sorts and sects associate me thether, But all (alas, woe worth) doe me disdaine, & one my Palmers weed, with scorn complaine Vp-brayding me, that I sometime of yore, Triumphant vertues vestures viuely wore: which thogh those lines a prisners pace do walk, Which whilom did in Courtly measure stalke. To open view, now they expose their faults, Though like a weakling yt on crowches haults. The fading flower of those youthfull times, Now rest of power, bewailes her ruthful crimes. And ruminating on a sea of sinne, Bewraies without, what her betrayes within: Then with my Poems, plaine wreck't dispence, Deuour'd in zeale, is oft distrac't in sence. Let not the rashnes of demolish't Time,
Explode my harshnes, and vnpolisht rime: Nor shun me now, though I like lowly Ioh, This leprous Corps of sin with raggs enrobe. But sit by me, read me and turne me o're, And with thine vngments, gently salue my sore. within this Port, wee'le Anchour safe frō rockes Frō swelling billowes, rageing gusts & shockes. Til Thetis, Halcion, Neptunes, storke doth haile Then shall our Gallion spread a loftier saile, And frō outragious stormes & tempests stand, For safe arriuall in the holy land. ¶ Idillion in eximii Millitis, Leightonis laudem. THese dulcid layes which heere thy Muse doth sing, sound most melodious to ye heauenly King Thy zealous Emulation heere aspires, To Parallel thy selfe in Angels quires: If such ambition from thy Muse can glide, Be more ambitious, t'is a heauenly pride: Still with this Emulation thee inuest, For t'is a habit that becomes thee best. And as thy selfe, thy selfe dost most controule, Seeming afflicted with a wounded soule: Know for thy comfort, thus Iehouah cries, Offer to me a liuing sacrifice. Thē these Oblations are more pleasing notes, Then flesh of Bulls & many thousand goates. To him that saith in his Diuine behest, Giue me thy heart, then shalt thou please me best.
Better then he who all at once exhausts, Chiliads of Hecatombs and Holocausts. Nor weigh's he Psalmes composures prickt by art, Till first the Psalmists soule be prickt in heart. Thē yeeld thy simphonies, which best accord, With Dauids harmonies that pleas'd the Lord: As when the women sung this sweet Idillion, (Saule slew his 1000. Dauid slew his million.) Hould on thy course, and be assur'd at last, Heauens will raise thee some Encomiast, That like Apollo's Pean shall disperse, The sacred diapason of thy verse: In spight of Zeallesse Zoylus all abroad, And make proud Momus chaunt his palinode. Ed. Cooke. ¶ In laudem authoris & presentes operis sui, Antonii dyat Arm. All euill deedes in darkenes doe delight, the perfect good surmoūts ye Sun shine bright: The cardinall vertues, yeald to thē their right, Doe vertues lead, that are Diuine in sight. The former frame to honesty of life, The latter are to soules saluation rife. The former hath our author lately showne, In Goulden verse and matter choycly apt: The Latter leading vnto heauenly throwne, Will be applauded as the onely, that Doth ioyes angelicall and eternall blisse, By sweete repenting bring from darke abisse.
Names do the Nature of the man declare, Leighton our authors name from true light floweth: To blisse the way to show he doth not spare, His name eternal therefore each man knoweth. God graunt the soyle where these good seedes do fall, may bring forth fruit to rid the soule from thrall. ¶ Vnto the troubles and sorrowes of the worthy Knight Sir William Leighton. CHrists yoake is sweet, see how it workes the Heart, with steam's of sigh's, with throw's of suppcation, Say Well-i am, whē griefes Leight-on my part. soul's are sublim'd, in fire of tribulation. No meruaile Marble weepes on gloomy day: Since griefe yeeldes Hunny dewes, griefe to allay. Io. Layfeilde.
To the Right Worshipfull Sir William Leighton Knight. his endeared friend and kinsman, concerning his diuine Lamentations. EVē as some curious Image wrought in gold is a rich obiect, stately to behold: And we not only doe the wealth desire, But doe asmuch the workmanship admire. Yet if it turn'd be, to a vse prophane, What men did loue, as soone they loath ye same: For all the cost and curious Art bestow'd, Is counted base, if worship to't be show'd. So stately posey oft is put in vse, To sing laciueously her owne abuse: And being rich and curious: often times, Is wrongd with base & foule vnchristian rimes. Then Poets all, this heauenly verse come view, Which bringes sweet Art and ripe conceipts to And doth thereby your Poetrie refine: And teach it how for to become deuine, you: A second Dauid here soules health doth sing, And thereby honor doth to Poets bring. Here is no forged tale of loue or lust, To sot the simple, and deceiue the most: No ticeing baud, or foule abusing scoule, No Art of loue, but Phisicke for thy soule. He that the Cardnall vertues late did bring,
For to vse conference with our mightie King: Now likewise bringes a liuely verse to winne, Faith vnto all, that all may hate their sinne, The flintie eye this worthy Knight doth moue To shed salt teares fore-wronging him aboue. And as himselfe, so is his verse likewise, Most Deuine, Noble, Ciuill, good and wise: Then let no blasting tongue abuse the tree, That beareth fruite to saue thy soule & thee. Ar. Hopton. MVsicke is then Diuine, and not but then, when words & notes in aptnes do con∣cord, Composed so by zealous cunning men: as words & notes both praise ye heauenly Lord Such Musique is Diuine, & none but such, be conceit & cunning ne'reso much. And such is worthy Leightons true intention, whose heauēbred Muse, & Musiqu; do conspire Both to Demonstrate his Diuine inuention: and to Illustrate his most iust desire: Oh, let not then his patterne be neglected, who hath Gods praise, by Notes to him di∣rected. Luke Iones.
I Inlaudem Authoris. THis is the second time thou hast appear'd, in publick print, wel willing worthy knight First thy Tryumphant vertue, highly rear'd: thy fame aboue our Moderne Poets flight. For why? those lines (in serious wise I write) do with such generall learning richly shine, As if some blessed, or Caelesticall spright, possessed had, that heart, and soule of thine, But in this second worke, much more Diuiue: thy Lamentations woefully cōposed, thou dost thy thoughts, in such low verse com∣bine as wondrous skill thou hast in thē disclosed. That mē may see, thou canst write high or low, in both so well; as none thy worth can show. Iohn Lepton.
THE TEARES OR LAMENTA∣tions of a Sorrowfull Soule. A prayer vnto Almightie God, to preuent, prepare, and dispose our hearts rightly, vnto prayer. Lord teach me how to pray. Luke 11. 1. Verse. O Louing God and Father deere, I humbly thee beseech & pray, For Iesus sake my prayers heare, and harken what my soule shall say. My heart & thoughts, Lord sanctifie, thine holy spirit inspire within mee: Mee from corruptions mundifie, and let thy louing mercies win me. Psa. 51. 2. Oh let me aske and haue of thee, let me by faith my suite obtaine: Luke. 51. 9.
Thy louing fauour shew to mee, Mat. 7. 7. 21. 22. 11. 24. Iohn. 14. 13 I am. 1. 5. 4 Mat. 6. 13 Luke. 11. 4 22. 4. 1. Peet. 5. 5. 8. all other fauour is but vaine. Restraine my vaine imaginations, preuent by grace Sathans intrusions, Let not him taint my cogitations, nor blind mine eies with false illusions. Which are th'nticements & the baites, of that great ghostly enemy, That still for worldlings seekes & waites: within which rancke, poore wretch am I. But as my mouth and lipps haue said, wordes of a faithfull seruant true, Iohn. 3. 5. 6. 7. So let my soule of Christ craue ayde, with inward spirit to liue a new. For now my poore soule is a-fraide, Eph. 5. 16. Collo. 4. 5. and time mispent alasse I rewe, To thee I run imploreing ayde: within me do thy spirit renue. O Lord I see the bloudy woundes, of thy sweete sonne my Sauiour, Iohn. 20. 27. 28. I see thy mercies there aboundes: and promised by thy fauour. And therefore I by sinfull deedes, that er'st liu'd carelesse in dispaire, Iam. 5. 16. 17.
Do fly vnto those woundes that bleedes: & plucke down grace by force of praier Oh in that grace graunt me to liue, and in that grace grant me to die, Eph. 2. 8. 9. Iohn. 1. 17 And when I die, Lord grace me giue, to reigne with thee perpetualy. A generall confession of sinnes. OMnipotent and gratious Father, Mat. 15. 24. Luke. 15. 14. 1. Peet. 2. 27. 1. Iohn. 1. 9. 5. Iam. 5. 16. frō thy waies haue I strayed & er'd Like a lost sheepe & follow'd rather, Mine harts deuises and prefer'de. My foolish fancies fond desires, & broake the lawes set downe by thee I haue not done what thou requires, but done those thinges that should not be. No health's in me, but thou O God, haue mercy on me sinfull wretch, Spare me, oh spare me, hould thy rod: that to offendors thou dost stretch. I do confesse my faults restore me, that doe repent (for Iesus sake) That promis'd euer is before thee, which thou in Christ to man did'st make. And graunt for his sake liue I may, a godly righte and sober life,
To thy names glory still for aye, possessing heauen that shuts out strife. All laude and praise be to thy name, for euer and euer now and then, To whom all nations sing with fame, sweete psalmes of ioy, Amen, Amen. A Morning meditation. I Laide me downe to rest, and slept, Psal. 3. 5. and in the morning rose againe, God me sustain'd and safely kept, and by his grace did me maintaine. His Angels pitch't, me round about, Psal. 90. 20 sleeping and waking keeping me, Both comming in and going out, they guarde me with securitie. Lord here my voice in morning bright Psal. 5. 3, Psa. 59. 16. Psal. 92. 2. when I my praiers do direct, And waite till thou the God of light, doe heere and helpe me with effect. O Father full of power and might, Luke. 18. 10. 11. mercie and loue, how dare I cast: Mine eies into thy heauenly sight, If thou remember my sinnes past. How can I thinke or hope for good, Luke. 18. 12. 13. heere in the earth to come from high,
Hauing so much thy lawes withstoode, And sin'd against thy maiesty. Thou in thy power & knowledg deepe lord seest the wicked waies of mine, Prou. 15. 4. Psa. 138. 7. Whether in sinne I wake or sleepe, they are all open to thine eyne. My vaine corrupt and euill deeds, my imperfections more and more, With my pollutions which still breedes, thine anger worse, then was before. Thy iudgement, I might iustly feare, if thou should'st note what's don amisse Psal. 93. 16 Psal. 126, 2 Thou might'st in torture be seuere, but thou giu'st rest, sleepe, peace & blisse. And hast me rais'de vp by thy hand, for onely thou preseruest mee, 1. Kings. 17. 6. Dan. 24. 33 And me defend'st by sea and land, a wake or sleepe (I seruing thee) whether I walke, worke, eate or drinke or what ere else, doe what I will, 1 Corr. 10. Collo, 3. 17 Thou blessest all that I can thinke, without thy blessings all were ill. For I a creature weake and faint, Psal. 6. 3. 11. Psal. 50. 10. subiect to daungers that are rife,
And closly workes my soule to taint, in this corrupt and euill life. I lie alasse in night and blindenes, and haue no watch mee to defend, Psa. 33. 20. Yet am preseru'de by thy kindnes, from them that ill to mee intend. Whose owlish eies doe shun the light, who lay their traps & snares in darke But thou defend me with thy might, & with bright eie their worke do'st marke Psa. 120. 4. Thou deare kinde Father full of loue, regardest thy weake and little ones, Thy many mercies do thee moue, tinuiron them soule, blood & bones. O gratious God I giue thee thankes, Psal. 2. 9. Reue. 12. 9. Reue. 20. 2. for all thiese mercies maniefold, Saue me from all the perilous prankes, of sinne, and of that Serpent ould. Forgiue me mine offences Lord, Mat. 3. 8. with true repentance Lord me right, Let thankes with life reform'd accorde, with trewe obedience in thy sight. I am inclin'd to vanitie; Psal. 51. to slide into one sinne or other,
No day nor houre true peace finde I, since first I came frō wombe of mother. With many foes I am beset, Ro. 7. 24. Gala. 5. 6. 17. corruptions in me dayly fight, Which workeing of thy graces let, and gain'st my faith vse all their might. Wresting my will and settled minde, rom true sincerity to sinne, From good desires to be inclin'de, to deepe dispaire and die therein. To make one trust in blandishment, of wiked world my soule deceauing, And in my soules sad languishment, of comforts all my soule bereauing. I flie vnto the sanctuary, of thy deare care and prouidence, Assured I shall not miscarry, Psal. 16. 8. Iam. 1. 3. when I depend on thy defence. Keepe me therefore O King of Kings as precious Apple of thine eie, This day me shroud vnder thy winges, for by thy sauing health liue I. Teach me the truth, me knowledg giue and wisdome with all humblenes,
Obedience, zeale, and faith relieue, my soule with hope in all distresse. Chaunge me from sinne to sanctitie, Psa. 13. from the nights darknes vnto light, Let my colde zeale, most ardent be, to serue the Lord both day & night. Teach me iustly to execute, my outward calling, giue successe: And happie issue to my suite, and all my lawfull labours blesse. To brethren loue and equitie, Psal. 89. 17. to me and mine in godly care: With heart and minde true pietie: to God alone let me repaire. And let thy holy spirit so nourish, Psal. 1. 3. 4. 5. and gouerne me, that more & more, I may increase, beare fruit and florish, in godlines and goodnes store. Vntill thou shalt cut off this life, that is corrupt with deadly sinne, And by Christs merrites end the strife, of mortall warres my soule liues in. And draw me then with cords of loue, Osa. 11. 4. Canti. 1. to thee and thy Tuition,
To new Ierusalem aboue, and giue mee there fruition. Off thee, & those that raign with thee, with Christ and all that in thy word, Thou promi'st me; graunt this to mee, for the same Christ his sake, O Lord. An Euening Meditation. ILe lie me downe to sleepe in peace, Psal. 3. 5. for thou Lord only mak'st me dwell In saftie with great quietnes, and do'st ill dreames from me expell. Ephe. 5. 14. My body to innormitie, is subiect, without rest and sleepe: Because of mine infirmitie, my life and health it cannot keepe. Psal. 89. 5. Good father all sufficient, my louing God, I yeelde thee praise: For this dayes blessings to me sent, and guiding me in all my waies. In that thou hast this day now past, me strongly guarded with thy handes With loue refresh't me. first and last, Psal▪ 108. 16. 106. 12. with mercies more thē sea shore sandes
That hast me brought to this daies end (blacke night & darknes drawing neere) Wherein all creatures rest attend, and lay them downe t'il day appeare. I finding my debilitie, poore creature, run to thee Diuine: Oh strengt'h mine imbecilitie, and ayde this soule and body mine. Thou hast me made of matter grosse, and brittle substance out of clay: Psal. 51. Which still is subiect to the crosse, a tennis ball for worldlings play. He wanting comfort cannot liue, Psal. 9. 12. (after great sorrow and much griefe) Therefore I doe my body giue, and soule to thee, Lord graunt reliefe. O Lord I doe thee humbly pray, (as thou art fountaine of all rest:) Be thou my succour, helpe, and Stay, 1. Thes. 5. 7 let me by thee this night be blest. Consider me in my weaknes, and let thy carefull eies behold: My miseries, and my distresse, to cry for mercy make me bold.
And since t'is time that night now brings of bodies rest, & quiet sleep: Oh shadow me vnder thy wings, Psal. 16. 8. Psal. 56. 2. let thy protection safe me keepe. Looke ouer me with watchfull eies, when this corrupted flesh of mine: In flumbering sleepe, and dulnes lies, Mat. 5. 13. Iohn. 11. 11 depriu'd of sence with closed eyne. Vnnable, my poore selfe to saue, from dangers of the darksome night: Keepe me my bedd, else is my graue, and I shall neuer see the light. Lord thou that onely mak'st me dwell Psal. 120. 4 and in sure saftie to abide: (Thou watchest ouer Israell) watch ouer me, be by my side. Thou art my Castle, and my fort, Psal. 18. 2. my Sword, my Buckler, & defence: My Rocke, my Refuge, & Comfort, saue me from force and violence. Alasse, without thee what am I? a beast that rightly nothing knowes: A senceles block a sillie flie, that no good doe, nor no good showes.
Thy louing fauour Lord extend, Psal. 3. 5. ouer the house, wherein I rest, My bed with Angels Lord defend, my spr'it by thy spr'it, be possest. Oh, lie me downe in rest and peace, in rest and peace, O let me rise: In rest and peace, O giue some ease, from torments, troubles, teares & cries. Let not the sleights of sinne deceaue, nor wicked practize ouertake me: Let nothing me, of hope bereaue, Oh, doe not thou (though all) forsake me. Lord I am poore, Oh make me rich, with those great riches of thy blessing: My soule, my soule, is blacke as pitch, let pardon follow my consessing. In hope of this, I lie me downe, depending on thy prouidence: I care not if the world doe frowne, for I am safe by thy defence. Lord let it be, for I am thine, my rest make sweete & comfortable: To thee I doe my selfe resigne, lord graunt all this, for thou art able. FINIS.
¶ A Nosegay gathered in the holy Paradice. ALmighty God which hast me brought, in saftie to this present day: Keepe me from sinne, in hart & thought, and teach me what, to doe and say. Psal. 1019. 112. Prosper me Lord, in all my workes, helpe me with thy continuall grace: Keepe me from Sathan vilde that lurkes, to trappe my soule in euery place. 1. Peeter. 5 8. Almightie Lord, and God ofloue, direct mine heart, and guide my waies: Amend my misse, my minde remoue: from all that from thy glorie straies. Thou that of wisdome, art true sprung and fountaine of felicitie: Reue. 7. 17 Let mercie meere, my prayers bring, by faith in me, to sight of thee. Thou which art Author of all peace, and the true louer of concord: Ph. 4. 9. Keepe me from foes, that neuer cease, to take my life, from me O Lord.
Thy seruice is most perfect free, to know thee, t'is eternall life, Iohn. 17. 3. Reach out thy helping hand to me, against my foes, that gain'st me striue, O God from whom all good desires, from whō, all iust workes doe proceed: Whose counsells wise, all men admires, assist me in the time of neede. O Lord whose power and qualitie, is sinners trespasse to forget: Being ti'de and bound with chaines loose me, of sinne for pittie, I intreate. Assist me in this mortall age, what chaunge or chaunce so e're befall From Sathan, sinne, and enimies rage, Lord still defend me from them all. Almightie God which giuest vs grace now in thy name to pray to thee: And promiseft in any place, when Ioynes together two or three. Tho'wilt giue & graunt what they re∣quest now lord doe the desires fulfill: Of vs thy seruants, as seemes best, and most expedient to thy will,
In this world knowledge vs granting, of thy pure truth and sanctitie: And after death, let our newe being, belife with thee eternally. O God that noe time do'st despise, the sighing of a contrite heart: Nor the desires of sinners cries, in troubles anguish, griefe and smart. Assist our prayers in distresse, and gratiously vouchsafe to heare: When sudden euills vs oppresse, and subtill craft of foes vs feare. Let thē, oh Lord be brought to nought and by thy goodnes scattered bee: That so to vs noe heart be brought, we may giue thankes, & praise to thee. Oh God of mercie wee thee pray, to looke on our infirmities: And all those euils turne away, which we deserue continually. Graunt that in troubles and sickenes, we put our trust & hope in thee: And serue thee in true holines, of life and praise thy deitie.
Through Christ the only Aduocate, and mightie Lord of all mankinde: To worke Gods loue, frō wrath & hate, towards his elect to be most kinde. Oh God to whom all hearts are seene and hid desires are plainely knowne: My life reforme, & minde make cleane, my spr'it, inspire, to be thine owne. That I may loue thee perfectly, and magnifie thy holy name: Through Christ my Sauiour worthely, and all the world confesse the same. Lighten my darknes Lord I pray thee from this nights dangers me defend: Let not flesh, world, nor diuell dismay me keepe me both to, and in the end. Thy mightie hand, & arme protect me thy mercy in Christ, be my saluation Lord euer let thy word direct me, and thy spr'it giue me consolation. The peace of God which far exceedes all vnderstanding of mans wit: Preserue my soule from wicked deedes, and guide mine heart, to doe what's fit. Finis.
¶ A particuler confession of a sorrow∣full sinner. MOst mightie and al-knowing Lord Ier. 11. 20. Ier. 17. 10. true spring of consolation: I doe confesse with heart and word, thou art my preseruation. I haue offended grieuously, by my transgression don gain'st thee, And haue drawne down a weight on me, of thy great Iudgements wilfully. Vnder which burden cannot I, Luke. 18. 13 but faint and fall in wofull sort: Vnlesse thy hand and thy mercy, through Iesus Christ doe me support. Thou know'st good father I am weake, Psal. 6. 3. and cannot beare thine heauie ire: Not knowing what to doe or speake, or how to saue mee from this fire. Vnlesse thou poynt mee out the way, with thy wise spr'it me directing: Psal. 24. 5. 9 10. 26. 11. Verse Vnto the deuill I am made a pray, were not thy power me protecting. Not euery one that heares thy word, can vnderstand thy wisdome great: Mat. 11. 50.
Nor euery one that cri'th Lord Lord, shall enter into heauens gate. Who is not ledd by better line, Iohn. 1. 13. Mat. 16. 14 then doth proceed from flesh & bloud Er's from the truth, and doth decline, from right to wrong, to ill from good. Whose end is death, though for a time, seemes sweet to please the outward man That's nothing else but durt and slime, or like a puffe, in length a spanne. As honor, riches, frends and health, preferment life and worlds delight: Esteeming these true happie wealth, but the true blisse is out of sight. Heb. 11. 1. They thinke that sicknes pouertie, imprisonment and enymies fell: And worldlie crosses veryly, Iames. 1. 2. 3. are gates and entrance into hell. Soe foolish and so ignorant, are those thou guyd'st not in thy way, Mong'st whom euen I, through wisdomes haue bin misled vntill this day. But hauing found the truth by tryall, want, that earthly ioyes are transitory:
When they me tempt I make deniall, and only seeke th'eternall glory. Now I disclaime all confidence, in Honor, health, in wealth or feature: In wit or worldly sapience, Mat. 16. 14 or yet in any earthly creature. And Lord I heere doe dedicate, all thou hast giu'n me to thine honor: My selfe I wholie consecrate, Marke. 3. 14. to march and fight vnder thy banner. And now I bid these ioyes adew, that only please my flesh and sences: Because they all are most vntrue, and still doe cause so great offences. 1. Iohn. 2. 15. Because their glorious bountie fades, and leaue nought but deformities: Because they are nought else but shades, 1. Iohn. 2. 16. and bring forth grose innormities. Because they are most false and fickle, because they are indeed hells fewell: Because their rose hath many a prickle, Iames. 4. 4. because their slauery is most cruell. Because they are not firme and stable, because they are profane not holie:
Because they are but as a fable, because they are but sottish folly. Because my soule they call and kill, Mat. 26. 27. Marke. 14. 44. 45. because they giue me Iudas kisse: Because my good they spot and spill, & draw me from mine heauenly wish. because lik swords, they woūd my soul because like serpents, they do sting me: Because my conscience doth controule, 1. Cor. 15. 56. & saith to hell gates, they will bring me. Because they doe beset my sences, 1. Sam. 21. 25. 26. because they dull my spirits quicknes. Because they cause so great expences, because they cause my sad soules sicknes Bcause all vertue hindred is, by this vild worlds accused pleasure: Because t'will mee bereaue of blisse, and of that blessed heauenly treasure. And therefore earth & world farewell 1. Iohn. 21 16. adue fond fancies flattering fauoures, Your ioyes are toyes, your heauen is hell, I hate your poysoned tast and sauours. And thou that art, life of my life, soule of my soule, O Iesus Christ: Iohn. 14. 6.
Poynt downe the period of worlds strife. Psal. 109. 4 thou art that prophet, Prince, & Priest. That went'st vp to prepare that place, aboue Sonne, Moone, & planets seauen Oh saue me by thy sauing grace: and bring me to that highest heauen. Where are such ioyes caelestiall, 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10. as cannot be expreste by penne: Bring me from things terrestriall, to raigne with thee for aye Amen. A heauenly hymne touching the Natiuitie of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. COme let vs sing to God with praise, our Prophet, Prince, & Priest, alwaies And to the sacred holy spirit. and &c. Oh let vs laude the Trinitie, 1. Iohn. 5. 7. 8. With heart and voyce them magnifie. For Christ who made vs life inherit. &c. Luke. 2. 13. 14. 15. Giue thankes to God with ioy & mirth For his sweete sonne, our Sauiours birth, Of all mankind the comfort true. He is the guiltles lambe alas, Iohn. 1. 29. Whose death & passion brought to passe Faith hope, and blisse, with spirit anew.
Lift vp your heart, with ioy abound, With solace sing sweete Musicks sound: Psal. 33. 3. In honor of Gods holy name. Who Christ his Sonne the lambe did make, By death mans sinnes away to take: All nations sing his worthy fame. He is the seede was promised, To bruse and crush the serpents head: Which caus'd all men for sinne to die. He is the mediate to appease, Gods wrath by death to giue vs ease: Praise him praise him continually. Finis. ¶ A prayer in extreame sicknes THou God of might hast chastned me, and mee corrected with thy rod: Wounded my soule with misery, and humbled me to know my God. And soe made soft my stony brest. Thy Arrowes sticke most fast in me: My heart doth pant, my ioynts opprest, my flesh me paineth wofully. Psal. 38. 23 My bodies members mee deceaue, I languish still my strength's decayd, Psal. 3. 8.
I am soe weake of power bereau'd, I cannot stand but must be stayde. Thy hand O God doth presse me sore, my sicknes soe extreamely growes: That I am euen at deathes dore, thou do'st it Lord. my heart it knowes. That I am vexed thus with payne, it is for sinne and mine offence. For my misdeeds and trespasse plaine, the cause of wrathfull recompence. Ease me O God, and sucker me, send comfort lay no more on me: Then I can beare, O suffer me, to draw my breath, and looke on me. O Lord consider my weaknes, beare with my great infirmitie- Helpe me oh Lord cure my sicknes, 2. Chro. 32 2022. that I may giue all praise to thee. Incline thine eares vnto my mones, harke to the voice of my complaint: Let both my crying and my grones, come to thy throane oh I am faint. I make my plaint to thee alone, for thee alone I haue displeas'd:
To thee alone I make my mone, may't please thee that I may be eas'd I know not how for to appease, thy high displeasure that's gain'st me: I am afraide to aske for ease, or looke on thee that pain'st me. I am neare drown'd with deep dispaire when I in minde doe well perpend: How I did sinne (sans) feare or care, without regard of my last end. Lord I haue sind, and thou hast said, that at what time I doe repent, Eze. 18. 21. 22. My debts sor sinnes shall all be paide, thy gratious pardon shall be sent. On this thy promise Lord I build, vpon thy goodnes I relie: Mine heart doth to repentance yeelde, graunt pardon Lord, or else I die. Though I haue often heinously, offended, and thy patience prou'd: By sinning often grieuously, yet thou with pittie hast been mou'd Art slow to strike, yet strong to suffer, Psal. 103. 10. thine hands are yron, thy feete of leade:
Thou art more readie grace to offer, then we to aske our dayly bread. O now for pittie ease my paine, for Iesus sake, my Lord thy Sonne: Restore to me my health againe, if not, Lord let thy will be done. But graunt me strength to beare thy yoake, and patience Lord vnto me lend: Mat. 11. 23 30. That I may bide thine heauie stroake, & then send Lord whatthou wilt send. Thy punishments are pursiuants, that thou of faithfull loue dost send: To all thy true and iust seruants, to warne them of their latter end. Thy rod and staffe doth comfort me, Psal. 23. 24. and me vphold t'wixt hope and feare: Thou gain'st presumption chastnest me, and th'other keepe me from dispaire. To thee O Lord I doe commit, my selfe I neuer will repine: For thou know'st best what is most fit, in life and death let me be thine. FINIS.
¶ Precepts of duties. HIgh mightie God of righteousnes, in wrath, a dread consuming fire: Exo. 20. Gen. 1 2. 27. 28. Thou did'st in perfect happines, make man, that dard gain'st thee conspire And breake thy lawes with all dispight whē thou had'st made him pure & holy Plac'd him in garden of delight, Gen. 3. (so great and wicked was his folly. That hauing leaue, to take or leaue, to chuse, refuse or vse, at pleasure: He did himselfe by sinne deceaue, of that Diuine surpassing treasure. And by his mutabilitie, (regardles of thy sacred sawes) Gen. 18. 14 25. He brought in instabillitie, lost his free will, made breach of lawes. Thou God of iustice must doe right, man wanting grace, with want of grace: By grace substraction did'st requite, & bannishe him, that blessed place. By meanes of which we are inclin'd, from thy behests to runne astray:
Our tōgue, our heart, our soule, our mind by sinne is carried cleane away. Thine honor first is sted fast faith, Mic. 6. 6. 7. 8. in Christ, and in thine holy booke: And in thy truth that thy spirit saith, which in mine hart for faith doth looke The next obedience to thy will, as thou cōmanded'st by thy sweet word Exo. 19. 20. Exo. 20. From Syna and from Sions hill, to teach vs do thine hests O Lord. Vs for thy children hast elected, Rom. 9. and vs adopted to inherit: Thy blisse (if thy blisse be respected) and seal'd vs with thine holy spirit. Thou mad'st vs free, by thy sons bloud to th'end thou mayest be glorifi'd 1. Iohn. 1. In soules and bodies for our good, his passion hath vs purified. thou freed'st vs to that end we mought serue thee in holy righteousnes: Luke. 1. 74 Thou gau'st thy sonne, and he vs bought from thraldome of our sinfullnes. Thou would'st he should for al men die 1. Iohn. 4. 14. to make him liue in thine elect:
And they in him, to fructifie, and with his graces hast them deckt. By grace and holy inspiration, Exo. 18. Exo. 19. rebellious nature seek'st to tame: With precepts for instruction, & leau'st vs lawes in thine owne name. The readie way of seruing thee, and profit to our neighboures bring: And louing thee most zealously, who art our father, Lord and King. Though by thy Gospell we be free, from lawes of sinne, and Punishment: Rom. 8. Yet rules of life and pietie. thou hast prescrib'd, and to vs lent. Thereby to mannage all our deeds, and guide vs, least we stepp awry: And rightly vse our natures seedes, both well to liue, and well to die. These lawes did'st write in tables two with the pure finger of thine hand: Deliuered them Moyses vnto, that we thy will might vnderstand. The first cóntaineth precepts foure, of duties due vnto thy fear:
The second six commandements more, of loue we should to neighbours beare The summe and substance of them all and that fulfilleth euery part, Rom. 13. 10. Is thee to loue, on thee to call, with all our soule, might, minde, & heart To other men (especially, thine houshold that are firme in faith) As to our selues to giue supply, with all our helpe as scripture saith. But we are weake, our case thus stands in this fraile mortall life of ours, Rom. 8. 3. 4 No man can keepe these thy commaunds but breakes them at all times & houres. Yet thou thy children oft dost will, them selues to comfort hopeingly: Ther's left for them some measure still, 1. Iohn. 2. 1 t'approach to thee acceptablie. Namely when they bend their whole strength, (dayly preuented by thy spirit) And stand in hope t'attaine at length, what now they want, by Christ his merit Walking and dayly going on, by stepps thereof to Paradice:
Praysing and lauding thee alone, sighes yet for their infirmities. Psal. 51. 17. The faithfull know all and beleeue, with thee our father mercie is: Esa. 56. 1. For with thy sonne do'st all thinges giue, how can we then of mercy misse. Therefore my God now giue to me, all that thou giu'st to thine elect: Psal. 51. 11. Of thine eternall clemencie, let not thy spirit my soule reiect. Illuminate my knowledge darke, Possesse my heart the Lord to loue: Psal. 18. 18. What's don amisse, Lord doe not marke, but let thy spirit, my spirit still moue. That I most constantly may walke, the steps & path's of thy iust lawes: Psal. 119. And of thy goodnes dayly talke, with feare and loue and all applause. To whom I wholie owe my selfe, (for thou hast Lord created me: Gen. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. And bought me not with worldly pelfe, but by thy sonne hast made me free) Whence I doe also learne to loue, 2. Eor. 15. 1 4. all men in thee and for thy sake:
Who beare thy image from aboue, and my vocation surer make. O let me thus thy fauour finde, and peace of consience vnderstand: Rom. 5. 2. Iohn. 16. 33. Thy blessings and thy mercies kinde, to God the work's of mine ill hand. That fil'd with daies, I leaue my life, Gen. 35. 29 rest to inioy with all contents: And liue eternally from strife, and keepe thy ten Commaundements. Finis. ¶ An invocation to God, humbly praying for remission of sinne. WEll spring of bountie, God of feare, Reu. 1. 8. beginning that, mak'st all begin: With what oblation to appeare, appease thy wrath that's due for sinne. I know not blood of Bulles and beast, or sweetest incense that doth rise: From earth of old, they were the least, and are not now of any prise. O how should I be reconcil'd, againe, vnto thy louing fauour: Psal. 51.
How long Lord shall I be exil'd, from my sweete Lord & only Sauiour. How long, O haue I cal'd to thee, to thee, in name of thy deere Sonne: Psal. 4. 1. Yet what I ask'd thou gau'st not mee. and what I would is left vndonne. I long haue knocked at thy doore, of mercy but none entrance finde: Psal. 167. Psal. 18. 5. 6 Sorrowes and troubles more and more, increase and vex my soule and minde. I dayly waite most wofull mortall, before thy seate of clement grace: But may not peepe within thy portall, nor see thy glorious beautious face. I sigh and mourne my teares are seas, I sincke vnder the burdnous loade: Psal. 7. 7. Psal. 39, 13. Psal. 42. 4. Of sinne and shame, and find none ease, prouoke me forward with thy word. Of castigation I desire, to quench thy wrath with flouds of teares: Yet still increase thy fearefull fire, and so increase my frostie feares. By prayers thee to presse who dares, except by thy sonnes mediation:
To seeke thy glory's, all our cares, and th'end of earthly mens creation. what course should I poor wretch thē take, to doe or aske that's good & iust: Psal. 57. 2. 118. 8. But vnto thee, my prayers make, and onely in thy sonne put trust. Yf that my sinnes shall thee offend, then all thy creatures rage & storme: 1 King. 13. Iohn 1. And all conspire by thy commaund, to beate on me poore sillie worme. Where shall I be, or whether flie, from sight of thine all seeing ey ne: Psal. 139. 7. Gen. 8. As Noahs doue, on earth am I, and cannot looke against thy shine. But if thou show thy louing face, all creatures on my seruice tend: 1. King. 17. 4. 5. 6. Iohn. 10. 12 13. Men beasts and Angels, doe me grace, to helpe me all their powers doe bend. What should I then, say, giue or doe, what payne can gaine my fauour lost: Riuers of Oyle or ought thereto, Mic. 6. 6, they are thine owne, and of thy cost. Accept yet Lord the sacrifice, of Heart & Calues, of lippes vnfained: Mic. 7. This is that Offring did'st deuise, to haue thy grace to be obtained.
The free will offringe of my Zeale, in sence of sighing still assending: Psal. 51. They to thy mercies seate appeale, & would make peace for mine offending faulter, Although mine heart & tongue doe Psal. 40. yet in Christ Iesus meditation: Receaue this offering on thine Alter, with all my best imagination. Heare me in him, in him relieue me, Mat. 11. 29 30. for without him, noe helpe can be: None can my soules, or harts ease giue me nor can I inward comforts see. Till I know that thy wraths appeas'd Gen. 15. 1. and haue thy charter of thy pardon: Then shall I finde mine heart so eas'd, that I desire noe further guerdon. And now I most vnhappie man, Psal. 18. 2. that did offend my God soe kinde: By grace of him in all I can, i'le seeke with heart, with soule, & minde To honor, serue, obey and please, him that is mine al-seeing maker: Psal. 119. Whom I beseech to graunt me peace, and make me of his ioyes partaker. Finis.
A Godly meditation, wherein the distressed sheweth, he is vnfeignedly grieued, hat he hath offended God, who is so powerfull and so dread a iudge: who also (as the repentant thinketh) hath armed man and all creatures against him for his sinnes. But (aggrauating the greatnes of his miseries and afflictions) at the last, here∣solueth to goe vnto God in Christ his name, with whom he is well pleased, and in whom he will accept the prayers of the offendant. ALas that I offended euer, this God of Gods, this Lord of powers That can in peeces all men shiuer, and ouerturne the stateliest towers. Gal. 3. 10. Ah woe is me that I offended, and iustly God stir'd vpp to ire: Who by his lawe, hath sin condempned, The exam∣ple of Ionas swallowed with a whal for his dis∣obedience, shew'th this Ionas 1. vnto the pit of endles fire. I dayly see Gods creatures all, iustly for sinne displeas'd with mee: Mens hearts are hardned and with gall, feede mee that haue offended thee.
My God thy blessings all one earth, thou doest witholde, & from me keepe: Alas my soule sustaines a dearth, of grace, vnto thy grace I creepe. But what to doe or what to say, I know not Lord, but I know this: My grieses encrease more day by day, my mirth is moane, bane is my blisse. One euill doth another call, like waues on waues in raging seas: Iohn, 2. 3 Psal. 6. My weary burthen makes me fall, I find no comfort helpe nor ease. I hope of helpe, but that hope quailes, in crosses are my comforts ended: I fly to faith, but then faith failes, when I neede most to be defended. As if I were the onely man, So Dauid complain∣eth that he was a mark to shoot at. Psal. 11. 2. prepos'd by thine intendement: Whom heauen & earth must curse & ban as subiect of all punishment. Thy iustice dams me, I appeale, to mercy, then appeald I feare:
To be reiected, thus colde zeale, and secret sinnes with griefe I beare. Shall I thinke it a fruitles taste, vnto my God for to repaire Mat. 7. 7. That Sinners calles and bids them aske, and they shall haue all things by praier. Can it be bootles downe to fall, beoe his throne of maiestie: And with repentant tongue to call, for pardon for my iniquitie. May not vnfained cries at last, The impor∣tunate wid∣dow pre∣uaileth with the vniust iudge. Mat. 18. 7. preuaile with him that's pittifull: To pardon my offences past, & moue my spr'its which now are dull I'le frame my heart to meditate, my tongue to vtter what may please: Him whom best knoweth mine estate, and seeke his wrath for to appease. To him i'le goe in Christ his name, The pro∣digal child returned to his Father. Luke 15. 11. in whom I know hee is well pleased: And will confesse my sinne with shame, and so mine heart, shall sure be eased.
¶ The second part of the meditation. FOr Christs sake, looke on me againe, Gen, 17. 1. hee is God all sufficient: Hee doth behold and see my paine, my inward faithfull hearts intent. Hee knoweth what I goe about, Psal. 39. 16. all I thinke, speake, or doe amisse: He writes or noates, without all doubt, in his remembrance booke it is. I know he will in worth accept, what iustly I intend to doe: And cannot it performe, except He put his helping hand thereto. He knoweth that I am but flesh, and what is flesh but fraile and ill: 1. Pet. 1. 24. Psal. 40. 6. Iam. 1. 10. And what is man a lumpe of trash, whom vaine desires do fully fill. And will this God Iehouah high, so strong and powerfull set his might: Psal. 22. 7. Against a worme so weake as I, a silly man a shade of night. What conquest can there be in God, to worke reuenge on mee poore soule
Who still corrects me with his rod, whose iustice doth my sinnes controle. shall I dispute with thee, nay rather, poore wetch I should fal prostrate down, Rom. 9. 10. And humbly kneele vnto my father, & pray with teares whē he doth frowne If he afflict, more be it so, if further plague me let be so: If he will kill with paines and woe, do what he list, let it be so. For I am his, do what he will, Mat. 6. 10. with mee and all that mine can bee: It is his owne and must be still, theres no disputing God with thee. There is noe Art, or Eloquence, psal. 49. 16. can quench thy coales of burning ire: It is not words can make defence, nor friends can saue me from they fire Nor take me from the powerful hands so full of might force strength & power: Or breake a sunder thy strong bands, nor ease one minute of an houre. Ile yeelde me therefore to his will, Mat. 16. 10. Lord doe what thy good pleasure is:
Turne me as may, thy minde fullfill, i'le waite the time of happie blisse. Ile waite thy pleasure, time will come, wherein I may the issue see: Of my afflictions all and some, and what thy purpose is with mee. The meanetime I will with thy word 1. Sam. 2. 1. 1. Sam. 5. 19. consult and vse my exercise: And comfort take though hope O Lord refresh dull spr'ites & cleare dim'd eies. With dewe of thy sweete promises, laying aside all fleshly ayde: I onely rest on thy mercies, in holy word as thou hast said. And in true faith will I remaine, and seeke thee (beeing the true way: Wherein who walkes, at length shal gaine true blisse and happines foraye. Iohn. 14. 6. Who this embraceth shall not erre, wherein who liues, shall neuer die. But weare a crowne past reason farre, to liue with God etetnally. FINIS.
¶ A prayer wherein the distressed, humbly confesseth his sinnes, and the vanities of his former times lewdely mispent, desiring others to take example by him, and to returne to God by reptntance before it be to late. And at the last preparing to die, commendeth his soule to God: with whom after death, he hopeth to liue foreuer. AN heart, that's broken & contrite, Psal. 51. to God, is a sweete sacrifice: Repentant sinners him delight, far more then iust men in their eies. what I haue bin my God hath knowne what I now am the Lord doth see: What I shalbe to him is showne, from him no secret kept can be. How I consume so many yeares, mispent so many monthes and daies: Both houres and minutes all appeares, to God who markes my life & waies. Time is the meane that all things tries, time worketh what mens wits deuise: Eccl. 3. 1.
Time with his swiftnes, euer flies, and time in time, will make men wise. Fly from me, follies of my youth, packe hence my sins that burdned me: Welcome to me is age and trueth, now I by faith in Christ will be. whose sins do make their harts to bleed let them examples take by me: Psal. 25. Whose wickednes all mens exceede, come, come, and my repentance see. Lord now let me depart in peace, I feele thy rod, I finde thy loue: Mat. 5. 16. My paines doe grow, my ioyes encrease, this mercie comes from thee aboue. My sickenes is a present meane, to heale and cure my wounds of sin: Luk. 2. 29. Lord purge all my corruptions cleane, and let my death, my life begin. FINIS
The repentant complaineth of his horrid and grieuous sinnes, and in the end giueth thankes vnto Iehouah on high, who is distinguised into one God and three persons. HIdden O Lord are my most horred sins, vnto ye world, though open plaine to thee Psal. 17. 5. He neuer betters that no time begins, corruption killeth all good thoughts in mee. What sin doth dwell in this vild flesh of ours, but doth encrease like monsters huge in me: Cōmitting them both minutes, daies & houres, as swift as Time, so fast grow they in me. Rent thine owne flesh, & teare thy wretched haires, scrape clean corruptions marrow frō thy bones Mark. 9. 47 Put out thine eies, cut of thy tongue, stop eares lame all thy sences, to kill sinne at once. I faine would walke yt know not how to creep I am opprest with such most hainous crimes: Whē I should wake, sin drowneth me with sleep for one good thought I sin a thousand times. Sigh O my soule, weepe, sorrow & lament, and seeke for helpe, if any hope be left: Pray vnto Christ, for grace thou mai'st repent, before his merits from thee be bereft.
Though by his rod, afflictions humble thee, and for thy sinnes, thou suffer grieuous paine Psal. 23. 4. Yet with his staffe, he still vpholdeth thee, from deep dispaire, in blisse with him to raigne All glory be to God on high, Luke 2. 4. and to his sonne our sauiour wise and iust: To whom with ioy still pray and sing will I, and to my comforter the holy Ghost. Whose being was from all eternity, one deity distinct in persons three: According to the blessed Trinity, 1. Iohn. 5. 7. 8. distinguish't three, yet one in vnity. Finis. ¶ The repentant wholy flyeth vnto the mercies of God in Christ, and describeth the loath somnes & vglines of his sinnes, aggrauating the great∣nes thereof, aboue all other mens. O Lord behould my miseries, my paine and deadly griefe: Psal. 51. 1. No helpe, no hope, but thy mercies, to yeeld my soule reliefe. I hate my selfe, and loath my sinne, my heart is rent with feare: To thinke what state I haue liu'd in, my wits with torments teare.
If sinnes seeme vgly vnto mee, who did the same commit: How loath some Lord, shew they to thee, that do'st in iudgement sit. Whē others sins, my minde haue vext, and make me search mine owne: My heart with horror is perplex't, for my sinnes seedes so sowne. By measure iust and true I finde, no man that euer liu'd: Hath sinn'd so much in heart and mind, as I that am thus grieu'd. If all mens faults were put in one, (and knowne were my offences) T'weare no compaire to mine alone, so vil'd in all pretences. O cease to sing, sigh and lament, turne tunes to weeping teares: Psal. 51. And learne of Dauid to repent, by faith to cure thy cares. True faith in Christ, Lord grant to me, that now liue in dispaire: From Sathans bondage set me free, let Christs bloud cleanse me cleare. 1. Iohn. 1. 7
Blot out of minde my cursed crimes, and my misdoings all: That dayly sinne so many times, and hourely sinck and fall, Thou bid'st thē come that loden are, with burthen of their sinne: Mat. 11. 28 And let thy spirit, my spirit prepare, that I may now begin. At first to creepe and then to goe, and so come to thy gate: And then be cured of my woe, O Lord t'is not to late. Whil'st I liue let me liue to loue thee, Col. 3. 1. for now mine heart aboue: There's nought on earth, to loue can moue me my life is with my loue. Where thou doest sit on cherubins, and Angels sing thy praise: With holy, holy, Seraphines. Lord let me liue alwaies. FINIS
The poore Suppliant being visited with a grieuous sicknes, sheweth how he languisheth in all the corporall parts & members of his body, but es∣pecially with the torture of his conscience for sinne, and at the last prayeth that God would take from him this heauie yoake of miseries. O Lord giue eare to my complaint, Psal. 5. 2. Psal. 39. 13. attend my teares & heare my cry My sinnewes shrinck, my limes do faint, I languish in my malady. My bones are broke, my flesh gon quit my strength in euery part doth faile: Psal. 6. My thighes grow thin, dim'd is my sight my leggs & feete, with weaknes quaile. My tongue doth faulter in my head, my spr'its faint, my hands do shake: Psal. 22. With paine and ach, I tosse in bed, my vaines are stiffe, mine hart doth ake. My bodie is with griefe opprest, noe place, noe part, is free from anguish Psal. 102. I grieue and groane and, take no rest, I faint, I swoune, I fall, I languish.
I liue, but dying euery houre, my glasse of time is almost run: Iam. 1. 10. Isay. 40. 6. I sade away as doth a floure, that withers with the heate of sunne. I liue and die yet not with death, I lingring liue, yet dead with sinne: Condemn'd to die yet draw my breath, in such confusion liue I in. As if all tortures due for sinne, were euery minute laid on mee: Horrors with-out, and hell with-in, and all thiese things thine eie doth see I charge not Heauen, I blame not earth but of this one thing am assured: That flesh and world, the diuell my birth and faults not fates, haue this procured Lord for thy building thou dost square mee, with many a strong and sturdy stroake When thy will is, O Lord do spare mee, 1. Pet. 2. 5. and take from me this heauie yoake. FINIS.
A feruent prayer vnto God, that the repentant may find fauour in Christ, whose merits and satisfaction he offereth vnto thee O Lord, as a pleasing ransome for his sinnes. ATtend vnto my teares O Lord, regard my woefull moane: Psal. 39. 13. And seeke to saue mee by thy word, or I am ouerthrowne. For sinne doth so oppresse my minde, that I am damn'd to hell: Isa. 53. 5. Vnlesse by Christ I fauour finde, whose woundes must make me well: Cure thou my soule so sicke with sinne by merrits of thy sonne: Marke not the state that I liue in, but marke what he hath done. Most perfect he (though I be vild) Psal 110. to please when I offend: He sits with thee (though I exild) in glory to the end. My nature is inclin'd to euill, though his with good accord: Psal. 51. 7.
My senses seeke to serue the diuell, his will to please the Lord. Wherefore O God which art most iust, in him my debts to pay: In his desert my soule doth trust, thy wrath for to alay. Finis. ¶ The first Lamentation in distresse cōteineth a confession of sinnes, and a petition to be released of the punishments due for the same. The first part. ¶ The first part sheweth that a man must not on∣ly repaire vnto God in prayers, in silent sighes, and in inward desires and groanes: But wee must also worship God, with our tongue, words, and voice, and in royall speech praise his holy name. O Father full of knowledg deepe, Rom. 8. 27. Ier. 11. 20. thou searchest secrets of each hart, Behold'st desires, we priuate keepe, with hidden silence in the darke. But yet thou do'st thus much require, thy children should know & confesse: Thee for to be their lightsome fire, Rom. 10. 9. that iudg'st their works in righteousnes.
As thou hast fram'd in man a heart, wherewith his maker to beleeue: A tongue and lippes, and euery part, wherewith he glory may thee giue. And thou do'st challenge at his hands, free sacrifice of prayers praise: Psal. 51. Luke. 2. 51. And honors due throughout all lands, that all men can'st deect and raise. Thy children must not in their minde, be dumbe, nor in their tongues be mute Luke. 11. 9. whē they should seeke thine help to find: and by petition shew their suite. Thy sonne doth bid me aske and haue, and find to seeke, to knock and enter, What they do want, that they may craue by faith in him they may aduenture. Thou still art ready to be found, & helpe thine owne in their distresse: Psal. 37. 39 That in their faith are constant sound, and patient in their heauines. Therefore deere father, I beset, with many miseries distrest: Luke. 15. 18 Come vnto thee thine ayde to get, and after trouble to finde rest.
And haue thy grace with-out with-in, but I that am of sinners chiefe: Because thou hat'st in me my sinne, many doubt thou wilt not giue reliefe. Alas poore wretch what shall I doe? to aske I am so far vnfit, Luke. 15. 19. Vnapt my God to seeke vnto, vnworthy to haue benefit. Of what I craue or do desire, and yet to cry I will not lin: Till thou do'st send refining fire, and purifie me, from my sinne. The second part. ¶ The distressed prayeth to be sanctified, and to inioy the renewed graces of regenerations: and though his infirmitie causeth him to thinke that the Lord doth not heare his prayers, but deferreth him too long, yet he concludeth that Gods faithfull promises still nourish and feed him with neuer dying hope of comfortable issue. O Let thy spr'it me sanctifie, vntie my tongue, open my lips: Psal. 51. I cannot silence keepe, for why, my conscience euery houre me whips. My miseries grow more and more, Psal. 41. within my bones, I find no rest:
Thy grace anew to me restore, & let me speake, what likes thee best. That thine eares euer be inclin'd, to my extreame and dolefull cries: Psal. 102. 1. Let me thy mercies ready finde, to take my teares from weeping eies. Thou euermore do'st heare the cries, Psal. 86. 7. of all that feare thy holy name: And comforts them with thy mercies, that trust in thee and begge the same Their soules thou do'st from death defend, Psal. 116. 8. & cheares their hearts in time of need: To me therefore thy comforts send, and giue thy helpe with louing speede, Thy seruants cānot hold their tongue, though oft they muse & cannot see: Psal. 39. 1. 2 3. 4. 5. Why their afflictions last so long, and they for mercy cry to thee. Till at the length the fire of zeale, doth kindle, then it out must breake: Psal. 16. 10. Tongue cannot hould but must reueale, their grones & grieues & neds must speak To shew their hope which like to fire none can suppresse when they belieue:
T'will pierce the cloudes to thee aspire, yet thou do'st seeme no helpe to giue. At last thy goodnes doth appeare, and thou imbracest him with ioy: Psal. 37. 40 Time of deliuerance draweth neere, & thou Lord feed'st him from anoy. Good God, how cōmeth this to passe, that I so long haue sought to thee: And thou still seem'st to hide thy face, Psal. 44. 24. and keep'st thy graces still from mee. How long haue I vnto thee pray'd, and thou seem'st not to giue me eare: This makes mine hart & thoughts afraid ready to faint with deepe dispaire. I ready was for to surcease, the suite which I so long had sought: Made vnto thee for to appease, Psal. 80. 5. thy wrath by Christ that hath me bought. O Lord my God thy promises, and louing kindnes only feed'st: Psal. 23. And comfort'st me in heauines, with neuer dying hope in neede. I know expected time will come, when thou forgetting all my sinne:
Wil't see my sorrowes all and some, and free the bondage I am in. The third part. ¶ The repentant sheweth his faith & confidence in Gods fatherly goodnes and wisdome who knoweth best, what and when to giue his chil∣dren, and therefere he conditioneth not with God by appointing him a time: but onely desi∣reth that the Lord would not defer his graces too long: but mercifully heare him as he did al∣waies heare the righteous and holy fathers who also were subiect to the same impuritie of sinne as well as the suppliant. THou art my god thy helps at hand thou art a father, thou know'st whē Psal. 32. 3. To giue the state, do'st vnderstand, of richest kings and poorest men. The things most fit thou do'st bestow, and helpest, when all helpe is missing: Psal. 113. Act. 3. 2. 3. Those could not creep thou mak'st to goe & pourest downe on them thy blessing. Therefore God all sufficient, repleate with mercy full of loue:
I doe not presse to know th'intent, but pray thee doe what mercy moue. To say come now or then doe this, for the time, when, where, what, & how: Mat. 6. 10. What thou do'st ayme, my marke may misse, me to thy prouidence I bow. Yet be not ouer long away, for thou do'st know my feeblenes: Thou see'st my troubles day by day, bow'd down to extreame wretchednes. Without hope of recouery, Psal. 25. Psal. 57. I fall (alas) what shall I doe: There is no trust but trust in thee, for helpe and ayde and succour too. I know by proofe that thou art bent, to heare poore sinfull wretched men: When they are truely penitent, and when they pray, deliuer'st then. From troubles strife and all debate, Psal. 34. 18. 19. 20. from sicknes death and deadly paine: From enuy mallice sinne and hate, the righteous thou wilt not disdaine. But who is righteous in thy sight, or in thy iudgements cleane are seene,
Angels before thee are bright, much lesse we wretches righteous been. But all are sinners, all transgresse, our elder fathers were impure: Rom. 4. 18 All haue offended more or lesse, yet was thy promise firme and sure. And did obtaine mercy and grace, Psal. 4. 7. Psal. 16. 11. reliefe, hope, strength, saluation: They saw the brightnes of thy face, thou gau'st them consolation. The fourth part. ¶ The repentant sheweth that the Fathers were iuflified onely by grace in Iesus Christ: And therefore desireth that his sinnes may also bee couered in Christ his righteousnes: and then (complaining that his prayers are not heard) commendeth himselfe to God, whose good plea∣sure he still attendeth in steadfast faith & hope. OVr fathers Lord were comforted, steength'ned relieued & blest: Rom. 4. 5. Rom. 3. 24. Rom. 5. 1. Onely by grace and iustified, as righteous men in Iesus Christ. Impute not sinne vnto my charge, not for my merrit and desert: Psal. 32. 2.
Thou Lord art loue, in loue inlardge, Merita vnamisera∣tio Domini Ber. Psal. 1. all those that bee of contrite heart. Thou Lord full of compassion, and in thy mercies infinite: Beare with my imperfection, and let me in thy lawes delight. Couer my sinnes, as right'ous take me and right'ous shall I euer bee: Psal. 32. 1. That right'ous am not, right'ous make me in Christ O Lord cosider mee. O Lord what can it profit thee, mee to forsake or leaue in thrall: As though thou did'st disualew mee, my dayly cries and offerings all. My troubles yet continue still, Mat. 6. 10. I seeke thee, and am yet denied: Of earthly blessings, do thy will, thy name be alwaies glorified. Wretch that I am, what end shall be, I still complaine, I sigh, and cry: Iob. 13. 15. I cry and call, yet heerest not me, I still will seeke thee till I die. Thou mai'st be found, be as thou wilt, Into thy hands I me commend: Luke. 23. 46. Thou full of mercy, I of guilt, in faith and hope do still attend. Finis.
¶ The second Lamentation containeth God∣ly and deuout prayers for constancie in af∣flictions, and to beare malicious slaunders patiently. ❧ The first part of the second lamentation ¶ The repentant sheweth that his miseries and troubles increase dayly: and therefore his ad∣uersarie that iudge with a carnall cie, say that God hath for saken him, but he replieth to them that God alwaies chastiseth them whom he lou∣eth, and doth but correct his children as a lou∣ing father doth, for the amendment and bet∣tering of their life. O Lord how doe my woes encrease, Psal. 64. 1. 2 how many are my miseries: My troubles rise and neuer cease, men iudge thou wilt not heare my cries: They say thou wilt me quite forsake, Psal. 4. 3. that ther's no helpe for me in thee: But Lord they are but such that make, their sensure with a carnall eye.
And do not spiritually discerne, thy secret purpose and intents: Heb. 12. 6. 7. 8. Correcting thē whō thou would'st learne to know thy law & cōmaundements. Chastizing them whom thou do'st loue and scourging them oft with thy rod: that thou their harts & minds maist moue Pro. 3. 19. to feare and serue thee mightie God. The wicked outward meanes preferre, & worldly helps at neede they muster: And not to God themselues referre, nor comfort take from heauenly lustre. Who workes by meanes his sacred will, and without meanes, brings to effect: Iohn. 2. And against meanes, can saue or kill, for those him serue his, true elect. Therefore let not their mallice moue, nor yet their taunts dismay my mind: Psal 119. I will hould fast by God aboue, whose promise iust & true I find. I striue thy statutes Lord to keepe, what thou cōmaund'st I will performe: Psal. 119. Direct me right to thee I creepe, O Lord doe thou my life reforme.
Defend me Lord from their dispight, that watch to catch me in their snare: Psal. 69. 18 19. And to intrap me day and night, with nettes and ginnes er'e I be ware, And scoffe me basely with reproach, with shamefull scandalls and disgrace: With thy protection Lord approach, and let thy mercy me imbrace. Let not me come within the reach, of their inuentions and deuice: Pro. 17. 13. whose facts are foule, they faire in speach, and by base flattery me entice. Nor such as lie in waite for me, obtaine, their wish who doe desire: Psal. 9. 29. Pro. 10. 3. Fit time and oportunitie, to worke the euill as they conspire. FINIS.
❧ The second part of the second lamentation. ¶ The repentant prayeth that God would di∣rect him in the right path, that so he may grow from grace to grace, and from vertue to ver∣tue, he also confesseth that his sinnes deserue very sharpe punishments and yet desireth that the Lord would spare him in his mercy. O Let me treade in the right path, & walke frō faith to faith in loue: Psal. 5. 9. Psal. 27. 11 Obserue thy lawes and shun thy wrath, and forward to all vertue moue. And let my conscience witnes beare, of my saith and integritie: Let all men see the christall cleare, Psal. 51. and pure heart of conformitie. Though I good father cannot liue, Mat. 18. 7. 8. free from all sinne and all offence: And some take cause, though I none giue yet keepe thou cleare my conscience.
Shall I deserue still as I doe, mens iust reprouffes, though in discretiō And that against my meaning too, and suffer carnall mens oppression. That breake forth into bitternes, against me that am weake and lame: And vomit out their filthines, that thou hast don, they count my shame And take it as an argument, Act. 28. 34. 5. that I am in deiection: And thinke it is thy full intent, to keepe me from protection. Indeed O Lord I must confesse, my sinnes deserue sharpe punishment Luke. 13. 40. 41. Worthy of more and not of lesse, then all the plagues on me hast sent. I more should tast then I can beare, or able them for to endure: Psal. 51. 7. Thy mercies yet they doe me spare, and make me cleane that am impure. But in my weakenes of mine hauiour, I this haue done which caus'd me fall: Rom. 5. 9. 1. Iohn. 7. And therefore trust in Christ my sauiour, his pretious bloud hath paid for all.
Depending on thy mighty power, to saue, keepe, and deliuer me: Psal. 17. 4. 5 Least miseries doe me deuour, and enemies my sorrowes see. And take occasion to pursue, pretending to my soule no good: Inuettred hatred they renue, to eate my flesh & drinke my bloud. Psal. 27. 2. ¶ The third part of the second lamentation. ¶ The poore suppliant complaineth that God doth refuse to assist and helpe him, and hideth his face from him to his seemming. Neuertheles he continueth importunate and will not be de∣nied as pleading the merits and mediation of Christ, in whom God the father is well pleased. O Lord consider my great moanes, preuēt ye dangers cōming nigh me Rom. 8. 3. My heart is rent with grieues & groanes, I fly to thee O Lord stand by mee. Why standest thou a loofe a lasse, seem'st not my troubles to regard: Psal. 13. Why turnst thou Lord away thy face, mine heart doth hope for some reward.
Why hidest thou thy selfe me fro. when troubles are so much abounding Psal. 30. 8. As though thou lord did'st me not know thy darts are always mine hart wounding There is no helpe for me in thee, they say thou nothing do'st respect me: Iohn. 16. 23. I ne'rethelesse will come to thee, in Christ his name wilt not reiect me? The rather therefore me relieue, that righteous men may well perceiue: 2. Iohn. 16. 24. Thou ready art thine ayde to giue, and their desires wilt not deceiue. And not to faint when they are tride, 2. Cor. 6. 4. with like affections any waies: But shall with patient minde abide, thy will, and giue thy name the praise. Psal. 18. 6. The dullest hearts thou dost prepare, to call on thee and thou againe: Do'st heare their cries & them do'st spare and easest them of griefe and paine.
The fourth part of the second lamentation. ¶ The repentant in humility reasoneth with God that sith that the Lord threatneth sor∣rowes to those that seeke to other Gods, that he would be pleased to mittigate his afflictions, and to romoue his heauie hand, because he poore man onely flyeth to the Lord as his chiefe rocke and fortresse whereon he may safely build. HOw long O Lord, how long wilt thou forget me & how long shall I: Psal. 13. 1. 2 Seeke to be hard and know not how, to make thee listen to my cry. How long shall I thy councell seeke, yet ignorant what course to take: I pray to thee, O Lord most meeke, Psal. 13. 3. with sighes & groanes which neuer slake My heart with griefe and heauines, pow'rs forth complaints continually: Psal. 42. 9. Before thee in my great distresse, yet inward light obtaine not I.
That lighten should my pensiue soule and comfort mine afflicted heart: Thy wrath with rigour doth controule, my forward hopes and causeth smart Thou threatnest sorrowes to increase to such as seeke to other Gods: Heb. 12. 3. Why should not then my torments cease that child-like feare, thy awfull rods. Sith I in thee my faith repone, Iames. 1. 5. why should I then true wisdome want It being sought from thee alone, why doest thou then refuse to grant. Thou did'st create all men at first, Mat. 5. 45. and do'st preserue, & all maintaine: Thy sunne doth shine on best & worst, the same to all thou do'st remaine. But sith to thee alone I kneele, Psal. 51. 1. 2. and onely, vnto thee doe call: O let me Lord thy mercies feele, and let thy dropps of mercie fall. With thee there is redemption, 1. Iohn. 1. 9. and thou deliuerest all that trust: In Christ for their saluation, by whom the sinfull are made iust.
Thou keep'st thē safe vnder thy wings of fauour, from the mercilesse: Psal. 17. 8. Thy fauour giueth all good things, to thine elect in their distresse. O therefore be my rocke whereon, I may both safely build and rest: Psal. 18. 12. Castle of refuge, Arke alone, in which I am in safetie blest. For thou hast promi'st in thy loue, Psal. 123. 1. that they that put their trust in thee: Like Syons mount which doth not moue shall safely stand eternally. Breake thou the chaines which haue me ty'de, remoue the sorrowes from my heart: Wherewith Lord all my vaines are dry'd and I am parcht in euery part. That I walking at libertie. Psal. 51. with a free spr'ite may salue my sore: My hope may liue, and crosses die, and I sing praise to thee therefore. And let my foes no more preuaile, that Lyon-like doe me destroy: Psal. 22. 12. Iohn. 11. 14 And like to Wolues they me assaile. that spoile the sheep, the shepheards ioy
O carry me, Lord in thine armes, throughout thiese miseries cleane away And safely keepe me from all harmes, that now sticke fast in mire & clay. Let no vntimely suddaine fate, cut off my daies er'e fully spent: Or raging floudes sincke mine estate, nor swallow me incontinent. But rather Lord returne them backe, these swelling waues that roare & rage Psal. 69. 15. On euery side to worke me wracke, their gusts & tempests, Lord asswage Let me passe on my mortall course, and finish thiese my daies of life: Of thy meere loue and kind rem orse, in peace and loue, from hate and strife. FINIS ¶ A thankesgiuing to God, with magnifing of his holy name vpon all instruments. YEeld vnto God the Lord on high, praise in the cloudes & firmament Psal. 140. With heauens & earth's sweet harmony, & tunes which are from motions sent. His laude be with the stately sound, of trumpets blast vnto the skye:
Let harpe & Organes foorth be found, with flute and timbrell magnifie. Praise him with Simballs, loud Simballs with instruments were vs'd by Iewes: With Syrons crowdes & Virginalls, to sing his praise do not refuse. Praise him vpon the claricoales, the Lute and Simfonie: With dulsemers and the regalls, sweete Sittrons melody. with Drumes & Fife & Shrillest shalmes with Gittron and bandore: With the Theorba sing you psalmes, and Cornets euermore. With Vialls and Recorders sing, the praises of the Lord: With Crouncorns musicke laud the king of Kings with one accord. With Shackbuts noate that pierce the skies, with Pipe and Taberret: What tunes by reedes or Canes arise, do not his praise forget. Let euery thing that yeeldeth sound, by land or eke by sea:
The birds in aire, or beasts on ground, sing yea, his praise alway. All instruments deuis'd by art, all liuing things, by nature: Praise yee the Lord with ioyfull heart, of all the world creatour. ¶ The third Lamentation in distresse. ¶ Wherein is contained the hope, faith, and con∣fidence of the distressed: whereby he relieth who∣ly vppon God, not trusting in the helpe of man, nor fearing any euili that mortall man can doe vnto him. I Cannot Lord excuse my sinne, most infinite, before mine eies: Psal. 51. And many more are me within, I haue forgot: which secret lies. which slightly I haue ouer past, as if they were no sinnes at all: Psal. 6. Thy wrath for them makes me agast, to mercy I appeale for all. There's no man liuing at this houre, can satisfaction giue for me:
It is so farre beyond his power, of the least sinne to set me free. Who can rehearse or call to minde, what he hath don amisse before: Who in his reckoning booke can finde, his sinnes, that thou put'st on thy score If by my selfe I nothing knew, yet thou that see'st and iudgest all: 1. Cor. 4. 4. Can'st finde enough, both old & new, yea there's enough in Adams fall. I haue no meane for to be freede, neither from wrath or miseries: 1. Iohn. 1. 9 But by the wounds of Christ that bleede and wash me from iniquities. Condempne me not, oh father deere, but in him haue compassion: Heb. 12. 3. Though with thy rod thou beatest me heere, yet graunt to mee saluation. And then in death I shalbe safe, by thy grace preseruation: Psal. 23. 4. Thou wil't vphould me by thy staffe, from hell and condemnation. Thou seem'st as if thou had'st me left, why art thou Lord so farre me fro:
That am of comforts all bereft, depriu'd of hope and wrapt in woe. Why turnest thou away thy face? I offering sacrifice to thee: Psal. 14. 2. In prayers, praise vnto thy grace, and thou no whit regardest mee. I onely put my trust in thee, Psal. 25. 6. oh come Lord, come, now at the last Performe thy promises to mee, remember not my sinnes bee past, Vaine is the hope in mortall man, weake is his arme, his heart not right: Psal. 56. 12. No iustice, iudgement shew he can, but thou artiust O Lord of might: Therefore I onely trust in thee, to thee I onely am inclin'd: Let me not disappointed bee, but let me now thy mercies finde. O Lord looke on my miseries, behould my troubles paine & griefe: Who liuing in extremities of life, am weakned in beliefe. Our fathers prayed with trust in thee, Psal. 22. 4. in dangers, out of troubles all:
Being deliuered, and set free, and were rais'd vp when they did fall. thou heardst thē, whē they thee sought & did'st them lend, thy ayding hands: Ex. 20. when they almost, to death were brought and them deliuered out of bands. Great was thy fauour Lord to all, them that tooke hould of thee by faith Psal. 22. 7. But what am I that am so small, a worme, no man as Dauid saith. Yet I belieue, helpe vnbeliefe, Lord I am couered ouer with shame: Mar. 9. 24. Be thou my glory, ease my griefe, that I may magnifie thy name. The wicked worldlings me contempne because thou hid'st thy face from me: Psal. 14. 1. Deriding grace and me condempne, because of imbicillity. My neighbours that should me assist, disdaine me, my familiars all: That should me comfort, do desist, their helpe to raise me from my fall. They say of me my hopes are vaine, my kinsfolkes who should yeeld me ayde
In my necessities refraine, to come to mee they are afraid. And tauntingly they scoffe and say, deseruedly, he thus doth suffer: Is iust, he wrought his owne decay, none other kindenes they me offer. I know t'is thou that sitt'st on high, do'st send and suffer maladies: And therefore I on thee rely, to remedy my miseries. My woes O Lord by such increase, as should in friendly wise relieue me: They that should seek to make my peace, they are the men that most do grieue me But I that taste the cuppe will say, t'is thou hast don't, and I will beare it Mat. 6. 10. When t'is thy will, who can say nay, t'is out of loue, why should I feare it. Releiue my soule with timely dewe, Psal. 30. 42. and comfort me restore: Restore my soule vnto those ioyes. the which I felt too sore. Now after stormes Lord send a calme, and graunt me peace yet now at last:
And I will praise thee with a psalme, Psal. 33. 3. with thankes for all thy fauour past. I'le magnifie thy name for aye, that bring'st such wondrous things to passe That worldlings neither thinke nor say, nor know why t'is, or how it was. The iust shall heare, & saints be glad, when wicked men shall faint & quaile: To see what fauour I haue had, & all their hope doth quench & quaile. whō they so lōg haue scornd & deem'd euen through afflictions cast away: For thy name sake Lord mee esteem'd, their night is past, they haue their day. Respect my meditation, helpe mee in time conuenient: Lord graunt my supplication, thou know'st & tri'st my hearts intent. Let not the righteous be dismaide, nor wicked triumph in my fall: Nor yet let sinners be afraid, in time of neede, to thee to call. And let me put my confidence, direct my faith, erect mine hope: Vnto thy gratious prouidence, this of my praiers is the scoape. FINIS.
❧ The fourth Lamenta∣tion in distresse. ¶ Wherein the distressed prayeth for faith, for zeale, and strength in vndergoing Gods cor∣rections, and to be deliuered from dangers pre∣pared against him. O Lord I lift my heart to thee, my soule in thee doth euer trust: Psal. 25. 1. Psal. 31. 18 O let mee not confounded bee, but make me righteous with the iust. Let men not haue their wills gain'st me, but powre on mee thy comfort sweete Thy sauing health Lord let me see, who prostrate begg it at thy feete. Let thy right hand and prouidence, be stretched out to hould me vp: And giue me grace and patience, in lowlines to tast thy cuppe. So shall I sit on surest rocke, and strength and power to me get:
And ablely beare mine enimies stroke, though round about they me beset. For why my comfort is in thee, and on thy prouidence I depend: O keepe mee safe in libertie, till all my troubles come to end. From perills six hast me deliuered, I know therefore thou wilt from seauen Iob. 5. 19. From earthly thoughts let me be seuer'd, and conuersation haue in heauen. I know that loue, a multitude, Rom. 4. 7. Iam. 5. 20. 1. Pet. 4. 8. of shamefull sinnes doth closely couer: Within the gates, I me include, thou art my soules true spouse & louer. The faithfull thereby may take hold, of hope to haue a prosperous end: Of their desires, this makes me bolde, for ayde and comfort to attend. And with all patience to perseuer, I know thy word it is most sure: Poore penitent by faith, i'le euer, stand firme and to the end indure. Alas deere God I nothing craue, 1. Iohn. 14. 13. Iohn. 14. 7. to haue of thee by mine owne right:
But in Christs name I'le aske and haue, for hee's most gratious in thy sight. Yea for his merrits thou do'st loue me. in him I know thou art well pleas'd: And hearest sinners whē they moue thee forgiu'st their sin, and they are eas'd. Among'st whom Lord I am the chiefe and of good things am Ignorant: Yet on the crosse did'st saue the theefe, 1. Tim. 1. 15. for Christ his sake me mercy graunt. In this worlds vanities most vilde, I liue and haue no taste of trueth: I knew not I was in exile, but did in folly spend my youth. Of thee alone I knowledge haue, (for of my selfe I am but weake) Thou art my God that strength me gaue to worke, to rest, to liue, to speake. For of my selfe is misery, and of my selfe is all that's ill: But from thee Lord comes all mercy, and perfect power to worke thy will. With in, to consolation, of my sadde soule & wounded heart:
With out to preseruation, o my weake body in each part. Therefore teach me ye truth oh Lord, thy sacred truth shew mee thy waies: Psal. 25. That I should walke, led by thy word, & to thy glory spend my daies. Lord keep frō wicked thoughts mine heart mine hands that they commit noe ill: Mine eies, my tongue, and euery part, Lord grant they may performe thy will My feete from falling still preserue, as of my selfe regard me not. Psal. 51. Deale not with me as I deserue, as are my sinnes reward me not. Behould not my deformities but looke on me in Christ by loue: My sinnes and all enormities, as mists and cloudes from me remoue Thou righteous art and gratious, reformest sinners, sinnes forgiu'st: O be to me propitious, to liue in thee that euer liu'st. Keep thou my soule, let me not perish, nor vtterly to be confounded:
That trust in thee, but my soule cherrish, & ioy mine hart which thou hast woun∣ded. Thou art my strength & sure defence, in time of dangers imminent: Though all helpe faile, experience, hath taught me thou art permanent. I goe vnto thine Oracle, and from thy word I councell take: And finde a wondrous miracle, thou neuer do'st thine owne forsake. Thy seruants that in thee do trust, thy tabernacle shall them shield: In secret thou do'st hide the iust, that are not with foule sinne defilde. Harken O Lord harken and heare, vnto my voice that call and cry: O let thy loue to'wards me appeare, with streames and floods of thy mercy Thou sayest O Lord, seeke yee my face Psal. 103. 3. 4. what is it? but in my distresse: To cry for helpe and craue thy grace, and ayde in time of heauines: My soule by the pure priueledge, of thy free spirit which teacheth truth
My heart prepared with knowledge, and faith and hope vnto thee sueth. My tongue doth speake mine heart doth mutter, and euery member in his place: Doth striue to speake & these words vtter helpe me opprest hide not thy face. Though, father that did me begett, my mother that frō wombe me bare: Psal. 27. 10 And all my frindes forsake me yet, thou Lord of me tak'st charge & care. O Lord thou wilt me not forsake, for so ha'st promis'd in thy word: In all distresse noe feare i'le take, but fourthwith fly to thee O Lord. Thou giu'st not like our earthly Sires, nor wants suppli'st like carnall friends: That would, but cannot our desires, performe in deedes as heart pretends: Hopeles, I should downe faint & fall, did I not in thee surely trust: That holdeth noe respect at all, but vnto those whom Christ makes iust. And thou accept'st not vaine glorie, as worldings do, nor thinges eternall,
Thou look'st not to thinges transitory, but to the thinges that are internall. A lowly and obedient heart, a troubled spirit thou do'st elect: Of poore opprest, thou tak'st the part, & proud men downe thou do'st deiect frame thou therefore my inward zeale that outward busines, me deceiue not: Of comforts which thou dost reueale, to thine, and me of ioyes bereaue not. When at thy mercy gate I knocke, do not as rich men vse the poore: Mat. 7. 7. That gain'st them fast the gates do locke, but quickly Lord set ope the dore. Let not my miseries depriue, my spirits of ioy or soules comfort: Let noe vaine thinges ill men deuise, drawe me to be of their consort. make strong my faith, & hope lord giue me, and i'le take hould of thy protection: Be my defence and panoplie, and guide me safe to thy election. Thou hast O Lord my troubles seene Hast knowne my soule in bitternes:
Thou hast mine helpe & succour beene, O helpe me now in my distresse. In mercies thou hast mightily, sau'd me from perills infinite: My life consumes, mine heart doth die, my yeares do waste, my daie is night. the day telles day, the night ye morrow the base reproach of my disaster: Yea friendes & foes, add griefe to sorrow & each base mate doth me or'e-maister. I am now at the point to pine, O let it be thy blessed pleasure: To ease my griefe for I am thine, my paines asswage lord in some measure For thou my paines ha'st measured, and all that's good for those that feare: Lord thou in store hast treasured, to me Lord let the same appeare. In sight of those that are my foes, that thinke there is noe period: Of all my tortures paine and woes, graunt this for Christ his sake, O God,
❧ The fift Lamentation in distresse. ¶ Wherein the distressed prayeth God to keepe him from dispaire, howsoeuer men goe about to make him afraide. IN thee O Lord I put my trust, and yet there are which dayly say There is no helpe for me vniust, but Lord thy word cannot decay. Thou art my God how can they then, proue that thou wilt none helpe me send I am brought lowe in sight of men, there's none will helpe or comfort lend. My basket and my store is spent, Deut. 28. 16. Iob. 1. they say, it was by thee accurst: Thou did'st it take, that had'st it sent, but they take all thinges at the worst. At me they gape, at me they wonder, Psal. 7. 7. as at a monster seldome seene:
On all their works and words I ponder, What I now am, what haue I beene. I faint at nought thou know'st my smart th'art my Father & do'st me foster: what words or workes, can daunt my hart I am in thee become a boaster. Thiese men thy might & power disable or else thy loue to man diminish: Or else they thinke thou art vnstable, or do'st begin and wilt not finish. Or that the poore wilt not support, nor helpe thee needy in distresse: But as thou know'st what they report, so make them feele their wickednes. But I do know thou failest neuer, them that in thee their trust repose: Psal. 125. 1. If they be constant and perseuer, all things are for the best to those. Thou art in deed a iealous God, Exo. 20. Heb. 12. 6. and first thy children thou dost monish Thou bear'st with loue, & beat'st with rod if they mend not, wilt further pūnish. Yet cal'st thy chosen children backe, by gentle stroakes, from running riot:
And sufferst them to suffer lacke, and do'st prescribe to them their diet. We may condignely then deride, the iudgments of such foolish men: That vnto thee Lord wilt prescribe, the measure what, & the time when. Such fleshly men by wealth & woe, censure thy loue or thy displeasure: As natures friend or graces foe, by humaine reason all things measure They thinke thou lou'st whom thou feed'st fatt, with plentie pleasures worldly riches: And that all others thou do'st hate, thiese world & flesh, & deuils bewiches And great is this temptation, vnlesse our natures thou assist: Infeebled with affliction, whose helpe doth rest in Iesus Christ, When thou therefore do'st me correct with one hand, hould me with ye other: Let faith in thee make thee accept, me for thy sonne by Christ my brother. Lay not vpon me greater loade, then I poore wretch can well indure:
If I do sincke, stay my aboad, and if I fall then keepe me sure. thou know'st lord whereof I am made I am a silly simple man: Psal. 22. 7. A worme, a flea, a puffe a shade, that no good doe, nor no good can. Try by the crosse, true to the crowne that we may proue by wants & losses But to dispaire pull me not downe, but vnto comforts turne my crosses. I am not able beare thy yoake, least Christ thy son doth with me draw I am not able fend thy stroake, lesse he O Lord doth beare the blow. Lord with thy mercies compasse me, protection draw out of dispaire: O let me thy saluation see, and all things fit obtaine by pray'r. Thou showest mercy to thee meeke, that trust in thee in all mens sight: Mat. 5. 4. Thy children shall finde that they seeke, thou shalt to sunshine turne their night. a place whēce worldlings are excluded and all that hellish rable rout:
though here on earth they haue intruded to roote Gods faithfull children out. And such as haue with hate pursu'de, and trusted in the arme of flesh: And would their hands in blood imbru'd, shall say in iudgement they were rash. god's on my sid, who cā or'ethrow me, Christ pleades my cause, cā god refuse me Rom. 8. 31. As iust in Christ, ye Lord doth know me, he doth acquite, who can accuse me. Wee thought that this mans life was madnes, then shall the wicked worldlings say: But see his words are turn'd to gladnes, whom we haue deem'd a cast away. his hād hath wrought yt he would haue yea I my selfe shall say I er'd: That thought poore wretch would'st not me saue because my ioyes were then defer'd. I thought my cries thou would'st not heare, when I thee sought thy selfe did'st hide When I complaind thou cam'st not neare I would no time, and place thee tide. But now I knowledge and confesse, thy wisdome great in humbling me: Mat. 5. 10.
Thy loue sustain'd me in distresse, thy prouidence relieuing me. This past all iudgement and conceit, of learned'st, grauest, wisest men: Therefore deare father I will waite, take thine own time, how, where & whē I will not with thy will indent, nor thee direct the manner how: Thou should'st me helpe t'is mine intent vnto thy will to bend and bow. Heareafter I will hould my peace, though men shall say yet still of me: (& though their tongues will neuer cease there is no helpe for me from thee. ❧ The sixt Lamentation in distresse. ¶ Wherein the distressed detesteth the world and worldly things, and desireth heauen, and hea∣uenly thinges. MY soule doth long & shall depend, for euer on God euerliuing: God shall begin and make an end, that hath giu'n all, yet euer giuing,
I sigh and groane for to appeare, before his gratious mercy seate: As thirst'h, the heart for water cleare. so long I for thy mercy great. I am quite tyred with my groanes, I faint vnder mine heauy loade: Psal. 6. 2. Of miseries breaking all my bones, laid on me iustly by my God. O God the rocke of my whole strength Lord of mercy behould mine anguish Psal. 18. 1. 2 O graunt me helpe and ease at length, I faint, I fall, I sigh, I languish. Why do I daily weepe and mourne, and haue no comfort helpe nor ease: Psal. 6. 6. Why do'st not heare, but from me turne, why doe my woes and foes increase. Sith I do seeke thee vnfainedly, defend me, oh defend me in: This dangerous time of misery, laid iustly on me for my sinne. Preserue me from men mercilesse, hard harted, bloody minded cruell: Blesse me with thnie hid blessednes, giue me thy fauour my soules iewell.
The man of earth laies load on load, as on an Anuill stroake on stroake: Within without, at home abroade. mine head to heele, bowes with ye yoake They nip, they strip, they watch, they catch, they craue & raue, by hooke & crooke: Flesh bloud & bones, they teare & cratch on that they neither thinke nor looke. They wake they rake, they poll & pill, they face they brag, they boast dissemble Each stone they turne to haue their will, & make mine hart to quake & tremble. I am reproach to neighbours all, Psal. 71. 7. I am ashamde men should mee see: They scorne & laugh to see my fall, but this mine hope doth comfort me. That thou from them wilt set me free and thee triumphant shall behould: Reu. 7. 15. 16. In shining throane of Maiestie, where's neither hunger thirst nor cold. No want nor sinne, nor ignomie, nor sickenes, death, nor deadly paine: Reu. 7. 17. 17 But fullnes, mirth, ioy, victory, with thee in glory I shall raigne.
And if it bee thy will O Lord, now after all this sturdy storme: To my most troubled soule affoord, thy peace and pittie me poore worme Free me frō death (that's Mors Gehenis' giue peace, ioy, rest that's transitory: Reu. 21. 8. I take it as an earnest penny, of perfect blisse and endlesse glory. And i'le heere praise the men among, that they may see, marke and consider: T'is thou canst only right our wrong, and from all troubles vs deliuer. Thou can'stand wilt vs saue & keepe, though much wee suffer in this life: Thou art our Shepheard, we thy sheepe, saue me from hate, enuy and strife. So shall I also giue thee praise, my mouth continually thee laude: My soule and inward parts alwaies, thy wondrous workes shall still applaud I will be glad and ioy in thee, reioyce yea, and againe reioyce: Abiect though I, yet comfort me, i'le praise thee with mind, heart, & voice.
Awake therefore in time awake, preserue mee that I perrish not: Psal. 88. 4. 5 6. I am if thou do'st me forsake, but as a dead man cleane forgot. And censured a cast away, among such as see me depriu'd: Of present helpe, for thiese men say, my soule can neuer be reuiu'd. One sorrow doth encrease another, all hope on earth turnes to distrust. Of ayde frō neighbour, friend or brother hide not thy face my God most iust. Forget not mine extremities, Lord free me from infernall hells: Of torments and of miseries, which comes frō thee & from none els. my soule is beaten to pitts brim, my hart doth faint, my hands grow weak Psal. 6. My knees do faile mine eies grow dim, my tongue is dumbe & cannot speake. And each part of my body vext, Psal. 6. I dayly moane my miseries: Looke on me Lord, I am perplext, O ease my griefe & heare my cries.
Though thou by Iustice made ye woūd and by correction grieu'd mine heart: If thou wilt cure, salue soone is found, with spirituall comfort ease my smart. Do not with hould such thinges are good which for thy children are ordain'd: 1. Iohn. 1. 7 Turne thou thy face with Christ's bloud, clense all the spots my sins hath stain'd. Rise vp O Lord, rise vp I say, with thee doth loue & bounty raigne I am throwne downe I thee obay, therefore rise vp, raise me againe. Although my sins like swords do cut, me from thy fauour and thy grace: Let righteousnes of Christ be put, to hide my sinnes before thy face. Vnite me vnto thee againe, Iohn. 17. 11 in such sort Lord, make me so fast: That I with thee may still remaine, and ioy in ioyes, that aine shall last. FINIS.
¶ The seauenth Lamenta∣tion in distresse. ¶ Wherein the distressed sheweth his desire to hould more fast the promises of God. O Lord thou art my hope & strength Psal. 18. 1. thou help'st in trouble, do not hide Thy selfe for euer; but at length, for men distrest, doe thou prouide. For I by thee, will hould most fast, i'le trust in thee while I doe liue: And till those stormes be ouer past, i'le neither feare, nor faint, nor grieue. Tremble thou earth, rage Sea & land, winde, tempest, stormes and all about: Psal. 69. 3. I see thee Lord holde out thy hand, for my defence I'le neuer doubt. What though hills quake & staggering stumble and fall into the mid'st of seas: Though waters roare, rage & tumble, thou canst this chaunge, & all appease.
Should I thē faint at troubles small, which like small darts thou throw'st at me Iames. 1. 1. In loue, but not to kill at all, but make leaue my vanity. Forsake my follies euery deale, reclayming errors to the truth: This thou did'st hurt, & thou can'st heale, thou hast preseru'd me frō mine youth. I must confesse I merited the death of death, with paines of hell, Rom. 6. 23. And to be disinherited, of heauens high, where iust doe dwell. But Lord do mittigate thine anger, and turne thy heauy wrath to loue: Deliuer me from all this danger, let thy compassion mercy moue. And with trew cōforts Christall foun∣taine, my drie and thirstie soule refresh: Iohn. 4. 14 And poure on me from holy mountaine, sweete dewes to glad my soule & flesh. Thy darts in me sticke fast O Lord, O pull them out, cast them away: and cure my wounds, to helpe make hast, bind vp my sores, soules sorrowes stay.
Clense the corrupt affections, of my defiled wicked heart: Prosper and blesse mine actions, lighten my knowledge grose & darke. O wash me from impietie, Psal. 51. exhilarate my sicke soules sadnes: In darknes let me light espie, in mid'st of sorrow graunt me gladnes. On fruitfull ground Lord doe mee plant, and build me vp on surest rocke: Annoyes to ioyes, to wealth turne want, from future ills me keepe and locke. As trees that grow by waters side, whose leaues & blossoms freshly flourish Psal. 1. For euer let my state abide, thy loue reuiue, thy grace me nourish. Let thy spirit dayly spring & bud, with faiths pure braunches frō my hart. Let dewes & drops of Christ's deer bloud feede vaines of hope from sinners dart. My store's decayd, thou can'st renew it my basket's empty thou can'st fill it: Refresh my heart againe reuiue it, reuiue it Lord, for thou did'st kill it.
Thou help'st ye simple poore & needy, thou see'st my state thou can'st all mend, I know thou know'st when to be speedy, and know'st thy time when to defend. Helpe helpe O Lord else downe I fall, hould me fast, by thy strong hand: And lift me vp against them all, that by opposing me withstand. Thy promise Lord thou doest per∣forme, thy words are deeds, thou sai'st & do'st: A happie end thou doest returne, and graunt, to those that on thee trust. My safety Lord thou hast ordain'd, by faith my hope doth mount & fly: 2. Cor. 8. 12. And by that hope I am sustain'd, if that were lost my soule would dye. My faith hath fixt an obiect right, my will doth farre my power exceed: But Lord I know that in thy sight, the will is taken for the deeede. Then Lord for deede my will do take, and I secured shall be then: Oh graunt me this, for Christ his sake, to whom be praise for aye Amen. FINIS.
❧ The eight Lamentation in distresse. ¶ In which the distressed craueth pardon for his sinnes, the cause of his misseries. O Had I wings like to a Doue, Psal. 55. 6. 7 then should I from these troubles flye, To wildernes I would remoue, to spend my life, and there to dye. Mong'st bushes thicke, and branches tall of mightie Cedars hughe and high: With sauadges and wild beasts all, for to auoide my misery. But why thus wish I, Lord alas, that am vaine man of flesh & blood: Thou God that bring'st all things to pas, do'st know, this sorts not for my good. For were I in vast wildernes, in furthest part of earth or ayre: Psal. 139. 7. 8. 9. I could no whit my case redresse, as being in thy power there.
Were I in bowels of the earth, were I in Sea, in Cloudes or Skie: With sorrow, griefe, with ioy or mirth, there Lord thou art with powerfull eie. There canst thou also finde me out, Psal. 139. 10. and visit there my foule offence: Thou art my paths and bed about, t'is vaine to hide or seeke defence. ¶ The second part of the eight Lamentation. ¶ The penitent by faith preuailes against frailty in the fierie triall. THen let me at thy footestoole fall, & there acknowledge mine amisse For pardon begge, and mercy call, and pray for grace and heauenly blisse. And that thou bridle my desires, clense mine affections with thy spirit: Inflame me with thine holy fire, in nought but thee let me delight. Lord tame the fiercenes of mine heart, reforme my words my mouth & speach
Thou fountaine of all wisdome art, therefore right wisdome do me teach. In vnderstanding truth instruct me, vouchsafe me perfect patience: So to that freedome wilt conduct me, where is no losse nor paine of sence. And from thiese dangers best me free, which most I feare, & soon'st possesse: The comforts most desir'd by me, and so enioy true happines. O make not Lord thy absence long, but hasten my deliuerance: Against my foes Lord make me strong, which do themselus gainst me aduance. That ready are with on set newe, for to assault my silly soule: Wearied with stormes that do accrew, & plungd with waues which or'e me roule. The third part of the eight Lamentation. WHerefore hast thou left vnto vs, 1. Pet. 5. 7. Heb. 135. by thy word, a commaundement:
To cast our cares on thee which thus, with weighty burdens vs torment. With promise to vs helpe and ease, thou see'st & knowest Lord our desire: Our secret hearts and all our waies, all's plaine to thee as light as fire. If therefore I should iustifie, my selfe I should condempned bee: Thou find'st me out and do'st me try, my righteousnes is nought to thee. disclay ming mine integritie, I cast me downe Lord at thy feete: And pray for pure sincerity, that I do all, in all that's meete. Wherefore thou art most bountifull, when wants & weakenes we confesse: Yea then thy guifts are plentifull, vs to releiue in our distresse. On thee my burden Lord i'le lay, for well I knowe thou car'st for all: That thee belicue, loue, feare obey, 1. Pet. 5. 7. and for thy grace and mercy call. My faith and hope is all in thee, I am of imperfections full:
I Aske why thou do'st visit me? should I that blockish am and dull. Defiled within and eke without, pleade duties don or else be mute: Iobes exā∣ple sheweth the euidēce of this. It is in vaine to goe about, with thee O Lord for to dispute. Who euill am in my best way, in purest thoughts yea most impure: Pardon my weakenes Lord I pray, and giue me zeale & strength t'indure. With humblenes and perfect loue, which Lord thou do'st of me require: Instruct me God with wisdome moue, mee guide and lead to thy desire. Shew me the way that tends to blisse, after this my long straying heere: Mark. 18. 12. And bring me home where all peace is, let thy free fauour Lord appeare. Wherein is life and liberty, comfort ioy and society, With rest, peace, and tranquillity, for them that liue in pietie.
The fourth part of the eight Lamentation. OH happy he whō thou protec'st, most hapy he whō thou dost loue Hee's strong and wise in all respect'st, hee's fed and clad from thee aboue. In all good things, hee's rich in deede, when he doth call, thou dost him heare: What he doth aske, thou giu'st at neede, he seekes, & findes them euery where. When he is sicke, thou do'st him cure, when poore, thou do'st his wants reply: When he is sad he shall be sure, thy sauing health and helpe is nye. When he is troubled do'st defend him in danger do'st securenes giue him: whē men him hate thy loue wilt send him when dead to long, life doth reuiue him. And giu'st him thē such ioyes for euer, 1. Cor. 2. 9. as no mans wit can comprehend:
Me fauour graunt, Lord bring me thither to thiese thy blessings without end. This fauour Lord vnto me shew, and blesse my contemplation: Onely in heauen and thee I know, is perfect contentation. My sorrowes shalbe turn'd to ioy, my wants vnto sufficiency: Psal. 126. 5. My teares to gladnes from annoy, mourning to mirth and melody. My soule keepe safe from death & hell, my feete from sliding, & from falling: Let me vprightly walke and dwell: and on thee still O Lord be calling. Who do'st performe thy promises, and let'st none empty part away: That with their hearts seeke thy mercies, or do for helpe & comfort pray. The fift part of the eight Lamentation. SEnd helpe therefore, O Lord and saue me, from thē yt would me quite deuoure And dayly grieue me and depraue me, Psal. 22. 22 my soule's, with Lyons euery houre.
I wade as through the rageing sea, I dwell amongst men set on fire: whose teeth are speares, whose tongs bear sway like two edg'd sword with wrath & ire. Thy mercy therefore and thy truth, let be my bucklar and strong shield. Psal. 18. Hast bin mine hope euen from my youth, let troubles cease, new ioyes me yield: Set me vpon thy rocke foreuer, of perfect loue and true reliefe: Let rest and refuge faile me neuer, and thy protection saue from griefe. Bring thou to passe what's fit for me, what thou dost know expedient: That righteous men my end may see, and how mine hope obtain'd content. That they may of thy glory talke, and speake of thy eternall praise: All men shall say that see mee walke, doubtlesse God will the righteous raise, There is a God that's gratious good, to them that bee of perfect heart: When he hath all their foes withstood, heauen's ioyes to them he will impart. Finis
The first part of the ninth Lamentation in distresse. ¶ The penitent acknowledgeth mans vildenes & Gods mercies by faith and example of Gods prouidence, relieth on his goodnes. O Lord thy name's most excellent, in all the world, thy glorie's spred: Psal. 8. Through heauens and the firmament, and by all creatures vttered. In vniuersall harmony, extold in heauen and in earth: Exprese'st in Song and melody, with all alacritie and mirth. What thou bestow'st, what man can number, vpon vs slaues, and sonnes of men: Who by our sinnes are farre put vnder, all Creatures we can name by pen. Forgetfull and so capeable, of sinne, as pouder is of fire:
In all our words and workes vnstable, and know not what we should desire: Aboue all Creatures we fotget, thy grace, are prone to disobey: And if thy mercy did not let, all Adams broude thou should'st destroy And I for my part, me confesse, guilty of all sinnes, and all euilles: Psal. 51. And that I haue deseru'd no lesse, then to be damn'd among'st the diuels. The world for disobedience, did'st punnish, & thou mought'st subuert: But chiefely me for negligence, mai'st plague with all plauges, t'is desert I am not worthy breath in th'aire, nor haue the vse of any creature: Much lesse to the e to make my prayer, cause gainst my God I am a traitor. Thou worthily, me do'st afflict, at me thou takest iust offence: All punnishments thou do'st inflict, because thy wrath I did incense. My trespasses do more offend, then I can please with my best zeale:
The worthines I best intend, I least performe my soule Lord heale: ¶ The second part of the ninth Lamentation. I Shame at mine vnworthines, yet faine would be at one with thee: Thou art a ioy in beauines, a succour in necessitie. To them that do their liues reforme, and rightly frame their penitence: Sincearely follow and performe, thy will without all negligence. All this to doe I do desire, and what thou sayest I do belieue: Thy pardon graunt me I require, release and pardon Lord me giue. O be with them that doe thee seeke, & yeeld them helpe that hould by thee Instructing, humble men and meeke, that wisdome seeke by thy mercy. Sith I so long haue to thee cride, so long thee sought yet hope I will:
Though my sad soule in silent bide, in constant patience i'le waite still. thou rightly hear'st my inward grones my sorrowes sighes wants & desire: And do'st respect the outward mones, of men distrest that feare the fire. Though in their lippes they mute do seeme, & do speake nothing with their tonges: what they would haue, thou doest deeme and present art to right their wrongs. But loe the time is not expir'd, of mine ordeined punishment: Nor of that freedome I desir'd, i'le waite by hope in languishment. My helpe my comfort and my life, saluation mine depends on thee: Within my conscience stint the strife, and giue me grace and libertie. ❧ The third part of the ninth Lamentation. MY life, my comfort, helpe and all, Iohn. 11. 25. saluation, on Christ dependeth:
T'is he doth raise me when I fall, he all begins and he all endeth. I will not murmure neither grudg, nor feare nor faint; but alwaies waite: He is my Sauiour, and my Iudge, his grace decree'd who can retrait. Is there not an appointed time, for all things that by God be wrought? Iob. 42. Iob was brought low, at last did clime, to wealth and honor he was brought. And Ioseph was afflicted long, by brethren and by false accuse: He was shut vp in prison strong, did'st all his cause and wrongs peruse. At length brought'st him to honor great, and Dauid was at first cast downe: And then inthron'd in princely seate, and long enioy'd the royall Crowne. Poore widdow of Sarepta shee, and hirs were ready for to pine: 1. King. 17, 9. Hir barrell, and hir cruise by thee, were blest, and by that Prophet thine. Her meale, and oyle, did neuer faile. thou send'st that Saint, eu'n to that end:
That they in dearth should neuer quaile, so did'st from famine hir defend. Wherefore a little while i'le waite, I know th'appointed time will come: I shalbe freed from sinnes deceite, wilt mercy send in miseries roome. The fourth part of the ninth Lamentation. THou art my portiō & my strength my defence and saluation: Psal. 28. 1. Thou seest my troubles, and at length wil't giue me consolation. Thou send'st them notas ignorant, of thē, thou know'st thou did'st me make Therefore what's needfull God me grant good Lord do neuer me forsake. I am brought to the very pit, of all confusion men suppose: 1. Sam. 2. 5. Thou hast decreed the time most fit, of my deliuery from my foes. To me vnknowne that being seene, I may attribute to thee then:
The praise who praised ere hast beene, without the aide of mortall men. Which I haue sought so long in vaine, yea while I called thee vpon: Let me acknowledge helpe againe, to come from thee or else from none. And all that the world can affoord, bee but th'effects of thy deere loue: Thy power thy prouidence and woord, do send me comfort from aboue. O blessed man whom thou dost chuse, and call'st by crosses vnto thee, Whom thou by death seem'st to refuse, by secret sweetenes liues by thee. With inward consolation, fed with the Manna of thy loue: Who dwels in thy protection, with liuely hope can neuer moue. He fainteth not at mightiest frowne, Psal. 119. 57. so I O Lord assured rest: Thou art my portion and my crowne, to dignifie those loue thee best. Thou tendrest me as a deare sonne, though thou me visit with thy rod: Psal. 99. 33
Yet sufferest not me for to runne, with sinners and to fall from God. Although I seeme of hope depriued, and that my wonted comforts past: Yet I O Lord shalbe reuiued, by thee and by thy grace at last. For all my long and instant cries, I will not shrinke though knowing this: Thy wonderous power & great mercies, most infinite thy mercy is. Yf mad'st the Rocke a water spring, thy thirsty people to refresh: Frō mine hard hearted foes can'st wring, some comfort for my withered flesh. Yf thou raind'st Manna from aboue, meate by a Rauen thy saints to feede: Thousands of men did feede with loue, when their was little shew of bread. Yf to thy people thou sendest Quailes, in desert where all foode was scant: And since thy goodnes neuer failes, should I suppose that I should want.
¶ The fift part of the ninth Lamentation. COnfirme my faith for euermore, that I most constantly belieue: Thou can'st and wilt encrease my store, and all good things thou wilt me giue. All power belongeth vnto thee, who can imagine or will say: Thou can'st not in my neede helpe me, or that thy loue is tane away. Sith thou hast don such mighty things so freely for men in distresse: Should not I fly with swiftest wings, to thee in time of heauines. But lo O Lord all things are thine, the heauens are thine the earth also: The Cattle, Fowles, the shrubs & vine, all things in heauen and earth belowe. All things aboue, all things beneath, is thine, who truely then can say?
Thou can'st not giue, or them bequeath to whom thou wilt, who can say nay? Thou makest ye corn to spring & grow & waterst th'earth with thy sweet showers Thou causest beasts with thankes to low, with dewes, thou water'st fragrāt flowers. Since then thou art the Lord of all, sith thou cōmaund'st, & do'st forbid: The rich & poore, mak'st proud men fall, that down can'st throvv & raise at need. Sith that thou tryest & vvilt revvard, sith thou dost vvhat shall please thy will And in what manner vvilt regard, & vvhom thou vvilt, can'st saue or spill. No liuing man commandeth thee, not all the vvorld can thee controle: O Lord I still vvill pray to thee, for health of body and of soule. Let it be thus, O father deare, for Christ his sake thy dearest sonne, That dyed and rose my soule to cleare, in all things Lord, thy wilbe done. All glory to the Trinity, to Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost:
Combind in holy vnity, of power in might and glory most. FINIS. ❧ To God the Father▪ WEll-spring of deity God God-head giuer, who giu'st away, yet kepest what was giuē A fountaine vndiminisht by thy riuer, Riuer and fountaine both in fullnes euer. Father by euerlasting generation, Without precedence in paternity: Whether it be of substance or relation. For all things are togither in eternity: Disclose the depth, take frō my muse obscurity, Thine hidden depth, which makes my verse an oracle So shall I both attaine vnto thy purity. And all yt read my lines conceiue this miracle. How God in getting of another, yet, Another not an other God did gett. FINIS.
To God the Sonne. GReat sonne of God, but borne the sonne [of man, One subiect of a double substance fram'd: wherein nor man-hood lost, nor god-head wan But of thē both at once one Christ was nam'd Before all times begot, in time created, The Lord of Lords, a seruant from retaining, And yet no former forme thereby abated: In seruāts forme, the forme of God remaining Great sonn of God, thē whō there is no greater No not the father in his great diuinitie, As God creator and as aman a creature: [For more and lesse, agree not in infinity.] Teach me to know how man by God assumed Ys both, and yet not man by God consumed. To God the holy Ghost▪ O Spirit Diuine, the cōmon knot whereby, The father & the sonne do loue together: For sonne and father vniuersally. Are loue, though loue be proper vnto neither,
Thou that frō both Proceedest & from none: Vnequally but with the like authority, As from one principall, though from that one, Principally yet without priority: One all the first from two the last of three, Sweete breath that ioyest euery pensiue heart, Breathed from God, O God breath into me, Skill aboue skill, and teach me how thou art The last of three, and yet of three so cast, As in them all is neither first nor last. FINIS. ¶ Diuers consolations that the life and time of affliction is short. THe comfort yt doth make vs bold, is our afflictions transitory: Cause wee of Christ do take sure hold, the troubles short, endlesse the glory. Eye hath not seene, eare hath not hard, the ioyes that God for his elect In heauen already hath prepar'd, though many troubles to effect. Light are our troubles temporarie, because Christ and his spirit diuine,
This waight and burthen helpe to carry, and doth in yoake with vs conioyne. We looke not on, things, seene & vaine, but on things vnseene, cast our eie: The blessed saints for Christ were slaine, Christ answered, when they did cry. How long, how long, Lord wilt thou stay? a little time though God doth lowre: Reu. 6. Stay till, his wrath be past away, t'is but a minute of an howre. Christ calles the time of troubles little, but Paule doth say the glori's great: And in respect, t'is but a tittle, if't be compar'd to heauens seate. A while saith God, I thee forsooke, that is short time in misery: But thee t'ernall mercy tooke, that is to heauen's felicity. I'le feare no danger, paine nor losse, t'is but the twinckling of an eye: I see the crowne i'le beare the crosse, for I shall liue eternally. Good gratious God, me patience send, and then do send, what send thou wilt:
Graunt me those ioyes that ne'r shall end for to that end Christ's bloud was spilt. FINIS. ❧ Of Death. WHat's death? a seperation of mortall body frō our breath: What's that? but a Cessation, from cares, and from a liuing death. What's that Cessation: it t'is a sleepe, by which we wholie are refreshed: Yea but in sleepe, who shall vs keepe? he that blest all, and is most blessed. But who made death? t'vvas made by sinne, & what is sin? the lawes transgression: Of that how should I vauntage win? all sinne is weakned by confession. But by death's dynt, t'is ouercome: and whence came sin? frō hell beneath? Whē wa'st first bred? in mothers wombe: when will it end? not till our death.
This seemeth strange, but this is true, by nature sinne is hatcht in vs, Old Adams rules, till God renue. why then I see, the case stands thus: As sinne goes in, soe life goes out, as sinne goes out, so life comes in: So by the Lord, t'is brought about, sinne conquers life, Life conquers sinne. Though life by sinne be still anoyde, & sinne of death by strength & sting: Yet Viprous sinne, by death's destroy'd, life killeth death, whē death kill'th sin. The death of body, or of nature, is that, where to all subiect be: Cause sinne hath tainted euery creature, according vnto Gods decree. When bodies life doth fade away, and we giue vp our dying ghost: And this our Corps is clad in clay, and vnto God our soules doth poast: It is ordayned and decree'd, that all men by necessitie: Through that first Adams sinfull deede, are subiect made, the death to die.
To dye for sinne, t'is due for sinne, to dye in sinne, a heauy case: To dye to sinne is to beginne, to leaue to sinne, and liue to grace. The death in sinne, without repenting, in affect, effect, and aspecting: In thinking, doing, and frequenting, and offred grace of God reiecting. I wretched wofull execrable, haue plague of God, by sinne for sinne: Of miseries, most miserable, to them that liue and die therein. But he that dies, before he dies, when he is dead, he is not dead: But oldeage dies, and he shall rise, with glory from the graue his bed. And he that's toucht with conscience pricke, whose sence of sin is sharpe & quicke: That man is sicke, ere he is sicke, and when he's sicke, he is not sicke. I looke poore wretch on mine estate, and others monish, by mine harmes: That was neere death but now of late, by sinne inchaunted by her charmes.
Had I not dyed, sure I had di'de, (oh happie Phenix liuing death) Still let my flesh be mortified, let my sp'rit, breath, by thy spirits breath Sweete Iesu thou didst die for me, and in thy death, with thee I di'de, Oh liue in me, and J in thee, shall liue, and euermore abide. And wormes meate thou, durt clay & slime, thy body kill, thy soule to saue: Quaile vild affections, whil'st hast time, yt life by death, through grace mai'st haue Shake hands with sinnes & all offences and learne to dye before thou dye: When bid'st adue vnto thy sences, then shalt thou liue eternally. The Cause of death. THe cause of death is wicked sinne, for out of sin our death did flowe: From thence our plagues did all begin, cut of this tree, our ills did grow.
Hunger, fire, death, and all, created were for punishment: And laid on man for Adams fall, and was the cause of our torment. God said to Adam, Scripture saith; what houre soeuer thou shalt eate: Thou shalt be sure to die the death, god made not death, but death did threat Through enuy, malice of the diuell, into the world came this estate: Sinnes entred with all actions euill, by Adams fault: not by our fate. Two sortes of death, frō death by sin, proceed, as effects from their cause: The death of Nature doth begin, & death of grace next by Gods lawes. ¶ Death of two sorts. BY which we are made slaues for euer, in darknes, called death eternall: From worme of conscience freed neuer, depriu'd of all the ioyes supernall.
As by example, euident, two sorts of death approued well: The▪ Glutton rich, being dead was sent, his body buried quicke in hell. And Lazarus poore, beggar dead, to Abrahams bosome caried is: With Angells wings, with glory spread, where is true ioye and comforts blisse. The one hath heauen, the other hell, the one hath blisse, the other bale: The one in heauen still must d well, and th'other, Diuells pull and hale. He died with his conscience euill, in death he saw his wickednes: And his dampnations with the diuell, as holy Scriptures doe expresse. To the elect and faithful. THis is the consolation great, of the that in their death-beds lie: Their mindes fly vp to th mercy seate, and there for mercy loudly cry.
By Christ which death abollished, and sinne that's clensed by his bloud: Whose merits, pardon purchased, for all our sinnes, and death withstood. To vs his goodnes is imputed, to him the sinnes that we committed: And we for righteous are reputed, and all our sinnes, they are remitted. For he alone by death hath bought vs, from power and paine of deuill & hell: & merly he through loue hath brought vs with him in heauen to raigne & d well. That no afflictions giue vs griefe, that Sathan should vs not destroy: And giu'th to vs eternall life, and filth our hearts with heauenly ioy. He made vs free-men, heires to God, which captiue bondslaues were to hell: Beate Sathan downe with iron Rod, to place where dampned diuels dwell. Eternall death could not preuaile, gain'st him, nor ouer him haue power: christ strēgthned those whō sin did quaile his might, the mighty did deuoure.
O're death o're sinne & hidious hell, he gaue vs life and victory: T'all those that keepe his precepts well, and them installes in endles glory. For as by Adam all men dy'd, for sinne and by iniquity: In Christ shall all men be reuiu'd, to liue with him eternally. FINI Si ❧ Although the body die yet they shall liue. THe Godly and iust people haue, most cōfort though with paine & griefe: They suffer death & lie in graue, and seeme for saken sanz reliefe. They are as sheep which men ordaine, to death and slaughter to be put: As silly guiltles Lambes are slaine, when Butchers knife their throates doe cut. For we which liue shall giuen bee, to death for Iesus Christ his sake:
If they doe not dispaire in thee, noe feare of death can cause thē quake. But rest assured they shall passe, through death to life eternally: Who aske for mercy and for grace, and vnto God for faith doe cry. They suffer both his hand and Rod, and when he strikes, are patient: They put their hope and trust in God, who comforts thē with hearts content. Their death is good, & of great price, they also know through Christ his passiō Death's ouer come, in wond'rous wise, and soe, receaue they consolation. If any touch't in latest paines, of dierfull death, this faith hould fast: In mid'st of death, his life attaines, and shall haue lasting life at last. The Christians surely doe belieue, that whē they seeme to be most dead: That then, they most of all doe liue, and soe with ioy lift vp their head. FINIS.
The death of the Godly is a sleepe. CHrist calls the death of godly men, a sleep, his owne a death, & why? The Souldiers speare was made a Pen, his bloud the Inke to write thereby. Quietus est, for Christians all, and then the same to vs was sealed: A sleepe, he iustly may it call, cause by his stripes our wounds were healed. His was a death, cause death was due, in him died all, he di'd for all: Gods Iustice vs to death doth sue, he pay'd it and repair'd the fall. that we moight sleep, he suffer'd pains, that we mought laugh, he oft did weepe His was the losse, ours was the gaines, thus did he change, Death to a sleepe. FINIS.
To whom they that die ought to commit their Spirit. TO Christ did Stephen yeald vp his spirit, for hee's the way the truth & life: He purchast life by death and merrit, the husbandes he, the Church his wife. He is that Noah, his Church ye doue, that houldes his hand for to receaue vs: He bids vs come to imbrace his loue, we fly to him when all deceaue vs. The heauens & earth the Lord com∣maundes, to him all Creatures runne but wee: None can vs take out of his handes, in life and death to him we flee. FINIS.
¶ The bodie is buried but shall be raised vp againe at the last day. PIllor of faith, Basis of blisse, of true religion sure supporter: The pointe of Resurrection is, in death it is the chiefe comforter. If this doe fall, all faith may faile, what article doth vs refresh: When life and health, and strength doth quaile: the Resurrection of the flesh. Our bones shall blossom as the grasse, we shall be raised out of dust: Dan. 12. Iob. 19. Rom. 8. The bodie that before time was, by power of Christ's spirit rise it must. The first fruit's Christ, ye head is rais'd, the members shall the same likewise: The Lord God for the same be prais'd, we know that we shall also rise.
If head, aboue the water bee, how can the body then be drowned: We shall arise, and Iesus see, and with him shall be kingly crowned. FINIS. ❧ In the pangs of death and in all tribulations, the reme∣dies be to be learned in the sufferings of Christ. OF life and death the true director, who in his life and his dying: Of our misdoing is corrector, and into all our actions prying. Christ is afflicted for our sake, left vs, example that we should: Follow his stepps and his way take, thy Crosse to beare with courage bould Our Sauiour Iesus teacheth thee, how can that be (say'st thou) behold: Example, if thou punisht bee, with sicknes, hunger, thirst, & colde.
With thy selfe reccon and accompt, how it cannot compared be: with his thornes, yea his nailes surmount, the greatest payne that paineth thee. Art thou restrain'd of thy desire, & lusts yt draw thou know'st not whe∣ther Thinke on Christs crosse, Gods wrath & ire, & put his tortures all together. If prid puffe vp thy mind with motiōs, looke on Christ, nailed on the Crosse: And thinke as bound by due deuotions, of our great gaine, by his great losse. If thou in filthie lust dost burne, or any other ill desire: Thinke but how Christ his flesh was torne, to saue thy soule frō flames of fire. With stripes thrust through, and all to brokē his drinke was Ezell mixt with Gaule: With his last gaspe, ye earth was shoken, who suffered for the sinnes of all. If enuy, hate, reuenge, thee grieue, thinke with thy selfe how Christ did pray (O Father, doe them all forgiue) for them that tooke his life away. FINIS.
An exhortation to forgiue one an other, before we de∣part out of this, world. GOd vs commaunded to forgiue, & saith then we shall be forgiuen: Without offence noe man can liue, and God his ballance hangeth even. He that doth not forgiue his brother, will then the Lord his faults remit, Noe, as he dealeth with another, another shall repaire t'is fit. And when you kneele to God & pray, forgiue if you haue any thing: Gainst any liuing man that day, that Christ may your remission bring. And when thy guift thou dost present, and on the Aulter sacrifice: First with thy brother make consent, and him forgiue in any wise.
When thou to Christ wast enemie, and strengthned, in great extreames: Yet then did he giue remedie, and or'e thee spred his mercie beames. He gaue to thee his holy spirit, to guide and leade thy soule aright: And gaue thee heauen there to inherit, all ioyes and blisse, lay in his sight. When thou from him wa'st gon astray, he sought thee out & did thee finde: And finding thee, brought thee away, vnto his fould, he thee resignde. Thanke God therefore & render praise exalt and laude his holy name: Vnto the heauens sing alwaies, all men on earth doe ye the same. Hence forth my soule, walke in his path and erre not from him any more: Lesse thou prouoke his heauie wrath, and then art worse then wer't before. Let not Gods spirit be giuen thee, to worke thy condempnation: But let thy eye remembred bee, for thy soules preseruation.
Shun thou all wicked company, with dooers ill associate not: Least thou from faith should'st fall & fly, and soule & body soile and spot. But blesse his name who called thee, vnto the state of righteousnes: And thy sinnes vengance tane hath hee, to giue thee heauens happines. Blesse thou his blessed holynes, his praise let minde & heart record: And let thy tongue and voyce confesse, the gratiousnes of God the Lord. Prostrate thy selfe downe at his feete, offer thy seruice with free heart: O yeeld God all, for t'is most meete, since he made, sau'd, & blest each part. Who spared not his only Sonne, but let him die thy soule to saue: To pay and ransome thy faults done, and to redeeme thee from the graue. So in the prayer of our Lord, we doe forgiue that's done gainst vs: As God forgiuenes shall afford, our Sauiour Christ doth teach vs thus.
That is, that we forgiue them must, who did vs harme in any thinge: In thought, in word, in deede vniust, or ought to thine indamaging. FINIS. ¶ Diuers consolations that the life and time of af∣fliction is short. THe cōfort that doth make vs bould, is our afflictions transitory: Cause wee of Christ doe take sure hould, the troubles short, endlesse the glory. Eye hath not seen, eare hath not heard, the ioyes that God for his elect: In heauen already hath prepar'd, through many troubles to effect. Light are our troubles temporarie, because Christ and his spirit deuine: This weight and burthen helpe to carry, and strongly vs to them combine. We looke not on things seene & vaine, but on things vnseene cast our eye:
The soules of Saints for Christ was slaine, Christ answeared, when they did cry. How long a time that they must stay, a little while though he doth lower: His stay till wrath be ouer past, t'is but a minute of an howre. Christ calls the time of troubles little, but Paule doth say, the glories great: As in respect of th'earth a little, so griefes compar'd, to Heauens seate. A while saith God, I thee forsooke. that is short time in misery: But there th'eternall mercy tooke, that is to heauen felicity. FINIS. ❧ A consolation for them which suffer for their offences. IF men you buffit for ill deedes, what praise mongst mē, get you ther∣by: Corrections from your faults proceedes, 1. Pet. 2. 20 and therefore take it patiently.
See none do suffer as an Actor. of ill, as busie bodies, theeues, Nor as a wicked male factor, for that barrs pitty from your grieues. But if please God we suffer must, for wicked deedes were done by vs: Deseruing punishment most iust, may holy be by suffering thus. 1. Pet. 3. 14 And vnto God t'is no lesse pleasing, then suffering of the Innocents: God can and will, helpe our diseasing, we are but as his patients. If euill men their faults confesse, and noe good course of life omit: Belieue in Christ, and faith expresse, then surely he'l their faults remit. And their deserued punishment, and crosses all he'l lenifie: And giue a crowne magnificent, to purenesse them he'l sanctifie. The theefe who died for heineous crime, hang on the Crosse by Iesus side: Confessing sinnes at his last time, was in his suffering sanctifide.
To comfort him our Lord did say, this day thy soule to heauen seal'd vp: On Iacobs ladder, heauens high way, because thou tasts with me my cup. Then sinners all that him belieue, repent their sinnes & mend their life: As mercy them shall sure releeue, and so cut off their mortall strife. The suffering Martiers testifie, Christ and his Gospell he vs sent: The law doth sinners scourge and try, faith frees their paines if they repent. Whē thou sufferest for right or wrong let steadfast faith in Christ remaine: Such sufferings shall ere it be long, the crowne of endlesse glory gaine. No man therefore ought to dispaire, Christ dyed for our redemption: Him aduocate did God prepaire, from sinne to cause exemption. And thē he wil'd his word be preached to euery creature instantly: And by his Gospell his grace reached, cause he would haue no sinners die.
The health of all he doth desire, calls all to him that burdned bee: And to forgiue doth vs require, and all to pray that troubled bee. FINIS. A disputation betweene the Diuell and vs. Man. IF Sathan heape vp all thy sins, addresse thy selfe to God on hie Fall thus to pray (when he begins) Lord turne thy face, & heare my cry: The Diuell with strong inuasion, suggesteth his temptation. Guarde me from Sathan, death, & hell, the Feind on me his wrath doth wreake All ill temptations Lord repell, defend my soule for it is weake: Looke on the face of Christ thy Sonne, consider Lord what he hath donne.
For Christ is mine, and I am his, mine is his iustice, mine the gaines: Lord turne thy face from mine amisse, Christ bear'st my sins, & bore ye paines: Thou did'st me aske, and I shall haue, in faith therefore thy grace I craue. Diuell. God heares no sinners, why do'st pray? thy sinnes the sandes in number passe: M. Christ blood hath washt my sins away and made me righteous as he was. Christs merits shall me cloath abont, God will not finde my vildenesse out. D. Shalt thou the sincke of sinfullnes, goe on with Peter and with Paule: To euerlasting blessednes, noe, noe, to Hell, downe must thou fall: I but in thought did him offend, and he me dampned without end. M. I with ye theefe reach out my hand, of faith, to Christ his hand of grace: He holdeth me that fearefull stand, and drawes me vp to heauenly place: Thou neuer canst be sau'd, and why? for men, not Angels, Christ did dy.
D. How hast thou this assured trust, Which hast done nothing that is good? M. Because though god, be god most iust, My debts are paid with Christ his blood: My sinnes are all to Christ imputed, And righteous, I in him reputed. D. Thou shalt be haled downe to hell. M. my head's in heauen, ther's no hel fire D. with vs in chaines, & paines shalt dwel M. Thou art a murderer and a lyer: When head's aboue, who can be drown'd, Christ is the head, mine head is crown'd. Thou art a damned fiend no iudge, T'is thou set'st God & man at warrs: Thou art that enuious slaue do'st grudge, That man should shine as do the starrs: & heauē enioy whence thou wert thrown Thy malice ould, false fiend is knowne. D. Legions of Diuells watch sinners soules. M. but Angels pitch their tents about me God me protects, & thee controles, Diuels are in chaines, I need not doubt thee If thy power stretch not to a Swine, How can'st thou hurt this soule of mine.
D. God is not iust, if for thy euils, He giues thee euerlasting life: Thy balefull portion is with diuels, Where thou shalt haue torture & strife: Endles, mercles, remediles; Due for thy monstrous wickednes. M. God's iust and doth his promise keepe, From iustice to his mercie seate: In Christ's name I appeale and creepe, And so obtaine his mercie great: And by his grace in largest scope, By Christ I doe erect mine hope. D. Thou feed'st thy selfe with hope in vaine. M. Christ is the truth, he cannot lye: He saith his saints with him shall raigne, And such a one by Christ am I Presumptious slaue, my hope's not vaine, Cause Christ is heauen & cheefest gaine. D. Thou see'st what thou shalt leaue behind, What thou shalt haue, thou seest not: M. Sathan auaunt thy faith is blind, From the heauens blisse is far remote: That may be seene with natures eies, My soule doth scorne and I dispise.
D. y• part'st hence loadē with misdeed, And of good workes th'art naked bare: M. Christ's works & merrits stand in steed Of mine by faith are mine I dare. By faith in him and true repentance, Still hope for blisse and scape Gods ven∣gance. D. But thy repentance comes to late, Againe thy God's the God of truth: I must needs say, he must thee hate, Cause gainst mee all thy flower of youth: Think'st now that he will take the bran, No ti's to late thou wicked man. M. To late it was not for the theefe. D. yea but the theefe, his faith was true, Thine is a wauering weake beliefe, Hast no more faith then hath a Iewe: Now what remaineth, but deepe dispaire For God of thee, will take no care, M. I'le fly to God, i'le him beseech, To blow this little sparke of fire: And he that is in mercy rich, I know will graunt me my desire: Faith pleaseth God by quallitie, He cares not for the quantitie.
D. Do'st not thou see God hath in store In earth, in hell and euery where: Ten thousand thousand, plagues & more, Which makes vs Diuels quake & feare: Yet art so sensles. foolish dull, To say thy God is mercifull. M. He like a good Chirurgion, Doth hurt to heale, they are his launces: That lett out our corruption, And so saues vs from worse mischances: Our plagues on earth saue vs from hell, diuels wel may feare, for there they dwel. D. It is a wretched thing to dye. M. To die in Chri'st, a blessed thing: D. A sinners death's a misery, M. By death is lost my sin deaths sting: D. & god hath made thy death most biter M. the ioyes of heauen will be ye sweeter. D. Thou leau'st this world, go'st know'st not whither, M. I leaue this Hellish place on earth: Mine home is heauen, & il'e goe thither, My soule doth claime it by hir birth: Heauen is my country, there was bred, My soule, & there is Christ mine head.
D. Thou leau'st cōmodities behinde, And many great and pleasing things: Thou many moe ill things maist finde, yt men to care & sorrow brings: M. Ther's nought on earth that's worth ye buying For that's in heauen, is worth my dying. D. Thou leaust thy riches & thy store, M. Thay'r other mens, that I do leaue: I beare mine with me and no more. D. Therein thou do'st thy selfe deceaue: Thy wife and Children do'st forsake. M. They are y• Lords he will them take. D. It's hard to be quite pluckt away, From those thou lou'st so deerely well: M. Within short space they shall not stay But come to me where I shall dwell: D. thou do'st fiō thy sweet friends depart M. I goe to sweet friends true of heart. Whom Sathan cannot make dispaire, Them he'le tempt, in themselues to trust: Against that giue thy selfe to prayer, And know, none in themselues are iust: So from thy selfe to Christ doe flie, And he'le relieue thee by and by.
He's ouer strong with vs to wrastle, Against this danger when help we need: Against his force Christ is our Castle, And his assaults defends with speed, Answere the subtill diuels dispute, With thiese replies shalt make him mute. It is a sure and strong defence, Against all desperation: When Sathan seekes with dilligence, To worke thy soules damnation: The more the diuell would thee depresse The more do trust in Gods goodnes. Against presumption and pride, Thy feeble weakenes well do weigh: And let humility thee guide, Remember th'art but dust and clay: Vnto thy Sauiour Christ do fly, What thou dost want, he will supply. If thou thus answearst diuels tempta∣tion, And all his vaine suggestion: Shalt not fall into desperation, Nor blowne vp by presumption: And being strong in faith and humble, The diuell shall not thee downe tumble. FINIS.
¶ The poore and distressed soule being loaden with the burthen of his sinnes, feruent∣ly prayeth to God for his remission thereof. O Lord come pittie my distresse, see how I sigh and groane: With teares and floods of heauinesse, my heart is ouerthrowne. Noe hope I finde, noe helpe I feele, noe cure nor salue I see: None can my sinnes corruptions heale, sweete Iesus comfort me. My wounding sorrowes neuer cease, my greefes grow more and more: What I should kill, doth still increase, Lord saue my soule therefore. I liuing dye, yet dying liue, in life, yet dayly dye: I figh and grone yet cannot grieue, sinne makes this mistery.
Lord let me liue yet howrely die, in loue yet dayly hate: Let me imbrace yet still defie, let peace breede all debate. O let me liue, yet neuer liue, a liue yet euer dead: O let me grieue, yet neuer grieue, fed with thy liuing bread. Let passions passe, let groanes be gon, let moanes be turn'd to mirth: I liue and die to Christ alone, let sorrowes sincke to earth. FINIS. ❧ Seauen Psalmes of Da∣uids repentance commonly called Penitentiall Psalmes. Psalmes. 6. I Am thy childe, O God most deere, then fatherly doe chasten me: Rom. Heb. 12. 6. Exo. 20. In irefull wrath as iudge seuere, correct not mine impiety.
For Lord to thee still turnes my hope, (because thy mercies haue no end) Euen as the lowly heleetrope, vnto the lofty sun doth bend. Forgiue me Lord for I am weake, angry rebuke, I may not dure: My vexed boanes through paines doe breake with mercies mirth doe them recure. Dire anguish stickes in troubled soule, with Oyle of grace do it alay: My conscience sting doth me controule, thy comforts doe not long delay. In debth no man remembreth thee, nor offreth thankes vnto thy name: In dark some graue how is he free? to celebrate thy glorious fame. I am a weary of my groanes, all night I wash my couch with teares: Wearing my selfe away with moanes, my hart is quite consum'd with feares. My beauties gon with very griefe, and worne with anguish of my foes: But thou at last wilt send reliefe, to me my God in spight of those.
Away from me you wicked traine, and workers of iniquity: My weeping hath not bin in vaine, for thou at length hast heard my cry. My prayers Lord thou wilt embrace, and all mine enimies confound: With sudden shame thou wilt deface, and make them leuell with the ground. FINIS. Psalme. 32. BLest is he, whose vnrighteousnes, the Lord hath pardoned and bin: So carefull of, in his distresse, to hide and couer all his sinne. O blessed is that man againe, to whom the Lord imputes no fault: And in whose spr'it no guile doth raigne, his soule with error to assault. Whilst I in silence yet forbore, my flesh with languor gan to faint: And all my bones to nothing wore, by reason of my dayly plaint. Thy heauy hand doth make me quaile, and tremble too, both night and day: My heart and soule with drynes faile, my moysture is consum'd away.
My fault's to thee, I will vnfould, to God my sinnes I haue expos'd: As vnto him the truth I tould, so he with mercy me enclos'd. Therefore to thee, the pure shall pray, in season due, with zealous ground: For in the floods there is no stay, in waters deepe thou art not found. Thou art my stocke and stay secure, with songs of ioy I am consin'd: Thou art my rocke and countermure, from all annoy I am enshrin'd. I will instruct thee in thy way, my eye shall euer be thy guide: That thou maist neuer erre nor stray, nor yet thy foot-steps once to slide. Be not like to the Mule disturb'd, that reason doth not. vnderstand: Nor to the horse which must be curb'd, before thou canst his force commaund. Sorrow and woe remaine for those, that wicked are and loue discord: But mercy still shall him enclose, which puts his trust in God the Lord. Be ioyfull O yee righteous then, lift vp your soules with cheerefull voice: All yee that are pure hearted men, in grear Iehouah, still reioyce. FINIS.
❧ Psalme. 38. PVt me not to rebuke and shame, nor in thine anger chasten me: O righteous God, for thy great name, pardon my sinnes and set me free. In me thine arrowes fast doe sticke, thy heauy hand doth presse me downe: My flesh, my bones, and heart are sicke, when thou in wrath on me dost frowne. I haue no rest in any ioynt, by reason of my deadly sinne: With balme of mercy me annoynt, and bring me to thy heauenly Inne. My dismall deeds doe plunge me soare, like rageing billowes of the maine: O wast me to thy blissefull shoare, and be mine Anchor-hould againe. My festred wounds breed mine annoy, by reason of my foolish guyze: Chasing my heart and soule from ioy, all day I mourne with wofull cryes. Full of diseases are my loynes, and limmes decay in euery part: Longuor vnto my flesh adioynes, and anguishment consumes my heart.
Thou knowest all my hearts desires, my groanings are not hid from thee: Extinguish these outragious fires, O Lord and cure mine agonie. My heart doth pant, my strength doth faile, my neighbours did their loue exchang: And darkenesse did my sight assaile, my very kindred waxed strang. Mine enimies that sought my life, layd snares for me in euery place: Plodding all day to worke my strise, and bring my name into disgrace. But as one deafe that could not heare, their taunting scoffes I did neglect: And like the dumb did speech forbeare, for thou their slaunders wilt correct. For in thee euer doe I trust, to right my wrongs and plead for mee: A gainst my foes O God most iust, for all reuenge belongs to thee. Of the most humbly I did craue, that they in tryumph should not rise: If I by chaunce a foile might haue, they would exalt with ioyfull cries. With deadly plagues I am beset, and heauy thoughts in me doe stay: My horrid sinnes Ile nere forget, but mourne for them both night and day.
My cruell foes are great in strength, and they in number doe exceed: Therefore O Lord ayde me at length, and succour me in time of neede. ❧ Psalme. 51. LOrd of thy mercies multitude, and goodnes great I doe implore: My hainous sinnes from me exclude, and sanctifie me euermore. Wash me cleane from my wickednesse, and purge me from my sinfull crimes: That I may neuer more transgresse, but glorifie thy name all times. For I acknowledge all my faults, my sinnes are euer in mine eyne: Defend me still in all assaults, thou know'st O Lord my soule is thine. Gainst thee alone was mine offence, my sinnes lay open to thy view: Therefore the Lord's Omnipotence, (if I were cast) is iust and trew. Behould I first was form'd in sinne, and from my mother so was borne: And so (poore soule) continue in, yet let me neuer be forlorne.
But loe the truth thou do'st require, from the interiour parts of mine: And then my soule thou shalt inspire, with prudence, secret and Diuine. Purge me with Hisop, then I know, although my sinnes are wondrous blacke: I shall be whiter then the Snow, no brightnes then, my soule can lacke. O Lord into my wounded heart, send downe thy spirits ioyfull voice: That my brus'd bones in euery part, which thou hast broken may reioyce. From mine offences turne thy face, and Purge me from mine euill deeds: Increase in me thy spirit of grace, from whence new birth of heart proceeds, Let me not from thy presens part, take not thy holy spirit from me: But be a comfort to my heart, still with me, let thy spirit be. And then the man that doth transgresse, I shall reclaime from wicked waies: O free me from bloud guiltienesse, that I may sing thy rightfull praise. O Lord doe thou my lips vnfould, that open'd mouth may offer praise: Which is the sacrifice of ould, gratefull to thee in all my daies.
A contrite heart thou dost require, for a sweete smelling sacrifice: A broken spirit is thy desire, which at no time thou wilt despise. Be gratious Lord to Sions hill, and Salems wales build and repaire: Then Caues and Lambes we'le offer still, vpon thine Alter fat and faire. FINIS. ¶ Psalmes. 102. O Heare my prayers Lord and let, my mournefull moanes to thee assend Hide not thy face nor me forget, in time of trouble me defend. Encline thine eares vnto my call, heare me O God and that right soone: Support me euer least I fall, both Morning, Euening, Night, & Noone. My daies like smoake consume away, my bones are burnt, my heart is dead: And withered like grasse or hay, that I forget to eat my bread. My flesh will scarce cleaue to my boanes, I am become so weake a man: And worne away with grieuous groanes, like to some Owle or Pellican.
In watching I haue spent the night, and like a sparrow all alone: That on some houses top doth light, disconsolate I made my moane, All the day long I am reuil'd, by those which are against me sworne: And lead a life like one exil'd, and of his country quite forlorne. For I [like bread] did ashes eate, and powred teares into my cup. Cause in thy wrath and anger great, thou threw'st me downe & took'st me vp. My daies doe like a shadow passe, but thou for euer Lord art sure: And I am wither'd vp like grasse, but thy remembrance still shall dure. O Lord arise and pitty take, with Sion let thy mercy stand: Good God euen for thy meries sake, for now the time is full at hand. For why thy seruants Meditate, vpon her stoanes with greeuance iust: To see her lye so ruinate, deuoid of comfort in the dust. The heathens, then thy name shall feare, and earthly Kings thy maiesty: When thou O Lord shalt Sion reare, vnto her glorious dignity.
And then all Nations of the earth, which vex the poore with furious hate: Shall quake and tremble at thy breath, when thou shalt helpe the desolate. This shalbe written on Record, for vnborne babes which shall ensue: That they may lawd the liuing Lord, and magnifie his iudgements true. The Lord lookt from his mighty throane, and glorious seate of maiestie: That he might heare the playning moane, of Captiues then adiudg'd to die. That they in Salem might declare, the glorious name of God the Lord: How he of Sion tooke such care, as with his mercy did accord. My strength in progresse down he brought and suddainely cut of my daies: To spare me yet I him besought, till riper age, when life decayes. Thy yeares O Lord endure for aye, there is no limmit to thy times: For thou did'st the foundations lay, of heauenly Spheres, and earthly Climes. Thy handy workes shall weare away, but thou for euer wilt endure: They like a garment shall decay, thy yeares, eternall are most sure.
Thy Seruants, Children shall remaine, and their posterities abide: And they in heauen with thee shall raigne, in earth stand fast and neuer slide. ❧ Psalme. 130. OVt of the deepe to thee I cry'd, therefore O Lord heare thou my voice, Oh let thine eares to me be ty'd, that I in thee may still reioyce. If thou O Lord wilt be seuere, to note in me what is amisse: Thy iudgments I might iustly feare, dispairing of thy heauenly blisse. But thou art mercyfull O God, and still thy grace doth most abound: To them that reuerence thy rod, thy fauour euer wilbe found. On thee O Lord I did attend, and in thy word repos'd my trust: Till thou thy light to me did'st send, and raise me vp euen from the dust. Trust in the Lord, O Israell, his mercies rich as sands on shore: Redemption great with him doth dwell, in bounteous plenty: plenteous store.
Then he from sinne will thee redeeme, and ransome home, from soule offence: Houlding thee in as great esteeme, as Adam in his innocence. ❧ Psalme. 144. TO my Petitions bow thine eare, good Lord consider my desire: O comfort me in dreadfull feare, for thy truths sake I thee require. With vs in iudgment enter not, no man is righteous in thy sight: O let thine anger be forgot, and thine Annoynted vs acquite. The enemy hath vex't my soule, and cast my life downe to the ground: My boanes in darkenes he doth roule, that like a dead man I am found. Therefore my spirit, is opprest, my heart within me grieued sore: That I can finde no quiet rest, but desolation euer-more. Yet former times to minde I call, musing vpon thy workes begun: And exercise my selfe in all, the wondrous acts which thou hast done.
To thee, doe I stretch out my hand, and vnto thee my soule doth groane: Euen as the dry and thirsty land, that for her moisture maketh moane. Heare me O Lord, and that with speed. because my spirit waxeth spare: Hide not thy face in time of neede, least that I fall into the snare. O let thy comfortable loue, betimes into my soule distill: And let thy spirit like a Doue, dwell in my heart and keepe me still. Vpon thee onely I depend, direct me in the perfect way: And guide me to my iourneyes end, for thou art my support and stay. Good Lord defend me from my foes, for vnto thee I fly for ayd: Vnder thy wings hide me from those, that for my soule, their snares haue layd. Teach me to doe the thing a-right, that may be pleasing to thy minde: And amiable in thy sight, that I, thy fauour still may finde, Thou art my God and onely guide, which dost protect me with thy hand: O let thy spirit with me a-bide, and lead me to the holy land.
For thy names sake, Lord quicken me. and for thy righteousnes I craue: O set my soule from troubles free, and let it neuer see the graue. And for thy goodnes sake destroy, mine enemies that me pursue: And to my soule would worke annoy, O Lord confound that damned crew. I am thy seruant O my God, Deare Father guide me with thy rod. FINIS. ¶ A Mistery to be noted and followed of those that are parting out of this life. IN the departure of the Lord, of mortall bodies vitall breath: Luke. 22. 41. Mat. 26. 36 Mar. 14. 31 Their liues a misterie worth record, which he did shew, vs heere on earth. Who doth prepare to die each houre, must follow Christ, our Sauiour. For he the night before he died, did single out himselfe alone: Disciples all he set aside, and to his Father makes his moane: His mother deere he leaues with Iohn, to comfort her when he is gon.
So Christians all when they goe hence, must cast of care of worldes respect: 2 Chro. 32. Isay. 38. 1. Setling their house with prouidence, and then all earthly care neglect: Leauing all thoughts of common wealth, which too much mens affections steale. Commending wife and children all, to Gods protecting will Diuine: Himselfe to God Coelestiall, betakes from world to Gods designe: Forsaking friends and kinsfolkes heere, exempts his heart, from care and feare. He must then secret be alone, who will with high Iehouah walke: Distilling teares with prayers moane, and seruent sighes with God to take: His soule and spirit let him commend, to heauenly ioyes deuoid of end. At time of death Christ watch't and prai'd, with earnest zeale and seruencie: In Oliue Mount all Night he stay'd, a place for heauenly secrecie: He there thrice his disciples warnes, to watch and pray, gainst tempters harmes, Euen so all they must watch and pray. with sighes and groanes for former sinnes: (That from this life depart away, against temptations, Sathans gins:
Exhorting all, to liue to die, to Faith, sure Hope, and Charity. Christ bow'd his knees t'was not enough, he fell downe flat vpon his face: His cryes, the heauens pierced through, to God for ayde and heauenly grace: He twice retir'd to feruent praier, with ardent Zeale in open ayre. He bends his knees with humblenes, who himselfe, commits to Gods dispose: He falleth flat with lowlines, 2 Chro. 32. Isay. 38. 1. that takes the loue for his repose: And wholy doth himselfe deny, fixing his faith in God on high. As Adam first in paradise, had seemely corps without array: So Christ from Earth on Crosse doth rise, Gen. 1. his naked selfe doth them display: As Brasen Serpent was erect. so he's lift vp for his elect. Euen so that soule that Heauen aspir's, Iohn. 3. 14. from earths affections must ascend: Mounting with heart and his desires, to heauenly life that hath no end: Himselfe to th'world, must crucifie, nayl'd with faith, hope and charity. This Champion there must combate make, with Dragon fierce mans enemy: Till he turne backe the victory, leauing the Lambe tue victory: Reu. 12.
Then victour shall enioy the nest, of highest heauens and be possest. FINIS ¶ Short Meditations or Iaculatorie prayers, to be had in memorie vppon seuerall occasions. When any sodaine feare assayleth thee, pray. BE vnto me O Lord a Tower, of strength against my mortall foe: Psal. 60. O guard and ward me with thy power, which way soeuer I shall goe: Then shall my heart and soule reioyce, in God my Lord with cheerefull voice. ¶ If an ill Suspicion ouertake thee. CReate O Lord my heart anewe, regenerate my spirit within: Psal. 50. Suspicious thoughts, which me pursue, expell, and purge me from my sinne: Still let thine Angels me conduct, and with thy spirit my soule instruct.
¶ If vndesent sadnes perplex thee. LEt thy saluation be my ioy, confirme me with thy spirit of grace: Psal. 50. Let sadnes not my soule annoy, for pensiue thoughts too much take place: Oh let my comforts still reside in Christ, who for my sinnes hath dy'de. ¶ If vaine-glory seduce thee. NOt vnto vs, but to thy name all honour (Lord) we attribute: Psal. 115. For thou alone deseru'st the same, what can we to our selues impute? Oh Lord, thou knowest we are but dust, yet we presume in thee to trust. ¶ If despaire molest thee. THou art my hope euen from my youth, Psal. 70. & from my Mothers wombe my guide: Why should I then despaire in truth, but in thy mercies euer bide: For thou O Lord wilt still protect, with consolation thine elect.
¶ If thou be afflicted in minde. HElpe me and I shall then be safe, Psal. 118. and I will meditate alwaies: Vpholde me with thy strongest Staffe, that I may euer sing thee praise: Thy wonted loue Lord let me finde, to comfort mine afflicted minde. ¶ If Slouth assaile thee. LOrd, with thy powre my soule excite, Psal. 79. come and confirme me in thy way: That in thy lawes I may delight, and from thy statuts neuer stray: Rouse and reuiue my drowsie spirit, that ioyes with thee I may inherit. ¶ If wrath disturbe thee. OH giue me patience Lord, and peace, Luke. 12. least y• my soule should lose her crowne: O let thy loue to me increase, and powre thy grace and mercy downe: For thou hast said in thy behest, in patience be your soules possest.
¶ If desire of honour or promotion tempt thee. LOrd vnto thee my heart incline, Psal. 118. from greedie gaine my thoughts with∣drawe: From vanitie direct mine eyne, and rectifie me in thy lawe: For in thee doth all honour rest, it comes not from the East nor West. ¶ If Gluttonie solicit thee. THy Kingdome is not drinke nor meate, but ioy and peace in heauen aboue: T'is not the flesh which we doe eate, can profit vs without thy loue: Then with thy grace my spirit cherish, for that's the foode which cannot perish. ¶ If any blessing of God happen to thee. VVHat shall I render to my Lord, for all his blessings powr'd on me: My heart and soule with one accord, shall laud and praise thy maiestie: All Blessings doe from thee descend, blest be thy name world without end.
¶ In any grieuous persecutions. IVdge them oh Lord which me pursue, and ouer-throw my foes in fight: And with thy sword confound that crewe, which prosecut me with despight: Oh be thou still my guard and guide, defending me on euery side. ¶ When thou seest thou art forsaken of God. LOrd, why doest thou depart away? and turn'st thy face out of my sight: Oh let thy comfort with me stay, for now O Lord it waxeth night: O let my soule not be dismaide, to the O Lord I cry for ayde. ¶ Against Detractours. SAue me, O Lord, for righteous men, and truth begin to faile: There is no truth in tongue nor pen, detractions now so much preuaile: Confound the tongue and lipps of those, who to deceipt themselues dispose.
¶ For our enemies. LAy not their sinne vnto their charge, alas they know not what they doe: But of thy mercies them inlarge, free them from sinne, and Sathan too: Open their eies that they may see, and so repent their iniurie. ¶ If Corrupt flesh prouoke thee. LOrd pearce my flesh with thy true feare, subdue my wicked vilde desire: Psal. 118. I know thy iudgements are seuere, in me Lord quench lusts burning fire: Which sinne, God graunt all may abhore, which is the cause of many more. ¶ If labour tyre thee. BEhold Lord my humillity, and eke my labour doe respect: Forgiue my faults continually, wherein my duty I neglect: Let neither time nor labour tyre, my thoughts to serue thee with desire. FINIS
¶ The penitent prayeth for the Testimonie of a good Conscience. LOoke down (O Lord) on me poore man, In thee I liue, I moue, and am, O cleare my soule and conscience, That I in thee my peace, may finde Rest to my heart, ioy to my minde, freed my sinne and mine offence. Let me not stretch my conscience, But trust vnto thy prouidence, nor by deceipt or guile get gaine: Ill gotten goods let me restore, And of mine owne giue to the poore, as thou my portion shalt maintaine. From conscience that shall erre amisse, Out of the way of heaueuly blisse, and hath not warrant from thy word: From all the pathes Hereticall, From all the waies Scismaticall, Restraine, refraine my feete O Lord. From conscience strict, and full of nicenesse, And ouer curious much precizenesse, represse mine heart, my soule and minde: And with traditions new inuented, That are not with thy word indented, let not my actions be inclinde.
A wounded conscience who can beare, Tis full of horror dread and feare: it is an endles perturbation. A witnes torture Iudge and Gaile, It makes our faith and hope to faile: and lead'th to desperation. A conscience wicked and peruerse, That none but great sinnes can it pearse: and mightie mountaines mole-hills makes, It hindreth our Saluation, It furthereth Obduration: and sence of sinne it from vs takes. Of each good guift Lord thou art giuer, From all ill conscience me deliuer, and euer, and euermore preserue me: Then I in quietnes and rest, As one of thine whom thou hast blest, for euer, euermore will serue thee. FINIS ¶ A heauenly Himme of the ioyes Celestiall. O Lord that art my propugnacle, I looke vnto thy Tabernacle, where doth thy wondrous glory dwell: By th'eye of faith I doe beholde, Such ioyes as noe tongue can vnfolde: scarse holy Angells can it tell.
I see the downefall of my foes, The glory of thy Saints and those, sweete quiers of Angells shning bright: Me thinkes I see thy Maiestie, Thine honour and high dignitie, allclad in Radient beames of light. O how I long for to imbrace, The benigne kindnes of thy grace. that reall rich possession. Which thou by Charter of thy word, Dost giue to them that feare the Lord, and thereof make prosession. I meane that high Ierusalem, The Cittie dwelling for all them, that shall in endles glory raigne: The Cittie of that holy one, Hath Walls vprear'd of pretious stone, of Pearle the gates, there's nothing vaine. The Temple thou, the Lambe the light, Noe Sunne by day, nor Moone by night, neede there to shine, there is no iarre: But all is peace, all well there do, Yet subiect vassalls there vnto, all Monarks, Kings, and Princes are. Possessions none impeachment haue, Lordshipps noe care, noe worldly slaue, can take away my right from me: Loue without iealousie is there, Ther's noe distraction, ther's noe feare, ther's noe corrupted state can be.
Good shall we be, not persecuted, Noble, and not as proud reputed, rich and not rob'd nor flattered: For to enioy we shalbe sured, For to retaiue we are secured, Heauens walls cannot be battered. Take thou ye troubles Lord from mine heart To me these ioyes of ioyes impart, and me vnto this Cittie bring: That I with all hearts enargies, In heauens most blessed hierarchies, may Alleluia to thee sing. FINIS. ¶ A prayer for a good Conscience. TO him Ile sing my songs and himmes, That rideth on the Cherubimes, and heauens doth like a Courtaine spread: My Madrigalls and roundelayes, Shall be my makers name to praise, whose mercie doth vphold my head. I lust not drinke of Hellicon, To Poets that I leaue alone: they climbe yt high Parnasous mountaine: I will assend to Sions hill, I long haue longd to drinke my fill, of blessed Israells sacred fountaine.
Faith, hope, and loue, shalbe my proppes, In steede of Aganipes droppes, on me God powre down showers of graces His holy word and spirit Diuine, In stead of all the Muses nine, my heart my soule and minde imbraces. I seeke not grace from graces three, But begge grace of the Trinity, early at Morne, at Noone and Night: I scorne a Sycophants applaudings, I hate a flatterers base collaudings, I way not blacke mouth'd Momus spight. Great God that know'st each secret part, To thee I offer hand and heart, and waite to doe thy gratious will: And thee beseech for Christ his sake, My meaning well for deed to take, my heart for Art & cunning skill. How wise and good is God by this, Each man may see, that euery misse, in vs, and euery thought and word: Both good and bad by conscience, And power of his spirit influence, is Regestered and of Record, Iut all our actions, hit doth pry, Accust'h or excust'h, by and by, and as a thousand witnesses: Will speake before the iudge the truth, Of all thinges done in age and youth, of iustice and all wickednesse.
If conscience to Hell doth runne, The same to vs shall sure be done, we shall goe to, for company: What thousands say, we neede not care, Doe what they will, doe what they dare, if conscience doe not test fie. A conscience good doth make vs blest, T'is chearefull, a continewall feast, a Paradice of passing pleasure: The Temple of the holy Ghost, This makes the blessed Martyres boast, and is the Christian treasure. A conscience good, let's striue to keepe, For though some-times it seemes to sleepe, at iudgement t'will awake: And in a booke all shall lie open, Before the iudge what's done or spoken, when we accompt must make. FINIS. ¶ The penitent proueth that sinne is not of God, but of the diuell and our selues. CVrious discourse, religious rod, Sinnes not in God, then not from God, what's not from him, is not his deede: Gods workes haue none enormitie, We are the workes deformitie, all's good that doth from God proceede.
He tempt'h to try, not ouerthrow vs, Yet needes not try, for he doth know vs. but t'is, that we our selues should know: From him all's good, from vs all's ill, He makes all good, wee all doe spill, our selues, our selues, doe ouerthrow. In punishments that t'vs are ill, What he doth doe, he doth it still, (hee's one, the same▪ and that same one:) Not doing ought, but by not doing, In him t'is good, to good ensewing, hee'le see if we can stand alone. Gods grace is not difficient, Sinne hath not cause ifficient, and thee to sinne God doth not make: Suggestions by the deuill are sent, And there vnto man giues consent, why should not God that man forsake? Our conscience is sent as a spiall, Our punishments sent as a triall, and oft times plagues sent as a curse: God neuer was to vs a debter, If all be sau'd hee's neuer better, if all be damn'd, hee's nere the worse. God made all good, that all good can, Then looke into thy bosome man, an Ambuscado there there doth lie: Of hideous sinnes by good omitting, And monstrous sinnes, by ill committing, t'is there plac't by, mans enemy.
¶ A comfor able Himne for the Children of God. SAluation doth to God belong, He blesseth all both old and young, that are his chosen and elect: He doth defend his Children all, That are in danger, griefe and thrall, by his good meanes and kinde respect. He hath meanes all sufficient, And power all perills to preuent, to those with thankes doe euer pray. What comfort helpe or good soeuer, Wee finde from him let vs parseuer, and magnifie him night and day. Let vs with humble hearts confesse, His mercies, loue and great kindenesse, with heauenly himnes to God aboue: With mirth and ioy sing euery one, God heard our soules petition, and sent his sonne to show his loue: The Lord receaues and heares our prayer, Hee heares and helpes vs in dispaire, be glad my soule, in him reioyce: Oh spread abroad his holy fame, With songes Melodious lawd his name, with heart, with minde, with tongue & voice.
O thou most high God, art not prais'd Vnlesse from heart, that praise be rais'd, who onely knowst our thoughts and minde: The glory all must be thine owne, By prayers thy powers are euer showne, to those by faith thou iust dost finde. O hallowed be Gods holy name, Who Heauens made and world did frame, and man like to his Image pure: He all his other Creatures blest, Fish, Cattle, Foule, and all the rest, to comfort man while times indure. FINIS A prayer against temptations especially fit for a man that findeth in himselfe a conti∣nuall Inclination to any particuler sinne. OH gratious and most louing God, who in beginning did'st Create: Man to thy shape and image good, and likenesse in most pure estate. And did'st him place in holy place, the garden sweete with all delight: With mercies and abonnding grace, dect heauenly with earthly sightes.
And did'st thy Creatures all ordaine, in heauen and earth man for to serue: Oh what was man that he should gaine, Gods great respect, him to preserue. Yet Lord how soone he fell away, from thee and from originall grace: How gresly did he disobay, thy secret will before thy face. Which thou to him did'st then reueale, by whose fall, all corruption grew▪ And sinne shut out true godly zeale, and earthes corruptions did insue. And all things in the earth began, to disobay him instantly: By God made good, to comfort man, who hated him, forsaking thee By his transgression these proceedes, of his pollutions Lyneall: Haue all defild their waies and deedes, and all men tainted by his fall. Which first offence bred infinit, sinnes in corruptions of mans nature: As I my selfe both day and night, doe feele & know▪ most wretched Creature. Which I confesse, oh Father deare, to whom this chiefe offence was done: How Sathans workes, in me appeare, who hourely into euills run.
Which are most vilde, most meane & base, doe iudge my selfe of all the worst: When I behold my wicked case, considering how I am accurst. I that confesse, I cannot hide, how most to sinne I am inclin'd: Knowne vnto thee my God and guide, who see'st the secrets of my minde. Much more the deeds which I commit, of darknes seene to thee aboue: To whose bright eyes both darke and light, at seasons all, doe seeme as one. And therefore find'st out all my sinne, in thought, in action, or intent: Though by each sinne death did begin, yet thou do'st promise those repent. That they shall be forgiuen all, within which number, Lord make me: Who seest my sinnes for mercy call, that raignes in me continually. And as hit were, commaund me goe, drawne there vnto by violence: By Sathan vilde our deadly foe, that neuer ceaseth ill pretence. Who workes in me corruptions, corruptions more pollutions breeds: Which draweth mine affections, which minde inclines to wicked deeds.
And chiefely to that odious sinne, which makes me weake for to fullfill: Thy lawes and precepts iust wherein, thou vs commaund'st to doe thy will. Yet strong and apt for to effect, those thinges forbidden by thy lawes: Therefore to kill, Lord sinnes conflict, remoue from me the wicked cause. Especially this hedious crime, that hanges and stickes so fast on mee: That hit doe raigne no longer time, which feele it loathsome vnto me. A heauy burthen to my soule, which I cannot shake off at all: By mine owne power or strength controule, but by Gods workes parpetuall. Who worketh all repentance true, therefore Lord make me penitent: With contrite heart my spirit renew, let loathsome sinnes thy grace preuent. For thou Lord seest I doe commit, sinnes as hit were against my will: Giue me therefore power, strength, and wit. corrupt affections all to kill. The thoughts whereof we vex and grieue, and heapes of feare my soule possesse: Dispaire Attemptes hopes to depriue, me to deuour in all distresse. FINIS.
¶ An exhortation to praise God, and to acknow∣ledge our thankesgiuing to him without ceasing. WE praise thee God, we knowledge thee, Our onely Lord and Christ to bee, the earth and world doe worship thee Eternall father, Heauenly King, To whom aloud bright Angells sing, the thrones and powers thee magnifie. The Cherubins and Seraphin, To cry to thee doe neuer linne holy holy, most holy Lord Of Saboth, God of Maiestie, Heauens full and earth of thy glory, all Nations laud thy name and word. The glorious postles company, The goodly prophets Vnitie, the holy Marters noble army: The holy Church, the world through out, Doth spread the Gospell all about, the Father of true pietie. Thy sacred true and onely sonne, The Holy Ghost vs comfort wonne, thou art of glory King oh Christ: Thou art the euelasting sonne, Of God whose blessed will was donne, in the all people to deliuer.
Thou did'st not then the Virgins wombe, Abhorre nor loath that sacred Tombe, till thou wast borne whō God sent hether: When thou the serpents head had'st broken, The heauens, Kingdomes gate set'st open, for true belieuers to come thether. Thou sit'st on Gods right holy hand, Thy fathers will dost vnderstand, whence thou shalt come our iudge to be: Wee therefore thy poore seruants pray, Thy sucker▪ ayde, and helpe that day, whose pretious Bloud redeem'd vs free. Let them with saints be numbered, In endles glory comforted, thy people Lord keepe, saue and stay: Blesse saue thine owne inheritage, Lift vp their hearts from age to age, we magnifie thee day by day. Wee worship thee, world without end, This day from sinne Lord vs defend, haue mercy, mercy on vs Lord: Lord let thy mercy on vs light, Our trust is on thee day and night, we trust in thee with one accord. O Lord I put my trust in thee, Let neuer me confounded bee, all glory to the Trinitie: To God the Father and the sonne, And Holy Ghost all praise be done, for euer and euer eternally. FINIS.
❧ Adams fall. INiurious Adam in thy selfe accurst, cease to cōplaine of God & natures thrall: Since he that made man good, left him at first, a power to stand, and yet a will to fall. fetch not thy fault, frō heauens determinatiō but blame thy mind to weake & insufficient: Sinne is no being but a meere priuation, and hath no cause efficient, but deficient. For such is his respect yt all things moueth, yt all thinges hold there motion & condition: Error he neyther liketh nor approueth, but suffreth onely by a iust permission: Soe hast thou Adam in thy wish rebelling, Thy faults not fates, nor ought there else com∣pelling. FINIS.
The Table. 1 A Prayer vnto Almighty God to pre∣uent, prepare, and dispose our hearts rightly vnto prayer. fol. 1. 2. 2 A generall confession of sinnes. fol. 3. 3 A Morning Meditation. fol. 4. 5. 6 7. 8. 4 An Euening Meditation. fol. 9. 10. 11. 12. 5 A Nosegay gathered in the holy Paradice. fol. 13. 14. 15. 16. 6 A particuler confession of a sorrowfull sin∣ner. fol 17. 18. 19. 20. 7 An heauenly Hymne, touching ye natiuitie of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ. fol. 21. 22 8 A prayer in sicknes. fol. 22. 23. 24. 25. 9 Precepts of duties. fol. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 10 An inuocation to God, humbly praying for remission of sinne. fol. 31. 32. 33. 34. 11 A Godly Meditation, wherein the distressed sheweth that he is vnfeinedly grieued that he hath offended God. fol. 35. 36, 37. 12 The second part of the same Meditation. fol. 38. 39. 40. 13 A prayer wherein the distressed, humbly confesseth his sinnes, &c.—fol. 41. 42. 14 The repentant complaineth of his horred and grieuous sinnes, &c. fol. 43 44. 15 The repentant flyeth vnto the mercies of God in Christ, &c. fol. 44. 45. 46. 16 The poore Suppliant visited with great sick∣nes &c. fol. 47. 48.
17 A feruent prayer vnto God, that the repen∣tant may find fauour in Christ, &c. fol. 49 50 18 The 1. 2. 3. and 4. parts of the first Lamen∣tation in distres. fol. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 19 The 1. 2. 3. and 4. parts of the second La∣mentation in distresse. fol. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 20 A thankesgiuing to God with magnifiing of his holy name, &c. fol. 70 21 The 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7. Lamentation in distresse. fol. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88. 89 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 22 The 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. parts of the 8. Lamen∣tation in distresse. fol. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 23 The 1. 2. 3, 4. and 5. parts of the 9. La∣mentation in distresse. fol. 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 24 A Petition to God the Father. fol. 118. 25 Another to God the Sonne. fol. 119. 26 Another to God ye holy Ghost. fol. 119. 120 27 Diuers consolations, shewing that the life and time of affliction is short. fol. 120. 121. 28. Of death. fol. 122. 123. 124. 125. 29 The cause of death. fol. 125. 126. 30 Death of 2. sorts. fol. 126. 127.. 128. 31 Although the body dye, yet they shall liue. fol. 129. 130. 32 The death of the Godly is but a sleepe. fol. 131.
33 To whom those that die ought to com∣mit their spirit. fol. 132. 34 How the body is buried, but shalbe raised vp againe at the last day. fol. 133. 35 Remedies to be learned in the suffrings of Christ, &c. fol. 134. 135. 36 An exhortation to forgiue one another, &c. fol. 136. 137. 138. 37 Diuers consolations, shewing that the life and time of affliction is short. fol. 139. 140 38 A consolation for them that suffer for their offences. fol. 141. 142. 39 A disputation betweene the Diuell and vs fol. 143. 144. 145. 146. 147. 148. 149. 150. 40 How the poore and distressed soule being loaden with the burthen of sinne feruently prayeth, &c. fol. 151. 152. 41 Seauen Psalmes of repentance, commonly called Penitenciall Psalmes. fol. 153. 154. 155. 156. 157. 158. 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 42 A Mistery to be noted of all those that are parting out of this life. fol. 166. 167 168 43 Certaine short Meditations, or Iaculatorie prayers, &c. fol. 169. 170. 171. 172. 173. 174. 175. 176. 177. 178. 179. 180. 44 A prayer for a good conscience, & a prayer against temptations. fol. 181 182. 183. 184. 185. 186. 45 An exhortation to praise God. fol. 187. 188 46 Adams fall. fol. 189. FINIS.
