17716 99857268 22963
THE TRAGEDY OF ANTIGONE, The Theban Princesse. Written by T. May. First Edition. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Beniamin Fisher, and are to be sould at his shop, at the signe of the Talbot, without Aldersgate. 1631.
TO THE MOST WORTHILY HONOVRED, ENDYMION, PORTER Esquire one of his Maiesties Bedchamber. SIR. THis Tragedy of An∣tigone may perchance (considering the sub∣iect of it) be thought a Poem too sad and balefull to bee read with pleasure,
or presented with delight vpon any Stage. I confesse the saddnesse of it; but if it suffer for that, it will raise a question more general; Why trage∣dyes haue at any time bin allowed? Why the ruines and calamities of some men haue beene represented as a delightsome pastime to other men? Why those ancient witts, whom Greece in her learned'st times did highly admire, haue chosen for their deathlesse Poems almost no other arguments then those calami∣tous storyes of Thebes, Mycenae, Troy, and, most of all, this very dis∣course of the fatall and incestuous family of Oedipus? where almost
all the passages are so farre (a man would thinke) from delighting men, that they might mooue a suffering euen in the furyes themselues? and why the grea∣test Princes, both Graecian and Roman, in their highest iollity haue not onely beheld with delight the presentation of them: but for their owne excercise (as many of them as haue had the itch of writing) haue chosen these arguments, and made them into Tragedyes? VVhy this hath been generally so (though the cause neede no Apology, at least not mine) I will venture some few coniectures. All the spectatours are
either wretched or fortunate; the wretched in sad storyes are in some sort eased by fellowship in woe, or delighted with tragicall expressions, as being somewhat of kindred with their owne thoughts; those that are fortunate, are affected, in such showes, either with delight, or whol∣some sorrow; if they be delighted, it is in the tast of their own prosperity, which appeares greater, set off by an obiect of such contrariety▪ & this de∣light is not out of malice (as plea∣sed with the woes of others) but acknowledgement to those high powers which made the difference; if they be sorrowfull, their sorrow is
wholsome; for as in melancholly dis∣eases merry tales are vsed to assist na∣ture: so in too great a ioy, & wanton∣nes of the soule, such sad representa∣tions are as a good allay, depressing the leuity of their thoughts to such a meane, as is fit to entertaine the best contemplations. Moreouer Trage∣dyes (besides the state of them) are pleasing in the expression, foras∣much as saddnesse doth vsually af∣ford the best straines of writing: to omit other instances, loue it selfe (the vsuall argument of our new Comedy) is there best written, where it is most distressed, and in de∣spairing passion; that part of the
Comedy seeming best, which is nearest tragedy, in that straine also goe most, or the best of loue-sonnets that noware made. But I wander too far in this theame; excuse me (no∣ble Sir) for pressing so much vpon your patience, the worke it selfe, did it not more trust ot your good∣nesse then it's owne worth, would thinke it selfe too long to be read by you. If you accept it, it seekes no farther. To speake of you as you deserue, I dare not, since your known modesty would checke my pen: but this I dare say; there are no arts or armes, or any other trueabilities, that euer had the happinesse to know
you, but will sprea your worth, & thinke you most worthy to stand (as you doe) in the presence of a King, wishing you long blest in his Maiesties fauour, & the King blest with moe such seruants as you are. God, after all, grant vnto you his blessed presence; and so I rest Euer to be commanded by you, Tho: May.
A short argument of this Tragedy. ETeocles and Polynices sonnes to Oedipus by that incestuous marriage with his mother Ioca∣sta, hauing slaine each other in a single combate, Creon is crowned King of Thebes. Creon denyes to the Argiue bodies funerall rites, which among the heathen, was therefore esteemed a cruell punishment, because they thought the soules of them, that were vn∣buried, wandered an hundred yeares before they could be transported by Charon into Ely∣sium. Aemon the sonne of King Creon fal∣ling in loue with Antigone, the pious daugh∣ter of Oedipus, cannot obtaine his fathers
consent to mary her. Antigone, contrary to the Kings command, goes by night to bury the body of her brother Polynices, and there meetes with Argia the widow of Polynices, and daughter to king Adrastus. They are sur∣prised: Aemon attempting their rescue is wounded, and lyes a while conceal'd. Antigone by Creon is doomed to death. Aemon killeth himselfe. Theseus killeth Creon, and giueth funerall to the Graecians bodyes.
THE TRAGEDY OF ANTIGONE The Theban Princesse. Actus Primus, scena prima. Oedipus led by Antigone. Oedipus. LEt go this wicked hand; oh daughter leaue me, Leaue me while thou art vertuous, before Th' infection of my crimes do blast thy good∣nesse Or draw some plague vpon thee; this dire head Abhorr'd by heauen and earth, liuing in Thebes Brought forth a pestilence, which helpe of art
Could neuer cure, vntill, by heauens decree, Most hatefull I was banish'd from the City. Oh Daughter leaue me. Anti. Neuer, neuer Sir. While you are heere, Cythaeron's craggy mount Is my abode, and farre prefern'd before Labdacus stately palace, or the towers Of wealthy Thebes, for which my brothers striue, What there I lou'd, I am possest of heere, My Father's presence; doe not banish me Thither againe; that place is banishment, While you are heere; what but impiety, And brothers hatred shall I there behold? Oed. Thou art too good, Antigone, thy birth Would make me Ioue my crimes, but that all sense Of vertue, as of light, is dead in me. If thou wilt guide me, guide me to that high And fatall cliffe, from whence vnhappy Ino Pursu'd, leap'd downe into the seas, and mett The danger which shee fled, there let me ly Conceal'd for euer from the eye of heauen Ah could I kill my memory as well, That no succeeding ages might relate The name and story of sad Oedipus! Anti. Be not vniust vnto your selfe to thinke You haue deserued death; the gods call that Mis-hap and errour, which your cruell selfe Against your selfe call crime; loue would not hold His vengefull thunder, if he iudg'd it so. The age were good, were men as penitent
For true and reall faults, as you for that, Which ignorance hath wrought, and was the crime Of fate it selfe, not yours: you could not thinke That Theban Laius and Iocasta were Your happlesse parents; and too great a feare Of beeing guilty, made you what you fear'd. Remembring what the oracle foretold, You left a Kingdomes glory, and forsooke Good Polybus and louing Merope, Your then supposed parents, and betooke Your selfe vnto a willing banishment. What more then this could you haue done? to keepe Your goodnesse, you forsooke a crowne, which others Striue to attaine by all impiety. Yet cruell fate pursu'd you still, and made Your vertuous minde the way to your offence; As if the Gods themselues had punish'd you For striuing to be innocent, when they Had-fore decree'd your guilt, take comfort Sir, No man offends, but where the will consents. Oed. How well canst thou, Antigone, that bea'st, A Magazen of vertuous thoughts within thee, Speake words of comfort, but accursed I Am most vncapable, there's nought in me, But horrour, greife, despaire and misery. Shew me some way of death, or let me goe. Anti. I cannot leaue you Sir, nor shew your death, But where I meane to beare you company. Oed. I neuer should haue had a vertuous childe But to afflict me more; nature will worke
A miracle to make my sufferings greater. The Sunne shall bring blacke night, the Euening starre Vsher the day, and seas shall meete the sky To make addition to my misery! Anti. good Sir, goe take some rest; doe not destroy That life, on which another life depends. Oed. There's none but thou, has a commanding power Ore Oedipus, if thou command me leape Into Sicilian Aetna's scalding throate, I'll gladly doo't; if thou wilt haue it so I will, like Titius, with my liuer feede A tiring vultur; more, I will take rest; Nay, most of all, Ile liue at thy request. Anti. I see some signes of rest vpon him now. Exeunt. Scena secunda. Aemon. Aemon. How well this sad and solitary place Suites with my thoughts? these vnfrequented woods, Where nature voide of artificiall robes Presents her naked and vngarnish'd face. In such abodes as these dwelt piety, White innocence, and spotlesse chastity In that first golden age when Saturne reign'd. And still me thinkes within these woods he reignes, Though banish'd quite from all the world beside, Here liues the soule of vertue; here abides The faire Antigone, whose matchlesse goodnesse Vpbraides, and expiates this ages crimes, And quite our-weighs th'impiety of Thebes,
This place the Gods, disdaining other sights, Behold with wonder, when Antigone With pious hands directs her blinded sire The wofull Oedipus; hither the Graces, The chaster Nymphs, and harmelesse Dryades Leauing their bowers of pleasure, all resort To wate on her, and beare her company. Antigone, Aemon. Anti. My father is asleepe; you powers aboue Send sweete refreshment to his wearyed soule. Oh pity him, and punish not too fare That crime which fate and you your selues haue made. He has already beene himselfe a iudge Too cruell to himselfe, to expiate His fatall errours, left a crowne and scepter, Fled mens society, and day it selfe, Torne out his innocent vnhappy eyes. Now since he wants the comfort of your light Grant him a quiet vndisturbed night. Young Aemon heere? Aem. Pardon me royall virgin, Thinke it not rudenesse in me thus to presse Vpon your priuacyes; but call it seruice, Or zeale to wait vpon you, and behold What I doo most admire. Anti. Sir, tis no fault That I can apprehend; or if it bee, Tis such a fault as punishes it selfe.
This is the house of sorrow; nought is heere That can inuite or recompense your comming. Aem. To visite you, so you be pleas'd to grace That visite with a welcome, is a blessing No place has power to lessen, it would make Hells saddest caue a faire Elysium. Anti. You come from Court, and speake as that has taught you. This place knowes no such language. Aem. Aemon neuer Was tax'd of flattery, nor will your worth Admit it; gentle Lady, be but pleas'd To thinke my heart speakes in my tongue to you. Oh giue me leaue but to confesse my flame, Which neuer can be hid; a better fire More chast, more true, and full of constancy, (I dare maintaine it) warmes no breast on earth. No earthly power but sweete Antigone Can sentence me to blisse or endlesse woe. Oh saue that creature that depends on you. Make me immortall by a faire returne Of grace from you and fauour. Anti. Noble Aemen, (That title, though I hated you, your worth Would challenge from my truth) I loue you better Then so to worke your ruine; Loue and wed-locke Haue still beene fatall in our family. The balefull owles and croaking rauens sing Our Hymenaean songs, and furies light Their brands for torches to our bridall bedds. Aem. No, wondrous maide, you beare a heauen about you,
A heauen of vertue, that is proofe against The furies rage, and fortunes vtmost spite: You are aboue them all. Oh take me to you, And by coniunction of your goodnesse, make Me higher then the power of fate can reach. Anti. These are no times for Hymen, when the frowne Of all the gods lyes heauy on our house. Oh mooue that suite no more; but yet as farre As my chast sorrow can admit of loue, Let this suffice you, I do loue your soule. And if this storme should cleare, and I haue power To marry euer, Aemon is the man Of all the world I choose. Aem. Oh heauenly voyce! This promise from diuine Antigone, More then fruition of the proudest beauty That ere mortality could boast, reuiues me, And makes me euer happy; all the howers, That from my countreys cause, and from the warre I can be spar'd, Ile keepe as holy ones To pay deuotion heere, heere Ile relate What euer fortune throwes on doubting Thebes. But one chast kisse and so farewell. Anti. You haue it. Yee powers of loue, bee all auspicious now. Hymen redeeme the wrongs that thou hast done Our house already; had I neuer seene Young Aemon's face, nere knowne his matchlesse worth, No other man or minde had ere had power To warme Antigones cold breast with loue.
Prosper that flame that you your selues did mooue. Dircus, Ianthus. Dir: Tis so, Ianthus, Aemon is in loue With faire Antigone; no other passion Could make so fresh a youth and spirit as his To seeke such sad retreats; from that dark groue, Which cloaths Cythaerens rough and craggy top, Where farre from sight and company of men The wofull Oedipus laments alone His happlesss;e errours fault, vnseene by any But good Antigone his pious daughter, How oft of late braue Aemon has beene mett! What but her loue had power to draw him thither? Ian. Shee is an obiect worthy of Aemon's loue. The mirrour of her sexe, a lassting patterne Of piety to all succeeding times. Dir. As much true wortha nd manly vertue liues In noble Aemons breast, hee's the true brother Of braue Menaeceus, whose deuoted head Sau'd Thebes from ruine. Ian. True, if Thebes be safe, As neuer fairer were her hopes then now; Th'Argolian forces are dishearten'd quite, And of their seuen proud leaders, which of late Beset the gates of Thebes, but two are left Onely Adrastus, and our banish'd prince. If we, I say, be safe, we owe that safety To Creons sonnes, to braue Menaeceus death, And Aemon's liuing valour; one by death
Gaue life to thousands; t'other noble life Deseru'd an easier way to fame then death. Dir. But I haue heard newes from the enemies campe, Alls quiet there, and tis suppos'd they meane To fight no more, but secretly dislodge, And fly away by night. Ian. Tis like enough, And would the King be rul'd by my aduice Hee should not follow them, there has been spilt Already blood enough in that vniust, Vnnaturall cause. Those braue Argolians, Whose vertues wee, although their enemies, Must needes acknowledge, and lament their deaths, Besides those dearer funeralls, which Thebes Has mourn'd already for, to iustifie The broken faith of King Eteocles. But who's that makes to vs so speedily, Thy lookes speak newes, what are they man? be briefe. Nuntius, Dircus, Ianthus. Nun. The King was walking round the city walls, When straight a parley sounded from the foe, And Polynices our exiled Prince Himselfe appear'd, who from below complain'd So many noble funerals had pay'd The forfeit of his brothers periury; Defi'd him then, and challeng'd him alone To end the difference in a single combate. Dir. Oh horrid monstrous challenge?
Ian. Has the King Accepted it? Nun. Yes, with a seeming ioy, And did complaine alone that he himselfe Was not the challenger. Dir. Vnnaturall! Nun. Though many that were by, perswaded him He neede not answer it at all; his strength Was great enough to keepe the crowne without it. Ian. But piety how euer should forbid it. Nun. It did not mooue his breast; thou shalt (quoth he) Immediatly at head of all our troopes Finde vs prepar'd to answer, and to take Mistake away, wee'll weare our royall crowne▪ It grieues vs onely t'was thy motion first. And one of vs, when this blacke fight is done, Shall without riuall keepe the Theban crowne. Ian. Come Dircus, let's away, and or preuent, Or see the issue of this dire intent. Exeunt. Chorus Thebanorum. Cho. Can Thebes yet finde no peace, nor see A period of her misery? What booted braue Menaeteus death, Who gaue vp his deuoted breath To saue his Countrey? what the falls Of all those worthyes, whom the walls Of our sad Thebes late trembled at? Bold Capaneus, whose strange fate No human strength, but from aboue The thunderbolts of armed Ioue
Could worke; the stout Hippomedon, And Meleager's beautious sonne; Apollo's sacred Prophet too. Quicke to Auernus forc'd to goe Amphiaraus, to preuent The fates, by his so strange descent Frighting the Ghosts that dwell below. Nor could the fatall sisters know, Before they saw him 'mong'st the dead; That they should cut his vitall thread. These, and a thousand worthyes moe Are fled downe to the shades below, And yet the wicked part of warre Doth still remaine; the Princes are Both yet aliue, and yet doe hate. What end can be compos'd by fate? Their hate is impious, but to try The cause, were more impiety. Our feares doe still encrease, the skyes Are fill'd with nought but prodigyes Which woes and ruines doe display. I long to heare what fate to day The field affords; relate to vs How blacke so ere and ominous. Nuntius, Chorus. Nun. Then heare a story that might make Amazed natures selfe to shake The Princes both are slaine (alas).
Cho. What guilty hands could act such tragedyes? Nun. Nay there's the sorrow of it, and a griefe Worse then their death's are, in a single combate They slew each other. Cho. Oh blacke family? But yet relate the manner of their death. Nun. When this great warre of one diuided wombe, Two brothers mett, both armies stood at gaze, Amazed both; the greiued gods of warre, Withdrew their presence from so blacke a fight. Bellona broke her lance, the blew-ey'd maide Fled from the field asham'd, and Mars droue backe His Thracian charriot; in whose stead the furyes Marshall'd the field, and all th' Ogygian ghosts In a blacke ring beset the combatants Blasting the day with dampes of Acheron. No Trumpets sounded, nor shrill cornets peirc'd The wounded aire; for these the nights sad King Thrice thunder'd from Auernus; thrice the Earth with mournfull grones gaue signall to the fight. Old men complain'd that they had liu'd too long. To see that horrid sight; the women shreik'd, And weeping mothers from the walls forbad Their children to behold it, but the Princes With such a furious hatred both encounter As if the soules of all their slaughter'd friends, And both the armyes, whom their cause engag'd, Had liu'd in them, till fate so cruelly Ballanc'd their strength, that both were slaine, yet both were guilty conquerours. Cho. But did they dy Together then. Nun: Eteocles fell first;
Ore whom, before death closed vp his eyes, Bloodlesse and feeble Polynices stood, And from his head taking th'imperiall crowne Empal'd himselfe therewith; at last (quoth hee) Thou art mine owne. oh doe not close his eyes Pale death, till he haue seene me weare the Crowne. But I must leaue it too; Oh short short raigne. If there be iustice in the other world, Before great Minos vrne, it Minos vrne Be not a fable, will I summon thee, Nor shall this combate end our enmity. Then on his brother falling downe he dy'd. Cor. Oh horrid fight! bright Phaebus hide thy head, Wrap vp the day in foggy clouds, and make An endlesse night, to hide this tragedy From human eyes; a blacker deed then this Thy light did nere discouer, here let all The prodigyes that threaten'd vs, haue end. Nun. The Argiues all with winged speede are fled, And Thebes once more has peace; but that, I feare Long cannot last. Chor. What storme can threaten now? Nun. Creon no sooner was saluted King (For so hee was since both those Princes fell) But he commanded (Oh fond tyranny) No man on paine of death should dare to bury One body of the Argiues, they (alas) Remaine exposed in the open field To feede the foules, or perish in the aire. Nor must the Argiues only want the rites Of funerall; but Theban Polynices
Because with them he fought against his countrey, Remaines exposed as the Argiues are In th' open aire, who ere shall bury him, His owne dead carcasse shall supply the place. Cho. Thebes will, I feare, incurre the enmity Of nations by this act, and we shall wish (If Creon so begin his froward reigne) Th' vnhappy house of Oedipus againe. Finis actui primis Actus Secundus. Ornitus, Argia, Deiphile. Arg. WHere shall we vent our griefes? what power on earth Can lend our woes redresse? Deiph. Accursed Thebes, Ist not enough thy guilty soile hath drunke So many princes bloods, but after death Vnto their Ghosts thou still shouldst prooue a foe, And barre what nature, and all lawes bestow? Ar. Whither is goodnesse fled from humane breasts? Tygers themselues, if tygers could performe These rites of funeralls, would now correct The malice of mankinde. Arg. What shall we doe T'appease the ghosts of our vnbury'd Lords? Deiph. Goe sue to Thebes, perchance the sighs, and teares
Of weeping queenes may mooue the tyrants heart: Or. No, royall Ladies, banish from your breasts That flattering hope; no teares, nor prayers can mooue, The ruthlesse tyrants minde; an impious oath Hath bound his cruelty; his watchmen tell The carcasses, and guard the place, to keepe Sad friends from thence: no creatures haue accesse To that dire field, but beasts, and birds of prey. His hate is constant, sooner hope t'appease Busiris altars, or the fiends themselues, Then sauage Creon; venture not to Thebes. Dei. What other course is left vs? Orn. To performe To their deare names such empty funeralls As fortune will allow; or if that that Will not suffice, goe speedily to Athens; Thither all conquering Theseus is return'd, Triumphant now from th' Amazonian warre, Whose mighty arme all sauadge tyrants dread, Whose high Heroike thoughts were ne're auerse From suppliants, and for encouragement To all that come, in midd'st of Athens stands A gratious altar, where white mercy dwells, The poore mans goddesse, shaded with a groue Ofsuppliant Oliues, and chast Laurell trees. None are deny'd to enter, but the rich, And fortunate; poore wretches, night and day, Find free accesse, and there haue leaue to pay Their cheape deuotion; no slaine bullocks blood, No Frankincense, nor rich Arabian fumes Do feede that altar▪ sighs, and floods of teares
Are all that goddesse craues; no gold adornes Her humble roofes, as those proud temples rais'd By happy Monarchs, and great conquerers, Instead of trophees, and triumphall robes, Torne haire, and widowes mourning garments hang About the temple, thither from all coasts Vnhappy soules repaire, sad folke subdu'd In warre, or banish'd from their natiue soiles, Or those, whom happlesse errour has made guilty. There they implore, and there obtaine their peace. Arg. Goe you to Athens, sister, and intreat Great Theseus aide, whilest I, whose fatall quarrell Was cause of all this dire and mournfull warre, Will try what mercy can be found in Thebes. Deiph. Do not expose your life to such an hazard. Arg. What mischeife can an humble suppliant feare? Besides my suite to Creon will in Thebes Be seconded by Polynices friends. Goe you with speed to Athens, if I faile, That your petitions timely may preuaile. And all the gods prosper your pious suite. Arg. May Thebes prooue gentle when Argia enters. Exeunt. Manet Argia, Menaetes. Arg. Now I am free to act what I designe. Shall I expect the doubtfull grant of Creon, Or Theseus lingringe aide, whilest thou, deare Lord, Art foode for Vulturs? whilst thy funerall Decreases daily, and thy wandering Ghost
Perchance complayning to th'infernall gods Cal'st me vnkinde, and cruell? I will lose No longer time, no danger shall withstand That act, which loue, and my chast fires command. Exit. Creon, Eurydice, Ianthus, Aephytus. Cre. Mooue me no more in that, can Aemon finde No match'mongst all the noble Theban Maides, Nor forreigne Princes, but Antigone? To mixe the fortune of our house with that Incestuous, dire, and fatall family? Mooue me no more I say. Eury. but good, my Lord, Weigh not alone her haplesse parentage, (Though that were royall, and ally'd to you In neere degrees) but her admired vertue, In which the generall voyce of people speakes her As much excelling, as the worst of all Her wretched race were infamous for vice. Cre. What reall vertue euer could proceede From such an impious stock? or being borne, Could euer prosper? Eury. Doe not taxe so farre The iustice of the gods, that they should punish In good Antigone her kindreds crimes: They haue already with dire punishments Pay'd for their proper guilt; and her rare vertues By the same law may challenge, as a due, The greatest blessings that the gods can grant.
Cre. No act of hers can recompence the guilt Her birth alone has brought into the world, And now we'll purge the city, Aephytus, Goe finde out Oedipus, and in our name Confine him to Cythaeron; speake it death, If ere he shew within the walls of Thebes His ominous head. Aeph. That banishment, my liege, Is come too late, hee is confin'd already Vnto his latest home, griefe for his sonnes Has broke at last his great and stubborne heart. Ian. The queene Iocasta hearing that sad newes Beating her breast, tearing her hoary haire, And vttering sad complaints against the gods, And fates seuere decrees, at last espy'd That fatall sword by which old Laius dy'd On which she fell, and ended her sad life. Cre. We haue no teares for her, although our sister; Let all the plagues, that Thebes so long has felt, Take end with them. None but Antigone Is now remaining of that family. Goe thou, Ianthus, in our name command her To keepe her house in Thebes, nor stirre from thence, Vntill our farther pleasure shall be knowne. Exit Ian. Eury. Be good to her, my Lord, for Aemons sake. What ere mishap befall Antigone Hee'll deepely share in, for I feare his loue Is too too constant ere to be remoou'd. Rather then loose him, grant his lawfull suite. Cre. Ile rather grant him death then marriage there.
Eur. Remember hee's our sonne, our only sonne, And vertuous too, of whom the Kingdome boasts. Blast not their hopes in him, the fate of loue Is irresistable. Cre. Let Aemon know Wee'll be his fate. No more Eurydice. Ianthus, Creon, Eurydice. Ian. Antigone was lately met alone Without the city. None of all her seruants Were priuy to her going, nor yet know Whither their Lady went. Cre. Ha! I suspect What she intends to doe. If I guesse right She goes vpon her ruine. Aephytus, Double the watch, and with a carefull eye Ore looke the knaues; this night shall be thy charge. Performe it well, and thou shalt finde reward Beyond thy wishes; let no negligence, No gifts, no fauour, nor respect to any, How neereso ere to vs, make thee or them Slacke in your charges, as your liues shall answer Our strictest iustice. Aeph. Doe not feare me Sir. Cre. Ile be at hand my selfe to make all sure. Exeunt. Antigone sola: Ant. Poast to the West, bright Phaebus, and thou night, That robb'st mortality of light, to lend them
A greater blessing, rest and sweet ropose, Spread thy black mantle ore yon mourning fields, Which those dead Grecians strew, where too too long My wronged brother Polynices lyes Barr'd by vnnaturall, and iniurious Thebes, Dead from a tombe, as liuing from a Crowne. This wrong must I redresse, assist me vertue, And all yee gods, that fauour piety. I haue at last escapt the curious eyes Of all that watcht my actions, and expect Nought but the safe concealement of the night: Were but these rites perform'd, not Creons spite, Nor racks, nor tortures should my soule affright. Chorus Thebanorum. 1 What could th' Argolian ghosts, though once our foes, Deserue so much from vs, as thus to lose The rites of funerall, which all mankinde Iustly expect from greatest foes to finde? Why should the land that gaue them death, deny Them sepulture? pursuing enmity Farther then that? why with so black a staine Dost thou pollute the entrance of thy reigne Vnhappy Creon, thwarting natures law, Vpon thy selfe and fatall Thebes to draw The hate and curse of nations, who will make The quarrell theirs; Pluto himselfe will take Reuenge for this great losse, that must befall His Monarchy, whil'st these Argolians all
Vnburied lie, wandring a hundred yeare Exil'd from him for want of sepulcher. 2 Thine anger bootes not, Creon; 'tis all one Whether the fire or putrefaction Dissolue them; all to natures bosome goe, And to themselues their ends the bodies owe. If now the Argiues bodies be not burn'd, They shall when earth and seas to flames are turn'd. Earth will, inspite of thee, receiue againe What euer she brought forth; and they obtaine Heauens couerture, that haue no graues at all. Thou that deny'st these people funerall, Why dost thou fly those slaughter-smelling fields? Breathe, if thou canst, the aire this sad place yeelds. Those vanquish'd carcasses alone possesse The ground, and barre the conquerours accesse. 3 When that annoyance shall be vanish'd quite, The wandring ghosts will still remaine, and fright The bafefull place; plowmen shall feare to toyle In furrowes of this ill-manured soyle. This ghostly land of ours perchance shall be Tane for Avernus by posterity, And claim'd by Pluto as his monarchy, Where thousand wandring soules together fly. Cleare Dirce shall be made the Poets theame, Instead of muddy Styx, whose fatall streame The ghosts so striue to be transported ore By churlish Charon to Elysiums shore: And rather then so great an hoast should seeme Exil'd from thence, it will be thought by them
Another Acheron shall heere be made, And they possesse their owne Elysian shade. 1. What shall we doe to cure this fatall staine Vpon our nation? 2. Nothing but complaine. Actus Tertius. Aemon. MY feares haue brought me early to this place. The night is young; No watches yet are set. How sad and deepe a silence does possesse These mourning fields! but why should that seeme strange! Why shake I thus? Why do my coward thoughts Tell me tis ominous? is it not night? And who dares tread on this forbidden ground? The Rauens, Wolues, and Vulturs heere haue fill'd Their hungry mawes, and now are gone to rest. What noise should I expect, vnlesse the Ghosts Of these dead Greekes with querulous cryes should fill The aire of night? what horrour thus inuades me? Is it because the Schreich owle cry'd about me Passing the gates of Thebes? because to night I haue so often stumbled on dead men? Tut; these are toyes for children, let not feare, That euer was a stranger to this breast, Reigne in it now. But tis Antigone,
Whom cruell vertue will command to night Into a world of danger, is the cause Of all my feare. Oh faire Antigone, Why art thou good? so excellently good, To make me more then wretched? you bright starres, That doe alternallie with Phoebus rule And measure time, if vertue be a kinne To heauen and you, if your faire influence Gouerne this lower world, let not the night, Which is your time of reigne, giue priuiledge To murders, witchcrafts, and infernall arts, Whilest vertue suffers, and white innocence Is made a prey. Ile watch the fields to night; But not be seene, till time require mine aide. Secretly shrowded in yon Cypresse groue Ile watch what fortunes doe attend my loue. Exit. Menaetes, Argia. Men. Madam, the place is neere; the noisome aire, Which those vnburyed carcasses exhale, Growes stronger still, and from that feeble shine, Which to the night halfe-clouded Cynthia lends, How large a shade the lofty Theban walls Spread ore this field of death! those twinckling lights, Which we from hence discerne, burne in the tower Of Creon's cruell watch. Arg. Oh Thebes, a name Once deare to me, but now a word of horrour, And endlesse sorrow! yet giue leaue t' enterre
My husbands hearse, and I will loue thee still, And leaue my heart for euermore to dwell On thy deare ground, behold with what attendance, What state the great Adrastus daughter comes To claime her right at Thebes; how poore a claime The wronged wife of Polynices makes. Tis not thy wealth, nor Cadmus stately throne, Nor crowne, nor septer that Argia claimes. I craue but mourning free, but death and dust, And such abhorred dust, as thou disdainst To harbour louingly, bestow but what Thou hat'st on me, and take the greatest thankes A queene can giue; and thou beloued ghost Of my dead Lord, if through these fields thou wander, And loue the rites that I performe to night, Direct me where thy wronged body lyes. Men. Madam this way, nearer the city walls My Lord was slaine, & there perchance he lyes. Exeunt▪, Dircus with a Torch. Dir. Prince Aemon is abroad, and woe is me Gone with too great a confidence I feare Vpon my plot, which is defeated quite. The watch is doubled, and more strictly kept Then heretofore, no possiblity To lay them all asleepe, what he entended To worke vpon it, is quite frustrate now. Oh could I meete him but to let him know What has befall'n. Ile range these fields to find him. Exit.
Menaetes and Argia with the dead body. Arg. Was this the sight was promis'd me at Thebes? Are these the triumphs of my dearest Lord? Thus to thy natiue countrey dost thou bid Argia welcome? thus dost thou requite. The entertainement, that kind Argos gaue To thee a stranger? why prepar'st thou not The Theban palace to receiue thy queene? But why complaine I vainely? thou alas Art held a stranger to thy natiue Thebes, Nay more, a foe, to whom the cruell ground Denyes that common bounty, which in death The meanest creatures challenge at her hand. But woe is me, t'was I that caus'd thy fall, T'was I that moou'd my father to this warre, And all those Graecian Princes; happy else Mightst thou haue liu'd at Argos still with me, And ne're set foote on this accursed ground. Did I for this entreat those valiant Greekes To warre with Thebes, to see my dearest Lord Thus all deform'd with gore, trod downe in dust, And couer'd ore with filth? Men. See, Madam, see The mortall wound yet gaping on his breast. Arg. Was this a brothers hand? but in that name I finde thy guilt as much; Ile rather thinke Thou nere hadd'st any kindred, neuer brother, Nor other name of blood, which nature meant A name of loue. For where are all their teares?
Where is their sorrow now? if not in Thebes Where hast thou kindred? none laments but I; To me alone is Polynices dead. Where is thy mother, and thy sisters now? Where is that good Antigone, so fam'd Forpiety, whom thou so oft would'st praise, And tell such pleasing stories of her vertue? Antigone with a Torch. Ant. About this place he lyes, deare Ghost forgiue Thy Sisters slacknesse, and with fauour now Accept these louing, though late rites I doe. A Graecian Lady? (so her habit speakes her) Some pious sorrow brings her to this place: Lady the gods assist your piety. Arg. Are you a wofull widow'd Lady too, That come to breake dire Creons sauage law? But yet you seeme a Theban; all their bodyes Haue rites of funerall perform'd already. Or does your too too charitable griefe? Extend to some vnhappy Graecian soule? Anti. I know not how to answer you; the man Whose hearse I seeke, was once a Thebes, prince; But since his natiue soile did proue to him So cruell, and vnnaturall, I dare Not call him Theban. Gentle Argos proou'd A kinder home to him, and freely gaue What Thebes, though due, deny'd, a princely state With royall nuptialls; now among the soules
Of those vnbury'd Graecians wanders he, And still perhapps desires to bee esteem'd One of their company, hating for euer (Ah woe is me) the memory of Thebes. His name was Polynices, my vnhappy, Though dearest brother. Arg. Oh my heart? are you That good Antigone, whom I so long Haue wish'd to see? Ant. I am that wofull maide. Arg. Then see your brother my deare husbands hearse Your griefe is mine. Ant. Pardon me royall sister, Are you Argia great Adrastus daughter? Let me adore the best of woman kinde. Has your most faithfull vnexampled loue Brought you so farre, and on so cruell hazards To my dead brother? was it not enough That first so great a princesse as your selfe Aduanc'd a banish'd man, and freely gaue That loue to him, which happyest princes sought? But that his dire misfortunes euermore Should make your vertue wretched? Arg. Dearest sister, Whose knowledge I am proud, though thus, to meete, By this true knot of euerlasting loue Our sorrow tyes to night, I here protest, No griefe, no losse that banishment could bring Did mooue so much sad Polynices heart, As parting from thy dearest company. No name to him was halfe so deare in Thebes, No name so often as Antigone
Would his sad tongue to me alone repeate. Antigo. And witnesse all yee sacred deities, Though Polynices from his natiue Thebes Were banish'd long, yet from a sisters heart The loue of thee could neuer be exil'd, Nor Thebes without thy presence pleasing to me. How oft haue I vpon Cytherons mount Appeas'd my fathers anger toward thee? And dost thou thus visite thy sister heere? Oh my wrong'd brother? Arg. Oh my dearest Lord! When first at Argos I beheld thy face, It was deform'd with blood, and wounded then, Yet then I lou'd it; fortune to my loue Shew'd thee at first a pityed spectacle As now at last, dearest Antigone; My brother Tydeus met him then at Argos, Both strangers there, before affinity Had made them brothers, in a mutuall rage They fought; but all the blood that then was drawne Seem'd but a sacrament, that did confirme Their after rare and vnexampled loue. Anti. Ay me, how different was i from the loue Which heere a naturall brother shew'd to him! Argos, how farre dost thou disgrace our Thebes In nature and in honour! Menae. Royall Ladyes, The night growes old, and danger threatens vs. Be speedy now: these obsequies perform'd, You may with more security enioy Each others mutuall loue, and then discourse Of Thebes, and Argos; danger, and the time
Will not permit it now; not farre from hence Are many fragments left of funerall fire, Where Thebans haue beene burn'd; those let vs vse, And then retire from this vnhappy place. Aephytus with the watch. Aeph. VVhere didst thou see those lights? 1. About the place VVhere Polynices body lyes. Aeph. If any Haue there perform'd forbidden obsequies, They cannot farre escape; pursue with speede; Spare none; you know your oath, and penalty. Aemon, and Dircus. Aem. The watch is vp, and with a winged speede Pursues those lights, which my presaging soule Tells me attend on faire Antigone. Should what I feare prooue true, they must not seize her, If all perswasions, promise of reward, Nor gold preuaile not, the deare cause will lend This arme a strength aboue mortality. Exeunt. Creon, Ianthus. Cre. The watch is diligent; they doe not know That I am in the field. Ian. No sure, my Lord. For your disguise is perfect, and no notice VVas giuen from me at all. Cre. VVhat things are these?
Two haggs passe ouer the stage. Ian. Witches, my Lord, that come to exercise On these dead bodyes that bestrew the field Their damned arts; here in the depth of night With incantations, and abused herbes They turne the dead's pale faces to enquire And heare the horrid oracles of death. Th' infernall gods ore master'd by their power, Or else perswaded by some piety Which pleases them, deny these witches nothing Which they request, the soules of those dead men Are forc'd t' obey their charmings, and returne Backe to their ancient prisons, to reueale To these dire haggs the secrecies of fate And things to come. Cre. Ile follow them Ianthus, And know what fortunes shall attend my reigne. Ian. Ah good my Lord vse not so bad away, You haue at hand, a nobler meanes to know The truth of all; the old Tiresias Taught from the wisedome of the gods aboue, Who by a magike more diuine and pure Surueyes the course and influence of the starrs, And in that glorious booke reads the euent Of future things, rather repaire to him, Let him prepare a sacrifice, and aske The pleasure of the gods. Cre. Tut tut Ianthus, Astrolog'is vncertaine, and the gods In mystike riddles wrap their answers vp.
But he that dares with confidence to goe Enquire of deaths blacke oracles below In plainest terms the certaine truth shall know. Exeunt 2. Haggs. 1. We come too late, nor can this field To vs a speaking prophet yeild. The carcasses, whose cold dead tongues From whole, and yet vnperish'd lungs, Twixt hell and vs should hold commerce, And be the blacke interpreters Of Stygian counsells to relate The hid decrees of death and fate; Those carcasses I say are growne Corrupt, and rotten euery one, Their marrow's lost, their moistur's gone, Their Organs parched by the sunne, That there the Ghost drawne vp from hells Darke entrance, nought, but broken yells, And dismall hizzings can afford, Not one intelligible word. 2. But from this field of slaughter I Haue gather'd vp a treasury, As dead mens limms wet in the raine, Cold gelled tongues and parched braine, The slime that on blacke knuckles lyes, Shrunke sinnews, and congealed eyes, Bitt from their fingers nailes ore growne, And from young chinns pull'd springing downe.
Flesh bit by Wolues I tooke away, And robb'd the vultur of her prey. Where Thebans funerall pyles had made, I did the mourning fire inuade, And there blacke raggs with ashes fill'd, And coales on which their fat distill'd, I gather'd vp, and tooke from thence Halfe-burnt bones, and Frankincense, And snatch'd the fatall kindling brand From out the weeping parents hand. 1 Once more lett's trott the fields about To finde a fresher carcasse out. And speake a charme that may affright All pious loue from hence to night, Lest we by funerall rites do loose What Creons cruelty bestowes. The 3 Hagge with a carcasse. 3 By Creons trembling watch I bore This new slaine carcasse, but before I brought him thence, I grip'd him round. The filletts of his lungs are sound. His vitalls all are strong and whole To entertaine the wretched soule, Whom forced furies must affright Backe from hell to vs to night. Enter Creon, Ianthus. Cre. You wise interpreters of fate, that looke
With iust contempt downe on that small allowance Of knowledge, which weake human breasts possesse. Whose subtle eyes can penetrate the depth Of darke Auernus secrets, and from thence Enforce an answer from th' obeying finds. Let me from your deepe skill be guided now To know th' assurance of my future state: It is a King that craues your aide, a King Whose power has giu'n your art this furtherance, By my command these carcasses haue lyen Vnburled heere for you to practise on. If Creon then deserue it at your hands, Resolue me of my fate. 3. You haue your wish. This carcasse shall relate it; do not feare To heare him speake: what herbs haue you prepar'd? 1. I heere haue gather'd, all in one, The poisonous gelly of the moone, Mixt with sulphur of the night, Libbards bane, and Aconite, Dew gather'd, ere the morne arose, From night-shade, henbane, Cypresse boughs. 'Mongst liuing creatures I haue sought, And from each banefull brood haue brought What ere could aide to our worke giue, Skinns stript from horned snakes aliue, The Lynxes bowells, blood of froggs, The Schreichowles eggs, the foame of Doggs, The wings of Batts, with Dragons eyes, The Crowes blacke head, the stone that lyes In Eagles nests, and pebbles round,
That when the Ocean ebbs are found: 3. Enough; but I to adde to these so knowne And vulgar helps of our great art, haue gone, And found such simples, whose concealed aide No witch ere vs'd, or trembling god obey'd. Thessaliaes valleys, Colchos famed shore, Nor Libyan squallid sands with Gorgont gore Bedw'd and sprinkled, nere produced iuice That could so much enthrall the deityes. When first I pluck'd them in yon gloomy vale The furies shreik'd, and Hecate grew pale, As loath to haue (in that abhorred ground) The power of simples, and their weakenesse found. 2. Then let vs now employ their powerfull helpe. What place doe we designe for our blacke worke? 1. There is within Cithaerons hollow side A darke, and squallid caue, where day nere peep'd, Nor euer light, but light by magike made Shot through that dismall aire; pale mouldy filth Bred there by drery night orespredds the place. The mouth of Taenarus, that balefull bound Twixt heauen and hell, appears not halfe so blacke. To this sad caueth' accustom'd fiends ascend, And thinke themselues still in their proper place. But Ghosts, that newly past Auernus lake, Shun the ascent, and though by vs inuok'd, Tremble to enter to that place vnknowne, And finde a hell more horrid then their owne. 2. Then thither let vs beare this carcasse hence. 3. No, no, we scorne the helps of that darke place;
Nor is it honour to our art to finde, But make a darknesse fit to serue our ends. We that can forcea Magike light to glide Through closest vaults, can force in spite of day A mist of night to rise, which all the rayes Ofburning Phoebus shall want power to scatter. Oh would it were not night, but that the sunne Rode in his height of strength; how proudly then Might we performe our rites, and make it knowne, We vse not natures darknesse but our owne. 1. Lett's goe no further then; this place shall serue. 3. 3. Apply your ointments to the body, whilest I Prepare, and speake a charme shall quickly call Th' affrighted soule backe to his mansion. Cre. My ioynts beginne to tremble, and I feare As much the meanes of knowledge, as th' euent Of what I came to know. Ian. How full of blacke And balefull horrour is this art of theirs? Would I were well from hence; let me hereafter. Rather remaine in endlesse ignorance Then purchase knowledge by such meanes as these. 3. Sad King of night, whose balefull Monarchy The still repaired ruines of mankinde Through euery age encrease; that greiu'st alone To see the heauenly gods for euer free From death's assaults, and thy subiection. Old formlesse Chaos, thou that would'st deface Natures whole beauty, quite disioint her fabrike, And swallow vp in darke confusion
Ten thousand worlds; thou squallid ferriman Of still Auernus; thou three-headed porter; You snake-hair'd sisters, punishers of guilt, As you would gaine our aid, or feare our threats, Whip back againeinto this vpper world That new-fled soule, which did of late inhabite This pale and ghastly seate, but if in vaine On you I call, thou wretched wandering Ghost, Not yet transported ore the burning streame, But doom'd to exile for an hundred yeares, If true rewards can tempt thee, once againe Enter thy ancient prison, and in lieu Of that shore pennance, I will make thee free (Releasing all thy tedious banishment) Of faire Elisium; with such powerfull rites Ile giue thee buryall, as no Magicke spells, Nor incantations shall for euer call Thee bakce, nor trouble thine eternall rest. Relate to Creon King of Thebes the fate That shall attend his reigne. Ian. The carkasse stirrs. Cre. The face retaines pale death; yet seemes to liue. The carcasse speakes. Thy death is neare; yet ere thou dy A great and strange calamity Shall seize thy house, and thou in woe Shalt thinke the fatall sisters slow In giuing death, desiring then Thy reignes short date had shorter beene; Yet thou at last in death shalt haue
(Though thou denid'st it vs) a graue. fals. Cre. Shame on your damned arts; it does not ly Within the power of fate to worke this mischeife. Ian. Beleeue it not, my Lord; lett's quit the place, And from the wise Tiresias seeke aduise, Exeunt. Aemon, Dircus. Aem. Dircus, shee's gone, and I am worse then dead, Oh would the villaines armes had had the power To haue dispatch'd me quickly. Dir. Good my Lord, Take fairer hopes, and liue; cast not away The Kingdomes ioy; what cruelty can touch So sweet a vertue as Antigone? Retire with me into yon little house; Ile there binde vp your wounds; you bleede too fast, And needes must faint before you reach the walls. The wounds I tooke are scratches. Aem. Honest Dircus, What care can ere my body haue without The presence of my soule? Dir. Delay not Sir. Their goodnesse will protect them: what other Lady Was that with her? Aem. It seemes it was Argia Dead Polynices wife, Adrastus daughter, Or else some grace or goddesse in that shape Came to consort with good Antigone. Dir. Wandering about the fields to finde out you, I met with witches, impious haggs, that came As I suppose, for execrable ends
There to abuse the bodies of the dead. Oh partiall fates, oh too iniurious night, Can these escape, when piety must suffer? Aem. A saintnesse seizes me, I prithee Dircus Let me haue speedy newes. Dir. You shall my Lord. When I haue drest you, Ile to court, and thence Bring you a true and swift intelligence. Exeunt. Chorus Argiuarum, Deiphile. Cho. By what new wayes of griefe shall we Our widow'd losses signifie? What strange expression can become A woe so strangely burdensome? No howles, no shreikes, no voice of woe, Not such as widow'd turtles shew, Nor such as Philomel, when shee High seated on a poplar tree, Sends sweet sad notes through th' aire of night, Wailing the husbandman's despite, That reau'd her of her dearest nest. Our losse cannot be so exprest. No, nor by actions, such as are The rending of disheuel'd haire, Or beating of our breasts; these all No more then death and funerall Can shew; but in our husbands we Receiue a greater iniury
Then death had done; the common rite Of funerall barr'd in despite. Deiph. Cease widowes longer in that straine To waile, or 'gainst the fates complaine For funerall rites; but vnderstand Great Theseus, whose victorious hand In conquests neuer yet has faild, Is he, with whom we haue preuail'd For aide; and thinke what action He vndertakes, already done. He will reuenge on Creon's head The wrongs that we haue suffered. Our deare Lords Ghosts shall righted be. Then ioine your voyces all  me, And in triumphant songs let vs Renowne the noble Theseus. Cho. Theseus is he, whose warrelike hand Defends mankinde in euery land No lesse by tyrants fear'd and knowne Then was the faire Alcmenaes sonne. Twas he, whose iust reuenging steele Subdu'd, and made dire Schinis feele The selfe-fame torture in his death By which he tooke from others breath, When trees together bowed were, And parted thence againe, did teare Poore wretches, but by Theseus he Was forc'd to tast that Tragedy. Deip. Procrustes that inhuman thiefe (Monster of nature past beliefe)
That made all passengers, whom he Surpris'd within the woods, to bee By an vnheard of cruell sport Stretch'd longer out, or else cut short, To fit their stature to his bed, By Theseus hand was conquered, And doomed then himselfe to dy By the same kinde of cruelty. Cho. 'Twas he alone that did set free Athens from that sad slauery Which Minos fury, for the losse Of his belou'd Androgeos, Had brought them to; when w ith clew He scap'd the Labyrin, and slew Fierce Minotaurus, that had beene The monstrous issue of the Queene Pasiphae, Whom vnnaturall Prodigious lust had made to fall Before a Bull; the monster held Both shapes, and her foule guilt reueal'd. Deiph. Against a farre worse monster now The noble Theseus armes to goe, Inhumane Creon, that denyes To worthiest soules due obsequyes, And, what those monsters would not doe, Does after death his hate pursue. Cho. Oh let that still victorious sword Be now as prosperous, and afford To wicked Creon the iust meede That is deseru'd for such a deede.
But 'tis against all holy lawes To doubt successe in such a cause. Actus Quartus. Aephytus, Creon, Dircus, Antigone, Argia. Aeph. PRince Polynices body is enterr'd By these two Ladyes, whom I apprehende Iust as the deede was done; nor did themselues Deny the fact. Cre. One I suspected still, And I am glad I haue her, what's the other? Arg. The wofull widow of that wronged Prince Who stay'd behinde my countreymen, to doe Those rites, which loue, and piety requir'd To my dead Lord; if that be iudg'd a crime Tis such a crime as I professe, and boast. Cre. Are you Adrastus daughter then? Arg. The sam▪ Cre. You are our prisoner now, take her, Ianthus, Into your custody: this falls out fittly, The ransome of this Princesse will come well To fill our now-exhausted treasury. But thou a Theban borne, bound to obey Our crowne and lawes, what fury moou'd thy brea (Disloyall maide) to scorne our edict so? Anti. No other fury then the loue of vertue, And reuerence of the gods, moou'd me to this. Which wer't to doe againe, not all the power Of hell, and tyrants should affright me from it.
Cre. Has guilt embolden'd thee? is this th' excuse Thou mak'st to me? Ant. Creon, Let impious acts Seeke for excuses; I nor can, nor will So wronge the cause of heauen and piety, As once to pleade a fond excuse for that▪ Which is my merit, for that act I say Which by direction from the gods themselues I haue perform'd. Cre. Is disobedience merit? Or do the gods command subiects to breake The lawes of Princes? Ant. Yes, their wicked lawes, Which thwart the will of heauen, the rule of nature, And those pure principles, which human breasts Did at their first originall deriue From that Celestiall essence: Such a law Was this which I haue broke, in giuinge rites Of funerall to Polynices hearse, My dearest brother, this disobedience Thy seruants (durst they speake) would iustifie; But forreine nations, and all future times In spite of tirants threatnings shall commend What I haue done, and though I dy for this Vniustly now, yet the infernall iudges, Whose sentence no mortality can scape, But must to all eternity sustaine, Shall from their iust vnpartiall vrnes bestow Endlesse rewards beyond my sufferings farre. Cre. To those infernall iudges shalt thou goe, And thanke my charitable doome, that sends
Thy soule to such great happinesse, if thou Esteeme it happinesse, and doe not feare What thou wouldst seeme to wish. Anti. No, tyrant, no; Death cannot proue a punishment to me, Whose life was nought but sorrow; free'd from this Vnhappy world, in t'other I shall come Most wish'd, and welcome to my fathers sight, And that deare brother, for whose sake I dy. Creo. Thou shalt be banish'd from the light of day, Nor then shalt thou immediately haue power To see that other world thou so desir'st. Ianthus, till our farther pleasur's knowne Guard safe Argiaes person; Aephytus; See present execution done vpon Antigone; without the city walls There is a new digg'd tombe, where neuer yet Lay any funerall; in that enclose Antigone aliue, and barre it fast As thou entend'st to liue, there let her pray To those infernall gods shee so adores, To keep her there, or take her quickly thence. Exit Cre. Dir. Oh black accursed doome; oh my sad fate, That must report this newes to noble Aemon, And with that breath destroy the best of men. Exit Dir: Argi. Furyes haue left their darke abodes, to dwell In human shapes on earth; there could not else Liue such a monster, one so opposite To heauen and goodnesse, as curs'd Creon is. Ah dearest, dearest sister, did the fates
Differre so long our wisht acquaintance heere To make vs meete so wretchedly at last? Anti. Weepe not deare sister; your calamity Adds to my sufferings more: why were not all The miseries of Cadmus wofull house Confin'd within our selues, and bounded here In fatall Thebes? why spread they so, to make The best of soules partaker? happy else, And safe for euer had your vertue liu'd Admir'd in wealthy Argos, had you nere Nere knowne the sad affinity of Thebes. Arg. Why did the tyrant thus diuide our sufferings? The tombe, where thou art clos'd, had beene to me More pleasing then a palace. Anti. Heauen forefend; May the iust gods hereafter recompence Argiaes vertue with a happyer loue Then Polynices was, and happier friends Then Thebes can giue, doe not lament for me, Not feare the torments of my lingring death. I am prouided of a remedy That shall delude the cruelty of Creon. Farewell my dearest Aemon, whose lou'd presence More then the sight of day afflicts my soule To loose so soone, farewell where ere thou art, Till in the other world we meete againe. Exeunt. Aemon. Aeem. No newes of comfort, or discomfort yet?
Forgiue me faithfull Dircus, if my soule My loue-sicke soule vniustly doe accuse Thy diligent care, and thinke thee slacke; my heart Till thy returne is stretch'd vpon the wracke, A racke of torturing thoughts, more painefull farre Then tyranny could wish, or foes inuent To punish foes, dost thou delay, because The newes thou bring'st is ill? if my faire loue Be dead, or doom'd to death, why doo'st thou keepe My soule from her Celestiall company? If all be well—but oh presumptous soule Checke that too happy thought againe; I know My fathers nature is vnmoouable In all resolues, and this bound by an oath So deepe, so solemne, and inuiolable As ere't be broke will break this heart of mine. Enter Dircus See here he comes, speake man, what newes? Ay me, Thy very lookes haue blasted me before Thy tongue can be their sad interpreter. No newes but black could force a souldiers teares. Antigone is dead. Dir. Not dead, my Lord, But liues among the dead. Aem. How man? Expound This Aenigmatike sorrow. Dir. In a tombe, Where neuer more she shall behold the day Nor Phoebus splendour, by the Kings command, Is faire Antigone enclos'd aliue—
To famish there and dy. Aem. Enough, enough. Shut vp aliue to starue, oh horrid doome! As if that death alone, though nere so gentle, Had not beene punishment enough for her For such a cause as that; but yet this sentence Giues respite to her death, and leaues a way To our preuention; I must spend no time In thinking now; all action is requir'd. Thus it must be; be speedy faithfull friend, Runne to my mother, and with all the vowes, And vehement protestations that thou can'st From me assure her, if Antigone Be not releast in time, it shall not ly In all the power of earth to saue my life. Her loue I feare not, though my father now Haue cast his frowne vpon me, to this place Returne againe with all thy speed, whilest I Deuise some other meanes if that should faile. Dir. Feare not my care, my Lord, but let me craue (By your owne worth I begge it, and that fauour Which you were euer pleased to reflect On my poore seruices) till I returne, Attempt no other course, I will be speedy, And if perswasions of the queene doe faile; Wee'll finde a way to saue the princesse life, But tis a desperate way, and must be vs'd The last of all. AEm. Oh comfortable Dircus, Do but assure me that, and I shall owe More then my life, and all my fortunes to thee Vpon mine honour, Ile not stirre from hence
Till thou returne, nor stay thee now t'enquire More of the plot. Dir. I will out-fly the winde. Exit. Aem. Clos'd vp aliue within a tombe to starue! Oh horrid cruelty, I would I could Forget whose crime it were, that my free hate Might not be check'd by duty to a father. Should I approue his action, 'twere a sinne So great 'gainst vertue, as no time could pardon; Should I condemne it, I must then abhorre Th' offendor, and that piety forbidds. Oh why should piety, and vertue striue? That piety, which I so much admir'd In faire Antigone, my selfe transgresse In louing her crosse to my fathers will. Yet in obeying him I must approoue Her piety, or else condemne mine owne. What thoughts will reigne in this diuided brest. Till Dircus doe returne? but courage heart, More strong is he, that can his doubts deferre Then he that knowne calamities does beare. Exit. Chorus of old men. 1: Oh smooth thy frowne at last, great queene of heauen, Let not vnhappy Thebes for euer feele The dire effects of thy too mindefull wrath: What could the wretched Semeles offence, Or poore Alemenas errour more deserue, Then they themselues haue suffer'd from thy hand? Or if succeeding branches needes must bleede
For parents faults, before a goddesse wrath Can be appeas'd, could not Actaeons wounds Athamas maddnesse, Inoes wofull death, Nor pitti'd Oedipus his fall suffice? 2. Could not the actions of great Hercules, Nor Bacchus glorious deedes, which all mankinde For euer shall renowne, weigh downe the crimes Of their vnhappy mothers, and such crimes, As only Ioues resistlesse power could force? 3. A feircer warre by farre now threatens Thebes Then that which old Adrastus with the aide Of all his rash confederates could make. The mighty Theseus, whose all-conquering hand No Kingdome yet with safety could withstand, Arm'd with a cause, in which the prayers and wish Of nations ioyne, is marching towards vs. 1. In vaine, alas, did we expect an end Of this dire warre, when both the princes dy'd, When th' Argines fled, must out owne victory Become our greife? and draw vpon vs now A greater ruine then our foile had done? 2. It must, it must, since Creons cruelty, Most vnexpected, barbarous cruelty Will haue it so, oh friend, I could belieue, Were not the noble Aemon Creons sonne, And heire apparent to our Diadem, We had beene happyer farre t' haue beene subdu'd Then brought by victory to such obedience. 3 True friend; there's all out trust, the gods in nought But that braue Princes life, haue left vs hope
Of any future faur to redresse The miseries, which we so long haue felt. But for this imminent, nay present danger What were we best to doe? 1. Aduise the King Rather to change his purpose, then expose His weakened Kingdome to great Theseus fury. Though he should prooue neuer so obstinate: Better that any one for good aduice Should suffer from his fury, then the land In generall should smart. 2. You counsell well, But who should be the man? 3. There's none so fit As old Tiresias, that most holy man, Taught from the gods aboue, whose words by all Our Theban Princes haue beene long esteem'd As oracles, him Creon will obey. 1. Then thither let vs, and with him aduise How to redresse our present miseries. Actus Quintus. Euridice, Dircus. THat was my feare before, I thought my sonne Too farre in loue to beare, with patience, His Ladies death, and therefore did entreat The King with teares, and sighs, that would haue moou'd A rocke of flint, but hee more hard then rocks, Deafer then Northerne winds, with rage repuls'd
My oft repeated suite, and now, ay e, What most I fear'd is proou'd, my sonne will dy; For he has vow'd neuer to pardon her. Dir. Must I returne the Prince this killing newes? Eur. No gentle Dircus, stay a little while, Twill not be long before the King returne, Ile mooue him once againe. Dir. Your highnesse pardon, Not for the world would I delay the time— Vpon vncertainties; I feare I haue Already stay'd too long. My quicke returne Is th' only meanes to keepe the prince aliue. Please it your highnesse then when I am gone To mooue the King, and feare not, gratious madam, The Princes life a while how ere. Exit Dircus. Eur. Farewell, True faithfull Dircus, all the gods assist Thy good entents, and blesse thy loyalty. Enter Creon. Cre. What, weeping still? Eur. Would I could weepe my selfe Like Niobe to marble, and become A wofull tombe to Aemon, whom my womabe With fates disastrous brought into the world, My vertuous Aemon, Cre. Why, is Aemon dead? Eur. Why doe you aske, that meane to murder him? Cre. How? murder him? Eur. Yes in Antigone His most inseparable loue. Cre. Must then Th'audacious giglot, liue vnpunished, To braue a King?
Eur. Were kings ordain'd to kill Vertues true seruants, and controll her lawes? Enter Tiresias, Chorus senum. Tir. Where is the king? Cre. Hee's heere. What mischiefe now Com'st thou to vtter, neuer from thy tongue Flow'd any good to me. Tir. A guilty man Was neuer pleas'd with truth, but heare me, Creon. I come to thee sent from the wrathfull gods To let thee know thy guilt, and punishment. Great plagues from heauen, if Tiresias Truly diuine, are threaten'd'gainst thy house. When I for thee vnthankefull man prepar'd A sacrifice within, the open'd beast No signes but sad and fatall did afford. None but th' infernall gods deign'd to appeare. The blood was blacke, the burning entrailes gaue No flame at all, but darkely did consume, Mouldring away to ashes, and with blacke Vnsauoury smoake clouded the fearefull ayre. Vnto our augury no birds at all But sad, and balefull birds of night appear'd. Nor to our orizons would th'inuoked gods Vouchsafe an answer, but in signes alone Declar'd their wrath. The cause of these their threats Against thy house is for thy cruelty To good Antigone, and if she dy These plagues will surely fall. Eur. Can we auoide them. By sparing her? Tir. The gods aboue relent
At humane penitence, and heare their prayers, Nor like the fiends are they inexorable. Eur. No longer, Creon, shalt thou now deny me Since heauen is ioyn'd with my petition. Tir. You are not constant in persisting thus, But obstinate. Eur. Now I renew my suite. Cho. In which we bend our knnes, release, O king, For Thebes, for Aemons sake, that vertuous maide, And to preuent a feirce and cruell warre, Vouchsafe to grant our suite, and giue vs leaue To bury those dead Graecians in the field. Cre. No more of them; that last must not be granted, For our command is past too farre already, And must be iustifi'd, not changed now. But for the life of that Antigone, Although it cannot suite well with our iustice To pardon her rebellious stubbornnesse, Yet shee is thine Eurydice, to thee Do we referre her wholly; take this ring, And absolute power to dispose of her, Either to pardon, or to punishment. Eur. The gods reward thee for't; Ile goe my selfe And bring her out with speede from that sad place; Heauen grant that griefe haue not already kill'd her. Nuntius, Creon. Nun. To armes, my Lord, if any armes so soone Can rescue Thebes from quicke destruction. The mighty Theseus threatens you at hand.
Creon. Why let him come: Should I esteeme the name Of Thesous such a buggebeare it should fright Me from my constant resolution? Haue our late conquests, haue the ouerthrowes Of Argor and Mycenae taught the world Nothing of vs? looke on you purple fields With slaughter dy'd, and learne what Thebes can doe, Where Capanaeus, and stout Tydeus Parthenopaeus and Hippomedon Ly weltring in their gores, and should we then So tremble at the threates of Theseus? No power must daunt me; 'tis not Kingly now Vpon constraint to change my rough decree. Though I relented now, though my soft breast Were moou'd with piety, yet thought of honour Would conquer that, as now it conquers feare, The feare of Theseus hand; nor haue I left A place for wisedome now; it comes too late; I must preuent or meete my instant fate. Dircus Aemon. Dir. Yonder's the tombe, my Lord, which though it seeme Too hard, and solid for our strength to force, I know a place will open presently. Aem. Then let vs breake this wealthy Cabinet, And take from thence a iewell, which the ransome Of all the Kings on earth would be a price To poore to purchase: Knew'st thou, happy caue, Or knew the world what true vnualew'd wealth Thy bare vnpolish'd bosome did containe,
Thou would'st despise the richest temples rear'd On Marble Columnes, and high-roof'd with gold; To thee would men with adoration come As to a place more sacred then the caue That nourish'd Cretan Ioue, then Bacchus Nisa, Or the Oetaean Mount, from whence in flames The great Alides mounted to the sky. But I forget my selfe, I first must know Whether I liue or no; for in that caue, Not heee does. Aemon breath. Antigone. Anti. Who calls Antigone? is it my Aemon? Aem. Dircus I liue; heardst thou that heauenly voice Which has inspir'd a happyer life into me Then my creation did. Lets loose no time In this sweete businesse. Dir. Ile ope the tombe Immediatly, my Lord. Aem. Sad Thebes adieu, Ile finde some happyer countrey to conuey My enuy'd treasure to. Possest of her I shall be richer then the Theban crowne Can make me; speake how fares my fairest loue; Shall we be gone? Ant. I would, my dearest Aemon, Begone with thee rather then liue; but fate Too cruell, fate preuents it. Aem. How? what fate Can let our iourney, if thy loue consent? Anti. I loue thee, Aemon, better then my life, And neuer truly wish'd to liue till now, But now I cannot liue. Aem. Oh doe not mocke My ioyes, Antigone, or if thou doest not,
Tell me what sad disaster can befall. Anti. That sad disaster is befall'n already; Fearing the paines that such a lingring death Might bring vpon me, I haue tane already A gentle poison downe, which long before 'Gainst some such dire occasion I prepar'd, I feele it worke; my vitall spirits faile. My dearest loue farewell. Liue long and happy; Let fate hereafter recompence to thee What ere her cruelty 'gainst me has wrought. Aem. No fate can make me happy, I am lost Beyond her cure. Dir. What end of tragedyes Can wofull Thebes for euer hope to see After this sorrow. Oh I more then feare The Princes fury; Aem. Her white soule is fled. What vnsubstantiall bubbles are the best Of humane ioyes? how from the top of all My hopes and comforts in one fatall minute Has enuious fortune throwne me downe againe Into the depth of misery, and woe. Oh fortune how extreme thou art in all Thy fauours and thy frownes! Dir. Most noble prince, Collect that strength of man, which all the world Expects from you, and arme your selfe to beare With fitting patience this calamity. The passiue fortitude is great and noble As is the actiue. Aem. Strike that string no more, Doe not in vaine torment a desperate man
With thy dull counsell: Tis as possible Thou should'st perswade a dead man to arise After his soule is fled, as me to liue. Now shee is dead, I doe coniure thee Dircus By all the loue thou bearst me, by that faith Which I haue euer found and priz'd in thee, To leaue me heere. Dir. My Lord, I will obey; And thus I take my leaue. Dyes. Aem. Too cruell Dircus. Was I not miserable enough before, But thou must loade my sufferings with thy death? What cause hadd'st thou to dy? thou hast not lost A loue, why should my losse extend so farre As to the ruine of so braue a friend? Thy death has iniur'd faire Antigone, And made a strange Diuision in my griefe. For all the sorrow which this breast could hold, Was due to her before. I must encroach Vpon her right in spending teares for thee. My breast's too narrow for so great a griefe, And must be quickly open'd. Thou pure soule Of my Antigone, which still suruiu'st, Though this faire palace be demolish'd quite By deaths vngentle hand, thou heauenly substance, True obiect of a chast, and spotlesse loue, Thy Aemon comes; and from these bonds of nature Flyes forth to meete thee in the other world, To wedd thee there; to finish there the rites Of long-cross'd loue, and tast eternall sweetes. Dyes.
Ianthus, Aephytus, Eurydice. Ian. Oh horrid spectacle! see Aephytus, The Prince, Antigone, and Dircus dead. Aeph. All dead? Eur. Ay me. Ian. Looke to the Queene, she sownes Aephy. Alas, tis more then so; cold death has seiz'd her I feare, beyond recouery, Lett's in, And certifie the King, who now may see. The dire effects of his rash cruelty. Theseus, Chorus Thebanorum. The. Our warre's already ended, and the death Of sauage Creon, whose dire soule is fled To pacifie the Argiues wandring ghosts, Hath satisfi'd our iustice, heere we sheath Our sword againe, and free your towne from feares. And now enterre with fitting obsequies The Carcasses of all your slauter'd foes. Let cruell Creon too, though he at all Deserue it not, haue rites of funerall. Cre. Those pious rites will we performe with ioy, And thankes to mighty Theseus, may the Gods. Assist thee euer; and great Hercules Beholding thy braue actions from the sky Reioyce, and not disdaine at all to be Esteem'd thy aequall by posterity. The. Send backe Argia to her father's court
With faire attendance; and tis left to you To place the Theban scepter where tis due. Cho. Thebes humbly bowes to mighty Theseus, And layes her crowne and seepter at his feete. The. No; still let Thebes be gouern'd by her owne; T'was not our warres intention to enthrall Your land, but free it from a tyrants yoake; And to preserue the conquer'd, not destroy them. We drew the sword of iustice, not of conquest, Ambitiously to spread our Kingdomes bounds, But to auenge the lawes of nature broke; This act being done, Theseus is peace againe. Souldiers march on to Athens. Thebes adieu. Now let mankinde enioy a happy peace; Oh let no monsters breede on earth, to glut Themselues with human slaughter, let no theeues Infest the woods; no tyrants staine the cities With blood of innocents? but if such monsters Must needes be bred to plague the wretched earth, 'Gainst nature, and her holy lawes to striue, Let them appeare while Theseus is aliue. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Beniamin Fisber, and are to be sould at his shop, at the signe of the Talbot, without Aldersgate. 1631.
