18023.5 99848058 13132
CONTEMPLATIO MORTIS, ET IMMORTALI∣TATIS. LONDON, Printed by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAIESTIE: and by the Assignes of Iohn Bill. Anno Dom. 1631.
CONTEMPLATIO MORTIS ET IM∣MORTALITATIS. PHilosophers, States∣men, & Diuines do all hold, that in this world there are but tria gene∣ra vitae: Vna est actiua: Altera Con∣templatiua: Tertia voluptuaria. Which of these is best. Quaeritur: Actio Contemplationis expers, is but vita impolita; Contemplation, if it take vp all a mans time makes vitam sterilem. Voluptuaria vita, though it bee not otiosa, because it is in actu: yet is but desidiosa occupatio. Amongst these, who so tryes all as I haue done, shall finde; that Action pro∣fits most, but Contemplation pleases best: specially that which indebts a man to action. For man
was not made for Contemplation onely. It is true, retirednesse is is more safe then businesse, yet as hee is not happy that is alwayes busie: so a publike man should not alwayes bee shut vp in thoughts pleasing his life in the sweetnesse of thinking. The sweetnesse of thoughts, and vertue of Contemplation, lyes in the right choice of the subiect: euery knowing man being so in∣quisitiue by nature, and of so busie a fancie, as it is happy for him in this way to fall vpon a fit subiect. Some ancient Fathers, and some late Writers haue fixed vpon the loue of God, some vpon the Passion of Christ, some vpon the ioyes of Heauen, some vpon con∣tempt of the World. So seue¦rall others vpon seuerall other subiects. All opining, that some one is to bee chosen. For who so will viuere sibi, must vacare Deo. Ego in meo solito recessu in quo à
negotijs publicis vacans, mihi ipsi vacaueram (which was but sel∣dome) found it fruitfull, vsefull, and delightfull, cogitare de No∣uissimo. Quatuor sunt Nouissima, say the Fathers; Death, Iudgement, Hea∣uen and Hell, subiects large enough. But considering I had passed so much imployment, so many of∣fices in seuerall professions, I was some while musing whether any of these fitted me to contemplate. In the reuolution of many things, I found, that when Meditation had produced Deuotion, then it applyed it selfe to Contemplation. And that true Contemplation re∣quired a settlement vpon some di∣uine obiect. Hereupon I made choice of Death and Immortalitie for the subiect of my Contem∣plation. But first my thoughts did beate to finde a difference betwixt Me∣ditation and Contemplation.
Meditation or recogitation, I saw was but a reiterated thought, proper to production either of good or euill. Day and night haue I meditated on thy Law, saith Da∣uid in one Psalme: in an other, Why haue they meditated vaine things? But Diuines doe now de∣dicate Contemplation to diuine mysteries. Which affecting our soules, and exciting our wils, pro∣duceth some holy resolution. We meditate, saith one, to know God; wee contemplate to loue God. Meditation is the mother, Contemplation the daughter. Yet as Ioseph was the crowne of his father, and brought him encrease of honour and contentment: the like doth Contemplation to her mother Meditation. When God himselfe had seene the things crea∣ted in seuerall peeces, hee said, they were good. But when hee considered the Vniuerse (as it were in Contemplation) then hee said, Lo, they were exceeding good.
For Meditation considers her obiects peece by peece; but Con∣templation summes them vp all together, and sees as in a grosse, all the seuerall beauties of meditati∣ons obiects. Meditation is with a man as hee that smels the Violet, the Rose, the Iessamy, and the O∣ringe flowers, one after the other, distinctly. But Contemplation is a sweet water compounded of them all, wherein you shall smell all these odours together, extract∣ed from the seuerall sents, which before you smelt diuidually. Which extract is farre more fra∣grant, then were any of the sim∣ples, though euery one was sweet alone. This is more elegantly de∣noted in the Canticles; where the Spouse pleates vp her hayre, trus∣sing it vp in one knot, to shew that wee should not diffuse our thoughts into varietie of conside∣rations, but recollect them by contemplation. The end of all is, after many
changes of meditations and dis∣courses, to reduce all cogitations to one conclusion. Which is, contemplation of things diuine. Here with a mans soule being once affected, hee shall hardly obtaine leaue of his thoughts to returne againe to imployment. Now to returne ad meum No∣uissimum. What man liueth (saith Dauid) and shall not see death? And if after death Iustus vix sal∣nabitur, as the Gospel saith; Then wee may well bee fearefull, and had neede be carefull, that wee be not taken vnprepared. When I was a young man (saith Seneca) my care was to liue well. I practised Artem bene viuendi: when age came vpon me, I studied Artem bene morien∣di, how to die well. It is true, Iter vitae occupatis non apparet, nisi in fine: yet when I was occupatissimus, hoc me dulci oblectabam solatio, aliquando me victurum mihi. And this at last I
am come to, disponendo, non mu∣tando me. The couenant of the graue is shewed to no man, saith the Wise∣man: But the watch-word is gi∣uen to all men: Sint lumbi prae∣cincti, Lucernae ardentes, semper vigilantes. Lord let me be found in this posture, when I shall bee to dye. Nunquam ego fortunae credidi, etiamsi videretur pacem agere. I haue had my portion as another man, of the worlds fauours: yet did they neuer so delight mee, or abuse mee, as to make mee neg∣lect, or to deferre this worke of preparation. I considered this, Guttatim per horas & dies fluit vi∣ta. And although the houre bee not past till all the glasse be runne, & nemo multum ex stillicidio po∣test perdere: yet the glasse then runnes most faintly, when it drawes neerest to effluxion. Care∣full Martha was full busie about many things, but was well ad∣monished,
there was onely vnum necessarium. Physicians exclaime, Vita bre∣uis, Ars longa est. But Diuines teach, Ars optima est, vsuendo dis∣cere artem bene moriendi. If this Science bee to learne, when prae fo∣ribus Mors est; Thy sin-sicke Soule will say, Infelix ego homo, quis me liberabit à corpore mortis huius? But if thou hast learnt it betime, then it will reioyce to say, Mihi viuere Christus est, & mori, lucrum. Welcome death, more blessed then my birth. In the whole course of my life I haue alwayes thought the right way to die, was to liue well; and the way to liue well in the world, was to dye betimes to the world. Mihi Mundus Crucifixus, & ego Mundo: yet I found it rem diffici∣lem; In mundo viuere, & mundi bona contemnere. Therfore for assistants, I tooke three coadiutors; Faith, Hope, Charity. Charitatemex corde puro, spemex conscientia bona, fidem
non fictam. And for my soules health often vsed this preparatiue; Examen conscientiae meae. Nam qui∣cun{que} cordihabet salutem suam, let him euery day, mane & vespere, examine his heart. Quid nocte vel die praecedente, hath hee thought, hath he said, hath he done? Et in quo peccati labem inuenerit? Let him mend it, cum proposito efficaci, simili non peccare. This if it be done daily, I dare boldly say, Vix fieri poterit, vt quis moriendo peccet, aut peccando moriatur. Inter these thoughts, I had these things in Contemplation. 1. First, what Death was, and the kinds of death. 2. Secondly, what feares or ioyes death brought. 3. Thirdly, when death was to be prepared for, and how. 4. Fourthly, death approching, what our last thoughts should then be. Of these I thus resolued.
THat Death was a fall, What death is. which came by a fall. Our first fra∣med father Adam falling, in him wee all fell. Cecidimus omnes (saith S. Bernard) super acerbum lapidem in luto, vnde inquinati & vulne∣ratisumus. Therefore wee needed water in Baptisme to wash vs, Blood in the Eucharist to heale vs. This falling sicknesse infected not only the person, but the nature (such is the infection of euill al∣wayes worse thē the Act) making man that was immortall, subiect to Death, as are Birds and Beasts: whereas before wee were differen∣ced from them in this condition, though made of the same matter, Dust. Yet as wee now stand, the fault is ours, if that fall be not our rise: the aduantage wee haue by Christ, being more then the da∣mage wee had by Adam, ideo qui stat, videat ne cadat. For relapse may turne vs againe to be as Birds and Beasts, that haue no ioy, but being; no sorrow, but dying.
Consider Death originally or in his owne nature, and it is but a departed breath from dead earth inliuened at first by breath cast vpon it. Take the dimension of it, and it is but a point of Time, in∣teriected betweene two extremes. A Parenthesis which interposed breakes no sense, when the words meete againe. When Seneca was asked, Quid est Mors? he answe∣red, Aut finis est, aut transitus. Ro∣gatus Secundus Philosophus said to the Emperour Adrian, Mors est aeternus somnus, Diuitum Pauor, pauperum desiderium, incerta pere∣grinatio, ineuitabilis euentus, latro hominis, fuga vitae, resolutio omni∣um. Plato said it was Lex Natu∣rae, Tributum mortalium. Scaliger defines it to bee, but the cessation of the soules functions. All men graunt the cause of Death was iust, yet few can tell, who was the Author, or whats the name or nature of it. Estimemus sin∣gula famâ remotâ quaeramus quid
sint, non quid vocentur. In Nature it can be nothing for it hath no cause efficient, The nature of Death but defi∣cient. Post mortem nihil est, ipsa{que} Mors nihil. It hath no Essence, though Existence. It is no sub∣stance, but priuation; no crea∣ture, but creaturarum sepultura. Therefore curiously to search the efficient of it, were to labour the eye to see darknesse. God made it not, saith the booke of Wisedome, nor is it mentioned as any of his workes. God that made all things, saw that all things which he had made, were good. Omne ens bonum, & omne bonum estens. Therefore good Saint Augustine said finely, Lord, thou hast not made Death, wherefore, I beseech thee, suffer not that which thou hast not made, to reigne ouer that which thou hast made. It is no errour to say that man made death. For curiositie (the itch of mans Soule) affecting to know that which God neuer made, which was the euill of
death, thinking it had been good, to know euill, by desiring to know it, made it. He that knew all other things, knew not this one thing: that hee knew enough. So diuine a thing is knowledge, that wee see, innocencie it selfe was ambitious of it. Life did not con∣tent, that was thought but the act of knowledge: knowledge was the life the soule looked at. That yet begets a studious scrutinie to discouer things wee can neuer know. So we see, that although Nature be moderate in her desires, yet conceit is vnsatiable. But since God hath reuealed more then we can know, enough to make vs happy; let vs learne sober knowledge, and contented igno∣rance. Who then was the Author of Death? The Autho of Death. The booke of Wisedome saith, that through enuie of the diuell, death came into the world, and they that hold on his side, finde it. But if the Diuell was the
father, Sinne was the mother. For saith Saint Iames, sinne being fini∣shed, trauaileth in child-birth like a mother to bring foorth death. Adam falling, sin followed him: Man being tempted, Death at∣tempts him, and by sinne death entred. Death had no interest in man, till sin had dispossessed him of the freehold hee had in God. There was no trust in Gods ser∣uants, saith Eliphaz, but euen An∣gels were charged with folly. And to doe the Diuell right, hee did but perswade, not compell. It was in mans choice to stand or fall. Adam acceperat posse, quod vellet: non velle, quod posset: nos accepi∣mus & posse, quod volumus; & velle, quod possumus: ille posse non mori, nos non posse mori sic Augustinus. Power of standing, man had from God, but possibilitie of falling from himselfe. Therefore though wee may thanke our first parents for our birth-sinne; Yet wee may thanke our selues for improouing
of it; wherefore said the old Le∣tanie, Ame, salaa me, Domine. All mans natiue vertues were giuen him but in trust, and vnder a condition. Hee abused the trust, and brake the condition, so incur∣red the penaltie. For that is mans nature, euer subiect to extremi∣ties, either dull in want, or wanton in fruition. Ne moriemini was a faire warning, but hee cared not for it: when Satan tempted, hee consented. Had the mind gouer∣ned the eye, the Apple could not haue beguiled, though it was faire to see to. The proud aspiring thought was hatched in man. The Diuell was but the deuiser, sinne was the Author, and wee being partners in the sinne, shared like∣wise in the punishment. Facinus quos iniquinat, aequat. Since then Death stole in at the eare, by our hearkening to ill counsell; let vs now cast it out by the eares, through hearkening to Gods Word: the word of life, the life of Death.
For the name of Death: The name of Death. Saint Iohn cals it a sleepe, Amicus noster Lazarus dormit. Of Saint Steuen it was said, and when hee had thus spoken, hee slept. The Patriarkes and Kings of Iudah slept with their Fathers. Transitum ad vitam, ali∣qui appellant mortem, saith Saint Bernard. Sed ideo Scriptura dormi∣entes appellat, vt euigilaturos mini∣mè desperemus. Hee is not dead (saith Dauid) but sleepeth, whose flesh doth rest in hope. The night sauours of mortalitie, and sleepe is but the shadow of death, and where the shadow is, the body cannot bee farre off. But let it be Mors à mor∣su, which our first Parents tasted; or Mors à mora, which yet tarries for vs all. Let her bee stiled Ladie, mistresse of the world, that will not bee courted, nor yet cast off. Yet is she but vox tantum, a thing next to nothing. Solo timenda sono. Better is it called a transfigurati∣on, or transmigration from life by death to life againe, Exitus
non transitus. Transitus quem ire non intelleximus, transissesentimus. The graue is but a withdrawingroome to retyre in for a while, a going to bed to take rest, sweeter then sleepe. And when it is time to rise, cum expergiscar, then I shall bee satisfied, saith the Prophet Dauid. In the meane time it is common to all, Death com∣mon to all. Mors etiam saxis nomini∣bus{que} venit. Yet this fauour nature hath done. Quod grauissimum fe∣cit, fecit commune, vt crudelitatem fati consolaretur aqualitas. Who liues and shal not see death? Quis∣quis ad vitam nascitur ad mortem destinatur, it respects none. Equat omnes cinis. It is as naturall to die as to be borne. Licet impares nasci∣mur, pares morimur. No sooner borne, but hastening to die: Ori∣mur, morimur. We come into the world with a sheete about vs, as no sonner borne, but going to bee buried. For all this, man is euen with Death. Nunquam enim mag∣nis ingenijs cara in corpore mora est:
nay, the good Soule aegre fert has angustias. Therefore what great thing doth death in hastening dayes? This shewes infirmitie, ra∣ther then power. Age doth more, nil enim non longa demolitur vetu∣stas: Death onely shortens time, not life; for lifes time shortens by lengthening: Morimur, quòd mortibus viuimus; morieris, non quia aegrotas, sed quia viuis. This all men are to know, that mortis meritum, is peccati debitum. Both imposed on man for sinne. Sith then, Life but a dying death. it is a Statute made in heauen, omnibus semel mori, and that life is so momentanie, and death so certaine; splendemus licèt, Hêu quàm citò frangimur corpora vitrea! Since life it selfe is no true liuing, but a dying being; and such a being, as euery day pants for breath, which nature fawnes vpon it for a while. Mors & fugacemper∣sequitur virum. And since death is no death, but a going vnto hea∣uen, and heauens comming vnto
vs; How can a man but thinke it a well spent life alwayes to be me∣ditating vpon death? But saith Zenophon, Cur vitam contemnendamputas, & habes? I will not inquire nor require more of death, but death. Err as enim, qui in terrogas, Quid sit mors? Et propter quod mortempetam? Quaeris enim aliquid supra summum. But if a man dye shall he liue a∣gaine? saith Iob. Yes, Life after Death. saith Saint Paul, we that are in this Taberna∣cle sigh, and are burthened, be∣cause we would not be vnclothed, but cloathed vpon, that Immorta∣litie might bee swallowed vp of life. Phoenix sponte crematur Vt redeat, proprioq solet pubescere letho: Ste tu corpus coactum Discere mutatâ melior procede figurâ. The bright dayes die into dark nights, but rise againe a mornings Though the body sleepe awhile in the dust, yet shal it arise after thy
likenesse. The Soule which de∣parted for a season, shall, as Saint Paul said of Onesimus, come againe and bee receiued for euer. That bodie which was sowen a natu∣rall body, shall rise a spirituall bodie: Sow in teares, reape in ioy; who so goe forth weeping and carrie precious seede, shall returne with ioy, and bring their sheaues with them. Yet caro ista Pulueries, this clod of earth must lye a while in Dust. Sed resurget tandem as the Queenes daughter all glorious within. For if in this life holinesse maketh the face of a man to shine by an Irradiation from the heart; what shall be the beauty of the bo∣die glorified? Surely though it be not deifyed: yet shall it be purified, perfected, and immortalized. Our vile bodies shall be changed, saith Saint Paul, and fashioned like vn∣to his glorious body. Such glory haue all his Saints. If the exchange bee such, who
would not be willing, yea, glad to die? Nilminus est hominis occupati, quam viuere. Quos autem felicitas grauat, exclamant illi, Mihi viuere non licet. It is a good minde to bee content to dye, and willing to liue. But to be willing to dye, and con∣tent to liue, is the mind of a strong Christian. Diligimus mortem pari∣ter, pariter{que} timemus. Ipse metus te noster amat. When the Senator Cato was asked a question concer∣ning Death; Si Deus (inquit) ille mihi largiatur, vt repuerascam, valde recusem. Nec tum me vixisse poeni∣tet, quia bene vixi; nec timeo, mori, quod ex hospitio, non domo, discedam. Wherefore though death be not to be sought in the errour of youth, as the Preacher saith. respects it may bee desired. Death de∣sireable for three re∣spects. Portus est aliquando petendus, nunquam re∣cusandus. As first, that sowe may betimes leaue off to sinne; since sin liues in vs, and leaues vs not till Death. Dixit Socrates, Appropin∣quante
morte multò es diuinior. Secondly, the Soule that soone departs, facilius ad superos iter fa∣cit, quia minùs facis ponderis{que} traxit. In this passage betweene life and death, whats the distance? So little, as with the Ancients the Em∣bleme of life was oculus apertus: Mortis clausus, but not extinctus: nec plus interesse putauerunt inter mortem & vitam, quam ictum o∣culi. Man is onely a winke of life, his life and death ioyned as neere as ioy and griefe; where teares ex∣presse both. Thirdly, that we might the soo∣ner come to liue indeede. Vita aeterna est illa vita vitalis, ista est tantùm mortalis. For this cause saith Bernard, praecipitat quis{que} vi∣tam suam, fuiuri desiderio laborat, praesentium taedio. Men commonly say. There is nullum tempus praeter Nune. But this present is not that which contents the Soule. Ni∣mis angustat gaudia, qui praesenti∣bus
acquiescit. They are onely creatures of inferiour nature, that are pleased with the present. Man is a future creature, his soule lookes at what is beyond this life. Scrutatur quod vltra mun∣dum, futura & praeterita illum delectant; Haec expectatione, illa recordatione. It would make a man heauenly proud, but to thinke of how Di∣uine a nature and qualitie his Soule is. The Heathens could say it was Diuinae particula Aurae. Epi∣curus makes it a Spirit mixt of fire and ayre: Others define it to bee a selfe-mouing number. Seneca said, Quid aliud est anima, quam Deus in corpore humano hospitans? Neuer could any giue it such a de∣finition, that either an other, or himselfe could conceiue it. And no wonder that a man cannot conceiue what his Soule is: Because it suffered a compo∣sure before it selfe was. There∣fore Admiration rather then
Search becomes a man in such a secret. Tully said, Mihi quidem nunquam persuaderi potuit, animos dum in cor∣poribus essent mortalibus, viuere; cum exijssent ex ijs, emori. Let mee euer worship the great God of this little god, my Soule. Et ne plus vltra. Onely this I know, That to no creature else God hath giuen a liuing soule, nor is there hope in any creature else, but man; and this hope is giuen for sustentation of his soule. Hee that contemplates these things, wil beare himselfe too lof∣tily, and thinke himselfe too good to looke so low, as vpon the sub∣lunarie things of this life. Angustus, est animus quem terrena delectant. How then can this Beautie bee pleased to inhabit long contubernio isto? All it needs to care, is but Se∣pulture to that body which once had the Honour to be the Tem∣ple of such a ghest: But because
many times the houses of the dead and the vrned bones doe meete with foule hands, for this also Nature hath prouided, vt disertè ait Maecenas. Nec tumulum quaero, sepelit Natura relictos. It is one of the daily petitions of euery good Soule, Adueniat Regnum tuum, Thy Kingdome come, O Lord Yet saith Ambrose, Hoc nitimur & reluctamur. For, Quis sine querela moritur? Quis non gemens, quis non recusans exit? Quis cum accesserit, non tergiuersa∣tur, timet, plorat? In all things else, Mans crosse Nature. obserue how contrarily wee carry our selues. The labourer from his work hasts to his bed. The Mariner rowes hard to gaine the Port. The Tra∣ueller is glad when hee is within kenning of his Inne: yet we, when Death comes to put vs into our Port, shun it as a rocke. Wee feare what wee should wish, and wish what we should feare. O fortunatiorem Marcellum eo
tempore, quo exitum suum Bruto ap∣probauit, Mans bet∣ter choice. quàm quo populo Romano consulatum! Heare, O Christian, what the Pagan saith, Quid ni non timeat, qui mori sperat? It is harder to make a true Philosopher pati∣ent of life, then of Death. Hic spe mortis patienter dolet, & taedio doloris libenter moritur. Hunc fert, illam expectat, sed expectata Mors, tardè venit. I am in a straight betwixt two said Saint Paul, whether to liue in the flesh were profitable for mee, and which to chuse I wote not. Yet at last resolued, liue or die Christ was to him aduantage. Therefore to bee loosed and to bee with Christ was best of all. Till then God grant that I may haue vitam in pa∣tientia, mortem verò in desiderio. So shall I fulfill my course with ioy, life not deare, nor death grieuous. In elder times both wise men, great men, Life and death com∣pared. and vaine men, had Death in such estimation, and so
vndervalued life, as they fondly said, Had man beene worthy to know what life was before, he re∣ceiued it, hee would haue beene loth to accept it. Nemo vitam ac∣ciperet, si daretur scientibus. Life would haue kept vs in slauerie, but that Death freed vs. They counted death but the retreite of life, & optimum Naturae inuentum: for by it euery man might make himselfe happy, no man be longer miserable then he will. Placet no vita? viue. Non placet? licet co reuerti, vnde venisti. They thought no state miserable, but that which Death could not remedy. Where∣fore (say they) a wise man liues but so long as he should, not so long as hee can. If Death were not in our power, wee should desire it more then now wee feare it. Magistra rerum ratio taught them, that common safety lay in Death, &, inuitum qui seruat, idem facit occi∣denti. Life was subiect to many fortunes, sed in eo qui scit mori, nil
posse fortunam. This made them cherish these desperate conceits: Nil referre; faciatne finem, an ac∣cipiat. For though life be not, yet Death is at a mans command. Mori nihil aliud est, quàm velle; in which respect no man could complaine of life. Quia neminem tenet. If any man did complaine, this was their wish, Mors vtinam pauidos vitae subducere nollet; sed virtus hanc sola daret. In scorne some said, Egone expectem vel mor∣bi crudelitatem vel hominis, cum possim medio exire tormento, & ad∣uersa discutere? But their brauest conceit was worst, that it was ge∣nus mortis generosum, for a man to be author of his owne death, say they, if permitted to desire death, why ill to giue it to themselues? — Sed furor est, ne moriare, mori. They seemed thus to main∣taine their assertion, by reason as wellas courage. Death is naturall, therefore we come. Viuere noluit, qui mori non vult, hee is sorry that
he was a man, that is not glad to dye. It is ineuitable, therefore we must be resolute, feras non culpes, quod vitari non potest. Fooles fly it, old men attend it, wise men wish it. Nay, some so prided them∣selues in this way, that for Care, Feare or Griefe they would not dye. Non inferam mihi manus prop∣ter dolorem, nor yet for feare, stul∣tum est, timore Mortis mori. Nor yet the threats of torments. Sic mori, vinciest. Sed si coeperat suspecta esse Fortuna, si multa occurrebant molesta tranquillitatem turbantia, then it was Fortitude to dispatch themselues. How, or with what, it mattered not. Scalpello aperitur ad illam magnam libertatem via, & puncto securitas constat, said Seneca when he bled to death. Cato will die because the Commonwealth declined; Nerua, because the lawes were not kept; Siluianus, because he would not liue at the mercy of his enemy; Lucretia, to couer a dishonour.
But Plato and his Socrates were of another minde: Death was to be expected till Nature called for it, or Iustice tooke it. For Religi∣ons sake men may ponere animas, but suas, not for ostentation, nor in discontent. Inde facult as fuit non ponendi animam, sed pendendi. Bona res est mori suâ morte. Life was giuen to manage to the vtmost, and to make the best of it. Euery one was heere set sentinell, not to depart the place till his Captaine calls him off. Non est optima, quae placet, sed quaedecet: That Death was best which was well recollec∣ted, quietly suffering what it could not possibly preuent. Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest. It is not enough to die with a Romane courage, nor that the cause of Death be iust; but it must bee also necessarie, vnsought, ineuitable. But let goe this discourse, my Contemplation lyes another way. The kindes of Death as of life,
are two: The one bodily, The kinde of death. the o∣ther spirituall. As bodily life is the coniunction of body and soule: So bodily Death is the se∣paration of soule and body. And as a godly man hath three degrees of life: The first in this life, when Christ liues in him; for the soule of a good mans soule is the Spirit of God within. The second when his body re∣turnes to the earth, and his soule to God that gaue it. The third at the end of the world, when body and soule re∣vnited shal enioy heauen: So like∣wise a wicked man hath three di∣stinct deaths. Dead in sinne while he liues, dead in soule when hee dyes, dead in body and soule when both are adiudged to eternall condemnation. Malis fit mors sine morte, fin fine fine, defectus sine de∣fectu. Quia mors viuit, fints semper incipit, & desicere defectus nescit. To labour not to lye is labour
in vaine, it is to deferre, not to a∣uoid. To forget to dye, and hope to liue is dangerous securitie. This let a wise man doe, quod ne cesse est, ne timeat; quod incertum est, semper expectet. Seeke not con∣solation against death, but let Death bee thy consolation; for there is no comfort against death, but in death. Supremum necoptes, nec metuas diem. Mortem optare, malum, timere, peius. Now to make Death easie: Thinke of the glory that followes it. Who will not endure a few pangs for infinite pleasures? The bitter pill promising health is swallowed willingly. Mors non anfert vitam, sed in melius transfert. That the aspect of Death may not trouble thee, looke not vpon Death in death, but looke beyond it. Thinke not so much of it, as of the happinesse that comes by it. Erit somnus dilectis, initium refri∣gerij, scala montis, haereditas secu∣ra, Ianua vitae, ingressus in taberna∣culum.
Therefore saith Iob, From sixe troubles it deliuereth thee, & in septima, that is, at point of death, non tanget te malum. Fit your selfe for it, and you will neuer feare it, doe by it as you doe in other things, when you would goe sleepe, you put off your cloathes, you draw the curtaines, and goe to bed. Thus as it were acting sleepe, before you goe to sleepe. So addresse your selfe to death before hand. Bring your selfe ac∣quainted with it, that when it comes you may entertaine it, non vt hostis, sed vt hospes, not as a foe, but as a friend: not as a stranger, but as a guest that you had long looked for; and bid welcome Death, more blessed then thy Birth. What a griefe is it to see some great men build stately hou∣ses, as if they should alwayes liue, and yet they to liue as if they had but mortall soules! It is good counsell; Effice mor∣tem tibi familiarem, vt possis, cum
sors tulerit, illi laetus & alacriter ob∣uiam exire. Those Philosophers were more mortified, who had their graues alwayes open before their gates, that going out or comming in, they might alwayes thinke of Death. Good Ioseph of Arimathea built his Sepulchre in the mid∣dest of his garden. So doe thou, amid all thy pleasures and de∣lights, thinke of death, and that wil coole and temper all thy vaine desires. It will so qualifie thee to the world, and the world to thee, as thou wilt not much care for it. In this world wee are all Beno∣nies, the sonnes of Sorrow. The way to Heauen is by weeping crosse. Hi motus animorum atq haec certamina tanta Pulueris exigut tactu cōpressa quiescunt. It is obserued, that most of other creatures liue long, but dying, pe∣rish all to nothing. Man that is
short-liu'd, he dying, liues eter∣nally. Thinke but of this, and you will thinke as S. Bernard did, that life was little better then hell, were it not for the hope of Heauen. Surely Christ would not haue dyed, but that wee might die with safety. Hee by death in death, did deliuer vs from death. And did Christ dye for mee, that I might liue with him? I will not therefore desire to liue long from him. It is a token of little loue to God, to be loth to goe to God. All men goe willingly to see him whom they loue. Our brother Ioseph li∣ueth, therefore though with Ia∣cob I cannot say, I will goe see him before I dye. Yet Lord let mee dye that I may see him whom my soule loueth. Liuing I cannot, but dying I shall. Let no difficulties hinder, for since Adams fall none passeth vn∣to Paradise, but by burning Sera∣phims. The way to Canaan is cumbersome, but knowing that
our iourney leades to the land of promise, wee passe it pleasantly. Yet before wee come at Hierusa∣lem, we take in our way the valley of teares. The swift Riuer of Ior∣dan must be crossed, before wee come to the sweet Waters of Si∣loam. Let no delights tempt you; prosperous fortunes may hinder a cheerefull dying: but if pleasures of life allure not, feares of death will neuer trouble. Neminem ad∣uersa conuincunt, nisi quem secunda decipiunt. Adam was set vpon in Paradise, Iob on the dunghill: yet Iob fortior in stercore, quam A∣dam in Paradiso. The very place of pleasure is dangerous. In Para∣dise Adam could not be innocent, but out of Paradise he was a good man. For any thing in life, lose not the cause of life, nor iudge not of things by the face of things. For life and death haue deceiueable vi∣zards: vnder the faire face of life lurkes griefe: vnder the foule fea∣ture
of death (which is but fan∣cy) lies felicity. Take off the mask and you shall change your minde; loath that you loued, and loue that you loathed. Ʋita habitu casto, cum non sit casta, videtur, Mors, praeter cultum, nil meretricis habet. Now for the freedomes that come by Death. Freedo by deat First it frees from all worldly iniuries: Mors multorum malorum finis, nullius boni. Heere good men doe but liue, and suffer benè agere, & male pati. It is their portion and it is good for mee (saith Dauid) that I haue beene afflicted. Non sentire mala, non est hominis; sed non ferre, non esset viri. Sufferings are grea∣ter trials then actions. Secondly, it ends all miseries. Man in misery (saith Iob) longs for death, and digs for it more then trea∣sure. Mors finis est, non poena. Nay saith one, Nec finis, nec paena
bonis lex est, non paena, perire. Death ends sinnes, not life: it reformes, but doth not destroy Nature. Vi∣tiorum est Sepultura, virtutum Re∣surrectio. Thirdly, it frees vs from all corporall infirmities. Mors omni∣um dolorum solutio. Life it selfe is a disease, and we dye by corrup∣tion of humours, whether they be of body or manners: who thinke to heale all infirmities with an easier plaister then Death, Delineamenta potius quam remedia podagraesuae ponunt. Fourthly, it frees vs from all bodily labours. So saith the Spi∣rit. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they rest from their labours. Adeo iuuat occupatum mori. Fiftly, it eases vs of all trou∣bles. Refrigeries est animae. Refecti∣on to the Soule. Were wee but in a throng, wee thinke that man at ease who gets out first. Noah, when hee had beene tossed but a yeere vpon the waters, Mount
Ararat was to him a gladsome place; for there the Arke rested. So likewise miscrable man after many wearisome yeeres, tossed vp and downe the world as in a trou∣bled sea, will bee glad of Death as of Mount Ararat, a resting place for his tyred Soule. As an Ap∣prentise patiently vndergoeth se∣uen yeeres labour to bee made a Freeman, or as a bondman waites for the yeere of Iubile: So doth the Soule for her deliuerance. Lastly, death doth vs not the least pleasure, in freeing vs from phantasmes and vaine pleasures. Pleasure may stand with inno∣cencie, for God loues to see his creatures happy: But common∣ly the pleasure of the body, is the poyson of the soule. A man smothered in Roses meetes with Death, though in sweetnesse. De∣licatas enim mentes eneruat feli∣citas. In vaine mirth, there is no true ioy, nor gladnesse in laughter. Nam res est seuera verum
gaudium. Delight in pleasures, and you shall finde your greatest plea∣sures become your bitterest paines in their losse. A man whose soule is conuersant with God, finds more pleasure in the desart, and in death, then in the Palace of a Prince. The benefits that come by death. FVlnesse of grace, The benefits by death. which heere we haue but in part. Viuere ve∣linthomines, vt perfectisint: Mori volunt, & perfecti sunt. Heere wee haue but arrham Spiritus, there we shall haue pretium. Secondly, perfection of glory; Erimus participes, non spectatores gloriae. Enioy with these eyes, vi∣sionem illam beatificam, ioy vn∣speakeable. And (saith S. Iohn) your ioy shall no man take from you. Thirdly, inseparable fellow∣ship with Christ. They follow the Lambe whithersoeuer hee goeth. There wee shall bee married to him, heere we are but contracted.
Desponsabo te mihi, saith the Pro∣phet. Those fauours and loue∣tokens I haue heere receiued, doe but inflame, not satisfie desires, and I am willing to part with them, lest they should make mee loth to depart to him that gaue them: Meretricius est amor plus amicum, quàm sponsum diligere. Lastly, it brings mee where I would be, into my owne coun∣trey, into Paradise, where I shall meete, not as in the Elysium of the Poets, Catones, Scipiones, & Scaeuolas, but Abraham, Isaac, and Iaeob: The Patriarks my Fathers, the Saints my Brothers, the An∣gels my Friends, my wife, chil∣dren, kindred and seruants that are gone before me, and doe there attend mee, looking and longing for my ariuing there. Therefore with Dauid I will say, Lord, when shall I come and appeare before thee? Like as the Hart panteth for the wa∣ter brookes, so panteth my soule for thee, O God. I had rather be a doore∣keeper
keeper in thy house, then dwell heere though in chambers of pleasure. Touching the second ge∣nerall Diuision. II. The feares or ioyes that death brings. NAturally men feare Death, The feares of death. because it ends being, which Nature would preserue: Rachel mourned for her children and would not be comforted, because they were not. When Moses Rod was tur∣ned into a Serpent, it was feare∣full. But when God bids, Feare not to take it vp, it may well be hand∣led. Timeat mortem qui Deum non timet, sed si sperare desideras, desine timere. It is well said, Pompa Mor∣tis magis terret quam mors ipsa. Groanes, convulsions, and a dis∣couloured face shew death terri∣ble. But that Philosopher is not to bee followed, who to prepare himselfe the better for death, set forth death most fearefully: nor
yet that Emperour to be praised, who so little esteemed of death, that hee dyed in a complement. Feare of death kills vs often, where death it selfe can doe it but once. The Philosophers thought, that if death (as bad as men count it) were not mingled with bitter∣nesse, men would runne to it with desire and indiscretion. Ergo mor∣tem concupiscentes, & timentes, aeque obiurgat Epicurus. It is true, life would not willingly be troubled with too much care, nor death with too much feare. Feares be∣tray, cares trouble those succours that reason would yeeld to both. Multi ad fatum venêre suum, dum fata timent. Feares multiply euils, Faith diminishes them: yet most men wish, vt mors potius semel incidat, quam semper impendeat, because nothing is so painefull as to dwell long vnder the expectation of some great euill. Conscience of dying, giues
the right sence of death, and the true science of liuing. For by death absoluitur anima, resoluitur corpus, gaudet quòd absoluitur, quòd resol∣uitur, non sentit. Therefore said the Heathen man, Non nego poenas esse quibusdam post mortem, sed quid ad mortem, quod post mortem est? If there be any feares in death, saith a wise man; Quare iuuenes non timent fieri senes? But it is the na∣ture of feare to make dangers greater, helpes, lesse then they are. When Anaxagoras had word brought him that his deare and onely sonne was dead: Scio, said hee, me genuisse mortalem. The sonnes condition, satisfied the fa∣thers passion without more words. Hee can neuer be at ease, nor liue contentedly, that liues continually in feare of death. Nil in morte metuamus, si nihil timendum vita nostra commisit. There is no such gentle remoouall of all life's discontents, as a quiet death. Hee that knowes not how to
end his time, hath lost all his time. Nescire mori miserrimum. So∣crates de morte disputabat vsque ad ipsam. When Otho and Cato had prepared all things for their death they setled themselues to sleepe: when they awaked, and found themselues vpon the stroke of execution, all they said, was, Vita supplicio data est, mors remedio. Cruell tyrants haue beene told to their faces, that their threates of death, were promises of life. Their swords were fauours to the suffe∣rer. Mortall wounds made them immortall. Ʋiuere non potest, qui mori non audet. Though it be true, that it is in vaine to feare what wee cannot shunne, and feare of death, as a tribute due to Nature, is a weakenesse: yet feares be not alwayes ill symptomes before death, nor in death: at that in∣stant nature will reluct for loue sake to keepe still her being. But grace thus distinguishes of being. To the wicked the best thing of
all were not to haue beene. Non nasci optimum. His next best were to liue long. It was ill with him that he was borne, worse, that he must dye: for hee not being sure of a better, would faine be sure of this. Conscious to himselfe that this dying life, will bring him to a liuing death. His hope is no longer then his breath. His word is Dum spiro, spero; he flutters inter mortis metum, & vitae tormentum: viuere nolit, & merinescit. With good men it is otherwise, to them the best thing of this life is to haue been, for this leades the way ad beatitudinem patriae, to the frui∣tion of their faith. Quid huius vi∣uere est, saith hee, sed dijs mori. His word is Cum expiro, spero: his hopes faint not, when his breath failes him. Patienter viuit & delectabiliter moritur. To this man, mori quāprimum is his rather: for that ends misery, and begins felicitie. There is no man so vali∣ant as the beleeuer. Therefore he
saith vnto his soule, Why art thou cast downe, O my soule? Why art thou so disquieted within me? Waite on God. Soule and Soule are differenced in dying, as well as liuing. The diffe∣rence of soules as well in dy∣ing as li∣uing. The Atheist dares not die for feare of non esse. The ill liuer dares not die, for feare of male esse. The doubt∣full conscience dares not die, ne∣sciendo; whether hee shall be, not be, or be damned. Onely the good man dares and desires to die, hee is assured of his hope, his hope is full of immor∣talitie. I am thy saluation, saith his Sauiour: to the other theend of these present miserable mise∣ries, is the beginning of worse, and such as death it selfe cannot terminate: for that would be hap∣pinesse enough; if they had but hope, there would bee an end at last: the greatest pleasure they would desire, is, the act of death, so that might end their sorrowes: but their conscience will not let
them lye, or flatteringly perswade them: Adueniet tandem quae non sperabitur hora. This they know, and grieue to thinke, that Tophet is prepared for the bad, and Paradise for the good. As the tree falleth, so it ly∣eth: and as death leaueth thee, so iudgement shall finde thee: hee that liues ill, seldome dyes well. Liue well, and you cannot but die well: practise well doing, and you shall haue the comfort of well dying. Sed quàm amarum erit hoc tem∣pore corporis & animae separatio? Body and soule par∣ting. We see old acquaintance cannot part without teares. Quid facient inti∣mè familiares, quales sunt corpus & anima, quae ab ipso vtere ita iucun∣dissimè vixerint? If the Oxe loweth when his fellow is taken from him that drew the plough with him, qualem mugitum shall wee giue when soule and body part? Siccinè separas amara Mors: Sic∣cinè separas, saith the Booke of
Kings? The Spirit at this time may be willing, but the flesh will be loth. Egrè amittitur, quod val∣dè amatur. Faith will assure, God is thy father; but nature will tell thee, She is thy mother, and thou mayest not yet leaue her. In this conflict take heede the mothers side preuaile not. Shee will play Naomi's part, perswade thee ear∣nestly to stay and enioy the de∣lights of Moab yet a while lon∣ger. But resolue thou with Ruth, to see what entertainment is for thee in Bethleem, for there thou shalt finde a Boaz. In ista hora, euery man will make Balaams suite, (for no man would be miserable, if it were e∣nough to desire to be happy) but such a wish onely will not serue. He must piè viuere, that will se∣curè mori. We all desire to shut vp our last Scene of life, with In ma∣nus tuas, Domine, commendo spiri∣tum meum. But it is not the last words a man vtters that doe qua∣lifie
his Soule. Remember how in thy life thou hast entertained Gods Spirit: for as wee vsed his in this life, so hee will vse ours af∣ter death. Qualem quis{que} se fecerit in hac vita, talem se inueniet exiens ab hac vita. At this houre what would a man giue for the redemption of his soule? but poore indigent man, neuer was any so rich that could pay the ransome of his own soule. A displeased mercy, askes greater satisfaction then thou canst giue. Laesa patientia fit furor. Now thou goest to giue account of thy Stewardship: that is, tem∣poris amissi, mali commissi, boni o∣missi. And thy Soule already knowes, in conscientia tua, whi∣ther it goes, quando egreditur è cor∣pore tuo. And although thou canst carry nothing else with thee, yet this thou canst not leaue behinde thee; Which is liber conscientiae tuae, that will tell thee whither thou goest, and what thou shalt
looke for. Tunc quasi loquentia tua opera dicent; Tu nos egisti. Tua opera sumus, non te deseramus: sed tecum semper erimus, tecum pergemus ad Iudicium. Man is a great flatterer of himselfe, but conscience is alwayes iust, and will neuer chide thee wrongfully. It alwayes takes part with God, against a mans selfe. It is Magi∣stratus domesticus, that will tell what you doe at home, and, saith the booke of Wisedome, wic∣kednesse condemned of her owne wit∣nesse, is euer timerous, and being pressed with conscience, forecasteth grieuous things. Nemo seueriorem seipso habet iudicem. If a man will take his ayme by the best men that euer dyed. That of Dauid, Ezechias, yea and of Christ himselfe (as a man) is able to amaze any man. When as our Sauiour Christ at the point of death, said, Father, if it be thy will, let this Cup passe from me. When Dauid said, Saue Lord, for thy
mercy sake; for in death there is no remembrance of thee. And E∣zechias wept sore, when hee was bid, Put thy house in order, for thou must die. Si Prophetae, si Apostoli, si Martyres, si Christus ipse, was thus troubled at the houre of death: wretched man that I am, what shall I doe? Euen as Christ bids me. Bee of good cheere, for I haue ouercome death. Mors morte redempta est. Now there is aduan∣tage in death: that death which was the wages of sinne, is made the reward of righteousnesse: and in these forenamed persons it was not death, but the curse of the Law that went with death, which Christ in our persons, and these other persons in themselues, feared. When Christ was to leaue the world, and his Disciples to the world, he left them this word for their learning and their comfort: If you loued mee you would reioyce, because I said, I goe to the Father. In
my Fathers house are many dwel∣lings. I goe to prepare a place for you, that where I am you may be also. Now that death hath ouercome death, and Faith hath secured feare: nec me taedeat viuere, nec ti∣meo mori. What can hee feare in Death, whose death is his hope? Right precious in the sight of God, is the death of his Saints. See then what makes men wil∣ling, or loth to die. Obsecro te Lucili, said Seneca, cur timeat laborem vir, mortem ho∣mo? It is the present condition of men in this world, that makes them willing, or loth to die. Nor life, nor death, are alike to all men: some can as willingly leaue the world, nay dye, as others can forbeare the Court. And as men differ in their condition, so doe they in their acceptation of Death: some pleasant their liues, as if the world should alwayes laugh vpon them. Et post mortem nulla voluptas. These would doe
any thing rather then die. Others liue as if they came into the world but to act a sad mans part and dye, these wish a change, hoping it will bee a benefit. Therefore well said the sonne of Syrach, O death, how acceptable is thy remem∣brance vnto him whose strength fai∣leth, that is now in his last age, and vexed with all things: and to him that despaireth and hath lost pa∣tience! But contrariwise, O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lyeth at rest in his possessions! vnto the man that hath nothing to vexe him, and that prospereth in all things: yea, to him that is yet able to receiue meate! Certainly to this man that thus liues at ease in delicacie with affluence of all things; (for euen to vse happinesse is as difficult as to forbeare it) to him it is a sad and bitter meditation, to thinke that death must take him from all these ioyes, wherein his heart tooke pleasure.
O quam amara mors mundum amantibus! Euery poore content∣ment glues his affections to that he likes. When as the best of this worlds contentments are but con∣temptible. If thy heart bee set on Heauen, thy soule will haue no pleasure in these low things, looke vpward. Os homini sublime dedit, coelum{que} tueri. The minde con∣templating Heauen, walkes be∣yond eye sight, and at so farre a distance discernes God, as if hee were at hand, there is his true so∣lace, to conuerse with God. Who euer they bee that dwell in Con∣templation of heauenly things, goe off rich in thoughts, satisfied in their expectation. For an antidote against Death, hate sinne, and the pleasures thereof, then will death bee de∣lightfull, nor life dolefull: nay, death it selfe looking thee in the face, knowing thy heart, will change countenance, looke vpon thee facie non horrendâ, sed blandâ,
non terribili, sed amabili. This very day of death. Dies iste, quem tan∣quam extremum aliqui reformidant, tibi aterni natalis erit. The good mans hope is euen in death: the world-louer ends both hope and happinesse when he dyes. Plato discoursing vnto one, de contemptu mortis, and speaking strangely vpon it, was answered, Fortiùs loqueris, quàm viuis. At ille dicebat non quemadmodum viueret, sed quemadmodum viuendum esset. How euer the Contemplation of death pleases, yet the sufferance of death pinches. A man satisfied that death is nothing but a bridge, to passe him ouer to an other shore where life stands, and lookes for his landing: yet while hee is vpon the Bridge, (which is but a short step betwixt two liues) his vertiginous braine wil grow gid∣die, and hee will before troubled in the passage. Did not the word Ibis ad Pa∣tres,
sweeten the contemplation, as did that wood cast by Moses into the the waters of Marah, tur∣ning bitternesse into sweetnesse: the thought of death (though it be but a gathering to our Fathers) would be an vnpleasing contem∣plation. But feares being past, which are but shadowes, set off ioyes the better. Therefore now to see What ioyes death brings. OVt of the bitter came sweet, The ioyes brought by death. said Sampson. When wee thinke vpon the separation of bo∣die and soule, then it is a sweet contemplation, to consider the coniunction of our bodies and soules with Christ: which being once made by the bond of the Spirit in this life, shall neuer after∣wards be cancelled. For let death, wilde beasts, or birds, deuoure and teare the body from the soule, yet neither body nor soule are thereby seuered frō Christ. Non curo (saith
Ignatius) si ferarum dentes me mo∣luerint modo pura fiam farina Christo. And yet the body thus consumed, liues not in the graue or belly of the beast, nor yet re∣ceiues life or sense from the soule while it is in this seate, vntill the great Assizes, that generall Venite comes. But then, looke what the condition of Christ was in his death, the like shal be of his mem∣bers. The body & soule of Christ were seuered, as farre as Heauen and the Graue were distant: and yet neither of them were seuered from the godhead, but both ex∣isted in his person: so likewise our bodies and soules, though rent and pulled in sunder milli∣ons of miles distant, yet neither of them is seuered or disioyned from Christ our head. Qui prae∣dixit, reuixit, this serues to work it. Humane wisedome cannot comprehend this. Weake faith lookes for meanes, and is put to shifts when shee sees meanes faile.
But omnipotency workes by im∣probabilities and tels vs. There is no faith, where there is either meanes or hopes. Difficulties and improbabilities are the obiects of Faith. Through the Spirit (saith S. Paul) wee waite for the hope of righteousnesse in faith. Yet in nature we see that in win∣ter season, trees which seeme as dead, reuiue againe in the Spring, because the body, graines & armes of the trees, are ioined to the root, where the sap lyes all the Winter, and by meanes of coniunction, it conueyes vegitation to all parts of the tree; euen so mens bodies haue their winter, when they are turned into dust. Homo arbor inuersa, cuius Radix in caelis, rami in terra. Their life is hid in Christ with God. Yet in the day of resurrection, by rea∣son of this mysticall coniunction, diuine and quickening vertue shall streame from Christ to his Elect, and cause them to resurge from the graue, to life eternall. For the
head wil not be without the mem∣bers: where he is, there they shall be also. It is noted how in that transfigu∣ration, the body of Moses which was hid in the valley of Moab, ap∣peared in the hill of Tabor, which assures that this body of ours, lodge it where you will, is not lost, but layed vp to bee raised in glory, as it was laid downe in cor∣ruption. The incineration and dis∣sipation of this dust, shall haue a recollection in that day of resur∣rection. In the valley of dead bones, did not the Spirit say to Ezekiel, Prophesie vpon these bones, and say, O ye dry bones, I will cause breath∣to enter into you; I will lay sinewes vpon you, and will bring vp flesh, and you shall liue? If any thinke, The diffe∣rence be∣twixt the resurrection of the vn∣godly and the iust this Resurge a∣gaine, which is so wonderfull, is not peculiar, but common vnto all, both good and bad, (as good men loue not to bee happy alone)
its truth, yet, it is not by the same cause, nor to the same end. For the wicked rise by the power of Christ, to be iudged and condem∣ned. But the godly rise by the ver∣tue of Christs resurrection, to re∣ceiue eternall life. Vita mortem assumpsit, vt mors vitam assumeret. Therefore they collect truely, who say, that the rotting of our bones is no death, but a being a∣sleepe; and that sleepe must needs be sweet, which hath peace with rest, and rests in safety. Awake then thou that sleepest, arise, come and liue: hee whom thou louest, sleepeth, but thou wilt come to awake him: till when his couch of ease, is his coffin, the graue his bed, wherein he lyes ne∣uer troubled with dreames or fan∣cies, what shall become of his bo∣die, till it rise againe. I am the resurrection and the life; (saith Christ) He that beleeueth, though hee were dead, yet shall hee liue: the arrest of Death shall not
alwayes keepe him. Well said S. Austine, The bodies of Saints shall bee raised, tanta falicitate, quanta felicitate, with as much ease as happinesse. Nam mors tan∣tum intermittit vitam, non eripit; death doth not disanul, but dis∣continue life. By our rising, wee are remitted to our better right, a life which neuer dyes, a morning which hath no Eue nor ending. Me thinkes I heare death say of life, as Iohn the Baptist said of Christ: He that commeth after mee, is before me. Which is life. O sweet word Life. The best Monasyllable in the world. Gods owne Attribute. Deus viuit. And my soule (saith Iob) shall liue, for my Redeemer liueth. And is this life, but the child of this word Death? then blessed also bee the word Death, the mother of life. I will no more call thee Marah, but Naomi; for thou art not bitter, but sweet; more pleasant, though swifter in thy gate then the Row
or Hinde. The Stoike could say, Mors est quae efficit, vt nasci non sit supplicium. But what saith S. Iohn? I heard a voice from heauen, saying, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, whose workes follow them, they die no more, death hath no more power ouer them, all teares are wiped from their eyes. Compare together the benefits of life and death, and you shall clearely see, how that death which seemes to dispossesse vs of all, puts vs in possession of more thē that al. Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerū Tendimus in Latium, sedes vbi fata quie∣tas Ostendunt.— It is but being which wee haue by Nature, or by Birth; our bet∣ter being is by Grace; but our best being is in glory: there wee cannot bee, till death haue con∣ueyed vs thither. Esse naturae est, benè esse gratiae, optimum esse gloriae. Better therefore is our last being by death, then was our first being by birth. Dici{que} beatus ante obitum
nemo. Birth brought mee into the world, but that was misery, allow∣ing no vacation to sorrowes. Ne natalem quidem excipit. For crying was the first note of my being. Calamitatis futurae propheta. Death carries me from a world of mise∣ries, to a world of felicities. Dies mortalis est fatalis Natiuitas. Heere I dwell in a house of clay, whose foundation is dust: Death brings to an habitation made without hands, euerlasting in the heauens. Ad excelsa sublatus, in∣ter felices currit animus, excipit{que} illum coetus sacer. Birth brought mee to conuerse, and haue com∣merce with men, death brings mee to haue communion with Saints, and fellowship with An∣gels; yea, to enioy visionem illam beatificam. The immediate fruiti∣on of God and Christ. Old father Iacob, when he was told of his sonne Iosephs power in Egypt, was not satisfied to heare of his honours, but en∣quires
of his life: intimating that life to come, is better then all the honours that are in Egypt, or fortunes that are on earth: nor yet did Iosephs life content him, without being present with him, and therefore said, I will goe downe and see him: counting it better to behold with the eye (and yetmost sinnes begin and creepe in at the eyes) then to walke in desires. Implying, that the best things that are, pleasure vs not in their being, but in our enioying them. What then shall bee the ioy, The ioy soule & dy at the meeting. when soule and body separated for a season, shall meete againe in ioy, and mutually enioy one the other? The sense of this de∣light and contentment did well appeare in that meeting betwixt Iacob and Ioseph, whom mutuall losse and separation for a while, did more endeare each to other. Intermission of comfort hath this aduantage, that it sweetens our delight more in the returne,
then was abated in the forbea∣rance. And was Iacob glad to leaue his countrey, the land of Pro∣mise, to see his yonger sonne Io∣seph, though in Egypt. What then shall bee the soules ioy to end a pilgrimage in a strange land, and goe to see his elder brother Christ in heauen, an inheritance more pleasant then that land of Go∣shen, freed from all the encom∣brances of this Egypt? There∣fore said S. Paul, I desire to be dis∣solued, that I may bee with Christ. For this tedious mortalitie, plea∣sant it how man can, will be intol∣lerable, if death doe not disbur∣then it; because long liuing so loads vs with sinne, as the burthen thereof tyres euery man at last. It is such an inmate, as will roost in vs as long as life affords it house∣roome: nor wil it lodge alone, but still one sinne will call in another: but through death, the very body of death, and burthen of sinne, are
both cast out together. Sith then the life I now enioy, is beset with death, tends to death, and ends in death, I will no lon∣ger mistake tearmes, calling that death, which is life; and that life which is death. Hanc esse mortem, quam nos vitam putamus: Illam vi∣tam, quam nos pro morte timemus, said Lactantius. More diuinely said S. Austine, Per vitam ad mortem transitus est, per mortem ad vitam reditus est. Therefore the Pagans did not ill, to celebrate the day of their death with mirth; and the day of their birth with mourning. For al∣though the soule be then infused, when man is made; Death the regenerati∣on of the soule. yet it is new borne, when man dyes. His bo∣die being the wombe, and death the midwife, which deliuers that to sorrow, this to glory. The Prophet Ieremie so little ioyed in his birth, that he said, Let not the day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed.
Quis pauet? quis flet? quis eget? quis errat? Solus (heusortes!) homo sperat, optat alget, voluit, explorat, queritur. Malorum omnia plena, said a diuine Poer. But to assure there are ioyes in death. What saith the Scrip∣ture vnto well dying men? Re∣ioyce, and lift vp your heads, for now your Redemption draweth neere. The third generall diuision. III. When Death is to be prepared for: and how. IT was the saying of the diuine Philosopher Plato. There is nulla salutar is Philosophia, The time when. but per∣petua mortis meditatio: and sine ista meditatione tranquillo esse animo ne∣mo potest. Scipio was wont to say, Mortis meditatio, Is vita sapientis: and that it was the most honou∣rable Philosophy to study a mans
mortality. Politiques say, Totâvi∣tâ discendum est viuere. But saith Seneca; Hoc magis miraberis, Totâ vitâ discendum est mori. Fooles would faine doe in the end, that which wise men doe in the begin∣ning, Prepare for their end: but carelesse men thinke, that the sig∣niory and gouernment of times is at their commands, to doe what they list, when they list. We haue little power ouer the present, much lesse ouer the future. There∣fore King Dauid cryed betimes; Lord, let me know mine end, and the measure of my daies, what it is, and how long I haue to liue. All the daies of mine appointed time, saith Iob, I wil watch, till my changing shall come. Change, the great Master of the world, that hath Time for his A∣gent, abuses many men with the hope of time. It is true, Time is a seruant equall to all men: it holds pace, and flies as fast in idlenesse, as in businesse; so as time wel spent, diminishes our time: yet when it
is imployed in timely preparati∣on, it layes vp time as treasure for a future time, and so is rather a husbanding, then consuming of time. He liues in safety that watches his time. Diem perdidimus, said Ve∣spatian. But in reckoning of time, most men miscast-time, counting that first which is last, and that last which is first; beginning our ac∣compt from the day of our Birth, whereas our deaths day is our first day. For in the accompt of life, our last day of life, is the first day to life. Wee then ceasing to dye, when we leaue to liue. Solebat dicere Fabianus, In tria tempora vita diuiditur, quod est, quod fuit, quod futurum est, ex his, quod agimus breue est, quod acturisumus, dubium, quod egimus, certum. Rec∣kon first with time past, and you may make time to come certaine: make your saluation certaine, saith Saint Paul. The Scepticks put a fortasse vp
on all things in the world. But said S. Austine, there is no one thing in the world to be named, where this word fortasse had not place, except you speake of death. Hîc solùm for∣tasse locum habere non potest. Death, as it is said of the kingdom of hea∣uen, comes not by obseruation. He liues not, that knowes where, when, or how he shall dye: yet noneliues but knowes hee must dye. Mors omnibus finis, multis re∣me dium, quibusdam votum, de nullis melius merita, quam quibus accidit antequam vocaretur. Therefore said one, dementiae est, it is more then folly not to bee prepared for death. Sed si mors veniens praemedi∣tatur, tunc superatur. The prepara∣tion for death, is the fruition of life. Nemo propter Canos & Rugas diu vixit: yet neuer man preserued himselfe from dying, by forget∣ting death. The very Heathens, by natures instinct, prouided themselues for death by sacrifices to their gods.
Frange toros, pete vina, rosas cape, fundere nardo; — Ipse iubet mortis te meminisse Deus. Solomon saying, A faire way of dying well the day of death was better then the day of birth, in∣ferred that there was a faire way of dying well: whereunto two things were most requisite. First, a timely preparation be∣fore death. Nam facilè sustinet, qui expectat mortem. Seneca said, Saepe debemus mori, nec volumus; mors∣mur, nec volumus. Wee ought of∣ten to prepare for death, and we will not: at last we dye indeed, and we would not. In hoc errore omnes versamur, quòd non putamus, nisi se∣nes ad mortem vergere, citamur nec sensu, nec aetate. Mors quo faciliùs obrepat, sub ipsovitae nomine latet. If you intend preparation for death, you must auoid all procra∣stination, Nescis enim quid serus ve∣sper vehat. This vox Coruina, that alwayes cryes, Cras, cras, couzens many a man, making him perdere
hodiernum, trusting vpon to mor∣row, saith Tibullus. I am mala finîs∣sem letho, sed credula vitam spes alit, & meliùs cras fore semper ait, but trust not to that: Ille sapit quisquis, Posthume, vixit Heri. Solomon saith, Ne gloriêris in crastinum, nescis enim quid superventur a pariet dies. By deferring, we presume vpon that we haue not, and neglect that we haue. Quod in manu fortunae po∣situm est, disponimus; quod in tua est, dimittis. Which made the Hea∣then Poet, diuino furore instinctus, vtter hoc salutare carmen, Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aui, prima fugit. Therefore, noli tardare, delay not thy prepare for death, til thou feelest the approaches of Death. Recordare nouissimum, & non peri∣bis in aeternum. Doe the worke of of the day in die suo. No man can promise himselfe a morrow. Fleres, si scires vnum tua tēpora mensem: — Rides cùm non fit, forsitan, vna dies.
Euery man hath his day. Est & dies hominis, & dies Domini. When mans day is past, then Gods day comes. The case therefore of those men is mostvnhappy, who after forty or fifty yeeres of dayes, in their mis-spent time (for it was not vi∣ta, but tempus) and now ready to die, are euen then to learne how to dye, when they are in the Act of dying. Quae tam stulta mortalitatis obliuio, inde velle vitam incoare, quò pauci perduxerimus? It was a sweet speech, and might well haue become an elder body, which a yong innocent child vsed lying in extremity of sicknesse: Mother, what shall I doe, I shall dye, before I know what death is, I pray you tell mee what is death, and how I should dye? Certainly, multum interest, peccare aliquis no∣lit, an nesciat. But there is nil mise∣rius morienti, quam nescire mori; nay saith one, Tolerabilior est non esse, quam nescire mori.
Since then it is a thing as well naturall, as necessarie for a man to dye, Quisquis ad summum peruenit, ad extremum properat. It is no thankes to a man to pay that wil∣lingly, which hee must doe of ne∣cessity. But in paying of this debt, wisedome counsels thee two things: First, to consider the time when. Secondly, the meanes or maner how. For the time, seeke not death in the errour of thy life. Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, while the euill dayes come not, nor the yeeres approach wherein thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in you. Before the siluer cord bee loosed, or the golden ewer broken. Before the Al∣mond tree flourish, and the Gras∣hopper be a burthen. Before the kee∣pers of the house shall tremble, the strong men bow, the grinders cease. They waxe darke that looke out by the windowes, and the daughters of musicke be brought low.
Old Barzillai, being in this case, refused all the pleasures of a Kings house, though hee was gently in∣treated by King Dauid. Age, or sicknesse, will make a man vnapt either to compose, or dispose himselfe to death. Tunc tibitarda sluunt ingrata{que} tempora. It is no good time then to prepare to die, when it is a burthen to liue. Thy best health affoords but time good enough for this busi∣nesse. Therefore dedicate not all thy time to businesse, for that as well as sloth, may rob thee of thy time. Doe you desire some signes of death, Three signes of approch∣ing death. before you take this course? Tres sunt mortis nuntij, casus, infir∣mitas, senectus. Casus dubia infirmi∣tas grauia, senectus certa denunciat. Casus nuntiat mortem latentem, in∣firmitas apparentem, senectus prae∣sentem. When man begins to be sicke, his senses are wholly busied about the paines of the disease.
I am vigor & quasso languent in corpore vires. The Physician is then confer∣ring with thee of the state of thy body. The Lawyer is consulted with, about thy worldly state. The Minister touching thy soules health. Thy friends are then vn∣welcome, strangers trouble thee, visites, offend thee: thy owne ser∣uants cannot please thee, other mens discourses tire thee, to speake thy selfe spends thee, and to be si∣lent grieues thee, not to bee told how thou doest, vexes thee, to be told how ill thou art, discomforts thee; but it most of all afflicts thee, to see thy wife, children and kind∣red, weeping and lamenting by thee. Thus miserably we poore men at this time are distressed and di∣stracted, made vnfit for any thing, when, as God knowes, a due pre∣paration to death, requires all the faculties and strength, of a sound, perfect, and whole man.
Euery man naturally, when hee comes neere the goale of death, euen for some intrinsicall cause, though vnknowne to himselfe, is then weary of himselfe, enter∣taines life with a tedious dislike. Tunc iniucunda est rei poenitendae re∣cordatio, distasting euery thing, neglecting the very thought of all humane affaires. Nec iuueni lusus qui placuere, iuuant. But then thinkes, O how am I straitned till it be accomplished! This should haue beene done when strength of vnderstanding serued. Nam serum est tunc viuere incipere, cum desinendum est. The little Bee, so soone as flow∣ers spring, goes abroad, viewes the gay diapry, and the diuersitie of the flowerie fields, suckes the choisest of them, fraights her thighes, carries to her hiue, makes a cuurious combe, and so by times hoards vp honey in Summer a∣gainst the Winter. Why is the winter harder to the Grashopper,
then to the Ant? onely prudencie and imprudency differs them. Thinke not thou the winter of thine age, a time fit enough for this worke. Mauna must bee ga∣thered in the morning; it is too late to prepare when time is past before you begin. Repentance also begun in the time of sicknesse, Repentance when to be practised. is commonly as sicke as the party, yeelding then, when it cannot resist, and then preparing and repenting, when all other helps and hopes faile. Sound repentance and fit prepa∣ration must both be timely, not then forsaking sinne, when sinne forsakes vs; and wishing time, when time is past. Omnis motus na∣turalis velocior est in fine, the end of time, affoords little time. Holy Iob tels vs, If thy bones be full of the sinnes of thy youth, they will lie downe with thee in the dust. Sed mortantur ante mortem vitia, & ad iudicium non sequantur. Whē death hath folded vp thy dayes, all op∣portunitie
is past. The Cocke crowed, but that Gallicinium, so soft a voice could not awake thee. Therfore Signicinium, lowder mu∣sicke, must end the Scene. It is a great masse of sinnes that we haue wound vp, in the dayes of a long mis-led life; it will aske long time to vntwist this bottome; nay, to rauell it out in many ends, will aske great labour. Great labour, and little time, suite not: Therefore worke while it is day, The night commeth, when no man can worke. Vse not time, as ill hus∣bands doe their Farmes, let their Lease runne out, before they bee e're the better by their Farmes. Few and euill are the dayes of the longest liued man, and yet to eue∣ry man there is a Triduum lent, the space of three dayes at least: but sleepe not vs{que} Quatriduum, lest it be said, Hee hath lyen foure dayes in the graue: Iam foetet. Flatter not thy selfe by the theeues example, who repented,
but in illa hora. That is not set for imitation, but to keepe from des∣peration. It is a strange thing to see, that old men wil not see death, though it be before their faces; nor young men, though it stand at their backes. The old gray-headed man to seeme young, had coloured his haire blacke; but the diuell told him hee would not bee so co∣zened. Nō omnes fall is, scit te Proserpina canum. The common fashion is to put men in mind of their death, when we doubt they cānot liue. Till the Physician findes some ill symp∣tomes, the patient may not bee dis heartened with the name of death. But hee is the good Physi∣cian of my soule, that tells mee of death, when he sees me liue in sin. There is not any man so wic∣ked, who with his good wil would die in his sinnes; yet most so liue, as if they beleeued permission
were the Article of their faith all their life long: and the Article of remission of sinnes, were reserued till the point of death. But terrible will death be, when the dying man with griefe for op∣portunitie lost, will repent that euer he liued, and count it happi∣nesse enough, if then he might die and be no more. But that will not be, quia Mors est sine morte. Sem∣per viuit, semper occidit, sed nun∣quàmpraeoccidit. That which ends all, is without all end; Remember the parable of the fiue foolish virgins, and the faire warning Christ giues: Bee yee readie, for the Sonne of Man comes at an houre when yee looke not. Ecce venio sicut fur; that is, when you sleepe best, and thinke least of him. Now as it is wisedome to bee prepared for death; Settlement in Religion, the best pre∣paratiue for Death. so if you will die with peace of conscience, bee well resolued in point of Religion before you die, neuer any man was
a looser by beleeuing; for faith is euer recompensed with glory; while thou liuest it is not amisse to make doubts: but thou shalt finde it a fearefull thing, to die in doubt; and the happiest thing vnder hea∣uen, to be well assured, and cleere∣ly resolued in the trueth of thy faith before thou diest. This done, then be of good cheere, for thou shalt heare Christ say vnto thy sicke soule, as he said vnto the sin∣full woman, Goe in peace, thy faith hath saued thee. And let all concei∣ted humanists remember what their master Aristotle said when he died: Anxius vixi, dubius morior. O Ens entium, miserere mei. Now of the way to die well. Non est res magna viuere: Hoc omnes faciunt: sed pauci bene mo∣riuntur. Et illi Mors grauis iucum∣bit, qui notus omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi. Man is readie to die before hee liues, and there∣fore liued in the world, that hee might die to the world, his yeeres
come to an end, as a tale that is told: his dayes deceiue him, for they passe as a shadow by Moone∣shine, then appearing longest, when they draw neerest to an end. Wee that now liue, liue by death; for had not Christ dyed, wee had not liued. Therefore saith S. Paul, My life is not deare vnto mee, so as I may finish my course with ioy. Doe you desire to liue a long time: the sonne of Sirach saith, A man that is made perfect in a short time, fulfils a long time. Et vita ip∣sa, si scias vti, longa est. Vir bonus bis viuit, saith the Spaniard. Am∣liat at at is spatium sibi vir bonus, hoc est viuere bis, vita posse priore frui He liues twice, that leades his first life well. Alexander had a good account of his age, reckoning by victories, not by dayes. So should Christians count their dayes by euery sinne they conquer in that day. Numbring of dayes, saith Saint Austine, is not numerus die∣rum
quis sit, but, quî sit. Tres sunt dies hominis, saith Saint Hierom, Dies Conditionis, dies Con∣uersionis, dies Resurrectionis. One day certifieth another, saith Dauid. Time lent vs, flyes away in the time that is lent, euery moment comming, being the death of that is past: But weigh well euery mo∣ment, for it is of so great moment, as that vpon it depends eternity of time to come. Vnto dying well, there are three things most requisite. Three things requisite to dying well. First, to bee often meditating vpon death. Secondly, to be dying dayly. Thirdly, to dye by little and little. Often meditation of Death, The first step to dy∣ing well. brings you to die in ease, alleuiates paines, expels feares, eases cares, cures sinnes, corrects death it selfe. Quo modo non morimur, cùm viuitur mortuis? wee liue with so many deaths about vs, that wee cannot but often thinke of dying.
Euery humour in vs engenders a disease enough to kill vs, so that our bodies are but liuing graues, and we die, not because wee are sicke, but because wee liue, and when we recouer sicknesse, wee escape not death, but the disease. Doe then as the Preacher coun∣sels; what you haue to doe, that doe quickely; For in the graue, whither thou goest, there is nei∣ther worke, nor discourse, nor tra∣uaile, nor wisedome, nor conuer∣sation, nor fruition of any thing; all is entombed in silence, darke∣nesse ouershadowing it. Measure not life, spatio, sed actu, because life is ordained for Acti∣on, not for fruition. If thou hast any good to doe for the Church, the Commonwealth, or thy Friends, doe it quickly. Hast thou much goods laid vp in store? make thee friends with thy Mammon, but sing not a requiem to thy soule; say not vainely, Viuamus dum viuimus, sors fortuna vt volet,
ordinet: vita iam in tuto est. Re∣member Hac nocte: know, that af∣ter the day of vanitie, comes the night of Iudgement: then both light and delight goe out toge∣ther. Sadly and suddenly shalt thou find all worldly pleasures turned into waking dreames: Et quae pa∣rasti, cuius erunt? All the towers in the ayre that thou hast built, Vno ictu prosternentur. On the other side, doest thou eate the bread of carefulnesse, and drinke the water of wearisome af∣fliction? Heere is Manna, bread from heauen, and water after which non sities. There is no such cordiall to comfort cares, or temper sorrows, as often and seriously to thinke of death, and to be acquainted with it betimes; Priuacie with death, a souereigne cordiall a∣gainst death. for through acquain∣tance, death will leese his horror: like vnto an ill face, though it be as formidable as a Monster; yet often viewing will make it fami∣liar, and free it from distaste.
It is said that Philostrates liued seuen yeeres in his tombe, that hee might be acquainted with it against his bones came to lye in it. Some Philosophers haue beene so rapt in this Contemplation of Death and Immortalitie, that they discourse so familiarly and plea∣singly of it, as if a faire death were to bee preferred, before a pleasant life. This is well for Natures part, Where the power of death lyeth. and Moralists thinke it enough for their part, but Christians must goe further, and search deeper. They must search where the power of death lies: They shall finde that the power of euery particular mans death, lyes in his owne sins, that death neuer hurts a man, but with his owne weapon: it alwayes turnes vpon vs some sin it findes in vs. The sting of death is sinne. Plucke out the sting, death cannot hurt. Quid huius viuere est, diû mori? Dye often, and you shall be sure to dye well.
The second step to dying well, The second step. is to dye dayly. Morior, ne moriar, I dye dayly, saith S. Paul. Singulos dies, singulas vitas putae; qui enim m∣nes dies tanquàm vitam ordinat, cra∣stinum nec optat, nec timet. The old saying is as good, Doe that euery day, which thou wouldest doe the same day that thou dyest. Bonum est consumere vitam ante mortem: Make that voluntarie, which is necessarie, and yeeld that quickly as a gift, which you must pay as a debt at last. Did men know that death were onely an end of life, and no more: euery man for his owne ends would bee a disturber of the worlds peace while hee li∣ued, and seeke to make his owne but when he dyed. Hee that dies daily, seldome dies deiectedly: so he that will liue when he dies, must dye while hee liues. The widow that liues in pleasure (said Saint Paul) is dead while shee liues. Liue holily & you shal die happi∣ly. Studeto talem esse in vita qualem
velis reperiri in morte. A liuing man is subiect to a double death: Two sorts of death, where to euery man liuing is subiect. The one natu∣rall, the other spirituall. Naturall death doth but separate the bodie from the soule: But the spirituall death separates the soule from God. Of all other, it is the most desperate state of life to liue natu∣rally, and to bee dead spiritually: Thou hast a name to liue, but thou art dead, said Saint Iohn. but of the Prodigall child returned from his euill wayes, it is said, This my sonne was dead, but is now aliue. Wee count it a fearefull thing for a man to bee author of his owne death. A sinfull life slayes the soule, and so while we liue, we kill or lose our better life. The commandement that sayes, Thou shalt dee no murder, specially for∣bids the murthering of our owne soules: but certainly that which depriues vs of our better life, makes of all other the worst death.
It is therefore a holy wisedome for a man to let his sins go before him. Moriantur ante te vitia. They to die actually, thou heere virtu∣ally: and so to liue, that when thou art to die, thou haue nothing to doe but die. Atchieuement of riches, pleasures, honours, haue beene painefull; yet if these things leaue not vs by accident, we leaue them by death, and at our death we shall plainely tell them, as Iob said, Miserable comforters are you all. If life delight, then vse it, yet so, as a Traueller doth his Inne, for a night and away, and in thy iour∣ney follow not the common tracke. Nam ad Deum faciens iter, per trita si itur, longiùs abitur. But do as the doubtful passenger, aske questions of euery one you meete, that can set you in your right way. Herein bee as great a questi∣onist as were those religious La∣dies of Rome, who neuer let Saint Hierome rest for questions,
which was the readiest way to hea∣uen. If a man would but compare the Forenoone of his age with the Afternoone, how long the one is and how short the other is, euery man would be dying dayly. Pal∣marios posuisti dies. The longest liuer hath but a handfull of dayes. Life it selfe is but a circle, alwayes beginning where it ends. Erat, quando non erat; sed erit. Time was, when man was not. But how late a beginning soeuer man had, yet after death hee shall be sure neuer to see end. With the Ancient of dayes there are no dayes: And the time shall be, when time shall be no more. There be two common errours which deceiue most men: Two com∣mon errors. First, that a man enters not into eternall life, till he dyes: when as his cal∣ling heere begins his life eter∣nall. To Zacheus (Christ said) This day is saluation come vnto thy house. Faith preuents time, and makes
things future, present. The godly man that hath his present life hid with Christ in God, so liues heere, as if his conuersation were in hea∣uen, carrying himselfe not onely honestly, ciuilly and humanely; but beyond naturall condition, his life seemes super-humane, di∣uine and spirituall. The second errour is that how∣euer a man liues, yet if at last he seeme to die well, then, all is well, and his soule is sure to bee saued: this is a bold and a dange∣rous conceit; for though Misery be the obiect of Mercy, and Hope the miserable mans god; yet hu∣mane life hath not a greater friend, nor many times a greater foe, then Hope. Many would dye, did not hope sustaine them: more haue dyed, flattered with vaine hope. Whoso hopes too much, cozens himselfe at last. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked: not euery one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdome of Heauen. In this mor∣tall life enter into the first degree of life eternall or thou mayest die eternally, with Lord haue mercy vpon vs in thy mouth. But haue thy part heere in the first Resur∣rection, which is from sinne to Grace: and then thou shalt enioy the second Resurrection, which is from dust to Glory. The third step to well dying, To die by little and little, the third step. is to die by little and little Totâ die mortificamur. Naturally wee are euery day dying by degrees. The faculties of our mind, the strength of our bodies, our common sen∣ses euery day decaying paulatim. He that vseth this course, euery day to dye by little and little, to him let death come when it will, it cannot be either terrible or sud∣daine. If wee keepe a Courser to runne a Race, wee leade him euery day ouer the place to ac∣quaint him by degrees with all things by the way; that when he comes vpon his speed, he doe not
start or turne aside for any thing he sees: So let vs enure our soules and then wee shall run with bold∣nesse the race that is set before vs. To die by little and little, is first to mortifie our lesser sinnes, and not to say with Lot, Is it not a lit∣tle one? Wee may not wash our hands from crying and from bloody sinnes, and yet hugge in our bosome some beloued and Herodian sinne. Certainely great sinnes will neuer be conquered, if little sinnes be cherished. Saint Cy∣prian writing consolatory Epistles, to the Martyres of his time, told them that he that once hath ouer∣come death in his owne person, doth dayly ouercome him in his members: if you mortifie the members of your flesh by little and little, you will not feare the crueltie of any exquisite death the Tyrant can deuise. There be a sort of little deathes, as sicknesse of body, troubles of minde, losse of friends, and the
like: vse these rightly in their kinde, and you may make them kindely helpes to dying well. The right way to bring any thing to a good end, is to proceed by degrees. God himselfe made nothing absolute at first. This great God loues to haue degrees kept degreeingly: to grow to greatnesse is the course of the world, so by little and little to goe out of the world, per gradus, not per saltum, is the way to Heauen. Let a man goe out of the world, as he came into the world, which was, first by a life of Vegetation, then of Sense, afterwards of Rea∣son. Dauid prescribes vs this or∣der when hee sayes, Doce me & duce me, Domine. Hee will not runnetill hee bee taught to goe. Teach mee to doe thy will, and leade me into the land: What land is that? There is terra quam terimus: land on earth, which yeelds vs all pleasures, that's not it. There is terra quam gerimus, refined earth,
beautified bodies which we beare about vs, nor is this it. There is, terra quam quaerimus: the glorious land of promise, that's the land we seeke. Into this land, duce me, Domine. For the manner of dying. AMongst men it is a matter of chiefe marke, the manner of a mans death. All men, as men, die naturally; as Christians, they should die religiously. The good man equally can die, or liue, for he knowes if hee liue: God will protect him, if he dyes, God will receiue him. The Prophet Dauid in a Contemplation of Death, in∣geminates the word, saying. Do∣mine Domine; exitus Mortis. The issues of Death belong to thee. A good man by his good will would die praying and doe as the pilgrim doth, goe on his way sing∣ing, and so addes the paine of singing, to that of going. Yet by this Surplus of paine, vnwearies
himselfe of paine. But some wret∣ches thinke God rather curious, then they faulty, if a few sighes, with a Lord haue mercy vpon vs, be not enough at the last gaspe. There is no spectacle in the world so profitable, or more terri∣ble, then to behold a dying man: to stand by, and see a man disman∣ned. Curiously diddest thou make man in the lowest part of the earth (saith Dauid:) but to see those elements which compounded made the body, to see these di∣uided, and the man to be dissol∣ued is rufull. So dependant is the life of man, that it cannot want one element. Fire and Ayre, these fly vpward. Water and Earth, they sinke downeward. So liuing man, becomes a dead carkase. Seneca thought a man might choose his own death, which was some ease to him. Quemadmodum nauim elegam nauigaturus, & do∣mum habitaturus: Ita mortem vti{que} quá sum exiturus è vita. But bet∣ter
saith another, Stultè haec cogi∣tantur: vitam alijs approbare quis∣quam debet, mortem verò sibi. But since it is so great a matter to die, so necessarie to die well, so dangerous to die ill: Let your life be an acting of death. Certainely Death hath great dependancie on the course of a mans life. There bee many that choose rather to die quickely, then to liue long sickely. Some that will inuite Death to doe them the kindnesse to take them soone out of the world, counting a short death, the happiest houre of a mans life. And for this (saith Tul∣ly) a man is most beholding to Nature. Quòd vnum introitum ad vitam dedit, exitus vero multos. Sed non sic itur ad astra. Christians know better wayes, as how to liue in grace, that they may die in peace. And to whom this grace is giuen, for him glory is reserued, saith Saint Paul. Many a good man is sore troubled to see men of
the best liues, to haue distempered and perplexed ends. Some rauing, some despairing, some dying sud∣denly, and seldome haue any so bitter draughts, as those whom God loues best. It is fit therefore to take notice of the causes that be naturall. De∣spaire in dying, may arise as well from weakenes of nature, as from trouble of minde: but in neither case can this preiudice him that hath liued well. Marke the righte∣ous, and behold the perfect man, for the end of that man is peace. Rauings, and other strange pas∣sions, are many times rather the effect of the disease, then mouing from the minde. For vpon deaths approaches, choler fuming to the braine, wil cause distempers in the most patient soule. In these cases the fairest and truest iudgement that can be made, is, that sinnes of sicknesse, occasioned by violence of the disease in a patient man, are but sinnes of infirmitie, and not to
be taken as ill signes or presages: I will not despaire in respect of that mans impatient dying, whom the worme of conscience had not troubled, or deuoured liuing. Dauid in this case, the better to make his way, prayed, and cryed, Lord, spare mee a little, O spare me, that I may recouer strength, before I goe hence and be no more. Indeede to Ezekias some yeeres of dayes were lent, but we are not worthy of that fauour, wee must time it as we may, and bee content to liue and die at vncertainties. As a sicke man hearkens to the clocke, so let vs watch Death. For sudden comming of death, finding a weake soule vnprepared, makes it desperate, leaues it miserable. Sudden death of it selfe is not therefore euill, What death is to bee counted suddaine. because it is sud∣den: but because it may take vs away suddenly, our soules vn∣prepared. The good man neuer dyes vnprepared, because his per∣seuerance in goodnesse, is a pro∣uidence
against sudden death. If a man bee alwayes prepared, and haue set all euen betwixt hea∣uen and his conscience; sudden death is but a quicker passage to heauen, and is not to be accoun∣ted a sudden death, but a sudden departure, because it came not vnlookt for. Though the righteous be pre∣uented by Death (saith the Booke of Wisedome) yet shall hee bee at rest, because hee hath made his peace beforehand. His departure is no miserie, for his hope is full of eternitie. Ezekiel the Prophet (so often stiled Sonne of man) to him God sayes, I take away from thee the delight of thine eyes, (which was his wife) with a stroke sudden∣ly, and yet thou shalt not weepe. Let not the present pleasures of this life allure thee, nor the cares thereof possesse thee, and sudden death cannot surprise thee. Impro∣uisa nulls Mors, cui prouida Vita. But if a man doe not prepare to
die, he may liue seuen yeeres in a consumption, and yet die a sud∣den death. For any time is sudden to him that is vnprepared. They take their marke amisse, who iudge a man by his outward behauiour in his death. If you know the goodnesse of a mans life, iudge him not by the strange∣nesse of his death. When a man comes to bee iudged, his life, and not the manner of his death, shall giue the euidence with him, or against him. Many that liue wickedly, would seeme to die ho∣lily, more for feare to be damned, then for any loue to goodnesse. To these men there is malum tri∣plex, quod manet in septima. Which is Horrour in exitu. Dolor in tran∣situ. Pudor in conspectu Dei. If my life please God, I am sure my death shall please me: for hee that liues well, is sure to die well: but he that liues ill, is not sure to de well. Vitae praesentis finem, talem esse oportet, quale futurae est principium.
It is a great happinesse to die in ease. Quis tam facile, quando vult, dormit, as he that layes downe his life in peace. Yet a good man doth not alwayes die in the exercise of his goodnesse. But as a wise man when hee sleepes, leeses not his knowledge; no more doth a good man his graces, though he die in distemper. For habitudes of good∣nesse doe not then leaue him, though they cannot then do their office for him. But the vulgar opinion, if a man die quietly, and goe away like a lambe (which in Consumptions and dul diseases, all men doe) then sure hee goes to Heauen. But if he die distempered, and of franticke behauiour (which happens to ma∣ny through extreame inflamma∣tions) then sure he goes to hell, is a iudgement from nature, not of Religion; and in this case trust not Natures iudgement, for it is arted with subtilties of physicke. Serenitie, ioy and peace in a
dying man, is a hopefull behaui∣our: yet wee see the cleere starres that are so delightfull to behold, bring forth their Rayes by sparke∣lings, and dartings, as though they were deliuered of their light by trauell and hard assayes. So good men in their death, haue great va∣rietie of accidents, many languors, many agonies, many iterated en∣deauours, trauailing of Death, as in a Childbirth. But when the pas∣sages of the soule lye open to God without opposition of world∣ly cares; then it peaceably makes egresse with a sweetnesse, and without disturbance. Naturall causes haue their ope∣rations; but it is the God of na∣ture that commands them. It is Gods propertie sometimes to worke supernaturally by nature. But trust to this, beleeue aright and liue as you beleeue, and you shall be sure to die in safety: and the way to end life quietly, is to render it willingly.
Let no contentment of the world so fixe you to the world; as to make you desire longer life. Saepe in hoc esse, Bene, non diu. Short∣nesse of life is no vnhappinesse. Citiùs mori vel tardiùs, adrem non pertinet; bene mori aut malè, adrem spectat. The Booke of Wisedome saith, Hee was suddenly taken away, least ill should alter his vnderstanding, or deceit beguile his soule. Had present death beene euill, or long life good, Cain had beene slaine, and Abel had suruiued. But Death commonly begins first, where God loues best. His soule, saith the sonne of Sirach, pleased God; therefore hasted hee to take him away. Wee see the best men liue not longest. And indeede it were in∣iurious to wish that goodnesse should hinder any man from hap∣pinesse. Hee that lends good men to the world, owes them a better turne then to let them
liue long in the world. One man seemes to die casually, another violently, both by desti∣nie, all men by Decree. Quē dederat cursum natura, peregi, said the Poet. But the Diuine tels vs, though Moses dyed vpon one Hill, Aaron vpon another Hill: yet both where they might see the land of Promise. How familiarly did Moses heare of Death, when there was no more betwixt God and him, But, Moses goe vp and dye? With such a sociable compella∣tion are good men inuited to Death, as to a Feast. Nec mihi Mors grauis est posituro morte labores. — Mors mihi merces erit. The assurance of life after Death. ALthough my flesh bee eaten with wormes, Assurance of life after death. these wormes turned to dust, this dust blowne through the earth, yet after thou
hast turned all to destruction: A∣gaine thou sayest, Come againe you children of men. Redemptor meus, is the word of assurance, My Fa∣ther, and your Father, saith the Gospel. Meum and tuum, are words of Assurance to mens soules, though in mens states they make all Controuersies. I know that my Redeemer liueth. How doe I know it? not by Opinion, but by Faith. Fides non creditur, sed cernitur. Things are not so, because we are perswaded they are so: but because they bee so, there∣fore wee are so perswaded. The woman with child, knowes shee is with child, when shee feeles it stirre liuely: So the Spirit of God assures our spirit, when wee feele his Spirit in vs. Holy Iob saith, Though after the skinne wormes destroy the body yet in my flesh I shall see God for my selfe, and mine owne eyes shall behold him, and not an others. Which numerall Identity giues
certaintie, that this soule of mine, impersonated anew, and so inani∣mating my body againe, shall giue a new being, and a better be∣ing vnto both. That soule, the lost pearle, which to finde a man would haue giuen all that he had, shal there be found ingrauen in gold, where as heere it was found set but in clay. The fourth generall diuision. IIII. What our last thoughts should be. AS in greatest extremities, good Physicians leaue drugges, and minister onely Cor∣dials: so deale by thy soule when death approaches, cast away all worldly cares, entertaine onely thoughts that will animate thy weake body, and refresh thy thirstie soule, as did that dew of
Hermon, falling vpon the Hill of Sion: nor will I feare how this body of mine shall appeare an other day. For I am promised by him that will performe, it shall not be found naked: But this co∣uering of flesh being cast off, I shall take this body againe cloa∣thed with glory, as with an other garment. This doth Saint Paul most ele∣gantly and diuinely expresse, say∣ing: Wee know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle bee de∣stroyed, wee haue a building giuen of God, that is, a house not made with hands, but eternall in the heaueus. For therefore wee sigh, and desire to be cloathed with our house, which is from heauen: Because, that if wee be cloathed, wee shall not be found na∣ked. For indeede, we that are in this Tabernacle, figh and are burthened, because we would not be vncloathed, but cloathed vpon, that immortalitie might be swallowed vp of life. And hee that hath created vs for this
thing, is God, who also hath giuen vs the earnest of his Spirit. Therefore we are alwayes bold, though we know that whilst we are at home in the bo∣die, wee are absent from the Lord. For wee walke by faith, and not by sight. Neuerthelesse, we are bold and loue rather to remoue out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord. 2. Cor. 5. This is so promising and so sweet, as it seemes, to transport a man aliue from earth to Heauen. Hîc in via es, sed illic eris in Patria. Therefore baite not too long vp∣on pleasures by the way. All the while I liued, said a good man, I was going on my iourney to∣wards my countrey: but now that I am dying, I finde my selfe neere home, I am now come to Mount Sion the Citie of the liuing God, the heauenly Hierusalem. I will not therefore sit downe on this side Iordane, but hasten to the Citie; whither when I come, I shall there see my God face to face: Heare my Sa∣uiour
say, Euge, bone serue. It is my Fathers will to giue thee a king∣dome. Is it not enough, that my God is gone vp to prepare a place for me, but will hee giue mee a king∣dome also? And shall not I bee glad, when God shall come and fetch mee to inthrone mee in this kingdome? Absit. Now mee thinkes I heare my soule say, Cur non accedis, Domine? Quid moraris? I haue too long dwelt in this sepulchre of earth. And woe is me, that I still remaine in Mesech, and dwell in these tents of Kedar. It is enough, Lord, as Elias said in the wildernesse, Take now away my life, for I am no bet∣ter then my Fathers were. Nay, my soule is now growne so high minded, that shee saith, Maior sum, & ad maiora genitus, quàm vt mancipium sim huius cor∣poris. Thus rich in thoughts, and great in expectation, doth diuine Contemplation make vs.
God hath not giuen a soule to any creature else but Man: There∣fore it is but duety in Man to know the dignitie of his Soule, which is so heauenly ambitious, as it will not let heauen alone, till it may see, as it is seene. Grauata est anima mea, my bo∣die is a burthen to my soule. It hath had honour enough to haue beene so long companion with my Soule: wherefore now as Saint Hierome said, Egredere, anima, egredere. The Hermite sitting on his turft, said to his soule, Sexaginta annos seruiuisti Deo, & nunc mori times? Goe out of this Arke of flesh, O my soule, for I smell the sauour of rest. Celeritas nunc in de∣siderio, mora est. Though my soule, as a bird, for necessitie sake, hath been faine to stay awhile heere vpon earth; yet willingly would she be soring in the skies. But I finde that ista vita est mihi impedimento ad id,
propter quod viuitur. Specially when I heare my Sauiour say, Father, I will that those whom thou hast giuen mee, be with mee also where I am: That they may behold my glory. To him that is faithfull vntill death, I will giue a Crowne of life. Therefore, desiderio desideraui ergastuli huius egressum, that I may see facie ad faciem, him whom my soule loueth, and to bee (Lord) where thou enioyest thy selfe, and glorified spirits en∣ioy thee. Entertaine thy last houres with such like thoughts. Et hatibi da∣bunt ad aeternitatem Iter, & in iti∣nere subleuabunt. They will An∣gelize thy body, and imparadise thy soule, before thou commest into Heauen; yeeld a sweetnesse, farre beyond the bitternesse of Death. Certainely, a good soule, thus imploying it selfe, in ista hora, will not leaue the felicitie it shall haue in such a transmigration from
death to life, for all the ioyes that life past did euer render her. Good Saint Austine, in a high speculation, endeuouring to ex∣presse this heauenly ioy, was as∣ked by a graue old man: Father Austine, quid agis? A man may as well draw in all the ayre in the world with one breath, as ex∣presse to the life that which thou art now about. Though this in∣effable ioy cannot bee expressed: yet it is res generosa conari alta, & mente maiora concipere, quàm quae effici possunt. Therefore this wee may doe, some way sample that which wee can no way expresse. Looke as a Bird that hath been long encaged, then chants it most merrily, when she gets loose into the open ayre. — Nititur in syluas qua{que} rediresuas: Or as a sicke man, that hath wearily tossed and turned himselfe in his bed all night, is them com∣forted
when hee sees the day breake, and the sunne beames guild the morning: Or as a prisoner that feeles his chaines heauy vpon him, longs for releasement. — Libera{que} â ferris crura futura velit: So it will bee with thy Soule, when thou shalt heare thy Sauiour say, I am thy saluation. Come vnto mee thou that art weary and heauy laden, and I will refresh thee. Poeni∣tentibus & petentibus pertinet Reg∣num Coelorum To them that are weary of this durance, and sue for deliuerance, belongeth the king∣dome of heauen. Wherefore as a wearied trauel∣ler that hath passed a long iour∣ney (though perhaps met with some delights by the way) is then gladdest, when hee comes with∣in kenning of his countrey. Natale solum dulcedine cunctos du∣cit. Euen so thy soule, after many yeeres pilgrimage in the wilder∣nesse
of the world, being come with Moses to Mount Nebo, and beholding the pleasant land of Canaan from the top of Pisgah, will then laugh for ioy, as doth the Horizon, to see the Sunne com∣ming as a Bridegroome out of his chamber. Dilectus meus descendit ad hortum suum, ad areolam aromatum. Of this ioy, thy dazled eyes might haue some glimpses, when thou wast in health: but then it was as the blind mans visiō in the Gospel, to whose first sight men seemed to walke like trees. But in this thy new state, thou shalt see clearely men and Angels stand be∣fore the Lambes Throne, and heare thy selfe inuited to the Lambes Supper, where thou shalt be brought into the wine seller, and loue will be the banner ouer thee. Come then, O Shunammite, stay me with flagons, and comfort me with Apples, for I am sicke of loue: Kisse me with the kisses of thy mouth, for
thy loue is better then wine; Shew mee, O thou whom my soule loueth, where thou feedest, where thou lyest at noone. Thus with Solomon in a Can∣ticle, and with Dauid in a Psalme, let be the Raptures of thy Soule, which, as in trance, shall bee caught vp to Heauen, as was Philip by the Spirit, or Abdias by the Angel. And with an Heroicall alacri∣tie, tempered with a gracious humilitie, giue vp thy soule to God, and bid farewell to the world. It was S. Bernards, I shall neuer truely ioy till I heare this word. Come you blessed; Nor cease to sorrow till this be past; Goe ye cursed. Dying Saint Stephen, before his eyes were closed, had a faciall fight of his Sauiour, looked sted∣fastly into heauen, and saw the glory of God, and Iesus standing at the right hand of God. And old Sime∣on, after hee had seene his Saui∣our,
then reioyced to say, Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, for mine eyes haue seene thy Saluation. Hoc videā, & moriar. Morior, vt videam. THE RAPTVRE OF THE SOVLE. RApitur anima, cùm coe∣lestia Contemplatur, & contemplando iucundatur. And because sight in∣creases delight; Therefore Rap∣ture would faine ascend to vision. But that's a priuiledge for Saint Paul; It so diuinely rauishes, as it raises in man towring thoughts, irradiates his soule with high ap∣prehensions; yea, so it eleuates mans soule to God, as it takes him out of himselfe, to liue aboue himselfe. The Soule being thus powerfully attracted by the faire inducements of so diuine delight,
She on her party corresponds, and with a willing assent glides after these attracts: And as a vapour exhaled by the Sun, shee goes out of her selfe, would willingly draw the body with her, but that sub∣stance is too sad: wherefore shee quitts it, as not agil, and spritefull enough to soare so high. It is an admirable thing to con∣sider, that the eye of a man, so weake a creature, should looke vp euery day to heauen, so wonderfull in height, and yet neuer bee tyred by the way. But by this I see, that heauenly Contemplation, if it be strong enough, and not ouer-clog∣ged with earthy thoughts, is able to carry vs with case to heauenly extasie: but then there must be ap∣plication of the will and vnder∣standing, from things sublunarie, to things heauenly. For the will takes pleasure to perceiue the vn∣derstanding taken into Rapture; and when as the faculties both of will and vnderstanding, doe inter∣communicate
their rauishments, then are we sweetly brought into diuine extasie. Of this sacred extasie, the Sera∣phical Diuines make diuerssorts: One of Vnderstanding a second of Affection, a third of Action. Action is well added, for a man is not to bee aboue himselfe in Contemplation, and vnder him∣selfe in Conuersation. The first of the three is in Splen∣dore. The second in Feruore. The third in Labore. The one caused by Admiration, the other by De∣uotion, the last by Operation. In these Raptures, the Fathers who were stiled Saints had such a complacency, as they stroue to act this as the way of a new life, sometime before their Death, in∣somuch as the Votaries would say: Neuer was Saint but had Ex∣tasie and rauishment of life before his death. They laboured by a liquefaction of their soules into God, to Insoule themselues in
God: to put their foules out of the naturall comportment of the body, and so to liue in diuine ex∣tasie, without liuing in the body. Some so liued, as it was doubted whether they were liuing-men dead, or dead-men liuing: nay some, with feruency of spirit, were transported into such Extasie, that their soules being wholly conuer∣sant in diuine Contemplation, they cared not to afford common assistance to Nature, and so haue dyed through exinanition and want of strength. Thus did loue performe the office of Death. Loue is as strong as Death, saith Solomon; nay with them it wrought more then death could doe. For death onely per∣formeth by effect, that which loue operated by affection. Death did but separate their bo∣dies from their soules. But loue se∣parated their soules from their bo∣dies. In such a trance they report Saint Austine to say, O God thou
onely art all mine, when shall I bee wholly thine? S. Bernard to say, What is there in heauen, or what desire I on earth, but thee, O Lord? Thou art the God of my heart, and my eternall portion, my Soule is satisfied with nothing, but to be with thee. S. Ambrose to say, The soule of Ionathan was knit to Dauid; but my soule is glued vnto thee, O Lord. S. Hierome to say; O my Sauicur, diddest thou die of loue for mee? A loue more delorous then death: but to me, a death more louely, then loue it selfe. I cannot liue, loue thee, and be longer from thee. S. Basil to say, That Iacob, when hee had fast hold on God, let him goe for a blessing: but the Shunamite, My soule will not let thee goe so. For she now seekes no more Benedicti∣ons of God, but to enioy the God of Benedictions. When Sauernius the Indian Saint, was recouering from dying, it is reported hee was heard to say,
O my God, doe not for pitie so ouerioy me, if I must liue still, and haue such consolations, take me to heauen. For he that hath once tasted this and thy sweetnesse, must necessarily liue in bitternesse. This is the state of loues life in God, which giueth a super-hu∣mane Being vnto man, man being yet on earth. So that this ardent loue, neuer satiated heere, hauing ingrafted mee into God by her vniting vertue, makes me now say Viuo ego, sed non ego: viuit verò in me Christus. My life is hid in Christ with God. And though my Saui∣our be hidden from my corporall eyes in God, as God was hidden in him, while hee liued heere on earth; yet now me thinkes I see him face to face. Visione beatificâ, & iugitèr reuelatâ facie, Sponsi gloriam speculando, transformatur anima de claritate in claritatem: Audet & ipsa loqui, Tota pulchraes amica mea.
MORTIS EPILOGVS. QVoniam mors me quotidiè expectat, ego mortem quotidiè expectabo. But before thou goest, consider well these foure things. 1 Ʋndevenis. 2 Quò vadis. 3 Quides. 4 Quid eris. Vpon enquiry vndè venio, I am told, Peccatores peccatorem me in peccato genuerunt. Miseri miserum me in hanc lucis mise∣riam induxerunt. Conceptus culpa. Nasci miseria. Ʋiuere paena. Mors Angustia. Et quantò est vita mea longior, tantò est culpa mea numerosier. This makes me to thinke, Quorsum commodata est mihi vita humana? For this onely, Ad comparandum vitam coelestem: Et hoc vult diuina clementia,
Quòd vita mea sit breuior, Vt labor meus sit leuior. For my, Quò vado. IT is lifes Posy, Vadere, to fade and decay. Vado tels me I am in transitu, But it reioyces mee to thinke, Eo ad Patres. And this promise comforts, Sepelieris in aetate bonâ. Therefore nec me taedet viuere, nec timeo mori: Mihienim Mors seruit in solatium vitae. Ʋitam habeo in Patientia, Mortem verò in desiderio. Plangam ergo Paulatim dolorem meum, Et tunc Oblitus exilij Ibo ad Patriam: nam Mortuâ morte reuertitur mihi Christus. To expresse, Quid sum. QVis fando explicare queat? Puluis & Aer, this I know;
Et in puluerom reuertêris. This is sure. That homo is Morbidum, putre, cassum; This euery man findes. Homo de humore liquido; This is our metall, And the mould is no better, In vtere impuro, Damnatus antequàm natus, that's our Condition. Semen Abrahae; thats our best Stocke. Dicens putredini; Thou art my Mother, And to the Wormes, You are my Brethren. So heere is our great kindred. Our dwelling is, Inter pulices & culi∣ces, amongst Flyes and Fleas. Our qualitie is vile and base, lighter then vanity, there is our waight. A thing of nothing, that's our worth. Et in non hominem vertitur omnis homo. There is our end. What then is our being? Somnium & dolor est tota vita hominis,
cùm crescit vita, decrescit. Vita ipsa non est vita, sed vmbra mortis & figura vitae. Flentes nascimur; In labore viuimus; In dolore morimur. Then certainly Si natus sum plorans, Si morior plangens, Nolo egoviuere ridens. Hoc tantum volo. Animam meam ornare quae Deo & Angelis mox praesentenda est in coelis. Now for, Quid eris. This also I know. QVodsum, & me nonesse, scio. Sedid esse & nôsse desidero. Num videre Deum, viuere cum Deo, Esse in Deo, & habere Deum: Haec est aeterna securitas & secura aeternitas. This may be admired, but cannot be througly vnderstood: Yet better vnderstood, then can be expressed.
Therefore to my soule I say not, O Animula, blandula vagula: but, O Anima Dei insignita imagine, Decorata similitudine, Desponsata Fide, Redempta Sanguine, Dotata Spiritu, Deputata cum Angelis, Quidtibi cum Carne? But to contemplate Quanta claritas, quanta suauitas, quanta iucunditas maneat te in illa visione, cùm facie ad faciem videbis Christum? FINIS. Erratae. PAge 2. line 2 is redundat. pag. 18. line 23. fawnes pro fannes. p. 19. l. 2. Diseere, pro Desere. p 29. l. 12. the threats, pro for threats. p. 30. l. 6. animas, but suas, pro animas suas, but p. 30. li. 7. Inde, pro Iudae p. 36. l. 3. conu ncun, pro comminuunt. p 38. l. 23. we chinke, pro wee would thinke. p. 51. l. 23. amaze, pro amuse p. 41. l. 8 amicum, pro annulum p. 74 l. vltima. Tolerabilir, pro Tolerabilius. p. 80 l. 4 Signicinium, pro Cygnicinium. p. 92. l. 7. Pal∣marios, pro Palmares.
