18539.5 23190901 26366
AN ORDER OF HOVSHOLD INSTRVCTION: By which euery master of a Fami∣lie, may easily and in short space, make his whole houshold to vnderstand the princi∣pall and chiefe points of Christian reli∣gion: without the knowledge whereof, no man can be saued. Deut. 6. vers. 6.7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, & thou shalt rehearse them continually vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them when thou ta∣riest in thine house, and as thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest downe, and when thou risest vp, &c. 2. Tim. 3.15. Thou hast knowne the holie Scriptures of a childe, which are able to make thee wise vnto saluation, thorough the faith which is in Christ Iesus. AT LONON Printed by the VVidowe Orwin, for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater-noster row, at the signe of the Talbot. 1595.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, THE LORD ROBERT DEVOREVX, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount Hereford, and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers and Chartly, Lord Bourchier, and Louaine, Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, Master of her Maie∣sties Horse, and one of her Maiesties most Honorable priuie Coun∣cell: grace and peace be multiplied. IT is a matter of great waight, and necessa∣rie duety, Right Ho∣norable, to consider wisely, and to iudge rightly of the workes of God, in the euent of thinges which happen vnto
men. For as it is written in the Psalmes: Psal. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his workes. And againe: 107.43. VVho is wise that hee may obserue these things? for they shall vnderstand the louing kindnesse of the Lorde. And againe: 92.6. An vnwise man knoweth it not, and a foole doth not vnderstand this. And seeing Rom. 11.36. all thinges are of him, and thorow him, & for him, and 1. Sam. 2.9. in his owne might no man shall bee strong: but Psalm. 75.7. & 33.11. God is Iudge, hee maketh low, he maketh high; and that the counsell of the Lorde shall stand for euer, & the thoughtes of his hart, Gods proui∣dence in all things is to be obserued. thoroughout all a∣ges: euery man ought carefully to regarde the prouidence of
God, in the thinges befalling to himself and others, which I find very fruitfully obserued by the holy seruaunts of GOD in the Scriptures. As Ioseph, when he sawe his Fathers house, in the time of the greate famine, to come into Egypt to buy foode, comforteth his brethren, who of enuie had solde him thither, with this obseruation, saying: Gen. 45.5. Bee not sad, neither grieued with your selues, that ye sold me hither: for God did sende me before you, for your preseruation. And Dauid comforteth himselfe, and stay∣eth the rage of his seruaunt, a∣gainst the cursing of Shimei, by this consideration, saying, 2. Sam. 16.12 Jt may bee that God will looke vpon
mine affliction, & do me good for his cursing this day. So Mordecai en∣courageth Ester, to make sup∣plication to the king (though it were contrarie to lawe, and in hazard of her life) in the behalf of the Iewes, who were appoin∣ted to die by wicked Haman: by such a wise collectiō among other wordes, saying: Ester. 4.14. VVho knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdome for such a time? In like sorte, when I thinke vpon your honor, remembring what I haue heard of your noble Fa∣ther, that good Erle, in the time of his last sicknes, & of his godly care ouer his children: compa∣ring thereunto how God hath preserued you vnto this time,
what speciall fauour you haue attained before so gracious a Prince, in what an high & waigh tie place you are set, & in what yeares of your age these things are befallen you, together with the blessed giftes by which you are fitted thereunto: mine hart is touched with a comfortable hope, that the Lords grace wor∣king effectually in you, and his heauenly spirite directing you: you might be a worthie instru∣ment, in faithfull and wise ser∣uice to her maiesty for the good of this common-wealth, & the churches of Iesus Christ among vs. For if 1. King. 18.4. Obadiah vnder wic∣ked Ahab, could keepe from Ie∣zebel, and feede an hundreth
Prophetes: and Iere. 38.8.9. Ebedmelech could obtaine of that euill king Zedekiah, to deliuer Ieremie out of the dungeon, into which he was cast by the Princes with the kings consent: and Nehem. 2. Nehe∣miah could apply the fauour he had with that heathenish King Artashasht, to the building of the walles of Hierusalem: who can tell? but that much more, such a noble man of Christian knowledge, aduanced by God into the fauour of so Christian and religious a princesse, may likewise performe some seruice of great importance, to the Church of God and his coun∣trie. And verily if God Pru. 18.4. made all
for himselfe, Euery man ought to serue God, accor∣ding to his place & giftes. and his elect Ephe 1, 6. for the glorie of his grace, Act. 17.26. assig∣ning the times, which were or∣dained before, and the bounds of mens habitation, that they should seeke the Lord: and if he haue Math. 25.14. giuen euery man a ta∣lent, whereof hee must render an account; then ought euerie man 1. Cor. 7.17.24 so to walke, as God hath distributed to euery man, as the Lorde hath called euery one, and therein to abide with God. Therfore 1. Sam. 15. Saul, without reser∣uing of any spoyle, by any pre∣tence, must bee obedient to the voyce of the Lord, in the vtter destroying of Amalecke; be∣cause God had annoynted him to be king, & called him there∣unto.
And Dauid, 2. Sam. 12. though hee were a man after Gods heart: yet because he forgate his ad∣uancement by God, & his great benefits, and by deflowring his neighbours wife, &c. disobeied God, and caused the enemies of God to blaspheme: was repro∣ued sharply & punished seuere∣ly. And thou O meeke Num. 30.12 Moses, what kept thee out of the lande of promise? And thou O wise 1. King. 11. Salomon, what made thy lat∣ter dayes troublesome, and a breach in thy kingdome? And thou O good 1. King. 22. Iehoshaphat, what brought thy life in ha∣zard? was it not, that God, who exalted you in honour, Who so honor not God are plagued. was not sanctified by your seruice? If
God thus deale with his owne 1. Pet. 4.17. house, where shall the vngodly and sinners appeare? Philip. 3.19. whose God is their bellie, who Haback. 1.16. sacri∣fice to the net of their own po∣licies, and honour the Luk. 16.13. God ri∣ches, but Exod. 5.2. know not the Lord, who giueth them all things a∣bundantly to enioy? Rom. 1.24. God gi∣ueth them ouer to their owne lusts, Iob. 5.14. they meete with darknes in the day time, and grope at noone day as in the night, some by 2. Sam. 17.23 their policie make an halter to hang themselues, some in the Dan 5. middest of their iolitie, haue the ioynts of their loynes loo∣sed and their knees smitten one against another, and some are Psal 53.5. Prouerb. 28.1. afeard where there is no feare,
and flye when no man pursueth them. And Esay 5.24. as the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chaffe is consumed of the flame; so their roote shall bee rottennes, and their bud shall rise vp as dust, because they haue cast off the lawe of the Lord of hosts, &c. that it might stand as an vnchaungeable de∣cree of the hie God, the posses∣sor of heauen and earth; con∣cerning the wicked & the true seruants of God: 1 Sam. 2.30. The feare of God rewarded Them that ho∣nor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised. So did the Lord aduance vertuous Gen. 45. Io∣seph, before all his brethren, he Exod. 1.21. made houses to the widowes, who feared God in Egypt, and
deliuered Iere. 39.16. Ebedmelech in the day of euill. Therefore, for the comfort of all them, that walke according to their gifts & cal∣lings with God, it is written: Psal. 33.18. Be∣hold the eye of the Lord is vpon thē that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercie, to deliuer their soules from death, and to preserue them in famine. For this cause (right Honorable) haue I pre∣sumed to dedicate this small booke to your Honour, not onely because I am perswaded of your fauorable acceptation, but also that by mee being one among many, you might know what hope and expectation there is, among her Maiesties most faithfull subiects concer∣ning
you: that your yong yeres being sanctified, and ( 1. Ioh. 2.14. as S. Iohn saith) being strong & the word of God abiding in you, and ha∣uing ouercome the wicked, you might amōgst other graue and wise counsellors, bee a ioy∣full labourer in all good cau∣ses, and a prosperous furtherer of things concerning God, to the great ioy, peace and honor, of her most excellent maiestie, and that by the mouthes of ma∣ny her louing subiects, prayses may redound to the glorie of God, and that you may glorie in his praise. And here I hum∣blie craue your Christian fa∣uour, to giue mee leaue to tell you, what the Lorde speaketh
vnto you. For me thinketh I heare him speake vnto you, as he did vnto Ioshuah and Abra∣ham: Ioshu. 1. Be thou strong and of a most valiant courage, that thou mayst obserue and doe according to al the law, which Moses my seruant hath commanded thee: thou shalt not turne away from it, to the right hād, nor to the left, that thou maist prosper whither soeuer thou goest. I will be with thee, J will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee. Gen. 15.1. & cap. 17.1. Feare not, J am thy buckler and thine excee∣ding great reward. J am God al∣sufficient, walke before me and bee vpright. Now this little booke of houshold instruction, I ten∣der vnto your Honors protec∣tion; nothing comparable to
the profound works set foorth by rare and singular men, but as a little candle to bee placed in the midst of the house, to giue light to all them that are there∣in. And as in the worke of the materiall Temple vnder Salo∣mon, 2. Chron. 2.2. hewers of stones had a necessary vse: so this little book may bee some good helpe, to prepare the seueral members of the familie, for the skilfull buil∣ders, that is, the 1 Pet. 2.5. faithful mini∣sters, to be ioined as liuely stons in the spirituall temple of God. For as the Psalmist doth testifie: Psal. 119.130 The entrance into Gods wordes sheweth light, and giueth vnder∣standing vnto the simple. And our Sauiour teacheth, that there is a
secret working in his kingdom, like the growing of the Mat. 13.3. small graine of mustard-seed, and as a little leauē hid in three pecks of meale: So 1. Cor. 1.27. God hath chosen foolish thinges of the world to confound the wise, & God hath chosen weake thinges of the world to confound the mighty, &c. And to whom should I of∣fer the booke of teaching the familie? but euen to him, whose houshold being well instructed, ordered, & guided, may diuers waies doe good vnto many of all estates and degrees: yea e∣uen to him, who knoweth verie well, how needfull a thing it is in regarde of the Common∣wealth: which in troublesome
times doth find, that a Christian Prince cannot be sure of such a peoples faithfulnes, in dayes of triall: whose bellies being fedde with the fatte of the earth, haue mindes vnsetled; and for lacke of the knowledge of Christ, and the feare of God, are apt to go after the sway of time, and to bee led as beastes by the bellie, where most ease, gaine, & plea∣sure shall draw them. Therefore nothing doubting, but that your godly wisedom, and good knowledge of Christ Iesus, will graciously receiue any thing, that may be helpful to Christi∣an religion and godlines: I pre∣sent this little booke vnto your Honour, with al humblenes and
good will in the Lord; leauing the successe vnto him, in whose handes are the Psalm. 31.15. times of all things, and 1. Cor. 3.7. who onely giueth increase. Most meekely pray∣ing his diuine goodnes to make you honorable in this world, in all pietie and Christian vertues, to the glory of his name, the ho¦nour of your Prince and coun∣trey, and to the reioycing of all good christians: & in the world to come, to bee partaker of his glory: who shall be glorified in his Saintes, and made maruei∣lous in all that beleeue. Amen. At Eastwell in Kent this 26. of Februarie. Anno 1596. Your Honours alwaies to com∣mand in Christ Iesus: IOSIAS NICHOLS.
To all gouernours of Fami∣lies, grace and peace, &c. I Very well remember, my welbeloued country mē, ye that are gouernours of families, that he was a wise Preacher, that sayde: Eccles. 12.12. There is no ende in making many bookes. And that ma∣ny very good and excellent Catechismes are published in our English tongue: being not one∣ly very profitable for Christians, to exercise themselues in: but also most notable tokens of the Christian care and loue, of diuers learned and godly minded men, toward their neighbors and countrie. Yet haue I some good reasons (as I thinke) to put foorth this little booke of mine as a mite, in comparison of the greatest gifts of other men, who by their excellent workes, haue greatly replenished the Lords treasurie. First, because that I finde that the Lord in the buil∣ding of his Church vseth the diuers gifts of
his seruants, to expresse his manifold wisedom. And as vnto men of diuers complexiōs and af∣fections, he hath giuen choise of meate and va∣rietie of apparell: so, many bookes to one end are set foorth in diuers fashions and with a diuers gift, order and facilitie: that hee whome one booke sauoureth not, might yet like the taste of another. So it may bee, that I striuing to enter into the lowest place of the Church, which is the familie; and applying my selfe to the mea∣ner sort, may happily finde a place to doe good vnto some, where books of greater excellencie, peraduenture are not entertained: and ioyning hands with my good brethren, who haue sorted themselues to the same standing place, may by ioynt working with them, peraduenture further their ioy, as they doe mine. Secondly, because I haue some experience in this order, that it may prepare them, which are hereby instructed, to haue their eyes open to other mens labours. And I am in great hope, that a discreet teacher shall finde by triall, that a childe of very tender yeres may be made able, through Gods blessing, with vnderstanding to giue a good reckoning of his faith, by the Scriptures. Moreouer, my purpose was not, curiously to set downe all points of doctrine, but especially those, which doe most neerely teach these two: Act. 20.21. Repentance to∣wards God and faith in Iesus Christ. And my desire was that these might be made to appeare
easie and familiar by the Scriptures. But aboue all other this moued mee most, that I might haue occasion to speake some things to the gouernours of the families, which doe very greatly affect my minde. Which is not to proue it their duties, to catechise their fami∣lies, or to describe the houshold gouernment, & diuers such things which I know to be very ex∣cellently penned downe by others: but onely to lay before them, the great necessitie of this du∣tie, and the great and honorable seruice, which a priuate man may doe, to God and his people, by this meanes. In doing whereof, I thought no better meane, then the setting foorth of an easie way, to doe the thing, to which I desire earnest∣ly to perswade them. The necessitie will be seene, Necessitie to teach hous∣holdes. if they obserue with me two things, the time present, and the time likely to ensue. In the first they shall finde, that although wee haue had the Gospell, by the mercie and long suffering of God seuen and thirtie yeares, vnder the happie raigne of our most deare and gracious Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth, (who, I heartily pray our good God, may yet raigne many yeares ouer vs) there are to bee found so many that know not how they shall bee saued, or how they are iusti∣fied, why they are called Christians, what is Christ in his person, and such like (which Hebr. 6.1.2. Psalm. 49.20. eue∣ry beginner and yongling in Christ ought to be
skilfull in; Lamentable ignorance a∣mong vs. and without the knowledge whereof a man is like a bruit beast) that I doe tremble to thinke, and am ashamed to vtter, and dare not commit to writing my knowledge herein. I haue had conference in some parishes with 400. some, 1000. some lesse, and haue made triall, and do make triall euery day, that I speake to any man, whom I knowe not, that I am asto∣nished to thinke, that so many Christians in name, and baptized, should bee so ignorant and brutish, and so farre from being indeede, that which they delight to bee called. For I take it, that Galat. 3.26. faith maketh the being of a Christian, and these Rom. 10.14. who haue no knowledge cannot haue faith, which will then appeare, 2. Thess 1.8. when Christ shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that do not know God. Therfore there is a great fault, whether it be in vs Ministers, or in you the masters of families, or in both, the Lord bee mercifull vnto vs, our danger is very great: for it is written, Rom. 1.23. As they regarded not to know God, so God deliuered them vp vn∣to a reprobate minde, &c. Therefore it is a thing of necessitie, that such as keepe houses, should traine vp their people cōmitted to their charge, Many Mini∣sters teach not. in the knowledge of the Gospel. Againe, we that are Ministers, for the most part, are very vntidie for these workes, which might preuent this mischiefe. 7. Tim. 4.10. Some imbracing this present world, and some being Math. 15.14. blind leaders of
the blinde. Therefore the masters of families looking not vnto this matter, the case is become lamentable. The time likely to ensue may bee very much iudged by the present. Coldnes in re∣ligion. Notwith∣standing that God hath warned vs, to make more reuerent regard of his Gospell, by windes and vnseasonable weather, by diuers sicknesses, by the plague and dearth & feare of the sword, not once nor twise within these fewe yeares: yet the great carelesnes and coldnes (that I say not contempt) of religion, may hereby appeare, that Atheisme, dronkennes, and other very great sinnes, are waxen bold and shameles, and he that feareth an oth, and taketh great paines to bee instructed in Christ Iesus, suffereth no small molestation. What may we then looke for? but as these former corrections, haue brought vs no one iot neerer to repentance, or loue of Gods word, so the Lord will yet stretch out his hand against vs. And what can we tell, that if other temporall plagues moue vs not, but that he will take away his word from an vnthank∣full nation, We may seare the losse of the gospell. and giue it to another that will bring foorth better fruites? If we that be Ministers ouerstip these things, how can they be repaired, but by the instruction of families. And many times when we take great paines, the backward∣nes of the masters doth pull downe all that wee build. Therefore it is of great necessitie, that the gouernours of housholds should stirre vp
themselues to this duetie. Now the honorable seruice, which a priuate man may do to God and his Church, Teaching the familie hono∣rable seruice to God. appeareth in this; that such as traine their families in these good grounds, bring foorth an holy gene∣ration to the Church, and a ciuill nation to the Common-wealth; which doth not a little shewe it selfe to Gods glorie, and the praise of the Gospell, in our owne experience. Whereof the example of Ioshua and his familie, Cornelius and his souldiers, Abraham and his three hun∣dred and eighteene, brought vp in his house, are as sufficiēt testimonies. How are the names of many priuate men and women for their ser∣uice in the Church, commended by Saint Paul, and registred to immortall fame and example of all professors, Priuate men and women may greatly further the Church. Rom. 16. So that among many he acknowledgeth, that all the Churches of the Gentiles were to bee thankefull to one Aquila and Priscilla his wife. And God doth so farre honour the house of Ierem. 35. Rechab, that he poynteth it out, and setteth it foorth, to be an euerlasting paterne, of the notable fruite of good gouer∣nours of families. And as Exod. 35.25. women did worke diuers things for the tabernacle, in the daies of Moses: and as the 1. King. 5. temple was not built, but by men of all sorts in the time of Salomon: and the Nehem. 3. walles of Ierusalem vnder the guiding of Nehemiah: So may priuate men very much further the building of the spirituall temple,
which is the congregation of Christ. The Chur∣ches spring out of instructed families. And as out of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacobs house, sprang forth the Churches of the Iewes: so the glorious congregations of the Gentiles, began in the fa∣milies: For if seruants well nurtured Tit. 2.10. may a∣dorne the doctrine of God our Sauiour in all thinges: and 1. Pet. 3.1. husbands obeying not the worde, may without the word be wonne, by the conuer∣sation of the wiues: how much more may the master of the familie doe vnto God and his Church honorable seruice? not only by sancti∣fying his house by the word of faith; but also by hauing alwaies in a readines, very notable matter to further the building of Gods dwel∣ling place. Which thing is auouched to thee by 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15. with Act. 16.1. young Timotheus, who being brought vp in the holy Scriptures from a childe, vnder his faithfull grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice, when he was yet a very young man, be∣came a companion of the Apostle Saint Paul, in that great and waightie worke of planting Churches. And Act. 18.24. Apollos cōfirmeth the same, who being an eloquent man and mightie in the Scriptures, was yet more perfectly instructed in the way of God, by the house of a craftsman: by whom not onely they which beleeued thorow grace, were very much holpen; but also the ad∣uersaries of Christ were mightily confuted by the Scriptures. Moreouer, I pray you to marke diligently,
how that the disorder of one priuate familie, One familie well or ill or∣dered, may saue or destroy both Church & Common∣wealth. namely, of one Iudg. 17. & 18. Micah of Ephraim, was an oc∣casion that Idolatrie did spread thorowe the whole tribe of Dan: and so continued many yeares. And so contrarily, cap. 6. & 7. & 8. Gideon being stir∣red vp by the goodnes of God, to the reforma∣tion of one meane familie in Manasseh, was the cause of a very great deliuerance to the whole nation, from most mightie and cruell enemies, and most abominable Idolatrie, for the space of 40. yeares. Where were those 1 King 14.14.18. 7000. in the daies of Eliah, that had not bowed the knee to Baal: when he thought there were none left in Israel that feared God? were they not in the well instructed families? Whence came it that Gen. 37. & 38. & 39. &c. Ioseph in his youth being sold vnto strangers, passed thorow so great temptations, the com∣fortles prison, the stocks & iron, to be so worthie a father of the Common-wealth of Egypt, & so good a nurse to the people of God? Ica name no other outward meanes, but his good education in the familie of the faithfull. Hence is it writ∣ten: Eccles. 4.13. Better is a poore and wise child, then an old and foolish king, which will no more bee admonished: for out of the prison hee com∣meth for to raigne, when hee that is borne in his kingdome is made poore. Therefore God commādeth his people, Deut. 11.18. to lay vp his words in their harts, and in their soules, &c. and to teach them their children, speaking of them when
they sit in their house, and when they walke by the way, and when they lye downe, and when they rise vp, &c. that their dayes may be mul∣tiplied and the dayes of their children, &c. Be∣hold then what good may come out of a well in∣structed familie, namely, that it may bee the preseruing of the countrie and Church, in the time of extreame daunger and darknes, the seedplot against the time of reformation, and a meanes by which God doth multiplie his people and peace in a countrie: and that by the con∣trarie, an whole countrie may fall into Idola∣trie and destruction. Whereby euery man may see what honorable seruice I wish him vn∣to, when I exhort him to the instructing of his familie. Therefore I heartily pray and earnestly en∣treate all gouernours of families, A request to the masters of families. that they would set such wise order, in the disposing of all their worldly affayres, that they may haue con∣uenient leisure and quiet time for the vse of this duetie: taking heede of all vaine excuses, Vaine excuses. which the diuell and our corrupt nature will set before vs, as blockes and hinderances, that we should not once meddle with such Luk. 10.42. necessary matters. First, The Lords day the Lords day being an ordinary rest & time of libertie, doth call vnto you from the king of heauen, to doe this seruice. After morning and euening prayer, when you haue tried your people what they haue learned at the
Church by their pastour, and called to mind the chiefe heads of his teaching: then is it good to make it a drinke offering, vpon the pastours les∣sons; to teach them a point or two of the princi∣ples of Religion. Two howers once in the weeke. And if it be possible, I would begge for these poore soules, in the name of Iesus Christ, (who shed his precious bloud for you and them) that you would bestowe some two howers euery weeke, in some one of the working daies, (as euery man shalbe able to find best and fittest lea∣sure) to instruct your children and seruants, ac∣cording to the order of this booke, or some such like: and that you would continue therein with al care and constancie. And I doe not doubt but you shall see great gaine by this little labour, e∣uen a blessing from the Lord our God, Hebr. 6.10. who will not forget any mans faithfull labour and loue, which is in Christ Iesus. There are foure sortes of people, Foure sortes of people haue most fit oppo∣tunity to teach the yonger. 1. Noble men, & Gentlemen. whome I would especially moue vnto this most vertuous and laudable worke, for that they haue most fitte opportunitie, to doe greatest seruice herein to God and their countrie. First al noble men and Gentlemen, and all Masters of great housholds. Whose families as they are the most in number, so most commonly they stand vnder the most reuerend and humble submission of their superiours. Therefore in regard of the one they may profit most; and in regard of the o∣ther with most easines and conueniencie; Vaine pretēce. For al∣though the greatest part pretend it, a very hard
thing in these daies, to bring their familie to Christian knowledge and sobernesse: yet the not hauing them so, consisteth not in the hardnes of the worke, or vnrulines of the people; but in the common neglect of many gouernours. Who pas∣sing ouer this dutie, Libertie the spoyle of the familie. as a matter either not much to be regarded, or not pertaining vnto thē: haue so hardeened the necks of children and seruants, with the loose raines of libertie and licentiousnes: that very few can abide this wholesome yoake of Christian nurture, the gracious & godly com∣forte of the knowledge of saluation. Great masters, rulers, princes, captaines, and kings may in∣struct their pri∣uate families. For if one man could command to feare God, & to instruct 318. able men, beside all other seruants women and children: as is spoken of Abraham, Gene. 14.14. and cap. 18.19. and that a chiefe ruler o∣uer 120000 people, could so gouerne his priuat familie, that he could say, I and mine house will serue the Lorde, as wee reade of Ioshuah, cap. 24.15. And an other great Prince had his seruants so guided in the feare of God, that hee and they were examples, in lending money and corne to the poore of the land: as did Nehemiah, cap. 5.10. And if a Centurion could make both seruaunts and souldiers readie and obedient to euery good worke, as appeareth, Matth. 8.9. yea if a King could protest vnto God, to banish deceitful and lying persons out of his house, and to entertain the faithful, & him that walketh in a perfit way: as you may see, Psalm. 101.5.6. I verily thinke
that no man endowed with a good conscience, fearing God and louing the Lord of life Iesus Christ, can haue any iust excuse or reasonable pretence, to keep about him a familie vntaught in the sweete words of the Gospell, and the hole∣some paths of our blessed Sauiour. Except they will say, that it is more behoofull for their chil∣dren and seruants to serue them, and to reue∣rence them; then to serue and reuerence the Lord of glorie. Instructing of groat families, furthereth both Church and common∣wealth. But why should I vse many words vnto men of such excellent wits & great gifts, in a mat∣ter so necessarily depending vpon them, that the least mention should suffice euery wise and tru∣ly noble Gentleman to so glorious a worke. For by the good order & Christian instructiō of one such great familie, many soules are brought to God, there is great encouragemēt by ensample vnto others out of the familie, and a maruei∣lous power for the bringing foorth and confir∣mation of al good things, both for the common∣wealth, and also for the Church of God. For hence doe all other sortes of people take their light, and the liues of noble & worshipfull men, are many times more of force, then either the law of God or man. For they are like the great pillars in a building, that if they stand steadie in faith and good life, with their families, ma∣ny are vpholden by them in the wayes of godli∣nes: but if they swarue and become carelesse
and dissolute; they draw many with them, as by a mightie sway, into the wofull downfall of infi∣delitie and destruction. Therfore aboue al men, it behooueth them to take heed to themselues, and the good instruction and gouernment of their housholds. The second sort are tutors in the Vniuersi∣ties, to whom I ioyne also the third sort, Second and third sort, Tu∣tors & School∣masters. School∣masters in towne & countrie. Which two haue a great resemblance in their opportunitie to do good, when many mens children of all callings, are committed to their conscience: to the one, They may doe vnspeakable good. in the first and more tender yeares: to the other, in the yeares of most danger. If these two sorts of men would be painfull to wring out the iuyce of this heauenly erudition, as a necessary sawce, to giue a pure verdure, to their other litera∣ture, or as a sauoury salt to season al other lear∣ning: it is not to be spoken how much good they may doe. For as young plants, being straightned while they bee tender, and trimmed with pru∣ning and other parts of husbandrie, will growe very goodly to behold in their greatnes, which being neglected, are many times very crooked and vnfit for diuers vses: So doe young men for the most part proue as they are nurtured in their youth. And the good instruction of Schoolemasters and Tutors (in my knowledge) hath very well straightned such young impes,
(who otherwise were very rough and vnfruit∣full) that many receiue comfort by their wor∣thie example. Therefore I do most instantly be∣seech all Tutors and Schoolemasters to practise this booke: or, because you are learned, some better forme of your owne. Lastly, Fourthly, wo∣men, as Ladies and Gentle∣women, ho∣norable by in∣structing their children. I doe heartily and humbly entreate all sorts of women, to watch carefully to doe this duetie: and first all Ladies and Gentlewomen, that they may be honoured by the spirit of Iesus Christ, as was that 2. Ioh. Ger. 1.4 elect Ladie, whose chil∣dren did walke in the trueth. And all other women like Rom. 16.12. Persis, who laboured much in the Lord. And as 1. Sam. 2.19. Hannah made coates for her sonne Samuel, who serued in the house of God: so these would aray their seruants and children with the Prouerb. 4.9. goodly ornaments of wise∣dome and knowledge, which is from aboue. A woman, Women being at hand may instruct their children. being the Psal 128 3. fruitfull vine on the house sides, in whose sight the Prouerb. 4.3. children are tender and deare: can by no meanes shew their natu∣rall loue better, then being alway at hand with their children and maides, to giue them euery day in milde and pleasant manner some of these Prou. 25.12. golden apples: wherewith the young babes will take such delight, that by the nourishment and exercise thereof, they will be made Psal. 8.2. strong to confound the enemies of God and their coun∣trie; when they haue learned to 1. Ioh. 2.12.14. know the fa∣ther,
and that their sinnes are forgiuen them for Christs names sake. It is exceeding great the profit you may doe in the familie, if as Salo∣mon sayth of a vertuous woman, you Prou. 31.26.28. open your mouthes in wisedome, and the lawe of grace be in your lips: For your children shall rise vp and call you blessed, & your husbands shall praise you. Whereas chap. 29.15. children set at li∣bertie, make their mother ashamed. And generally, Instruction of youth bring∣eth ioy to the instructor. as a man wil sowe his ground with the best seede, and plant his orchard with the best fruit; because he looketh for the grea∣ter and more gainefull encrease in the time of gathering: so if men, louing their children as well as they doe other commodities, would al∣so traine them vp in the best thinges, which are found in the discipline, knowledge and faith of Christ: they should not onely escape many a secret griefe and bitter mischiefe; but also blesse the Lord with great toyfulnes, when they finde this fruite of their education in know∣ledge of these good things: namely, their chil∣dren to bee a comfort refreshing and honour to their gray haires; and their seruants necessary helpes, before them, in all good causes and mat∣ters of honestie, truth, iustice and mercie. For it is written as a thing that faith not, Galat. 6.7. What∣soeuer a man soweth, that shall he reape. Ho∣ping therefore that such as bee wise in heart,
will earnestly follow my counsaile, and carefully stirre vp others to the same; I will hasten to the matter it selfe, by which, euery one may bee (as I hope) greatly guided in the performance of the same. I beseech almightie God, of his in∣finit mercie in Iesus Christ, to prosper this our godly purpose, to his glorie and comfort of his people. His glo∣rious name be praised for euer. Amen. Your faithfull seruant in Christ Iesus, Iosias Nichols.
The Booke to the House∣holder. COme buy me, but passe not by me, for by me thou shalt winne, To light thy people, by my light: to trauell light, from sinne. The word, with words of trueth and ioy, doth shew his word by me: A way (which if thou way) it waies thee to felicitie. Two houres, each weeke, sixe monthes, to stay with thee, no more, I begge: To stay thy people, on that stay, which hell gates cannot wagge. Then trie, how trie my triall is: if God doe helpe with grace; Both man and child, as wit doth grow, shall see the heauenly place. Yet know, that knowledge and no more, by thee, to thine I giue: The spirit of Christ (pray thou therefore) workes faith; that thou maist liue: And as by proofe, thou proues me true, to proue the thing I say: So double time, for double gaine, and grant me longer stay.
An order of houshold in∣struction, by which euery master of a familie, may easilie and in short space, make his whole houshold vnderstand the principall and chiefe poyntes of Christian religion: without the knowledge whereof no man can be saued. The first booke. CAP. 1. The first order of instruction. IN this order, some things are for the young & tender yeres, and some for yeres of greater capacitie, for confirmation and helpes: till they may bee grounded in the principles, with good vnderstanding, to giue a recko∣ning of their faith by the holy Scriptures. First, from the time that children speake, it is good to drop in this good licour of heauenly doc∣trine.
For as Salomon saith: Prou. 22.6. Teach a childe the trade of his waye, and when hee is olde hee shall not depart from it. The first order from the time that children can speake. Therefore from that time, it shall bee good to teach them (as the manner of all christians is) to say without book distinctly: The Lords prayer, the Creede and the ten Commaundements. And as hee perceiueth their capacitie to growe, to droppe into them by familiar wordes, the name of God, how hee made vs: the name of Christ, how hee shed his blood for vs: the name of the holy Ghost, who sanctifieth vs; and that there is but one God and three persons, &c. Also the name of death, that for sinne all men die: and the name of the resurrection, that through Christ we shall liue againe in heauen: alwaies applying himselfe with tearmes to their capacitie: and alluring the childe, to the feeling and loue of God, of Christ, and of eter∣nall life; and to the hatred of sinne: as by say∣ing and causing the childe to say: God loueth vs, for he made vs, and giueth vs all things, as our meate, drinke, apparell, &c. God loueth vs, for he gaue Christ to die for our soules. God lo∣ueth vs, for he giueth vs life after we he dead, in heauen. We must not doe sinne and Wicked∣nes, for it bringeth paine, sicknes, death, &c. Then the capacitie encreasing, make them pronounce, how many petitions in the Lords praier, and which they be: how many cōman∣dements & which they be, til they can tell you
euery one, being asked sodainely out of order, as the tenth, the fourth, the seuenth, &c. After that they haue been thus trayned a while, and can answer as children, readily to these: then let them learne that short Catechisme with∣out booke, which beginneth after this sorte. Who made thee? God. What is God? he is al∣mightie, &c. Wherefore did he make thee? to serue him, &c. Which may be bought for the valew of a pennie in the bookesellers shops. After all this, teach them some short sto∣ries and sentences of holy Scripture: stories such as these, Gen. 4. vers. 2. the trade, sacrifice and death of Abel, Gen. 11.1. the building and ouerthrow of Babel. Mark. 10.13. Christ receiueth children and blesseth them. Now some stories may bee taught them worde for worde, as in the text, such is that of Elisha, 2. King. 2. vers. 23.24. onely adding the Pro∣phets name, which is verse 22. and in the end of this storie teach them the vse. Children may not mocke. Some stories must be gathered more short, then the text, as that of Dinah, Gen. 34. Dinah the daughter of Iacob, went out to see the maides of the countrie; and one Shechem, sonne of Hamor Lord of that coun∣trie, saw her, and defiled her, and for this cause Simeon and Leui, slew Shechem and all the towne with the edge of the sworde. The vse, Maides must not wander or goe a gadding.
The sentences may be such as these are, Pro∣uerbs 29.15. The rod and correction giue wis∣dome, but a childe set at libertie, maketh his mother ashamed, Mark. 8.36. What shall it profit a man, though hee should win the whole world, if he loose his owne soule, Luk. 9.10. The sonne of man is come to seeke and to saue that which is lost. Then teach them an ensample of euerie commaundement to the sence of this follow∣ing. The first commaundement brake Ahab, taking Baal for his God, 1. King. 18.21. or 1. King. 16.31. The second, Ieroboam that worshipped golden calues, 1. King. 12.28. The third, an Israelitish womans sonne, striuing with a man of Israel, blasphemed the name of the Lord and cursed, Leuit. 24.10.11. The fourth, one that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, Numb. 15.32. The fift, Absalom, who rebelled against his father, 2. Sam. 15. The sixt, Cain, who slew Abel, Gen. 4.8. The seuenth, a Leuites Concubine, who played the whore, Iudg. 19.1.2. The eyght, the Shabeans tooke away Iobs oxen and asses, Iob. 1.14.15. Ninth, Potiphars wife falsely accused Io∣seph, Gen. 39.17.
Tenth, Ahab lusteth for Naboths vineyard, 1. King. 21.2. And in all these it will not bee amisse to cause the learner to repeate without booke, the places where all the stories and sentences are written: and herein the teacher may vse his discretion, to teach them more or lesse of like sort and easines: so that hee ouercharge them not at any one time: but let them as it were creepe vpon them by often repeating: and he shall finde that a little childe will beare very much more, then a man that hath not tried would beleeue. And if he cause them to learne without booke, the 1.15.112.127. and 128. Psalmes, or some of them, they will no doubt worke very godly impressions in the tender minds. And it is a good recreation to quicken them, to teach thē to sing some short psalmes, as the 117. the 131.133. and such like, as they are in English meter. CAP. 2. The second order of instruction, for the o∣pening of the vnderstanding. This order is best, from sixe yeare olde and vpwards, & in some capacities before, and for such as are ig∣norāt of what age so euer. AFter that they can handsomely do these things; then this catechisme following will be most necessarie for the opening of their vnder∣standing: where the master of the house must
not binde the learner to the very words (as be∣fore) here set downe: but so teach, as euery time he repeateth any question, there may bee some little difference in his wordes. And for that cause I will shewe him diuers formes of speaking, (in some of the most needefull pointes) teaching the meaning of one poynt, which a childe or young man will quickelie conceiue, and by the variation be able to vn∣derstand and beare away, and to answer with his own words, in diuers sortes, at diuers times and all to one sense. The Catechisme for the se∣cond order. Or thus: How many Gods are there? But one only and three per∣sons, &c. VVHat thinkest thou of God? I beleeue there is one God, and three persons, God the Father, God the Sonne and God the holy Ghost. Was there not a time, whē there was nei∣ther heauē nor earth? &c. Yea: How did they begin? God created them by his word, &c. How came the World? God made all things, of nothing in sixe dayes. In what day made he man? The sixt day. Was the woman made the same daye? Both man and woman were made in one daye.
How were they made? God made man of the dust of the grounde, and breathed in his face the breath of life, and the man was a liuing soule, that is, a liuely creature hauing bodie and soule. After God cast Adam into an heauie sleepe, and tooke out one of his ribbes, and closed vp the flesh, and of that rib, hee made the woman, so there was man and woman: the mans name was Adam, and the womans Eue. Was man made any whit more excellent then other creatures? Yes, in two things: he was made after Gods image, and clothed with happines. What was that image of God? Knowledge, holines, and righteousnes. What was the happines? He was made Lord ouer the creatures, and being naked, was not ashamed. What did God with man after hee had thus made him? Hee set him in a most pleasant place of the world, called the garden of Eden, appoynted him to keepe and dresse the garden, gaue him leaue to eate of all the trees in the garden, sa∣uing one, called The tree of knowledge of good and euill: and if he eate of that tree, he should die the death. What death?
Of bodie and soule. Was there not another tree of speciall name? Yes, the tree of life which was a Sacramen∣tall signe, that if man continued in his vp∣rightnes, he should liue for euer. If Adā were made good and happie: how came wicked∣ne and punish∣ments? By eating the forbiddē fruit, sinne, shame, damnation and all other miseries came vpon man∣kinde. Did man continue in his vprightnes? No, for the diuell abusing the bodie of a ser∣pent, tempted the woman Eue, and shee did eate of the forbidden fruite, and she gaue A∣dam, and he did eate, and then they were asha∣med. And so Adam and Eue, and all man∣kinde were dead in sinne, and vnder damnati∣on of bodie and soule. How shall we  deliuered,  How shall we escape sinne and damnation? Onely by Iesus Christ. leefe in  was he  Of God  man? Of ngin Ma∣ If Mary  this Mo∣er, who was ? He as uching his Godhead, and she touching his manhood. What is Christ? He is the eternall sonne of God made man, that is, perfect God and perfect man. What did he for vs to saue our soules? Hee died and shed his most precious blood to redeeme vs from our sinnes. Is it not possible for a man to liue so iustly and vprightly, that he may Deserue or merit. obtaine his owne sal∣uation, by well doing? No man hath such a gift or power. Why? Because no man can keepe al the comman∣dements of God: if we breake any one we be guiltie of all.
How shall we doe then? If we beleeue in Iesus Christ, we shall be sa∣ued. All? All doe not beleeue. What neede we then care to do To liue ho∣nestly or godly good works? We must doe good works, because they are commanded by God; and it is our duetie to obey him that made and saued vs: wee ought to bee thankefull and to glorifie him, and to declare our faith by our workes, for the good ensample of others, and for many other neces∣sarie vses. How are we saued by Christ, seeing we die daylie? This bodily death, is but the parting of the soule from the bodie for a time, but the bodie shall rise againe, euen as Christ rose the third day, for at the last day, when Christ shall come againe to iudge the quicke and the dead, all that beleeue in him shall rise againe vnto e∣uerlasting life, and all other to euerlasting damnation. How come we to know these things? God sendeth his word to bee preached vn∣to vs. Doe all beleeue who heare the worde? None but they, whose hearts are opened, by his holy spirit. Are there no other helps of Beleese. faith?
Many: as the experience of all Gods doings according to his word, and namely in tribula∣tion; the exercise of all good works: and e∣specially the right vse of the seales of the pro∣mise, which are commonly called Sacra∣ments. Which be they? Baptisme and the Lords Supper. What is to be seene in them? The outward signe as water, bread, and wine, and the signification which is the The death or promise of Christ, the be∣nefits of Chri∣stes death. grace of Christ. Wherefore bee children baptized with wa∣ter? In token that their sinnes are washed away by the blood of Christ. Why doe men receiue the bread and wine in the Communion? In token that Christ gaue his bodie and blood for our redemption. Are they onely tokens or bare signes? No: they are also as seales to assure vs of the grace of Christ, and his last will. How doe Baptisme and the Lordes supper differ? Baptisme is outwardly with water, and the Lordes Supper with bread and wine: second∣ly, Baptisme signifieth the washing of our sinnes, to enter vs into the Church: the Lords Supper is for the strengthening of our faith:
thirdly, Baptisme is once, signifying that wee which are by nature, the children of wrath are once borne in Christ, to be Gods children: but the Lords Supper is often, signifying by ea∣ting bread and drinking wine, the davly nou∣rishing of our faith in and by Christ, that wee may continually grow stronger and stronger vnto eternall life. What is eternall life? To liue with God, and to bee partakers of his glorie for euer. CAP. 3. The third order of teaching. HEre followeth diuers Catechismes for confirmation of knowledge, This order is for all that can conceiue well of the former, how young or olde soeuer they be: but in common and meaner capa∣cities from 8. yeares and vp∣wards. drawne out of the words of some place of holy Scripture. Where I must admonish ye Master or teacher in the familie, to follow this order. First, to teach his people, perfectly and distinctly to saye the place of Scripture without booke: which being perfect to shew them the briefe meaning; and then the seuerall poynts of doc∣trine, and how they bee gathered out of the text. For which cause he shall finde, the addi∣tion of other textes and notes in the margin, for his help and direction, which he must keep to himselfe, and giue them the meaning or substance onely. Yet if he once get his family
to conceiue deeper, hee may acquainte them with all; but he must take heede hee oppresse not their memories, with ouer much at once, but giue them more or lesse, as hee perceiueth them able to conceiue and beare away, and to remember at the next time; for it is very needefull to repeate that which was first lear∣ned, before he begin any more. Therefore for a while, after they can saye the place without booke, and shew where it is written, what chapter, what verse and the meaning, let them haue onely some two or three poyntes: but af∣ter a while, hee shall perceiue, that by vse they will bee able to take a great deale more, euen an whole Catechisme at once; yea and by often practise to gather some poyntes of themselues: yet must hee not cease going for∣ward, because that the Philip. 3.1. oftener, the safer it is, and happier for them to bee grounded. Now as ofte as they haue learned any one Catechisme thorough out, cause them to re∣peat all that whole Catechisme together, as the place of Scripture, the meaning, all the poyntes of doctrine, and how they are gathe∣red out of the text; and after (but not before) begin the next Catechisme.
The first Catechisme for confirma∣tion of knowledge, is drawne out of this text or place of Scrip∣ture. Gen. 3.15. I will put enmitie betweene thee and the woman, and betweene thy seede and her seede; he shall breake thine head, and thou shalt Heb. breake. bruise his heele. The interpretation or meaning. THe Master must consider out of the text, This is for the masters helpe. that the diuell abused the bodie of the ser∣pent to deceiue Euah: & therefore the punish∣ment is pronounced vpon the serpent, which partly and especially is in the words going be∣fore: but although he speak to the serpent, yet these As these pla∣ces expound, Esay. 27.1. Micah. 7.17. Psalm. 91.13. Luk. 10.18.19. Rom. 16.20. & Reuel. 12.7.8.9.10. wordes are properly to bee applyed a∣gainst the diuell himselfe, whose instrument the serpent was, (although they haue accom∣plishment, euen against the beast it selfe, in that hee is hated naturally of all mankinde) therefore the Master hauing wayed the places in the margin, may giue his familie this inter∣pretation following. By the serpent and his seede, This is for the familie. is meant Satan and his members, wicked men: by the seede of the woman, is ment Christ and his members;
by breaking of head and heele, is meant that either shall wound each other, but the diuell shall bee vanquished. The meaning is then, that God will haue this to bee a punishment of the diuell; that he should haue continuall warre with Christ and his Saints, and finally be ouercome, and all that take his part: Out of which interpretation arise these poynts of Catechisme. The poynts of doctrine. 1. This ap∣peareth in the circumstāce of the text, which inclusiuely cō∣demneth Adā for his sinne, to haue an ene∣mie to him & his seede for e∣uer. By the temptation of the serpent the di∣uell and Satanas, man became a great sinner, and subiect to great miserie. 2. This fol∣loweth of the former, and is shewed, cap. 1. and 2. Man was made good, without sinne and miserie, before this temptation. 3. Because the wordes are the indivial sentēce of God to that purpose, and is to expounded, Iohn 8.44.47. Acts. 13.10. 2. Cor. 4.3.4. cap. 11.13.14. Eph 2 1. 1. Ioh. 3.10. God hath decreed, what shall bee the e∣state of Satan and mankinde, namely, that some men shall be the seede of Satan and the children of perdition: and some with Christ conquerers of them both. 4. So expounded, Gal. 4.4. Here the person of Christ is declared, that he is, as all other men, the seed of the wo∣man, that is, the sonne of God made man. 5. Expressed in the meaning, and is seene in Caine, and all of like sort following. There shall be alway enmitie of Sathan and his members, against Christ and his members.
6. This is the breaking of the heele, as appeareth E∣say. 53.2. Cor. 4.8. chap. 6.4.5. Ioh. 15.19 20. 2. Tim. 3.12. 1. Pet. 5.8.9. Great sorrowes, temptations and perse∣cutions, in bodie, goods, name and life come vnto Christ & his members by Satan and his members. 7. This is the breaking of the serpents head, & is ex∣pounded, Act. 26.18. Hebr. 2.14. Rom. 8.31.32. Mat. 5.10.11. & 19.28. Phil. 3.21. By the death of Christ and all the parts of his mediation, hee for vs and wee thorow him doe ouercome the diuel: to the restoring of the bodie in the resurrection of life, and en∣dowing with immortall riches both bodie and soule, in the saluation of all beleeuers. 8. Plaine in the words, and is expounded, 2. Corint. 6.14. Iam. 4.7. Eph. 6.10 & 5.6 7. Psal. 15.4. The duetie of all Christian beleeuers is to resist the diuell and his members, and to haue no fellowship with the workes of wic∣kednes. CAP. 4. The second Catechisme for confirmation. The Text. Gen. 12.3. In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. The Interpretation. For the master THese words containe Gods promise tou∣ching the blessed seede made vnto Abra∣ham, when he called him to be his childe and father of the faithfull, which Gen. 3.15. before was spoken in generall hard to bee knowne, but here is shewed more plaine and easie to bee found by the particular, namely, that it must
be in Abrahams stocke and linage. This clause, For the fami∣lie. in thee, is to be vnderstood of Abrahams Gen. 22.17. and Gal. 3.16. seede which is Christ (who after a sort was in him, that is, in his loynes.) By all families, is meant Act 3.25. & Galat. 3.6. all nations as well Iewes as Gentiles. And by blessed, is meant the Gal 3.13.14. Rom. 5.12.13. 1. Tim. 1.1. deliuerance from the cursed and damnable estate, wherein we were by Adams fall. The summe is: God doth promise that both Iewes and Gentiles shall haue saluation, in none o∣ther but in Christ, who as touching his man∣hood was Abrahams seede. This teacheth especially two sorts of points: What wee are of ourselues. What wee are made by Christ. The doctrines. 1. Otherwise there needed not the pro∣mise. Eph. 2.1.2 Of ourselues wee are sinners, and there∣fore accursed to damnation, by Adams fall. 2. This is in a manner the text. By Christ wee are made blessed, that is, heires of eternall life. 3. Expoūded Heb. 2.16. Here is taught what Christ is touching his person (as in the former Catechisme) Christ is God and man of the seede of Abra∣ham. 4. These two are gathe∣red out of this text. Gal. 3.6.8. Rom. 4.11.12.23.24. There is but one way of saluation which is common to Iew and Gentill. 5. These two are gathe∣red out of this text. Gal. 3.6.8. Rom. 4.11.12.23.24. Christ is applied vnto vs for iustification by no meanes but faith onely.
6. So gathe∣red, Gal. 3.17.18. Our saluation commeth not of workes in our doing, or will in our choosing, but of Gods free promise. 7. Vnder this word blessed, Gal. 3.29. 1. Cor. 1.30. Reuel. 20.6. are contained all Gods graces and gifts, which thorough Christ hee giueth to his Church, and his pro∣tection in this life, with the resurrection vnto life eternall. 8. One part of this blessednes is, So applied Luk. 1.73. Act. 3.25.26. that Christ turneth vs from our sinnes, and leadeth vs by the promise to walke in godlines and hone∣stie. 9. For this promise is ex∣clusiue, as Act. 4.12. Gal. 1.8. Ioh. 3.18. There is no other meanes of saluation but Christ, and therefore all other professions and religions, which teach not the true beleefe in Christ, are the synagogues of Satan, and se∣minaries of hell fire. 10. Ancienter by 430 yeares then the law of works, Gal. 3.17. Tit. 1.1. Heb. 13.8.9. That we are iustified and saued by faith onely, is the most ancient doctrine, being taught by God vnto Abraham, long before euer there was any Church of Rome. Here the master of the familie, may ap∣plie vnto euery particular person, how his faith should agree with these points by the example of Iob, whose Creede thus followeth. Iob. 19.25. I am sure my redeemer liueth, &c. Where thou maist see his faith, in that he
saith, I am sure; his acknowledgement of sins, and expectation of Christ in the word Redee∣mer, and in the word, liueth, hee sheweth that Christ is alway the onely So expoun∣ded. Heb. 7.24.25. sufficient fauiour; his hope of the resurrection is plaine in the rest, and the description of eternall life in this, So defined, Psal. 16.11. & 17.15. he shall see God. CAP. 5. The third Catechisme for confirmation in knowledge. The place of Scripture. Esay. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous seruant, iustifie many: whose iniquities he shal beare. The Interpretation. THese words are euidently a prophesie of Christ Iesus, wherin the master must teach his familie to cōsider the persons. First he that speaketh is God: then the persons of whom he speaketh are two, 1. Christ whō he calleth his righteous seruant: 2. all beleeuers, which are many men and women whose sinnes hee beareth. The Doctrine. 1. In the first person. 2. Tim. 1.9. God decreeth the saluation of many by Christ.
2. Mans works, free-will, This fol∣loweth of the first. merit and satis∣faction are excluded, by the vndesired and vndeserued good pleasure of GOD in so de∣creeing. 3. In Christ we see two things, This ap∣peareth in the two following what hee is in himselfe, and what to vs: the first we call his person, and the second his office, adioyned to his person. 4. In his person hee is called: a seruant, In the se∣cond person. Gods seruant, and a iust seruant. A seruant, because being God he became a man, which is called the Philip. 2.6.7. forme of a seruant: Gods ser∣uant; because hee came to doe Heb. 10.7. Gods will. Just or righteous, because it behoued, that hee being 1. Pet. 3.18. iust should die for vs, who are vniust: so that he being Heb. 4.14.15. GOD, was also man in all thing sauing sinne. 5. In that God assigneth and accepteth him to iustifie vs, &c. 1. Tim. 2.5.6. His office is here generally to be a me∣diator betweene God and man. 6. The parts of his office, This is she∣wed in the two following. Psalm. 110. are his Kingdome. his Priesthood. 7. He being King of his Church, giueth giftes, that is, Ministers to teach remission of sinnes, and so as the righteous King he iustifi∣eth all beleeuers. In these words by his knowledge shal, &c. Act. 2.33. Eph. 4.8.9.10.11 8. Hee being Priest, beareth our sinnes, So expounded. Heb. 9.11.12. when he made himselfe a liuely sacrifice to his father for vs.
9. This ex∣poundeth the former two, & in them is con∣tained: reade 2. Cor. 5.19.20.21. & Rom. 4.25. and cap. 10.4.14. By his Priesthoode he performeth the worke of our righteousnes, and by his King∣ly office hee applieth it vnto vs. For being Priest he dieth for our sins, and riseth to make vs righteous: but yet till by hearing this kings Embassadors wee doe beleeue, wee are not iustified. 10. In the third person: Many, &c. Rom. 3.23.24.25. Wee are of our owne nature sinners, and al our iustification and redemption com∣meth onely by the free will of God, thorow beleefe in Iesus Christ. 11. Reade Rom. 8.30. Tit. 3.7. Vnder iustification is contained glo∣rification or euerlasting life, for these necessa∣rilie follow each other. 12. Gal. 1.4. If Christ iustifie vs by bearing our sinnes, then wee must knowe, that aboue all things we ought to flie sinne. Here the Master of the familie may ap∣plie to his people in a short summe, the substance of this Catechisme, by the words of Habbakuck. cap. 2. ver. 4. The iust shall liue by his faith. In regarde of iustification thus, So expoun∣ded, Rom. 1.17 Galat. 3.11. a good man findeth in himselfe, no wisdome, righte∣ousnes, power, will or workes to leane vnto: but looketh for his iustification and saluation onely by faith in Christ.
In regarde of sanctification thus: So opened, Heb. 10.38.39 1. Pet. 4.19. Gal. 2.19.20. A good man forsaketh all his owne earthly deuises, and all wicked workes, in the maintaining of his estate and life, beleeuing that his life shall bee maintayned without any euill deuises or shiftes, and therefore committeth his soule, life, and all hee hath into Gods hands, in wel∣dooing, depending vpon the mercie and pro∣mise of God in Christ. CAP. 6. The fourth Catechisme, for confirmation of knowledge. The place of holy Scripture. Psalme. 130.3. If thou O Lorde streightly markest iniquities: O Lorde who shall stand. 4. But mercie is with thee that thou maiest be feared. The Interpretation. THis text is a confession of faith, agreeing in substance with the former, wherein the faithfull soule, applieth the doctrine of iustifi∣cation vnto a speciall vse in prayer, contai∣ning two parts, what wee are without Christ, (for he is the Eph. 2.7. mercie seate) and what wee are by Christ.
The Doctrine. 1. Marke streightly. No mā can stand before God to be iu∣stified, if God should iudge him after his sins. 2. Mercie. It is his mercy applyed vnto vs by faith in Christ Iesus, by which we stand iustified be∣fore him. 3. Feare thee. No man can feare God, that is to saye, serue God, as his childe, vnlesse hee bee set free by his mercie. 4. Stand. Rom. 5.1.2. To stand, is to be in state of grace, vn∣der the hope of the glorie of God. And here the Master of the familie may doe well to shew vnto his folke, how the Scriptures of Luk 24.44. Moses, the Prophets and Psalmes, doe agree in one sweete harmonie, teaching one and the same doctrine of saluation and godlynes, e∣uen 1. Tim. 1.14. faith and loue which is in Christ Iesus. CAP. 7. Now here follow a few more, for confir∣mation of their knowledge and faith, out of the new testament. The fift Catechisme for cleerenes of vnder∣standing. The Text. Matth. 17.5. This is my beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased: heare him.
The interpretation. THese wordes are the voyce, For the ma∣ster, reade 2. Pet. 1.17. which Peter Iames and Iohn heard in the mount, to come from heauen, where Christ receiued of God the father, honour & glorie, when there came such a voyce vnto him, from the excel∣lent glorie. Which thing if the Master tell his familie, and demaunde of them, first the mea∣ning, as they haue learned by other places; se∣condly, what poyntes of doctrine they per∣ceiue in it; it may bee they will bee found by meanes of the former to doe much in this, be∣ing very easy. For the fami∣lie. How be it to vnderstand it three things must be found out: first, who spake the words, that is, God the father, testifying of his sonne, teacheth the summe of the Gospell: se∣condly, what is ment by this clause, In whom, whom signifieth Christ; and In, signifieth such as by beleefe are So is the clause vsed, Colos. 2.6. and Rom. 8.1. and 5.1. in him: thirdly, what is ment by this clause, I am well pleased which I take to be, that God hath Ephe. 1.5. & Ioh. 1.12.13. decreede in himselfe to engraft all his elect into Christ by faith, and so to be well pleased with them, being planted by beleefe in Christ. The substance then is, that God would haue all men know, this man Christ, who was now in the mount with Pe∣ter, Iames, and Iohn, to bee his beloued sonne, and that he hath purposed to accept of euery soule that should beleeue in him, and there∣fore commandeth all to heare and obey him.
The Doctrine or Catechisme. 1. This is all the text, and is proued, 1. Cor. 2.2. Coloss. 2.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. The Gospell consisteth in the true knowledge of the person and office of Christ. 2. The doctrine of his person is cleere, in that the father calleth this man Christ his sonne: so that hee is the sonne of God and man. Where this worde Sonne, is not to bee vnderstoode in regarde of creation, as was Luk. 3.38. Adam, or of adoption, as the Rom. 8.15.16. elect: but by Ioh. 1.18. nature and generation. 3. Obserue: the distinct person of the fa∣ther, acknowledgeth the distinct person of the sonne: to which adde out of Matth. 3.17. the distinct person of the holy Ghost. 4. Prouerb. 8.30.31. Eph. 1.6 Ioh. 1.14.16. This sonne is called beloued, to shew, that in the loue, the father hath to the sonne, there flow the ioyfull streames of loue vnto his elect: so that hee is the fountaine of grace vnto vs. 5. Vnto these two poyntes of his person are ioyned two of his office, answering vnto them: First, in the beloued he is well pleased: this sheweth the mediation of his Priest∣hood to GOD for vs: Secondly, him being sonne he would haue heard: this sheweth the mediation of his soueraigne kingdome, from the father, ouer vs. 6. Expoūded 2. Cor. 5.19.21. The mediation of his Priesthoode: that God will haue him come betweene vs and
himselfe; that our sinnes whereof we are guil∣tie in our selues, being pardoned through him, wee might haue his euerlasting fauour vnto saluation. 7. This mediation is to be vnderstoode in the parts: first, that Christ died for our sinnes, Rom. 4.25. and rose againe to make vs righteous: second∣ly, 1. Pet. 3.18. by this meanes hee bringeth vs to God: thirdly, setteth vs at peace with him, Rom. 5.1.2. that wee may haue accesse thorow him to his grace, wherein wee stand reioycing vnder the hope of the glorie of God: fourthly, Ioh. 14.2. hee is gone vp into heauen to prepare a place for vs: fiftly, 1. Ioh. 2.1. hee sitteth there as our aduocate. 8. Iam. 1.8. Galat. 1.4. Mat. 11.25. In that hee decreeth to please himselfe with Christ: this sheweth our free election, a∣doption, iustification, and saluation, to ex∣clude all mans merits, free-will, workes fore∣seene, and all the reprobate: and to establish an vnspeakeable comfort to the man, who findeth that God hath giuen him faith, that hee may knowe, that GOD hath Ioh. 6.40. predesti∣nated him vnto saluation in his beloued sonne. 9. In him, God spake this, & he will reproue them that put any thing to his word. Prou. 30.5.6. 1. Cor. 3.11. excludeth vnbeleeuers from this mediation, it condemneth all other saui∣ours and additaments whatsoeuer, as stubble for the fire. 10. The second parte of his office is his so∣ueraigntie, in this, Heare him, which sheweth
his soueraigne authoritie ouer Psal. 2.8.9. all nations: which is, that he is the chiefe Deut. 18. Prophet ouer all: chiefe or Heb. 3.1. hye Priest: and especially Phil. 2.8. Eph. 1.21.22. Matth. 28.18. Reuel. 19.16. King o∣uer all Kings, powers, and principalizies, and in all things head to his Church. 11. This so taught Luk. 8.15. 1. Cor. 1.1.2. Rom. 16.26. & 15.18. Vnder this word, Heare, is comman∣ded our obedience, that we should heare him, which is with our eares, heartes, and deedes, that is, by learning his word, by acknowledg∣ing it, by faith, and practising it by works. 12. Eph. 2.20.21. Reuel. 3.7. Matth. 23.8. 1. Pet. 5.4. Heb. 10.9.10. &c. and cap. 9.24.25. This word, him, is spoken exclusiuely, that is: there is no other head of the Church to rule and make lawes, but Christ: no other master to teach and prescribe doctrine; no o∣ther priest to offer, or satisfie by sacrifice. CAP. 8. The sixt Catechisme, for increase of vnder∣standing. The place of Scripture. Iohn. 3.16. God so loued the world, that he hath giuen his only begotten sonne; that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life. The Interpretation. IN this verse, Let the master shewe all this interpretation to his familie, and cause thē to shew it him againe. Christ teacheth Nichodemus af∣ter many other argumentes, to vnderstand the doctrine of regeneration, spoken of vers. 3.
by the cause, namely, by the first and princi∣pall cause, which is God. God: in whom there is rehearsed no So loued. outwarde cause to moue him, but onely that of his owne goodnes his sin∣gular loue did this worke, namely, hee loued The world. the world, which by no meanes had deser∣ued it. The greatnes of which loue is shewed by the He gaue. worke, that he gaue his sonne, not pur∣chased by any prayers, merits, or rewarde of ours, but of his free gift. And His sonne. what gaue he? the earth, the heauen, cattell, infinit trea∣sures, heauenly spirits? Nothing so: yea ra∣ther, that which excelleth al these things, euen his sonne. And what Onely begot∣ten. sonne? an adopted sonne, or counterfeit sonne? No: but his on∣ly begotten sonne. And Not perish, but haue eter∣nall life. why did hee giue him? that we should bestow any thing vpon him, or that wee can doe any thing for him? Least of all: but that he might deliuer vs from euerlasting perdition, and giue vs eternall life. Vpon what Whosoeuer beleeueth in l.im. condition? that we should do all his lawe, and satisfie by contrition, pilgri∣mage, or workes of condignitie, or supererro∣gation? No such thing: but whosoeuer belee∣ueth in him. So that wee with Nichodemus may learne, that God giuing his sonne of his singular loue doth work this new birth, when by the preaching of the Gospell, the spirit fra∣meth in vs faith in Christ, and when by faith he maketh vs partakers of euerlasting salua∣tion,
then doe we enter into the kingdome of heauen. And so it is expounded by the Tit. 3.5.6.7. Apo∣stle: God of his mercie saueth vs by the new birth, which is shed vpon vs thorow Christ, that being iustified by his grace, wee may bee made heires thorow hope of eternall life. Now there are in these wordes certaine things to bee further explaned: that seeing their meaning more cleerely, wee may more fitly gather out the seuerall braunches of do∣ctrine. First in this word Loued, what. loued, I vnderstand the goodnes of God according to his eternall decree, which is called Eph. 1.5. The good pleasure of his will. As the Esay. 53.10. Prophet also sayth: The Lord would breake him, &c. Secondly, I vn∣derstand this word World, what. world, for the vniuersall and whole mankinde, according to the coue∣nant of God made vnto Gen. 12.3. which is ex∣pounded be∣fore. Abraham, namely, that hee loued both Iewes and Gentiles, as is plainly taught, Rom. 3.29.30. Yet Reade Deut. 10.14.15. Rom. 9.7.8. Acts. 10.34.35.43. euery particular and singuler person is not meant thereby: as Christ expoundeth himselfe, when he addeth this limitation, that whosoeuer be∣leeueth, &c. Thirdly, this word Perish, what. perish, signi∣fieth the miserable condition of mankinde in himselfe by sinne: yet when hee sayth, should not perish, he meaneth not that in this world wee should not dye for a time, but that Ioh. 11 25.26 al∣though we be dead, we should be quickened and rise againe vnto eternall life. Neither doe
I thinke, that this bodily death is that death which was threatned to Gen. 2.17. Adam, which is properly the death Eph. 2.1. in sinne, and to bee ba∣nished from the presence of God, as was A∣dam, Gen. 3. Therefore this is our life to bee 1. Pet. 3.18. brought by Christ vnto GOD, to Psal. 16.11. enioy whose presence is euerlasting life it selfe. The summe then is this: The free good will of God hath giuen his onely begotten sonne vnto all mankinde, that, whomsoeuer hee by his spirit, thorow hearing the Gospell, dooth regenerate and make to beleeue; should bee deliuered from eternall death in sinne, and obtaine the euerlasting glorie of God. As I haue been somewhat longer in ope∣ning this most worthie place: Direction to the gouernour of the house. so I finde here a most large field of Catechisme. Where I will obserue this order, for the direction of the go∣uernour of the house, (whom I perswade my selfe, by that time he hath beaten the former Catechismes into his peoples heads, shal per∣ceiue them better able to receiue stronger meate) I will shewe the manifest beautie of this sentence, as a most goodly tree, where the master shall guide his folke to gather ve∣ry many kindes of fruites, to the comfortable feeding and nourishing of the soule: and how to discerne by the good fruite, that which is euill. First therefore, the doctrines shall offer themselues, out of this sentence, with most
sweete comforts annexed vnto them: and in the second place mine hand shall poynt out vnto him, how he may descrie vnto his fami∣lie, the errors contrary vnto the same. Vnto euery doctrine I will adde some one place of Scripture, for the further enlightning of their vnderstanding. The doctrines. 1. This is she∣wed out of the whole sway of the text, espe∣cially in the words, loued, gaue, and the end of giuing, which shewe his liuely wor∣king towards his creatures preseruation, &c. and so would hee bee knowne. Exod. 34.6. Malac. 1.2. 1. Ioh. 4.16. Psalm. 9.16. God is euerliuing, the most holy crea∣tor and wise gouernour and Sauiour of the world. 2. This is ex∣pressed, sauing of the holie Ghost, which is shewed by the effect, beleeue, which is set for his cause, vers. 5.1. Ioh 5.7. In this one God, are three distinct per∣sons, God the Father, God the Sonne, & God the holy Ghost. Here he must begin to shewe the distinc∣tion of the persons thus. 3. This is in a manner expressed, sauing of the holy Ghost, reade Ioh 15.16. The Father begetteth, the Sonne begot∣tē, the holy Ghost proceedeth from thē both. 4. The beginning of the father to loue and send, &c. the dispensation, it is done by the Son: the perfection, the holy Ghost worketh faith, &c. the like, Gen. 1.1. Tit. 3.6.7. Heb. 1.2. 1. Cor. 12.11. The beginning of euery action is giuen to the Father; the dispensation to the Sonne; the perfection or consummation to the holy Ghost. 5. Made man is in the word gaue: for by incarnatiō he was giuen, Ioh. 1.14. Mat. 1. all the rest is clecre enough. The person and office of Christ: person, Christ is the onely begotten sonne of GOD made man: his office, he is our Sauiour.
6. 1. Pet. 2.9.10. The estate of mankinde by Adams fall is here shewed: for vnlesse God had giuen his onely begotten sonne, we had perished. 7. Eph 1.5.6.7.8.9.10 and cap. 4.11.12. The causes of our saluation and their concurrence and proceeding, first, the good pleasure of Gods will, who freely loueth vs, the first cause: secondly, the matter or meanes he vseth. Christ by his incarnation, suffering, &c. thirdly, the ioyning of these causes into his forme, that is, faith apprehending Christ, wrought by preaching, thorow the spirite. Lastly, the thing for men, euerlasting life. 8. Here is taught, who are saued: This Christ so expoundeth in the next ver∣ses, and cap. 6.40.53. those onely who beleeue, which is not to beleeue there is a God, or that God made the worlde, &c. which yet are necessarie: but to beleeue in him, that is, in Iesus Christ the onely begot∣ten sonne of God. 9. Our saluation is most free & certaine. It depen∣deth vpō Gods loue. Ioh. 13.1. Tit 1.2. 10. In the worde giue. Eph 2.8. Our saluation is of the free grace of God, without our deseruing. 11. This is seen in his per∣son aboue all sacrificers, Heb. 10.11.12.13. Our Saluation is perfectly wrought by Christ alone. 12. 1. Pet. 2.6 7.8. Mat. 7.13. & Mar. 16.16. There are two waies of mens life, by the decree of God: some by beleefe in Christ shall be saued: some for vnbeleefe shall perish. 13. There is a double life, Heb. 9.27. 1. Thess. 4.14. Matth. 25. and a double death, one of the body onely, and the other of bodie and soule.
14. Matt. 16.18. Mark 16.16. 1. Ioh. 1.3. Eph. 4.15.16. Here is the catholike Churche, the communion of Saintes, remission of sinnes, resurrection of the bodie and life euerlasting, taught. For the catholike Church is of all that beleeue in Christ, the communion is our fel∣lowship with God in Christ, thorow the spirit, in the vse of all his giftes; or there is one God, one Christ, one faith, and one saluation to all. Remission of sinnes, & the resurrection of the bodie, are part of those giftes, which are sha∣dowed is this eternall life, for by forgiuenes of sinnes, and the resurrection of the bodie, wee come to eternall life. 15. 1. Ioh. 4.11.19. 1. Cor. 6.11.20. This place is most strong to teache men to liue godly, soberly, and righteously in this present world: for what may more moue, then the free loue of God: the great price of our saluation the onely begotten sonne of God; the order of our calling, by the spirite to be regenerate vnto faith, and lastly the sal∣uation it selfe, which is to bee deliuered from sinne? 16. This is taught, Rom. 4 11. cap 6 2 3. 1. Cor. 10.16. You may ioyne vnto these, though not expressed in the text, as the rest: That the Sacraments are signes to teach vs; as seales to applie vnto vs this doctrine. Comforts out of this doctrine. HEre is the place to explaine the sweete comfortes of this doctrine, which I may
terme the pleasant taste of these good fruites: which I desire that euery Master would care∣fully and painefully drop into his familie, that they may taste how good the Lorde is, and feele that they knowe, for this will mightelie worke towards faith: so that his labour shall be ioyfull in the ende. The comforts are gathered, by the consideratiō of the persons. meditation of the things. Comforts by the consideration of the persons. 1. Psal. 23.1. Rom. 8.31.32. Eph. 1.13.14. Beholde here the great loue of the al∣mightie and glorious God, the loue of Christ his sonne, and of the holy Ghost. What was greater in God then his sonne? That hee gaue for & to vs. What is greater in the sonne then himselfe? That he bestowed vpon vs. What is more precious then the power and goodnes of the spirit? that hee powreth into vs, renew∣ing and endowing vs with faith and sanctifi∣cation. O how vnspeakeable is the goodnes of God for the assurance of our saluation, so that no man can doubt, but euery soule that knoweth and feeleth these things, must needs reioyce with ioy vnspeakeable and glorious. 2. Rom. 5 6.7 8.9.10. 1. Ioh. 4.9.10. Marke who they bee vpon whom this glorious God bestoweth this great gift: vpon the world, euen vs men, who hauing offended
him by sinne are his enemies by euill mindes, and are weake, being able to doe nothing to recompense him, or to comfort or helpe our selues: but he chooseth vs, he redeemeth vs, he sanctifieth vs, he glorifieth vs. Must not this, being well wayed make vs burst out, with the blessed virgin? Luk. 1.46. My soule doth magnifie the Lorde, and my spirite reioyceth in God my sa∣uiour. Comfort by the meditation of the things. 3. Eph. 2.1.2.3.4.5.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.10. cap. 1.3.4.5. Coloss. 1.12.13 Reuel. 1 5.6. Philip. 3.20. 2. Tim. 4.8. Call to minde in what miserie, dan∣ger, and wofull condition, we be of ourselues: into what happines, freedome, and blessed e∣state we bee brought by Gods loue in Christ: from sinne, from death, from hell, from the curse of the lawe, from the power of Sathan, from the wrath of God and eternall corrupti∣on, anguish and searefull sorrow: into the glo∣rious libertie of the sonnes of God, to immor∣talitie and in corruption, to the crowne of righteousnes, and to be the sonnes and daugh∣ters of God, heyres of the kingdome of Hea∣uen, to the fulnes of ioyes in the presence of God for euermore. Mine heart cannot con∣ceiue, my pen cannot write the vnsearcheable riches of Christ: the price of this pearle, for which a man would sell all that he hath. And this is freely giuen vs, perfectly wrought for
vs, assuredly kept for vs; how may we triumph and glorie in our God? Reioyce in the Lorde alway, and againe I say reioyce. When the soule is thus seasoned with the taste of this heauenly doctrine, Admonition to the house∣holder. then may the Master of the familie boldlie descrie vnto them, the errors which are contrarie to these trueths. And this he shall finde a perfect rule: that the true doctrine being once vprightly taught; whatsoeuer is not agreeing thereunto, is falsehood and to be auoyded: as Epist. 2. ver. 9 Iohn tea∣cheth, Whosoeuer transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. Now the errors are infinite, as there are many by-waies, and but one true waie: So Eccles. 7.31. God made man righteous, but they haue found out many inuentions. I will name but a fewe in comparison, yet so many as I would the Ma∣ster of the house, should vse discretion in re∣hearsing of them to his familie, namely some fewe at once: and so it wil much further them; euen as by all contraries, euery good thing is the more perceiued, felt and esteemed. In re∣peating of these, he must rehearse the true doc∣trine, and so compare them together, that they may perceiue this to bee contrary to that: as light vnto darknes. And therefore by figures, answering to the doctrines, I wil shew him, which are contrarie to each other, and
with a little heede taking and attention hee shall finde it easie. The errors and heresies contrarie to the good doctrine. 1. THe first doctrine condemneth all these, i. the Atheists of whom Psal. 14.1. Secondly, the Philosophers who make God, to bee idle, and not to haue care of the world: thirdly, the gentiles, who turned ye glory of the incorruptible God, into the image of a corruptible man, and of birdes, &c. Rom. 1.23. Fourthly, they Saturnians. who make one God of the Iewes, and another of the gentiles, and ei∣ther contrarie to other, reade Rom. 3.29. Fift∣ly, Symonians. they who affirme, that the diuell hath free power ouer all thinges, Iob. 1.8.9. Sixtly, some ascribe ouermuch to phificke, pollicie strength and witches, reade 1. Sam. 2.3.8.9. Psal. 36.6. Prou. 21.30.31. Seuenthly, Priscillia∣nists. some make starres and planets to gouerne mens actions, Hier. 10.1. Eyghtly, some ascribe the euent of things to fortune, some the being and continuance of thinges to nature, reade Esay. 45.5, 6, 7. Rom. 11.36. Reuel. 4.11. 2.3.4. To these three of the Trinitie, are contrarie, three heretikes: first, Montanists. who say there is but one person in the trinity, which is called
by diuers names, of father, sonne, and holy Ghost. Secondly, Aetians. who saye the three per∣sons to bee onely three qualities: Thirdly, Triformians. who affirme the three persons to bee three diuers and separable Gods, 1. Corinth. 8.4. 1. Iohn 5.7. Fiftly, against the person of Christ, the di∣uell hath fought by many heretikes. Some Nestorians, make one person of his diuinitie, and ano∣ther of his humanitie: some Arrians. make Christ to be God, not by nature but by grace, and to be lesse then his father. Some Bonosians. call Christ an a∣dopted sonne, some Marcellians. say he was not begotten of the father: some Carpocra∣tians. say Christ was conceiued after the manner of other men. Apollinaris. Some will haue his bodie to bee heauenly, and not of the Virgin Marie. Eunomians. Some denie Christ a minde. Eutyches. Some auouch the humane nature to bee swallowed vp of the diuine. Timotheans. Some confound the two natures of Christ, and make him a mixt third thing. The doctrine of the office of Christ doth condemne the Symonians, Sethians, Menan∣der, and all that shew any other sauiour or meanes of saluation or additament, more then Christ onely and the faith and doctrine of him. Such as are the Papists, who ioyne mans workes, merits, satisfactions, pardons, pilgrimages, prayers, purgatorie, and I cannot tell what trumperie, as additaments to Christ,
Acts 4.11. Iohn 10.1, 2, 3. and 14.6. Gal. 6.14.15. Reuel. 22.18. some Manichies. say the soule one∣ly to be saued, and Paternians. some the vpper partes of the bodie, Rom. 8.1. Philip. 3.21. 6. The doctrine of the estate of man with∣out Christ, condemneth them Pelagians. who deny children to be corrupted with originall sinne, and that without the grace of God a man may doe all the commandements of God, and Papists. they who dreame of certaine pure na∣turals, by which they imagine they can pre∣pare themselues to grace, and worke with grace the merit to saluation, 2. Cor. 3.5. Phi∣lip. 2.13. Heb. 12.2. There bee also some a∣mong vs, who thorow ignorance, doe very lightly feele their miserie, and how wickedly soeuer they liue, they yet fancie to themselues an happie estate, they say they will doe well, or pray, or aske pardon: but not feeling the deep wound of sinne, they little feare the sore and grieuous punishment which hangeth ouer their heads, for neglecting so great sal∣uation by Christ. Heb. 2.1.2.3. and 12.25. 7. The doctrine of the causes of our salua∣tion first in the good pleasure of Gods will condemneth them, Pelagians. who doe vtterly deny predestination to establish free-will. And thē Papists. who tye it to workes foreseene. Rom. 9.11. Concerning Christ, the meanes, it condem∣neth them Heracleans. who put in his roome oyntments
and ceremonies. And the Papists as before in the 5. Heb. 1.5. The doctrine of faith apply∣ing Christ, is against the Papists, who would ioyne workes. Rom. 3.28. 8. This ouerthroweth all Atheists, Deists, Sophisters, and ignorant brablers, who frame to themselues a God, or saluation, without faith in Christ. 1. Tim. 3.16. Gal. 3.26. 9. The doctrine of certaintie, confuteth the Papists, who would haue men to doubt of their saluation. Heb. 10.19.20.21.23. 10. Free saluation excludeth merit. Tit. 3.4. 11. Perfect saluation ouerthroweth the sa∣crifice of the Masse, and much popish trash. 2. Pet. 1.3. 12. This ouerthroweth Purgatorie, which is made a third place, contrarie to 1. Iohn. 1.7. 13. This refelleth them, Cerdonians. who deny the re∣surrection, or Hymineus & Philetus. say it is past alreadie, or Epicures. make their happines in this life. 1. Thess. 4.14. 1. Ioh. 3.1. 14. This reprooueth them, Gnostici. who make faith a naked knowledge of the Gospel, with∣out the fruites of good workes: or Libertines. make good workes contrarie to faith, or Antitactae. will men to be free from Gods commandements Eph. 4.24. Gal. 5.6. Eph. 2.10. 15. Concerning the Sacraments in ano∣ther place, onely here if it can bee taught, the difference of the outward signe and the thing
signified, and that these are not to bee con∣founded, neither that which is proper to the one, to bee giuen to the other; it shall giue cleere sight against many errors. As 1. Pet. 3.31. Peter speaketh of Baptisme, that it saueth vs, ope∣neth his meaning, saying, not the washing a∣way of the filth of the flesh, which is the out∣ward signe: but the inward working of the spirit, which is in the answer to God, and by the resurrection of Christ. So 22.19. Christ calling the bread his bodie, dooth yet teach vs to fol∣low this rule; when he biddeth vs doe all that actiō of receiuing it, in remembrance of him. So that the outward action is as the signe and seale, but the power of working is in the thing signified, which is Christ by his spirit, apply∣ing through faith, that heauenly washing, and foode vnto our soules. CAP. 9. The seuenth Catechisme, for establishing of iudgement. HEre I will choose two places of holy scrip∣ture, because mine especiall purpose is to teach the doctrine of the Sacraments, and handle them both together: and because they are seales of the couenant of grace, the coue∣nant also is therewithall to be declared, that the one may shewe the vse of the other, and
each take light & strength from other: which I can hardly doe out of any one text. The first Text. Tit. 3. vers. 3. We our selues were in times past vnwise, disobedient, deceiued, seruing the lusts & diuers pleasures, liuing in maliciousnes and enuie, hatefull, and hating one another. 4. But when the bountifulnes and loue of God our Sauiour, towards man appeared: 5. Not by the works of righteousnes, which wee had done, but according to his mercie hee saued vs, by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost. 6. Which he shed on vs abundantly through Iesus Christ our Lord. 7. That wee being iustified by his grace, should bee made heires according to hope of e∣ternall life. The second Text. 1. Cor. 11.23. I haue receiued of the Lord, that which I also haue deliuered vnto you, that the Lord Iesus the same night hee was be∣traied, tooke bread: Vers. 24. And when he had giuen thanks he brake it and sayd, Take, eate, this is my bodie, which is broken for you, doe this in remem∣brance of me. 25. After the same manner also hee tooke
the cup when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new Testament in my bloud, doe this as oft as you drinke it in remembrance of me. 26. For as oft as you eate this bread, or drinke this cuppe, ye shew the Lords death till he come. The Interpretation. THese two places haue one end, Both texts to one end. namely, to teach good order and good behauiour a∣mongst Gods people: the first touching all dueties, and the latter in the seruice of God, as namely in the vse of the Sacraments. The first is by a comparison of the estate of Christians before their calling, The first text. with that wherein they are after they be called: the Were in times past. vers. 3. first estate is verse 3. in these wordes, were in time past: where he describeth the nature of the vn∣regenerate, in the Wee our selues. person of the Christian in these words, we our selues, first the corruption of the Vnwise, Disobedient, Deceiued. minde, vnwise in the vnderstanding part, disobedient in will, and deceiued in iudge∣ment. Secondly, in the Seruing the lusts & diuers pleasures. affections, seruing the lusts and pleasures. Thirdly, in Liuing in maliciousnes and enuie. conuersation, liuing in all wickednes to the hurt of others: and this is set forth by the Hatefull and hating. vers. 4. effect, that one ha∣ted the other. By which hee emptieth man of all righteousnes, and strippeth him naked, that he may bee seene, to be nothing but filthines. Then the other estate is shewed in the rest.
First, by the Bountiful∣nes and  of God. fundamentall cause, the secret boūtifulnes & loue of God. And because God is Our S∣our. author of christian happines wholy & so∣ly, he is intituled Our Sauiour, this bountiful∣nes is set forth, by the When appea∣red. vers. 5. time when it was knowne and effectuall, when it appeared and this is verse 4. Then verse 5. he sheweth According to his mercie. how it is wrought, namely by mercie, that is, com∣passion on our infirmities and miseries, being such desperate sinners, which is opened by his Not by the works of righ∣teousnes which we had done. contrarie, that it was not by our workes of righteousnes. Then hee sheweth He saued vs. what God did, he saued vs, namely from that miserable estate of sinne: and this is declared by the in∣strument, which is double, one Washing. outward of lesse power, which is washing, that is Bap∣tisme: the other Holy ghost. inward which is effectuall, and maketh the washing effectuall, this is the holy Spirite: and that by two New birth and renewing. effectes, the new birth or regeneration vnto faith, and re∣newing of vs in sanctification vnto holynes. And verse 6. these two effects are set forth by the holy Iesus Christ. conduit or meanes, by which they are powred downe vpon vs, which is aboun∣dantly by Christ: and then verse 7. by the Iustified and made heires, &c. ef∣fects, that we should be iustified by his grace, (that is Rom. 3.24. freely reconciled vnto God by faith in Christs blood) and made heyres of eternall life. This latter effect is declared by his Hope. in∣strument, Hope. The summe is then, that see∣ing
by nature wee are so corrupt in minde, in will, affections and workes, and that God of his bountifulnes without our workes, moued onely by his mercie, hath begotten vs a new, and sanctified vs with his spirit, whereof Bap∣tisme is a Sacrament, & all this by Christ, &c. We ought to bee subject to principalities and powers, obedient and readie to euerie good worke. The other place, The second text opened. is by a rehearsall of the in∣stitution of Christ, that by it as by a rule or lawe, the Corinthian abuses and disorders might be reformed, where firs is the I haue recei∣ued of the Lord, &c. preface to make it a rule, because he deliuerad to them that he receiued from the Lorde: insinuating that hee durst not teach them any thing else, and therefore they did ill to corrupt that or∣der, by their abuses: then for the thing it selfe, he first simplie and truly sheweth the very sto∣rie, and after he expoundeth the vse of it. In the storie he beginneth with the The night he was betrayed. time that it was ordayned, The same night he was betrayed: namely the Colos. 2.16.17 Heb. 10.1.2.9. time of the olde testament in the shadowes, hauing in him an ende, he erecteth ordinances for the new: then secondly hee sheweth the Hee tooke read and brake, &c. vers. 24. things. First, that hee tooke bread, then that hee blessed it by 1. Cor. 10.16. giuing thankes, that is, hee separated it to some speci∣all vse, to that end followeth the breaking the bread, and bidding them to take and eate it:
then he sheweth the This is my bodie. vse of these ceremonies in these words: this is my bodie, which is sa∣cramentally spoken (as Exod. 12.11.12. 1. Cor. 10.3.4. that of the Passeo∣uer, and of Manna, and the rocke, &c.) that that breaking of bread was a signe of his bo∣die to be broken, which he expoundeth him∣selfe in the This doe ye in remēbrance of me. next wordes: which are a com∣mandement, by vertue whereof, the Churche ought to vse this Sacrament, namely, that the Church should doe as hee did, and when they so doe, they should doe it in remembrance of him. Then verse 25. hee sheweth the After the same manner, &c. like of the cup, where the words of the This cuppe is the new Te∣stament, &c. vse, are spo∣ken by a borrowed speech, the cuppe for the wine in the cup: and alluding to the Exod. 4.8. righte of the sacrifices, he calleth it the testament in his blood: meaning that it was a sacramentall signe of the couenant of God, sealed with his blood: which least we should dreame of any Transubstantiation, or consubstantiation, hee likewise expoundeth himselfe, in a This doe as oft as ye, &c. comman∣dement to the Church, that when they drinke it, they should doe as he did in remembrance of him. Now the Apostle hauing the same spirit of Christ, in that very meaning doth teach vs the As oft as ye. &c. vers. 26. vse, verse 26. calling the crea∣tures, in the eating bread; and in the drinking wine: and that the same bread and wine, so se∣parated by thankesgiuing, are not changed in their substance, but in their vse, namely that it
is not now as common bread to feede our bo∣dies onely, but it hath a sacramentall and holy vse annexed, for the feeding of our soules, that is, Wee shew the Lordes death herein till hee come. The summe then is: seeing hee deliuered vnto them, onely that he receiued, and that in this order and to this vse: they must not pro∣phane this holy Sacrament, by their disorder or additaments what so euer to doe in any o∣ther order, or to any other vse, more or lesse, then it was ordained. Whereupon he procee∣deth in the rest of the chapter, to giue them certain canons or precepts, out of the premis∣ses: namely, how they should reforme them∣selues, and doe it orderly and profitablie. The Doctrine of the Catechisme. 1. Out of both places. These two places open vnto vs the co∣uenant of God, touching the saluation of his elect, by two things. First, by doctrine as a writing declaratorie. Secondly, by Sacra∣ments as seales of that writing, confirmatory. 2. The doctrine is in the description of the persons, couenanting one with another, and the couenant it selfe. 3. In the first place, vers. 4.5.6. The first person is he who offereth the couenant, namely God: who is described, by the speciall worke which hee doth in the co∣uenant, hee maketh his bountifulnes appeare,
and is therefore intituled a Sauiour, as one that seeketh vs, and not we him. 4. The second, man, Vers. 3. shut∣ting out pure naturals, free will, &c. who receiueth the couenants, who is described voyde of all goodnes, in minde, will, affections, & works: for so Ezech. 16.4.5.8. God findeth vs in our filthines before the couenant. 5. In the se∣cond place. vers. 24.25. The third person is the mediator of the couenant, Christ: who giueth his body and blood for the confirmation of the couenant. 6. This is out of both places. The couenant it selfe is first called the new Testament, that is, Ierem. 31.31. not of the lawe of workes, but of mercie and grace. Therefore on the partie that offereth it is thus described. First, God propoundeth himselfe to bee our God and Sauiour: then hee receiueth vs to himselfe by mercie in Christ, and not by our workes. Thirdly, he sheweth the effect of the couenant, that wee should bee iustified by his grace, and made heyres thorow hope of eter∣nal life. On our part the condition is no more, but to receiue all this by faith in Christ, which is giuen vs in the new birth, and therefore Rom. 8.15. cal∣led the spirite of Adoption, by which wee call God, Father. And so the couenant is made on our part, as it is Gal. 3.26. written, Yee are all the sonnes of God by faith in Christ Iesus. Where you may see that Christ is the mediator Eph. 2.18. to bring vs to God, namely, by beleefe in him. Which couenant God will haue declared be∣fore
men, by the vse of his seruice, as professi∣on, Sacraments, &c. and by obedience vnto euery good worke. 7. In beholding which couenant, wee may see all merit and reioycing in man, vtter∣ly excluded. For before the couenant, wee are altogether voyde of all goodnes: in the coue∣nant wee are receiued and saued by mercie without workes: Christ is a mediator to God for vs, paying the ransome of our sinnes: by him is powred vpon vs the new birth, and re∣newing of the holy Ghost: by him we are iu∣stified, and made heyres of euerlasting life. If we haue faith or hope, they are all the giftes of God thorow Christ: so that wee haue euery way, cause of abasing our selues, and onely to 1. Cor. 1.30. reioyce in him. Wherefore the Church ascri∣bing nothing to her selfe, maketh this ioyfull confession. Esay. 61.10. I will greatly reioyce in the Lord, and my soule shall be ioyfull in my God: for he hath clothed mee with the garments of salua∣tion, and couered me with the robe of righte∣ousnes, &c. Now not minding to shew euery particu∣lar poynt which these two places affoord, An obserua∣tion to the tea∣cher. we will come to the second parte of the Sacra∣ments. In handling whereof, if any thing bee not in one of these two texts (for it were much all to be) I will set in the margine some other place, as a supplie to their wants: and this do∣ctrine
is in two things. 1. How many Sacra∣ments. 2. What they be. 8. There are but two Sacraments of the I say couenāt, because the word sacra∣ment is vsed diuersly: this shutteth of vnproper vses. couenant, that is to say, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper. The other poynt, What they bee, will ap∣peare easie, if wee learne how they agree be∣tweene themselues, and how they differ both betweene themselues, and also from others. 9. Two Sacra∣ments agree in foure things. These two Sacraments agree in these things. 1. In a generall definition: A Sacra∣ment is a signe and seale of the couenant of grace. First, they are signes, In a generall definition. as water & wash∣ing in Baptisme; bread and wine, eating and drinking in the Lords Supper. They are both signes of the couenant: for Baptisme signi∣fieth Christs bloud in the couenant, and so dooth the Lords Supper: and they bee both more thē bare signes, euen seales of assurance. For as the seale is set to a will or deed, to con∣firme the writing: so are these two appointed by Christ, to assure vs of the thing they signi∣fie. Therefore the one is called his body, and the other the washing of the new birth: not because they bee chaunged in nature, but by such a neere speech to assure vs of the thing sealed or signed. They both herein assure vs of our iustification and sanctification. Secondly, They be as badges. they bee both outward badges of our profes∣sion, as by the one we shew the Lords death,
and by the other that wee are Gods children by a new birth. Thirdly, Both com∣manded, Mat. 28.18.19. they both haue a commandement from Christ. Fourthly, Both haue a forme of ad∣ministration. Acts. 2.14.37.38. Mar. 16.15.16 they both haue a prescribed forme of administra∣tion, in regard of the Minister and people. The Minister is appoynted to preach and declare the couenant, and to administer the Sacra∣ments; the people to heare and to receiue the Sacraments. In Baptisme the Minister must wash with water, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: the person to bee admitted into the Church, is to submit himselfe to such a washing. In the Lords Supper, the Minister by thanksgiuing is to set apart, to this holy vse, the bread & wine seuerally, to breake the bread, and to giue af∣terwards seuerally, first bread, and then wine, to the people, bidding them to eate & drinke, &c. and the people ought to receiue them both seuerally, first bread, and then wine, and to eate the bread and drinke the wine: not as common bread and wine, but as sanctified to the holy vse by Christ prescribed. 10. The first disagreement with others. The fiue forged Sacraments of the Church of Rome, cannot bee reckoned with these; because they are not pertaining to the couenant, nor commaunded by God, with outward signes to the vses here described: but either haue no outward signes, as Penance: or els other significations and vses: As Ma∣trimonie
hath no signe ordained of God to this vse, but sometime is made an Hoseah. 2.19. Eph. 5.23. allegorie, or metaphor, and sometime is taught by comparison, from Christ and his Church. Or∣ders haue imposition of hands, but not com∣manded by God for the grace of this coue∣nant, or to bee badges of our profession, but for the 1. Tim. 4.14. grace of the office of the Ministrie. So the annoynting of the sicke in the Gospell is not taught, as the Papists vse it: but only to bee an Iam. 5.14. outward signe, in healing the bodie: but a Sacramēt is for the comfort of the soule. The like may be sayd of the other. 11. The second difference in themselues. The differences betweene these two Sacraments of the couenant in themselues, are these. 1. In the signe, Baptisme hath wa∣ter and washing: the Lords Supper hath bread and wine, eating and drinking, &c. 2. In the manner of signifying; because they apply the couenant to vs in diuers sorts. Baptisme ap∣plieth it, as our first entring into couenant, and there it signifieth our new birth and re∣newing, &c. and therefore all that are Act. 10.47. with the pla∣ces before quo∣ted. first receiued into the Church are admitted by Baptisme; and a man is but once baptized, because hee is but once to bee borne againe. The Lords Supper applieth the couenant, in regard of the euerlasting continuance of fa∣uour betweene God and vs in Christ, there∣fore wee eate bread and drinke wine, as liuely
signes of our growing & increasing in Christ, in faith and good life, and in all assurednes of eternall life: And therefore it is often vsed, that wee may continually bee strengthened and confirmed in his grace, from faith to faith. 12. The third difference from others. In all this declaration, agreeing to holie Scripture, and so in all the Bible beside, you shall neuer sinde that the Sacraments by the outward worke wrought, doe giue grace: or that the signe leeseth his nature to be turned into the thing signified: or that there is a reall, locall and corporall presence of the thing, in the outward signe: or that in Baptisme, exor∣cisme, creame, spettle, salt, or any other thing is to be mingled, or vsed, but onely water: or that in the Lords Supper there should bee an vnbloudie sacrifice, the bread adored, reser∣ued or carried about, or the wine should bee kept from the common people. Therefore all these, and whatsoeuer other additaments and abuses of the holy Sacraments, are altogether to be reiected and condemned, by the rule A∣postolicall, because they are not receiued of the Lord. Here the master of the familie may ap∣plie the substance of the former Cate∣chisme to his folke, by this place. 1. Cor. 12. vers. 13. By one spirit wee are all
baptized into one bodie, whether we bee Iewes or Grecians, whether we bee bond or free, and haue been all made to drinke into one spirit. 1. One bodie, one spirit. Where one bodie and one spirit to Iew and Gentill, &c. shew the couenant in grace and communion of God with all nations and sorts of people thorow Christ, by his spi∣rit in one bodie. 2. Both Sacraments teach, Baptised into. Drinke into. there is one ho∣lie communion betweene GOD and his Church. 3. Baptisme, our regeneration and incor∣poration into the same communion: the Lords Supper, our daily nourishment from our head Christ, growing together in the same couenant. CAP. 10. The fourth order of Catechisme. NOw for the masters further helpe, To the house∣holder. I will commend vnto him these foure places: namely, Ephes. 2.8.9.10. 2. Thess. 2.13.14. Tit. 2.11.12.13.14. Iam. 1.18. whereof hee shall see euery one fit to bring into his remē∣brance the doctrines of the former Cate∣chismes. And I hope both he and his familie, may easily gather the same of themselues, be∣ing made ripe thereunto by their former pra∣ctise:
reioycing in the plentifull and sweete consent of so many places of Gods word, and admiring the goodnes of God, that so abun∣dantly and liberally bestoweth vpon vs his rich treasures of wisedom and vnderstanding. And if in them he finde something not easie, let the master repayre to his pastor, and seeke the lawe at his mouth: For Malac. 2.7. his lippes should preserue knowledge, being the messenger of the Lorde of hostes: and 4.1. steward of the se∣crets of GOD. Howbeit, in so waightie and needfull prouision, I woulde haue this housholder to bee well stored, that hee maye feede his familie with more ioy and plentie, to make them strong & well liking in the house of our God, children, that boldly will answer the enemie in the gates, and sight valiantly the battels of the Lord. Therefore I will here adde two Catechismes more for his helpe: where the first will shew him in a notable or∣der Iacobs Ladder: namely, by what steppes God bringeth all his children into the euerla∣sting kingdome of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the heauenly mansions of his diuine palace. And this is in one scripture most orderly com∣pact together, by the heauenly spirit. The o∣ther is Therefore I make it a book by itselfe, and uide it into chapters. a more perfect bodie of Christirn doc∣trine, of many and diuers places of scripture: as a shining light vnto the feete of all Gods
children, in the dayes of their pilgrimage, till they shal come into the land of their cele∣stiall inheritance. The eyght Catechisme for helpe of the housholder. The text. Ephes. 1.3. Blessed bee God, euen the fa∣ther of our Lorde Iesus Christ: which hath blessed vs with all spirituall blessings, in hea∣uenly things in Christ. 4. As hee hath chosen vs, in him, before the foundation of the world: that wee should bee holie and without blame before him in loue. 5. Who hath predestinated vs, to bee a∣dopted thorow Iesus Christ, vnto himselfe: according to the good pleasure of his will. 6. To the praise of the glorie of his grace, wherewith hee hath made vs accepted in his beloued. 7. By whom we haue redemption through his blood: euen the forgiuenes of sinnes, accor∣ding to his rich grace. 8. Whereby hee hath been aboundant to∣ward vs, in all wisdome and vnderstanding. 9. And opened vnto vs the mysterie of his will, according to the good pleasure, which he had purposed in him.
10. That in the dispensation of the ful∣nes of times; he might gather together in one, all thinges, both which are in heauen, and which are in earth. In shewing the Catechisme out of this text, I will follow this order. In the middle, by interpretation I will poynte out the golden steppes of this heauenly Gen. 28.12. ladder, by which the elect doe walke vp into heauen: and in the margin the particular poyntes of doctrine, as the goodly 1. King. 10.18. Lions on both side of the steps of Salomons throne, which with little marking, thou maist perceiue to offer themselues, The poynts of doctrine. in the meaning of the words. The interpretation or ladder. Ver. 3. HEre is the top of Salomons throne: for hee sheweth in this verse, the state of all faithfull Christians in this life, after their effectuall calling: that they haue, as it were, liuery and sesin of that heauenly king∣dome. Where the blessing is that of Abraham Gen. 22. communicated vnto them by the The trinitie. spirite: and it is described by the author The trinitie. God the Christ in his person, Gods sonne, in office Lord Iesus & Christ. i an∣noynted Sa∣uiour, king, priest, and pro∣phet. Father, of our The trinitie. Lorde Iesus Christ: and by the nature of it, which is heauenly, which may be translated, as chap. 2.6. heauenly pla∣ces. because the The state of beleeuers: to bee heires of heauen. blessing is to make vs heyres of heauen by hope, as is expounded verse 13.14. and Titus. 3.7. and it is set forth by the
meanes which is Christ the meanes. Christ, namely, that being in Christ, we haue this blessing, Gal. 3.14. and it is saide, all spirituall blessings, because The Spirit the worker. by the spirite all giftes necessarie to eternall life, are giuen vs, 1. Pet. 1.3. and he teacheth them to prayse God the au∣thor. God as the author, saying. Blessed be God, &c. Hauing shewed that the faithfull, are set by Christ, thorow the spirit, in the state of salua∣tion, as it were translated from death to life: now in the rest hee sheweth the proceeding of the causes, as the steppes by which GOD bringeth vs vnto this, and so in the accom∣plishment of all the elect, vnto the perfection of ioye, in the life to come. Verse 4. He sheweth the first steppe: The first cause of salua∣tion, chosen before the world was. God doth chuse them: this is declared by the time, that is, before all time: and by the God in cho∣sing looked not on worke or faith fore∣seene, but on his sonne. mouing cause in Christ, & by the Godly life an effect, not a cause of salua∣tion. end, that we should be holy, &c. Verse 5. He sheweth here a second cause or degree; which is, The second cause of salua∣tion, adoption thorow Christ Adoption, that is, God would take vs to bee his children, which is set forth, by the repetition of the first cause, They that are adopted, were first pre∣destinated. predestination, which is generall to electi∣on and reprobation, namely, that out of it came adoption, that is, God set downe by de∣cree, whom he would make his children tho∣row Christ, which is called the sure foundati∣on of God, 2. Tim. 2.19. and this illustrated by
another The good pleasure of Gods will, the mouing cause of predestina∣tion to adop∣tion. mouing cause, which is the good pleasure of his will. Verse. 6. The former cause is here ampli∣fied by the last The glory of God the finall cause. final: the glorie of Gods grace. Which The grace of God a third cause. grace is made a third and speciall working cause, bringing forth a fourth, which is our Iustifica∣tion a fourth cause. iustification, for hee saith that with If it bee of grace, it is not now of works. Rom. 11.6. grace he maketh them accepted; and to bee accepted, is alone with iustified, and his grace being the cause thereof, sheweth that wee are freely iustified by his grace, Rom. 3.24. And lastly, that we may know this iustifying to be We are iusti∣fied by grace thorow faith in Christ. by faith in Christ, he addeth him, as the ma∣teriall cause in all these causes, terming him beloued, by excellencie, because for his sake God doth these things. Verse 7. The Redemption by Christs bloud, a fift cause. fift cause of our saluation is redemption by Christs blood, & this is decla∣red by the Forgiuenes of sinnes, part of redemptiō. His bloud she∣weth Christ a naturall man. effect, forgiuenes of sinnes, which sheweth how Christ is the meanes of our iu∣stification, namely in that hee payed the ran∣some for our sinnes: and so wee being forgi∣uen, are accounted iust for his sake, as is ope∣ned, 2. Cor. 5.17.20.21. which is amplified by repetition of the working cause, his grace: Rich is the grace of God in forgiuenes of sinnes. which for the exceeding greatnes is called rich. Verse 8.9. Here he sheweth a The preaching of the Gospell, a sixt cause. sixt cause, euen the instrument, by which he applieth all
these causes vnto vs: which is the preaching of the Gospell called here, The Gospell is the opening of the mistery of Gods will, in all wisdome and vnderstan∣ding. The opening of the mystery of his will: So expounded, cap. 3.4, 5, 6. Coloss. 1.25.26. Which thing is set forth, first, by the cause: whereby, that is his grace: secondly, by the order of it, that it was aboun∣dant in all wisdome and vnderstanding: third∣ly, the The preach∣ing of the gos∣pell, commeth of Gods grace and good pleasure. repetition of one mouing cause, The good pleasure of his will: and lastly, by the first cause, his Preaching of the gospell, or∣dained of Gods purpose. purpose: wherein he regarded no∣thing but Christ, wherefore hee saith in him: that is, as God purposed in his good pleasure to elect and adopt these happie soules in Christ: so did he in that purpose appoynt the meanes; which is the preaching of the Gos∣spell. Verse 10. The Our effectu∣all calling, the seuenth cause. last cause, which is the ef∣fectuall calling, named the All the faith∣full gathered into one. gathering into one. The greeke word signifieth the gathering of dispersed things, into one entire or summe, namely, that where we be in all ages, as sheep going astray, we are called by the gospell, and gathered by fayth vnto Christ our shepheard; into one felowship or bodie: which then shall be There is a certaine num∣ber of the e∣lect, which shall be made full vp in Christ. perfected, when the whole number of the elect, being accomplished, we shall all meete with Christ, and hee made meruellous in all that beleeue, Ephes. 4.12, 13. which calling is set forth by two argumentes. First, by the times, wherein there is a The faithfull called in all times & ages. dispensation of
times, and a In the end of time all the elect shall be one with Christ. fulnes of times: which sheweth that God calleth and gathereth his elect, in many times, as before the law and vnder the law, and in the time of the Gospell, wherein the whole world shalbe gathered And there∣fore is called by excellēcie the fulnes of times: Gal. 4.4. and when all shall be gathered, then the times shall be full, Rom. 11.25.26. There is but one Christ to saue all of all times and na∣tions. Se∣condly, by a distribution of the things to bee gathered, which are the elect: some in If out of hea∣uen and earth, then there is no Limbus patrum, nor Purgatorie. hea∣uen, some still founde on the earth, till the whole summe be called and gathered. Now The Catho∣like Church is the companie of beleeuers in Christ in hea∣nenand eath. all these some at one time and some at ano∣ther being gathered, shall bee vnited vnto Christ, and then being perfect, they shall all be partakers of his glorie, and he shall giue vp his kingdome to his father. 2. Thess. 2.14. 1. Cor. 15.24. Now here the master may learne to set all these causes in their right order of place, out of Rom. 8.30. Whom he predestinated, them also he called: and whom he called, them also he iustified: and whom he iustified, them also he glorified. Where vnder predestinated be con∣tained, his purpose, the good pleasure of his will & election before the foundation of the world. All the rest is the performance of that prede∣stination: As first the calling, by which is not meant the outward calling onely: but also the inward calling, which Christ sheweth in this
posie: Matth. 22.14 Many are called, but few are chosen. For there is a generall calling by preaching to many, and an effectuall calling (accompany∣ing preaching) by the spirit, in a few. Vnder this calling are contained, the sending of Christ, the preaching of Christs Gospel, the worke of the spirit, making vs to beleeue in him sent and preached, the new birth and re¦newing of the holy Ghost: For none are truly called, but they in whom all these meet. The second worke of performance, is in this word instified: vnder which is contained our re∣demption, forginenes of sinnes, and imputa∣tion of righteousnes, which is the accepting of vs in Christ; the peace with God, adoption, the companion of iustification which is sanc∣tification, and his daughters ioy in the holie Ghost, standing in grace, &c. Lastly, is glori∣fied, by which is meant the finall gathering into one of all the elect vnto saluation, with Christ; when it shall be no small part of hap∣pines, to bee holie and without blame before God: (hauing no neede of earthly garments to couer our shame) and to praise God for the glory of his grace, raigning with him in fulnes of ioy for euer & euer. 1. Thess. 3 13 Reuel. 22.1.2.3.4.7. and 22.1.2 &c. and 20.6. Euen so Lord Iesus come quickly. Amen.
The second booke, containing the last order of instruction. COncerning this last and largest Cate∣chisme, An obsernati∣on to the housholder. I am to admonish the master of the familie: First, that I set downe in seuerall places and chapters, seuerall and particular places of Scripture, for the teaching of the se∣uerall parts of doctrine. The text is alway set before the doctrine not in the words, as in the former Catechismes, but onely the name of the booke, chapter, verse, or verses, where the words are written: which he is to peruse and to compare with the parts of doctrine which I set downe; and then to reade it to his fami∣lie, and out of it being read, to shew them so much as I set downe out of it. Secondly, hee shall finde in some poynts, that they are not so direct, or expressed in the text, but are ga∣thered by circumstāce or consequence. Such as Christ Matth. 22.31 vsed, to prooue the resurrection, if God call himselfe the God of Abraham, &c. and that he bee God of the liuing and not of the dead: then verily there is a resurrection appoynted for the dead. Againe, wee finde that God hath Ephes. 1.4.11 elected some vnto saluation before the foundation of the world, and that he doth thorowly bring to passe whatsoeuer he hath purposed. And againe we finde that
Luke. 13.23, 24, 25. 26. some shall not bee saued: then it followeth, that God neuer purposed their saluation, and by consequent he purposed the contrarie: ex∣cept wee will make God, as a Luke 14.28. foolish buil∣der, that doth not forecast what hee will doe with euery part of that hee buildeth: or els i∣magine some Eccles. 7.15.16. other power to take order in his ouerslippes, or els Esay 40.12, 13, 14, 15. giue him some coun∣sellers or helpers; which is as the foolish hath sayd in his heart, Psal. 14.1. Now because he should not stumble at a thing that seemes so bare, I will adde in euery such place, some one or two plaine places of holy scripture, to proue the matter of such a collection agreeing to faith: and these shall be alwayes in the end, or behind euery such poynt. Also some one poynt by reason of the order of his place, may not bee contained in the text by any collec∣tion, and some may be directly in the text, but not so cleere and plaine. Here I will also helpe the master with some other place direct and plaine, and by some one word guide him to discerne when any thing is not in the text. Lastly, in teaching this Catechisme, hee may sometimes giue them some one chapter: sometimes two for their easines; sometimes but a part of one, for length or hardnes; and in all things to vse good discretion. Al which rules being obserued, hee shall finde I hope good vse of this Catechisme.
The last Catechisme, containing the summe of the doctrine of Christ: by many places of Scripture. CAP. 1. Of the doctrine of Christ. What. Titus. 1.1.2. The doctrine of Christ is the knowledge of the trueth, according to godli∣nes: vnder the hope of eternall life, teaching the nature and actions of God. CAP. 2. Of the nature of God. Ioh. 4.24. Exod. 3.14. Reuel. 1.8. God is a spirit, being of himselfe, for euer. Ioh. 15.26. There are three persons in the Godhead, equall in substance. The Father of whom are the rest, in these words, sent from the father. The Sonne begotten of the Father from euerlasting. Ioh. 1.18. and 17.5. The ho∣ly Ghost proceedeth from them both, in these words, I will send, and proceedeth from the father. 2. The Father worketh of himselfe by the Sonne, and thorow the holy Ghost: the Sonne worketh from the Father thorow the holy Ghost: the holy Ghost worketh from the Father and the Sonne. Tit. 3.4.5.6.
CAP. 3. Of the actions of God. Gods decree. Eph. 1.11. Here the actions of God are de∣clared: which are of two sorts. 1. The decree, which is, that he foreappoynted all things, in these words; purpose and counsell of his will, after which he worketh all things. 2. The exe∣cution of the decree, which is, that he perfor∣meth all things according to his purpose, in these words, worketh all things. Here in regard of man this decree is called predestination, which is the foreordaining of some men to saluation, expressely: and some to damnation, by consequent. Iud vers. 4. Pro. 16.4. 1. Pet. 2.8. The performance of this pre∣destination, is by election in Christ, expressely, & by reprobation from Christ, by consequent; such as refuse Christ. Ioh. 8.42.43.47. CAP. 4. Of the execution of Gods decree. Psalm. 33.6.7.8.9.10.11. The execution of Gods decree is, that he performeth his eternal purpose, by creating all things, vers. 6.7.8. By gouerning all things in their times & seasons. vers. 10.11. CAP. 5. Of the creation. Gen. chap. 1. and chap. 2. These two chap∣ters teach vs. 1. God made all things by his
word of nothing. 2. In sixe daies. 3. Man in the sixt day. 4. God made man and woman, that is, male and female in one day, cap. 1.26.27. 5. God made man of the dust of the earth, touching his body, and breathed in him his soule: so he had both body & soule. cap. 2.7 6. The woman was made of the man: God cast him in a deepe sleepe, took out one of his ribbes and closed vp the flesh, and of the ribbe made the womā: the mans name was Adam, the womans, Eue: chap. 2.21.22. chap. 3.20. 7. The excellencie of man aboue other earth∣ly creatures, is in two thinges. 1. They were created after the image of God, which shineth principally in the soule, chap. 1.27. which is in knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. and practise of holi∣nes & righteousnes, Eph. 4.24. 2. They were created in most perfect happines, where vnto the image of God these things were ioyned; they had authoritie and Lordship ouer the creatures, chap. 1.28. they were so beautifull, that being naked they were not ashamed. cap. 2.25. CAP. 6. Gouernment before the fall. Gen. cap. 2. God placed man in a most plea∣sant place of the world, called the garden of Eden. vers. 15. 2. He gaue him commandement to keepe and to dresse the garden. vers. 15.
3. He gaue him the tree of life in the mid∣dest of the garden, as a Sacrament, that if hee continued in well doing, he should liue for e∣uer. vers. 9. cap. 3.22. 4. He gaue him this order: he might take of all the trees in the garden, except the tree of knowledge of good and euill, and in that day he should eate thereof he should dye the death. vers. 16.17. 5. Hee instituted marriage, to bee of one man and one woman: that they two should be one flesh. vers. 24. CAP. 7. The fall of man. Gen. 3. In this chapter, the storie of the fall of man is set forth, in these poynts. 1. The diuell abusing the tongue of a ser∣pent, entised the womā Eue, and she did eate of the forbidden fruite, and she gaue to her husband Adam, & he did eate: and so the cō∣mandemēt of God was broken. ver. 1.2.3. &c. 2. By this disobedience, Adam and Eue, and all mankind were dead in finne, and vn∣der damnation of bodie and soule, that is, hee lost his excellencie, and became ashamed of himselfe, vers. 7.8.9.10. expounded Eph. 2.1.2.3. Rom. 5.12.13.14. 3. To make man to see his owne miserie: God cursed the earth for his sake, that it shuld bring forth briers, thistles and thornes; made
the man to get his liuing with toile and paine, till hee dyed: the woman with sorrowe and griefe to bring forth and bring vp her childrē: and banished them both out of the garden of Eden, vers. 16.17. &c. CAP. 8. Gouernment after the fall: The restoring of man: The two couenants. Iere. 31.31.32.33.34. This place teacheth: 1. For the restoring of man, from the death of sinne and damnation: God made two coue∣nants: the couenant of workes, and the coue∣nant of mercie. 2. The couenant of works is, that God will be our God, if wee keepe all his commaundements, vers. 31.32. 3. The coue∣nant of mercie is, God will bee our God, by forgiuenes of sinnes thorow Christ, and write his lawes in our hearts, vers. 33.34. Heb. 10.12.13.15.16. 4. We are not saued by the co∣uenant of workes, that is, by keeping of Gods commandements: for no man can do them, vers. 32. But wee are saued by the couenant of mercie, that is, by beleefe in Iesus Christ, by whom our sins are forgiuen, vers. 33.34. Rom. 8.3. Eph. 2.8.9. CAP. 9. Of the first couenant, which is of workes, and the true force and perpetuall vse of the law. Rom. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. The lawe bewrayeth sinfulnes; pro∣nounceth
vs guiltie, maketh vs vnable to open our mouthes, to claime any things at Gods hand, for our owne righteousnes or well doo∣ing: that we might run vnto Christ in the co∣uenant of mercie, to be iustified, and saued by beleefe in him, Gal. 3.21.22. Ephes. 2.8, 9, 10. Although we cannot bee saued or iustified by our workes or well-doo∣ing: yet God hath ordayned, the good workes commanded in his lawe, for those, who shall be saued by the couenant of mercie, to walke in: as a perpetuall rule of right liuing to all beleeuers, 1. Thess. 4.2.3.4. with 1. Ioh. 3.6, 7, 8 Here the ten Commaundements are to be expounded. CAP. 10. Of the couenant of mercie, and the medi∣ator thereof. 2. Cor. 5.19. This teacheth the order of the couenant of mercie: namely thus. God calleth vs by his Gospell vnto his mercie thorow Christ, and offereth to reconcile vs vnto him∣selfe, thorow him, by forgiuenes of sinnes: and we are in couenant with him, when he gi∣ueth vs faith in Christs blood, Rom. 3.25. Gal. 4.4.5. This place sheweth the mediator Christ; by his person, and office. His person: that he is the sonne of God, made man: that is to say: perfect GOD and perfect man, in one
person: man, to be like his bretheren, as Heb. 2.17. God, to be holy, harmeles, &c. as Heb. 7.26. His office, to be the mediator of the coue∣nant of mercie, in that by his death, he redee∣meth vs from vnder the lawe, to bee made the children of God. Psal. 110.1, 2, 3, 4. This text sheweth the parts of Christs office of mediatorship, name∣ly, that hee should bee King, verse 1.2.3. and Priest. verse 4. CAP. 11. Of the Priesthoode of Christ. 1. Pet. 3.18.19. This declareth that Christs Priesthoode is fulfilled in two points: 1. in his perfect obedience, as a iust and holy man vnto death, and all other priestly actions thereunto adioyned, verse 18. Secondly, in his propheti∣call function, verse 19. Rom. 8.33.34. This declareth the priestlie actions of Christ, to be of two sortes: 1. the sa∣crifice of his death, and his resurrection, to put away our sinnes, and to make vs righteous, Rom. 4.25. 2. sitting at the right hand of God to make intercession for vs. CAP. 12. Of the Kingdome of Christ, and namely be∣fore, and vntill the last iudgement. Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Here is the kingly office of Christ described. 1. Hee is
head of his church, who nourisheth it, and fur∣nisheth it in all things, verse. 16. 2. This furniture is in the applying of the workes of his priesthood, both before, and vn∣till the last iudgement, and at the iudgement, verse 11.12.13. 3. Before the iudgement, in two thinges: first, the outward pollicie and administration of his Church, vers. 11.12. Secondly, the inward worke of his spirite, verse. 11.16. 4. The outward pollicie is administred, by officers; who are men furnished with giftes, to worke in the building of the Church, verse 11.12. and these are of two sortes: first, such as teach knowledge, vnto which are most com∣monly ioyned the administration of publike prayers and Sacraments, as Act. 6.4. Matth. 28.19. And these I finde to be either extraor∣dinary, as Apostles, the founders of the church, Ephe. 2.20. and their assistants, prophets and Euangelists, Colos. 1.1.2. Tim. 4.5. or else or∣dinary, as pastors to teach by exhortation, and teachers, to vtter doctrine, Rom. 12.2.8. Se∣condly, such as are for practise of life, namely, elders to bee gouernours, 1. Cor. 12.28. and Deacons to looke to the poore, Act. 6.1, 2, 3. and for this cause he hath ordained the elder∣ship, Matth. 18.17. 1. Tim. 4.14. 5. The inward worke of his spirit, is faith vnfayned, and knowledge, verse 13. and the fruites of faith, which bee our growing into
Christ; increasing by his grace; loue to edifie each other, vers. 15.16. Rom. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Here we be taught fur∣ther fruites of faith, wrought by the spirit: first, that wee bee iustified, to haue peace towards God, ver. 1. Secondly, adopted, to haue accesse to God, ver. 2. so opened, Rom. 8.14. & of this commeth ioy vnspeakeable, vers. 2. with pati∣ence, vers. 3. and hope by the feeling of Gods loue, to make vs bold, verse 4, 5. CAP. 13. Of the seales of the couenant or Sacraments. Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. & 1. Cor. 10.17. These two places teach ye doctrine of the sacramēts. 1. A sacrament is a signe to represent, and a seale to applie vnto all beleeuers, the coue∣nant of mercy: out of both, and is expounded, Rom. 4.11. 2. There be two, Baptisme and the Lords supper. 3. Baptisme is a signe and seale of our ad∣mission into the couenant, by the new birth and renewing of the holy ghost, this is in the first place, to which agreeth, Tit. 3.5. The Lordes supper, is a signe and seale for the continuall confirming of vs in the same couenant, this is in the latter place. CAP. 14. Of the last iudgement. Matth. 25.31, 32. &c. This shadoweth out
the secōd part of the administration of Christs kingdom, which is the last iudgement. Where we may learne two things. 1. The manner of Christes comming vnto iudgement, namely in glory with all his holy Angels, vers. 31. 2. The iudgement it selfe which is in two points: 1. The wonderfull meeting; first of the iudge Christ sitting in the throne of his glory, vers. 31. Then of the persons to be iudged; All nations, vers. 32. That is, all the dead raised in their bodies, and all the liuing chaunged, 1. Corm. 15.52. 2. In the Sentence Iudiciall, which is generall or common, that euerly one shall bee rewarded according to his workes, vers. 35.42. with 2. Cor 5.10. and also speciall or peculiar, for some are pronounced, Blessed, to inherite euerlasting life; ver. 34.46. & some cursed, to goe into eternal paine, vers. 41.46, 1 Cor. 15.24.25.26.27.28. This text tea∣cheth, 1. Thereshall be an end when all rule, authoritie, and power is put downe, vers. 24. 2. Christ kingdome lasteth, till all enemies to him and his Church be destroyed, ver. 25. 3. The last enemie is death, which shall be swallowed vp of life, vers. 26. 4. At the end he shall giue vp his kingdom to God his father, and so (touching his man∣hood) he shall bee subiect himselfe, that God may be all in all, vers. 24.27.28.
A short and plaine opening of the tenne Com∣mandements. THe tenne Commandements teach and command all dueties belonging to God and man, in two tables. The first table is of our duetie to God, in foure precepts, shewing what we must do to his person, and in his out∣ward worship. 1. The first precept teacheth, that we owe vnto the person of God, to set him onely vp as the true God, first in our hearts, by true know∣ledge of his diuine nature, attributes, Trinitie, Gal. 4.8. and by a sure confidence in him, to hope, loue, delight, reuerence and feare him a∣boue things, Phil. 3.19. Eph. 5.5. and second∣ly, by our outward profession, as Ion. 1.9. and in all our workes. Pro. 3.6. His outward wor∣ship is in two things: 1. The meanes. 2. The right applying of the meanes. 2. The secōd precept teacheth the meanes, which being negatiue and naming but one thing of mans deuise, forbiddeth all mans in∣uentions, in the outward worship of God: & commandeth onely that which God prescri∣beth, which is either ordinary meanes: as di∣uine adoration, Psal. 95.6. The vse of his name either simply, Psal. 68.4. or in an oth, Exod. 22 11. meditation on his creatures, Psalm. 145.1.
praier & thanksgiuing, Psal. 50.15. the Sacra∣mēts, Mat. 28.19. and his order in his church, Coloss. 2.5. or extraordinary, as fasting, Ioel. 2. feasting, Ester 9. vowing, Gen. 28.20. and in a lot, Prouer. 16.33. The right applying of the meanes of Gods worship, is either in the right vse euery day, or els in the vse of one day in seuen. 3. The third precept, cōmandeth vs euery day to vse reuerently the outward meanes of Gods worship, putting a part which is his name, for the whole being of the sam kind, and by forbidding the euill commanding the good, which is to bee obserued before and in the action, and after the action with profite. Leuit. 24.11. 1. Cor. 11.28.34. Ezech. 33.30.31.32. 4. The fourth precept teacheth the vse of one day in seuen, to bee put apart from all our owne workes, to be dedicated to the worship of God. In the congregation by the worke of the ministrie, and at home in applying the same to the familie. Act. 20.7. Deut. 6.6. The second table is of our dutie to man, in sixe precepts, which either regard the outward action with consent of will in 5. or els of de∣sire onely in the last. The 5. are either speciall dueties, or els ge∣nerall. 5. The fift precept teacheth speciall du∣ties;
by a part for the whole, and by propor∣tion, commanding all duties of superiours to inferiours and contrary, and of equals, where this any speciall bond or respect, requiring a speciall dutie. 2. Sam. 15. 1. Pet. 3.1.7.8. Loue as brethren. Generall duties belong either to a mās person, or the things pertaining to him. 6. The sixt precept teacheth duties to our neighbours person: commanding by a nega∣tiue of euill, to procure the safetie of our neigh∣bours erson. Gen. 4.8. Rom. 16.4. The things belonging to his person, are ei∣ther in him, or without him. 7. The seuenth precept, teacheth our du∣tie to the things in our neighbour, as his body, 1. Cor. 6.18. by a negatiue of ill commaunds the pure and vndefiled vsing of our neighbors bodie. 2. Sam. 11.2.3.4. Gen. 39.8.9. With∣out a man, are his goods and name. 8 The eight precept teacheth by a nega∣tiue, that wee ought to preserue our neigh∣bours goods. Exod. 23.4.5. 9. The ninth precept teacheth by a nega∣tiue, to tender our neighbours good name. Gen. 39.17. Psal. 15.3. 10. The tenth precept teacheth, that wee ought to doe al the former speciall and gene∣rall dueties, with all our thoughts and desires. 1. King. 21.12. Iam. 4.1. 1. Thess. 5.23.
A briefe and easie opening of the sense of the Lords prayer, which pertaineth to the second Commandement, and is to be learned after the tenne Commandements. THe Lords Prayer containeth sixe petitiōs, teaching vs to aske three requests pertai∣ning to Gods glorie: and three for our owne necessities. Concerning Gods glorie wee aske two things: that God be honored; & the meanes. 1. The first petitiō teacheth vs to ay that God may be honored in all things, Psa 19.1. 1. Cor. 10.31. The meanes of Gods honour are in regard of his kingdome and will. 2. The second petition teacheth vs to pray for the aduancement of Gods kingly regimēt in all things, and specially in his Church. Psal. 93.1.2.3. and Psal. 145. 3. The third petition teacheth vs to pray for the aduancement of Gods royall will in his decree in all thinges, and his word in his Church. Psal. 147.15.19. Concerning our selues, we aske things for the bodie and for the soule. 4. The fourth petition vnder the name bread, teacheth vs to aske whatsoeuer is ne∣cessary for this bodily life, as health, wealth,
libertie, &c. Esay. . For the soule wee neede forgiuenes of innes, and protection a∣gainst Sathan.  of a 5. The fifth petition teearne of them to  the letter innes then in eight dayes they haue all the ings but it must bee in this or∣der , to know them wheresoeuer  be, in the booke, which therall our ghostly e∣in a quarter  26.41. Eph. 6.18. The conclusion of the last order. AFter you haue passed thorow all these Ca∣tershismes, then is to be continued the dai∣ly reaing of holy cripture in order: begin∣ning at the first chapter of Genesis and of Matthew: one chapter euery day of the olde Testament, and another of the new. In rea∣ding whereof marke two things. First, what words are for the confirmation of any poynt of doctrine before learned. And secondly, if any thing bee hard to vnderstand, dispute not about it, but aske your pastors helpe, or els some other godly minister of graue iudge∣ment and grounded knowledge: so shall you increase with great ease and ioy, and auoyde the 2. Pet. 3.16. rocke, of peruerting the Scriptures, to your owne destruction. And as leisure will serue, direct them to reade some other Cate∣chismes and godly bookes. But aboue all
things you must  familie to goe to the publike preaching: for that hath the  the promise and blessing. And as oft as a  euery daye till three meth into  familie, if  thorow; and last of al the is to  sixe, or eyght lines at  gea keepe the Now last of  quest to all gouernours of  holders of all sorts, poore and rich, that they would cause al their houshold, mē, women & children, to be able to reade the English tung. For this is a worthie meanes to  much good in this so waightie a cause, & Gd hath giuen a marueilous blessing of printing to fur∣ther his Gospell: and wee are very foolish, if wee let slip any blessing or comfort, which is giuen vs of our louing and gracious father. First therfore such as be able I would entreat, that they would also helpe their seruants in this knowledge, and rich men shall make it a laudable and holy vsurie, An holy vsury. to lay out some hun∣dreth part of their superfluities towardes the helping of poore seruants, and poore mens children to learne to reade, and God will pay them againe a double and treble Pro 28.27. An order for poore men & seruants to learne to reade without losse of time, paine or cost. interest. But to such as haue no other helpe or meanes, I thought good to teach an order, how they might learne with ease, because I would not willingly leaue out any thing that might fur∣ther this holy purpose. If they can finde ei∣ther
be, in the booke. which  shall easily doe in a quarter of an houre, & I would not haue them  any more. Then after they know the letters, t them bestow the like time, in like order to learne three seuerall wordes, to spell th distinctly, to reade them, and to poynt to euery sillable, and to know them in any other place, being shewed by the tea∣cher, now one and then another, and this to continue at the least three weekes, or a moneth: and herein not to couet any more but three seuerall and new words at one time, and that in this manner: if his first lesson be, In the name, and the next words be of the father, he must count the word, the, to be learned in his first lesson, therefore the second lessō must be, of father and: & where the next words are, of the holy Ghost, Amen, he must account, he hath learned the two first words, of the, in his former lessons, therefore his third lesson must be, holy Ghost, Amen. so keeping in minde what he hath learned, and learning new, hee should quickely learne to reade. Now after three weekes or a moneth, let him learne, in
and to keepe the points,  and by this time he  teacher, onely let him  make himselfe perfect, by  when he meeteth with a  out of himselfe by spelli  and aske some one th  cher. And whosoeuer  ently follow, and consa  himselfe to this order,  time attaine to reade  nes, or any toyle to  or other,  any great cost. Then hath he iewell, which once in his life may bee move comfort to him, then all hee hath, or all hee trauaileth for beside. And so I commend you to the Lorde our God, whome I beseech to make this my la∣bour profitable and acceptable to his church for Iesus Christs sake: and that we may be ful∣filled with knowledge of his will, in all wis∣dome and spirituall vnderstanding; that we may walke worthie of the Lord, and please him in all things, and increasing in the know∣ledge of God. To whom bee all honor, praise and glorie for euer and euer, Amen, FINIS.
