19094 99856169 21696
A SERMON, Preached at the Funerall of that most Honorable and worthie Knight S. Richard Leueson, Vice-Admirall of England: Who dyed at London the 2. of August, and was interred at VVooluer Hampton in the Countie of Stafford, the 2. day of September following Anno Domi. 1605. By SAMVEL PAGE, Batchelour in Diui∣nitie, and Vicar of Deptforde in Kent. LONDON, Printed by William White, dwel∣ling in Cow-lane neere Holborne Conduit. 1605.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS especiall good Lord, the Earle of Nottingham, the Lord high Admirall of England. &c. SAMVEL PAGE wisheth all encrease of Honour. MY especiall good Lord, the Loue which that Honorable Knight Sir Richard Leueson did deserue from mee; hath made my eare so impatient of any impu∣tation by which he may be traduced to the world, that passing amongst the throng of variable sensures, and obser∣uing how Emulation and Enuie of his Worth, striueth to burie his Honour in the same dust with his life-lesse body:
I could not but wonder, that so many faire parts of vertue and goodnes in him, could be so slightly skipt ouer, and that so cursory eyes as beheld them, could so dwell vpon the errours and mis-heedings of his youth. It concerneth mee (whom he chose out of all his acquaintance, to breath his last words in my eares, and to make me the eye, and the tongue witnesse of his ende,) to doe him this right, to satisfie with my testimonie such, who be∣ing better acquainted with his course of life then my selfe was, might finde in it more to dislike, and might therefore sus∣pect his death: to those, and for discharge of my duetie to my honourable friende, though departed, I haue caused these Papers to speake more publiquely that, which in a full hearing I deliuered to those which were present at his Fune∣rals▪ and I protest herein my sinceritie; for as al my seruice done to him, had be∣ginning
in my loue of his vertue; So nei∣ther my labour was mercenary with him▪ nor my penne hired: for it is sufficiently knowen, that I neuer receiued from him more then the rich reward of his thanks▪ & acknowledgment of that cōfort which he receiued from mee; which I hold so deare a recompence, that I could sow dayly, to reape but such an Haruest. What I haue herein deliuered, I pre∣sent vnto your Honour, beseeching you, who haue vouchsafed to be the Patrone of my Studies, to receiue this; and here∣withall my most humble duetie. Debtford this 8. December. 1605. Your Honours Chaplaine in all duetie and seruice, Samuell Page▪
2. Sam 3. vers. 38. And the King said to his Seruants, Know ye not that a Prince and a great Man is fallen this day in Israel? ABNER is dead, DAVID the King is become a mourner; hee followed the Beare of Abner to the Graue: When hee came to the Sepulchre, hee lift vp his voyce and wept: He bemoned his death to the people▪ hee refused his meate till the Sunne was downe. And in this Verse he pleadeth the cause of his griefe to his Seruantes, and makes them sensible of his losse: Knovv ye not that there is &c. See how artificiall sorrow is, in telling of her owne tale: heere is not a word in this speach of the Kinges, but it hath the taste and the relish of the greiued heart where it grew.
1 It is not a feare, or danger, or some in∣firmitie of his friend, that mooueth him, but a fall; a fall as low as the Earth, and as deepe as the Graue. 2 It is not the fall of any artificiall struct∣are or composition, but of a man; a Man is fallen. Heere is the dissolution of a little World, a pile of the curiousest Architecture, and the maister peece of the most skilfull builder. Consult not herein the practise of hu∣mane inhumanitie, which holdeth the life of man cheape, and vnderualueth so rare a creature with low-priz'd estimation, but consult Nature: Hoc natura prescribit, vt homo homini quicun{que} fit ob eam ipsam Causam tantum quod homo sit consultam velit: This (sayth Cicero) is the document of Nature, that a man should seeke the good of a man, euen for this alone, because he is a man. 3 This man for whom Dauid makes this moane, is none of them that are wearie of the light because God doth humble them; and being vile, and sitting with the Dogges of the flocke, hunt after death: But, a great man is fallen: great in the proofe of his ver∣tue
in the aduenture of his person, in his ad∣uancement to be the fauorite of a King; in his imployment to be one of the supporters of a mightie Kingdome, a Prince and a great man, that is, a principall great man in Israel. 4 Hee is fallen in Israel, and it is so much blood let out of Israels veynes, some of that locke cut off wherein Sampsons strength lay: and Israel being the enuie of all the Kingdomes of the world, the Archers shoo∣ting at it, and greeuing it, as old Iaacob said of Ioseph: If it had been sowen with the seede of valiant men, it could haue set them all on worke to keepe violent intruders from inuasion and assault. Therefore Israel had a great losse in the death of Abner. 5 All this not a griefe of auncient times, as Hecuba sayd of Troy, Troia i am vetus est malum: Troy is an old greife, but it is a fresh woe instantly pressing, and oppressing the sence: for he is fallen To day. 6 Doe you not kn this? saith Dauid: had you an hope of his person, and haue you no greife for his death? Could your glad eares receiue the tydinges of his ioyning
with our forces, and do you with dry eyes see him, by death, disioyned from vs againe? Thus doth Dauid keepe a scoare of his owne losses. Beholde, heere is Abner a Prince; yet he is fallen: a Great man, yet a man, fallen in Israel: for Death hath left no place priuiledged, no person free. I will confine my present Discourse to these three perticular poyntes. 1 I obserue a difference betweene man and man, in this title ginen to Abner: a great man. 2 I finde the greatest, subiect to mortalitie: is fallen. 3 I note in Dauid a desire, that no∣tise be taken of this losse: Doe you not knovv? 1. Of the difference betweene man and man. This is not in respect of the maker: for God hath not made some men himfelfe, and deuolued the rest to inferiour iournimen vnder him: but we are all alike beholding
to him for our creation: not in respect of the matter; for we were all, digged out of the same Pitte. But the difference is in the vse, & seruice of men, and that is directed in all well me∣naged States, by their manners and merites. Tullies rule of a mans Fortune; that is, of his condition of life, is this: Suis ea cui{que} fingi∣tur moribus: It is such as his behauiour and carriage makes it. The best men seeke Honour; and they seeke it best, euen in the merrite of their owne worth; not in the groundlesse opinion of an vndiscerning multitude, and therefore they make their liues presidents of liuing to others, and their whole comportsment exemplary, deser∣uing well: Some for aduice, others for ex∣ecution: Some for Artes, some for the Tongues, some for the Sword, some for the Compasse, some in the Chambers of Prin∣ces, some in the Field making merite still, the true lustre of their greatnes. Paulum sepaltae distat inertiae celata virtus: Vertue that commeth not abroade, is little better then vnseen vnskilfulnesse: which the Poet spke not to encourage men to
put all their Vertue vpon the Stage, and to set it alwayes in the common eye, with base prostitution; for this is an ambitious beg∣ging of popular ayer: But he admonisheth to keepe Vertue in breath with exercise, to giue it life in action, and not suffer it to keepe house too much, or to rust with rest and idlenesse. Thus shall not a man trust to hereditary Dignitie, and spend vpon that stocke of Ho∣nour which his noble ancestors haue left him: neither shall hee basely purchase precedence and priority with the Penny, nor diue by cunning insinuation into the fa∣uour of Princes by flattering their amisses: All these are the Balles of Fortune, racke∣ted vpon high; but not abyding there, but falling downe againe: These spring tides haue their neapes▪ these are very Meteors, making a portentose shew of light awhile, but soone put out: For when this Curtayne of Greatnes drawne betweene them and the deceiued eyes of men, shall be withdrawen; when this ouer-guilding with false Honour shall begin to weare off, and their vnwor∣thinesse looke like it selfe, stript and naked:
When they shall vnlearne the art of See∣ming, shall it not then be sayd vnto them. What fruite haue you now of these thinges where of you are ashamed? Ler Honour then follow Vertue: and let Vertue be content with it selfe. S. Augustines rule is, Gloria nostra est testimonium Conscien∣tiae nosirae: Our glorie is in the testimonie of our owne Conscience. The first Adam sought Honour, and it fledde from him: The second Adam fledde from Honour, and it ouertoke him. The vse of this instruction is this, to pro∣uoke euery of you (according to the mea∣sure of Gods endowment of Grace) to stirre vp in your selues those faire partes of Ver∣tue and goodnes, by which your God may be most glorified in his creature, your Countrie may haue the benefite of your seruice, your King the vse of your Vertue, and all men the example of it. Seneca sayth, Recie facii fecisse merces est: To haue done well, is the reward of well doing: therefore if Riches buy away, or Fauoure giue away from you your wel-de∣serued Honoures; yet God hath promised to
be your portion, and exceeding great re∣ward. It will be a great euidence against you, that you neuer loued Vertue and goodnes truely, if you do neglect them when you see your selues neglected: for Honourable actions are not to be vndertaken in regarde of the honour which we gayne by them, but that God may be honoured by vs in them. Our Sauiour hath enformed vs, that they which seeke the prayse of men, haue their rewarde heere. I will conclude this first poynt with the saying of S. Chrisostome, Hon verus est in virtute animi: True honour is in the vertue of the minde: and for all other that goe for honours heere, let vs say with the same learned father Honores non sunt im ministeria: They are not Honours, but meere seruices. 2 Though I haue found as much diffe∣rence betweene man and man, as betweene high and low, rich and poore, great and small; yet I haue set mine eye in the second place, vpon the mortaliue of Great Men,
because my Text saith, A great man is fallen. It hath cost the liues of the greatest to ex∣emplifie this to vs from Adam, the Father of vs all; by whose disobedience Sinne came into the world, and by Sinne, Death, euen to this moment of time wherein thousands are breathing their last in sundry places, and by sundry sorts of death. Where be those great ones, euen the grea∣test of the Sonnes of men, which haue ouer∣runne Kingdomes & people▪ with an inun∣dation of power, and taught the Earth to groane, and tremble vnder the burthen of their Armes? Did not God blow vpon them, and they withered? And did not the whire wind take them away as stuble. Esa. 40. 24. When Iob was out of taste with his life, he wisht that he had gone immediatly from the wombe to the Graue: for sayth hee, I should haue slept then, and been at rest, with the Kinges and Counsay lours of the Earth, which haue builded them selues desolate places: or with the Princes that had gold, and haue filled their houses with siluer. Iob 3. 13.
Dignitie, friends, followers, wealth, plen∣tie, the best supporters that euer the world could find (of temporall happines) giue way when Death commeth. The Centution sayth to his seruant Goe, and he goeth: Death sayth to the Centurion Come, and he com∣meth. Deaths Nettes are not Cobwebbes to take none but small Flyes, nor Snares for none but small Birdes: If great Men should not die, small men should not liue. Vnrestrayned geatnes growes saluage: but the thought of Death, makes it come to hand, and become tame. All the life of some, is a rize from one aduancement to another, till they haue lost themselues in their owne greatnes: but they shall fall euen from the greatest. It was so decreed in Paradice, when wee were all yet in the loynes of our first Parents, before there was any such difference betweene vs in dignitie: For out of it wert thou taken, because thou art Dust, and to Dust shalt thou returne. Gen. 3. 19. Dust is our first and last. The most neat, & the most cutious amongst vs, shall not brush off this dust, till we rise againe, euen till our mortall do put on im∣mortalitie.
Reu. 6. 8. S. Iohn looked, and behold, a pale Horse, & his name that sate vpon him is Death. Death is an Horseman (you see) to shew his speede: and his Horse is pale, which is the complexion of departing and dying men. This ryder hath ouertaken Abner, a Great man in Israel. This filles the eyes of Dauid full of teares, till they runne ouer. 1 The vse of this obseruation is to vn∣derstand, that Princes haue their sorrowes. Luctus (sayth Tully) est agritudo ex eius qui charus est acerbo interitu: Mourning is a sorrow conceiued at the death of a deare Friend. In this, griefe is impartiall, the friendes of Kinges are as mortall, as the friendes of Subiectes. It is not in the Cota∣ges of the poore, or vnder the roofe of the Widow only, in the Hospitals of the diseased onely▪ or in the darke Dungeons of the im∣prisoned: but in the Palaces of Princes, in the Bed-chambers of Kinges; nay in their bosomes, and the inmost conclaues of their breastes: Luctus et vltrices posuere cubilia curae: Sorrow and sad vnrest haue taken vp their lodging.
Abner dyeth in the nonage of King Da∣uides soueraigntie; a limbe of strength vn∣timely lopt from the body of his greatnes. And I am this day vveake (sayth hee) and nevvly annoynted King. Dauid is exercised in these sorrowes: for in the next Chapter, he mourneth for Ishbo∣sheth the Sonne of Saul, whom some, pre∣suming to please the King, did murther in his bedd: but he calleth the executioners wicked men: he chargeth them with mur∣ther, murther of a righte ous Person, and that done vpon him in his owne House, which should haue been to him a Sanctuarie of peace: and vpon his owne Bedd, where he promiseth himselfe rest. The B should indeed represent the Graue, and sleepe Death: but to make a Slaughter house of his Chamber, and a Beare of his Bedd, was the worke of men of blood: and Dauid could doe no lesse out of his griefe for Ishbosbeth, and his iustice vpon them, but require his blood at their handes, and take them from the earth. Dauids Child be gotten of Bathsheba, and Absolon hi Sonne dying, were to much
cut out of his owne flesh: and (if Mors take name a Morsu, Death from byting) they were two morsels bitten cut of Dauids owne loynes. This Dauid a King may doe: hee may loue his Friendes whilest they liue, and ad∣uance them to honour: he may hugg them in the bosome of his best fauoures, and en∣girde them in the cincture of his royall em∣bracements: He may beweepe them when they are dead, & shed his sorrowes in teares vpon the earth for them: But to adiourne Death, or prolong Life▪ to fill the emptie Veines of his friendes with liuely blood, or their dryed Boanes with marrow: to open the eares which Death hath shut, or to light againe the Candles which Death hath put out, or to redeeme their life from the power of the Graue; In all these thinges, Diuid is no King. 2. Reg. 5. 7. When the King of Israel receiued Letters conteining a request that he would heale the Leprosie of Naaman, hee answered them with the rending of his cloathes, saying: Am I God, to kill and to giue I fo, that he doth send to mee, that I should heale a man from
Leprosie? In a lesse matter in the next Chapter, when a Woman in the Famine of Samaria, cryed, Helpe my Lord, O king. The King of Israel sayd: Seeing the Lord doth not succoure thee, hovv should I helpe thee vvith the Barne or the VVinepresse? Kings then haue their winges clipt: God wil haue them knowne to be but men: the Winde blowes on them, the Sunne heates them, the raine doth wet them: griefe and care is as ordinary a guest with them, as with their meanest Subiectes: their great Friendes fall also like other men: Mors aequo pulsat pede, it goes with an euen foote, and carryeth an indifferent hand, and leaues Kinges that onely remedy, to sitte to wne and weepe ouer their dead, as Dauid heere doth ouer Abner. It is not long since our eyes saw the fall of Maiestie, the death of the great Lady of these Realmes, the Soueraigne of all the honest hearts vnder these her dotninions, the wonder of her sexe, deseruing better of her people, then we haue words to expresse; as much aboue my prayse, as I was beneath
her greatnes, the holy Annoynted seru of God, hath not she read vs a lecture of Mortality, and shewed vs our of what Pitt Princes are digged? I would my words could go so neare the hearts of the greatest in this assemblie, as to perswade them to lay thus much to heart, and to make it their Philosophy and best learning, to learne to die. This meditation were enough to kill the Moath in their Garments, and to scoure off the Rust from their Gold, and to set their imprisoned Money at liberty: it were enough to cloath the naked, to feede the hungry, to comfort the oppressed, to make Rich men liue to God, & not to themselues, or to regard themselues chiefly for a com∣mon good. It were enough to distaste to men that auxious and solicitous impropriation of all their respectes vnto themselues, and to en∣large their hoartes to the pursuite of the good of their brethren. This meditation were enough to reare vp Temples to God, Colledges for Artes and Learning. Hospitals for the poore and disea∣sed:
for there is nothing that killes Cha∣ritie and Good▪workes sooner, then hope of long life. I beseech you, if your eare be open, to en∣tertaine this needful instruction, let it be te∣nible in your remembrance also, that whilst you liue, you may do good to all: and that when you die, your workes may follow you: not the merite of your workes; for, your well doing extendeth not to God. This were condignitie on your part: but the reward of your workes: for God rewar∣deth abundantly those that do well: this is gratuitie on Gods part. It is sayd of them that die, thus, , Their owne workes follow them, that they might not depende hopefully on the workes of other men, much lesse vpon their multiplyed rei∣terations of prayers for them. It is also sayd, which signifieth immediatly fol∣lowing, and therefore no stay by the way, euen with themselues. It is the reproch of Protestants, and the shame of our Professours at this day: It is spoken of in Gath, and it is proclaimed in the
streetes of Asklon; the Church of Roome doth iustly charge vs with it: Good workes liue in exile from vs: encroachments vpon our Church-reuenewes, and bequeathments of Dying men to holy vses, euen for the maintenance of good Artes and learning: The reentries of the Laye vpon the rentes of God, are frequent: the Church hath not the ouerflowings now of the fullest Cuppe: it is honour enough to them, that inuade not these consecrate and hallowed Beneuolen∣ces, that make a conscience of this gripple seasure, and vnrighteous intrusion, though they giue nothing themselues. But let me speake it to the eare of Great∣nesse; and let the heart that keepeth house there, tremble at it. Hinc colligendum est qua paena mulctandus sit qui aliena diripit si inferni damnatione percuitur qui propria non largitur▪ Hence we may conceiue, how they shall smart for their direptions, who inuade the goodes of other men, when hee shal be pu∣nished with infernall damnation, who gaue not that which was his owne: It is the speach of S Gregorie writing vpon the Parable of the Rich man.
I beseech you, as you tender the happines of your beloued soules, let the remembrance of the ende, kindle in you an holy ambi∣tion, which may mount your eyes & hoapes to a more loftie apprehention of that wealth which wasteth not, of that honour which commeth not into dust, of that happinesse which neuer can be vnhappied againe: and for these thinges, facite de damno lucrum of that which idly oftentimes leawdly is mis∣spent, make friendes: Ventres pauperum horrea diuitum, Lay vp, if not your Haruest, yet at least the Gleanings, in these Barnes: And if you giue charge for them, as Boaz did for Ruth, that they may gleane among the Sheaues, the bowels of the poore will blesse you, and they that are ready to perish, will pray for your increase. 2 Dauid teacheth vs a second vse of this Doctrine of Princes mortalitie. Psal. 146. Trust no in Princes &c. A King is called  quase Let Let them goe to him for Iudge∣ment, and in his rest & peace let them seeke rest▪ but to fasten dependance vpon Great
men, is to forget the Lord of Hoastes: they that sow their hope vpon this ground, reape no better Haruest then that vpon the house toppe. I will conclude this poynt, with that Isay. 31. 1. VVoe be to them that goe dovvne into Egypt for helpe. &c. The Egyptians are men, not God: their Horses flesh, and not spirit; and vvhen the Lord shall stretch out his hand, their helpers shall fayle, &c. 3 I note in this fall of so Great a man the losse which the State where he liueth, hath of him: the King he loofeth Abners seruice. I am nevvly annoynted King, and the sonnes of Zeruiah. &c. The people generally shall want his di∣rection and ouersight. It is one of the Roddes; rather it is one of the Scorpions wherewith God did vse to scourge the diso∣bedient; He calleth it The breaking of the pride of their povver. Leuit. 26. 19. Iermie in his Lament. bringes in Ierusa∣lem thus, complayning. 1. Lament. 15. The Lord hath troden vnder foote all my valiant men in the middest of me: For those thinges
I vveepe: mine eye, euen mine eye, easteth out vvater. Lamen 4. 2. The noble men of Zion comparable to fine gold, hovv are they esteemed as earthen Pichers, euen the vvorke of the hands of the Potter? What are the Walles about our strongest Townes, but heapes of Stone and congesti∣ons of Earth? Theopompus in Plutarch to one that shewed him the Walles of his Cittie, asking him if they were not goodly and strong? aunswered well,  no, if your Cittie hold none but Women. Our Shippes are but walles of Wood; our Or∣dinance but the messengers of Death: and there must be some to sende these messen∣gers abroade. Indeed all our defence, our strongest Bul∣warkes and Propugnacles of our land, what are they without the ministerie and seruice of Men, but as Shaftes and Arrowes hunge vp against the wall? And what are Men, without order and Discipline, but as droues of wilde Beastes? So did disordered Confu∣sion fashion the vnschoold minoritie of the world, euen then when the Romane Empire like a young budd of greatnesse, was first
Inoculate in the ranckstocke of vndisci∣plin'd tymes: So sayth a learned Romane. Disciplina militaris acriter retenta, &c. Millitarie Discipline seueerely retained, made Rome spread ouer Towne and Coun∣trey, Land and Sea, and bredd the Empire of all the Earth, in the poore Cottage of Romulus. And was not all this performed by the vertue of men of action, and vndertaking, such as are called Great men? Philip of Macedon had wont to call the Athenians an happie people, because they had such store of Great Men of worth, as yeerely to choose tenne fitt to be Leaders; whereas he had in all his time, found none but Parmenio, worthy to take charge vnder him. But now I begin to see how I do idle thetime, to shew you how great a misse a State may haue of Worthy men, and to en∣deare to you men of action. For we haue put off our Armour, and our Swordes and Sheildes hang vp rather as Monuments of old, then Instrumentes of new Warretour Ships are double moor'd, our Men of Warre haue wasted ouer wel∣come
peace into our borders; Abner hath leaue to die, and men of action could neuer haue been better spared: Smooth and euen is the face and outside of all things amongst vs. Let not our eyes, ô Lord, nor the eyes of our vnborne Children and Nephewes, euer see it wrinckled any more: Let vs all ioyne in prayer alwayes for the peace of our Ierusalem, and let them prosper that loue it. Yet by the faire leaue of a gentle Peace, let vs consider that the Sonnes of Zeruiah may be too hard for vs, and therefore let not Abner die without sence of a publique losse, euen without an vniuersall condole∣ment of the State wherein he liues, and of which he hath deserued well. But this is my third, and last Obseruation: For Dauid desireth that notice be taken of Abners death: Kovv ye not. Surely the righteous perisheth, and no man considereth it in his heart. Isay. 57. 1. It is not possible but the common eye doth see it, and the vnderstanding doth apprehende such sadd accidents: but men keepe such things as much as they may, from the heart,
loath to entertaine so vnwelcome a guest as Griefe is. Dauid doth not put them in minde of it as of some sadd betiding to Abner: for the aduantage of the death of the Righteous is manifold. 1 Rest from labours: For it is most true which S. Bern. sayth: Qui in labore hominum non sunt, in labore profecto Doemonum erunt: They that labour not heere amongst men, shall labour hereafter amongst Diuels. 2 They are taken avvay from the euill to come, as choyce stuffe remooued when Fire is feared; So doth God defend his chosen, from the conflagration of the vnrighteous. 3 They are translated from death to life. S. Gregory saith, Curramus et sequamur Christum, non sunt hic vera solatia, sed ibi ponuntur vbi vera vita: Let vs runne and follow Christ: heere are no true comfortes, they are layde vp there where it true life. But Dauids end in this bemoaning of Abner is, to teach them to depende vpon God, not on man; and to encourage euery bold hart, and able hand amongst them, to auenge the workers of that death to Abner, that griefe
to the King, that weakenes to the Church, and that common loste to all Israel. It is our great fault that when God giueth any such blow to our State, the smart of it in too soone past, and their memorie buried in the same Graue with them. This is a great disheartning of Worthy men, from great vnderrakinges: For this Land hath buried, in our memorie, of Worthres that are all dead, their actes, their name and all; such an honourable breed, as huing eyes cannot find paragons too, and our present hopes (which yet are our franckest promises) cannot apprehend: Let them all goe with this honour done them in heauen, In me∣moria aeteina erit iustus. And let Learning, which bath the best eye to sec Virtue, & the Honourablest affc∣tion to loue it and the longest liued meanes to immortalize it, keepe her owne cours vpon the earth: Vignum laude virum Musa vstat mori: And let their owne good deedes prayse them in the gates. They that trust a curious pile of Stone Piramids, Colosses high-reard Monumentes ouer, their low layd bodyes in the losome
of the Earth, with their memories, doe bue deceiue themselues. A good Name is a pretious Oyntment powred foorth, the per∣fume of it filleth all the house. Thus much of the vvords of my Text. COncerning this occasion of meeting, let me also borrow your parience and attention. Though I know you haue saued me a labour in the application: and your vnder∣standings in their cleare light, haue seene that this honorable Knight, of whom there is now but thus much left, euen a morsell fitte for the Wormes, and atenant for the house, aud a guest for the bedd in the darke, of which Iob speaketh, Hee hath beene my Teate, the Abner, the Great and Worthie man whom I haue personated all this while: and our Sceane lieth in our Israel, and that this fight is the Catastiophe of our Tragedy. Yet I beseech you, let mee pay the debt which I owe to his loue of mee, and the duetie which I acknowledge tributarie to his memory, at least to say to you of him as
David did of his Abner: Knovv ye not that a great. &c. A man great in his birth and descent, as you all know, linked by mariage in a most Honorable Familie, of a goodly & a louely personage, of an casie and affable nature where his discretion found it fitt to be so: of a daring and hardie spirit. of a sterne and sower aspect against the enemies of his Soueraigne, magnanimously valiant in his vndertakinges, wise in his counsailes, speedy and resolute in his executions; valuing his worthy life lesse, then the common good of his Countrey: Witnesse that aduentueous expedition of his, Irish seruice; where he wrote his volour in the blood of the op∣posites, and filled the care of this Kingdome with the welcome tydinges of his victo∣ries. Hee was iudicious in the finding out of Virtue, magnificent and bounteous in the reward of it  spare in speach; but when oc∣casion prompted him, rather performing, then promising his fauoure and loue, where he saw desert.
Great in the fauoure of the late Maiestie of this Land, and succeeding in his loue, who succeeded in her greatnes: great in his employment and office of trust and charge: and (for which he forgate not his duetie to God in all humble thankes giuing amongst his dying meditations) very fortunate and succesfull: great in the loue of the com∣mon man that went vnder his charge; for the eye that saw him, blessed him; and euery tongue of theirs, beare witnesse of his righ∣teous dealing. Great in his estate and means of main∣tenance; for like a Tree planted by the Riuers of vvaters, so hee grew, and so did God giue him a plentifull encrease: But that which maketh all this greatnesse a great deale greater, hee had an vnderstanding to know God, and an affection to loue him. I must not flatter the remembrance of flesh and blood so farre, as to exempt him from offending (with other men) I know that humanitie and infirmitie are indiui∣duall: But I am his witnesse, that he looked vpon his life past, with a censorious eye: hee charged himselfe with his defaultinges
without excuse or mittigation of his sinnes, euen with detestation of his vnthriftines of good howers, and sorrow for the losse of so pretious minutes, that should hane been better spent, and with most serious depreca∣tion of Gods wrath. It pleased him in my attendaunce vpon his honourable Father in Law into Spayne, wherein this worthy Knight had a great place of Commaund and Charge: it pleased him in this expedition, to take knowledge of mee, and often to vouchsafe me his conference: and being desirous to sing the songe of the Lord in a strange Land, he re∣ceiued at my hands the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, accompanied with many worthy Knights, & Gentlemen of qualitie, in one of the Harboroughs of that Land; where there was peace for our persons, but not for our religion: Yea, many wayes he testified to mee, his loue of God, and of our Religion: Hee looked iudicially into the difference betweene vs and the Church of Rome, touched with commise∣ration of the darknes wherein they lyued, and wishing encrease of zeale amongst vs,
and knowledge with them. After his returne, it pleased Almighty God by his last Sicknes, to put him in minde that hee must set his House in order: For he must die. This he maturely regarded; and after the setling of his Estate, he reserued the re∣maine of his time, as a vacation from all temporall thoughts, and consecrated it to his preparation for his remooue of the body, that he might dwell with the Lord. It pleased him then, to remember his acquaintaunce, with mee; and when hee had dispatched a Messenger with his Let∣ters to mee, to entreat my resort to him, I preuented expectation: for the vnwelcome newes of his dangerous Sicknesse, was to mee messenger enough to call vpon mee to doe so Honourable a Friende my last seruice. Hee receiued my free and voluntarie vi∣sitation, with more then thankes: and de∣sirous to be priuate with mee, to this pur∣pose he bespake mee. First, he tolde me of his present weaknes, and appeared to mee sensible of his danger of death, and therefore protested an earnest
desire to spend that short time of life limit∣ted then to him, in a religious preparation for that end. Hee began at the acousing of his former leawd life (so he was pleased to call it, with a sorrowfull detestation of it) and com∣playning to mee of his present infirmitie, which had so weakened his memorie & vn∣derstanding, that he could not lay him selfe so open before God as he desired, nor com∣prehend in fitte wordes his suite to God for pardon of his sinnes, and the assistance of his holy Grace to the last gaspe, as he wished: Hee earnestly desired mee to conceiue a forme of confession of his sinnes to God, and a Prayer for those mercies which I might leaue with him when I should de∣pare from him. This I soone satisfied him in, for I had more vse herein of my memorie of that which he had deliuered to mee, then of my inuention for that which I was to delyuer to him: His sorrowes had the true face of woe; and his feeling of his owne griefe for finne, was so sensible, his zeale so feruent, his humiliation made him so deiected, that
I saw in him a true mirrour and president of repenting in good earnest. O let mee heare the tongue speake which is prompted by a soule truely humbled be∣fore God. Hee vsed this forme of Prayer, with an affection sanctified, and a Spirit wayned from this world: And this done, he desired mee now to supply the weakenes of his memorie, by calling into his remem∣braunce those thinges which are most fitte to be the last thoughts of a dying man. I spared not my best endeuour herein, and entertained him with all the comfortes which I could. Hee heard mee attentiuely, vnderstan∣dingly, consentfully, and beleeuingly: And confessed this doctrine of Peace, which passeth all vnderstanding, to be the best Phi∣sicke; and that onely which now he desired. Thus commending him to my earnest Prayers to God, hee dismissed mee, pro test∣ing that he had much cheared and refreshed his ouercharged spirit with these holy ex∣ercises; hee desired mee to repaire to him the morning following betimes: this I did gladly, and full of hope that the Lord would
haue mercy on vs, that he might liue. When I came, hee gaue mee a louing and chearefull welcome, and then desired mee not to depart from him, till I had seene the last of him. Hee told mee of the sorrowes which he had sustained the night past, and that he saw no possibilitie of life beyonde the morning following, he found such de∣cay in himselfe: then I vnderstood how in the night past, he had called vpon God, and what good watch he kept, that if at midnight, or at the dawning, God had sent for him hence, hee might not be vnprouided. Hee then in the hearing of vs all present, made his confession of sinnes, and prayers to God so earnestly and effectually, that when he requested vs all to pray to God for him, hee taught vs to be importunate, and that it past not good manners to take no nay of our God. I neuer sowed my comfort in a better ground; for I began to reape, ere I had done sowing. Hee heard our prayers for him, with grea content & comfort. This whole day was spent in prayers, and reading of those things to him which might best endeare to him the ioyes of Heauen:
and when he felt his decay more sensible, he desired our prayers to God for him againe, as loth to loose the aduantage of any mi∣nute of that short time of his life: and after vs, hee sayd the Lords Prayer, to our great reioycing in his zeale, who grieued so much for his weakenesse; and hee testified to vs witnesses, the Religion and Fayth wherein hee died. I desired him to be plaine and true to me in one demaunde: I shewed him how those that are in miserie (as Iob speaketh) seeke after death, and reioyce when they can finde the Graue; but their miserie and wearines of suffering, bringeth foorth in them these defires: But for him who had plentie of all that his heart could wish for his meanes of maintenance, greatnesse in his place, ho∣nour s employments ce with his So∣ueraigne, loue with the tude, and the common language of all men to applaude his noble desertes of the state in which hee liued: I enquired therefore if hee who bad so many prouocations to desire to liue, could be content to forsake this life, and all these
thinges? Hee smiled cheerefully, and pro∣tested that hee dyed as willingly, as that poore man mentioned in Iob, that had no∣thing but miserie to forsake; for Heauen was his hope, and GOD his exceeding great reward. Shortly after, hee began to decay more and more, and slumbring out a little time, after some pange and strong Conuulsions, hee fell into this last sleepe, leauing teares in euery beholders eye, and deuiding a∣mongst vs his friendes and followers, a well witnest sorrow: and leauing this body of clay to these our last obsequies. Thus leauing him with God; and to God commending our selues, I conclude. I haue but planted and watered, the Lord giue the encrease. FINIS.
