19312 99836208 465
ABBA FATHER: OR, A PLAINE AND short direction concerning Priuate Prayer. Also, SVNDRY GODLY AD∣monitions concerning Time, and the well vsing of it. By ELNATHAN PARR, Minister of the Word. Rom. 8.15. Ye haue receiued the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father. Ephes. 5.16. Redeeme the time because the dayes are euill. LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for Samuel Man, and are to be sold at the signe of the Swan, in Pauls Church-yard. 1618.
TO THE VE∣RY HONORABLE and most worthy Lady, the Lady Iane Cornwaleys, wife to the very Noble and Religious Gentleman, Ma∣ster NATHANAEL BA∣CON, Esquire, Grace and Peace. PRaier is the true Christian pro∣per element, without which hee can no more liue, then without fire: Breath is the instrument of the life of the body; Prayer is the breath of the
soule: I haue obserued in many a difficulty of this breathing, which I haue endeauoured ac∣cording to my simple skill, something to re∣medie by this directi∣on. I humbly desire your Ladiship to giue it leaue to passe vnder your worthy Name: I confesse it can bee no waies vseful to you; but it may bee to weaker Christians, who are yet as babes newly begin∣ning to cry, Abba Fa∣ther. Herein I present my thankfull mind to your
Ladiship, whose great fauours and encourage∣ments, my deserts can neuer equall. I daily pray for your Ladiship, that as God hath highly aduanced your Name on earth for godlinesse, so he would in the time appointed, glorifie your soule in heauen, for the merits of your Iesus. Your Ladiships de∣uoted seruant in all humble obser∣uance, ELN. PARR.
TO THE CHRI∣STIAN READER, encrease of all good gifts. TO condemne a set forme of prayer, argues want of sobrie∣tie and wisdome. In pub∣like prayers in the Congre∣gation it is necessary to haue a prescribed forme called Liturgy, or Diuine Seruice, which for more ease of memory is to be read out of the booke. The anci∣entest Fathers (in the peace
of the Church) haue by their practice so iudged it: many Councels haue appro∣ued it, and the best refor∣med Churches follow it. As for priuate prayer of one Christian alone, it is more expedient that it bee vttered without a booke; and the most compleat per∣formance of that duty is, when a Christian is able not onely to repeate and apply to his owne soule and conscience a prayer concei∣ued by another, but also vp∣on fit matter, and heads suteable to the occasion, to conceiue and vtter prayers of his own. Yet seeing there are many to whom God
hath not giuen memory and vnderstanding fitting, to expresse in a continued speech the desires of their hearts; for such haue I written this direction. The reason why I haue vndertaken this businesse, considering there are so many good Prayer-bookes in euery mans hand, is, first, because, though it bee cōmendable to vse a booke, yet it is more comfortable to pray of our selues, whose wants may be such, as that we shall hardly finde them sufficiently expressed in a∣ny booke: for euery man is best acquainted with his owne heart.
Secondly, a man may be cast into prison, and his booke taken from him: how vncomfortably must he needs passe his time, if he cannot pray without his booke. The booke cannot be vsed in the darke, when we may haue iust occasion to pray. The booke may bee forgotten, or lost: but if thou attainest this gift, thou canst neuer loose it, vnlesse thou loosest thy selfe. For these reasons I commend this Treatise to thee, which I could haue amplified further, and it may be, clothed it with a more elegant stile. But I
aimed at thy profit, re∣membring that I directed beginners, for whom short∣nesse and plainnesse are most fitting. If thou profitest by this which I heere propound to thee; praise God: and in thy prayers forget not him, who hath at least en∣deauoured to further thee. If thou profitest not; yet I haue done my good will, for the which I de∣sire thee to loue Thy true friend in Iesus Christ, Eln. Parr.
Abba Father. OR A PLAINE AND short direction con∣cerning priuate Prayer. PRayer is a holy conference of a godly mind with God, whereby belee∣uing, we aske things ne∣cessary, and giue thanks for benefits receiued.
Prayer is either Mentall onely, or Vocall also, this 1. Extraordinary, or 2. Ordinary, this 1. Publike, or 2. Priuate, this 1. Lesse priuate with the fami∣lie. 2. More priuate, by one alone. Publike is that which is vsed in the publicke Congregation, by the Minister with the peo∣ple. Priuate is that which is vsed by priuate per∣sons in priuate places; of this is this present Dire∣ction. It is a great blessing,
that God will vouchsafe to attend and receiue our deuotions poured forth in any priuate place. Great Personages re∣quire places sutable to their Greatnes: but thy great God respects not the place, how meane so euer, but the necessitie of his seruant. Where there is a Ie∣remy, a Daniel, or a Ionas; a dungeon, a Lions den, the belly of a Whale are godly Oratories. But remember, that neuer any man prayed well priuately, who con∣temned or neglected the
publicke prayers in the Church. For the comfortable performance of this pri∣uate seruice, two things are to be considered: viz. 1. Preparation. 2. Execution. Preparation is an ho∣ly and considerate fit∣ting our selues for this dutie. This is necessary in a threefold respect. 1. Of the person be∣fore whom wee present our selues, which is the Almighty. 2 Of the importance of the thing it selfe,
which is a speciall part of diuine worship. 3 Of the consequence of this duty, which is the obtaining of things needfull, for this and a better life. Vnto this preparati∣on seuen things belong. 1 First, a fit place, which must bepriuatMa. 6.5.6.: Christ himselfe went in∣to a mountaine alone to prayMa. 14.23.: and into a soli∣tary placeMar. 1.35.. So Peter went vp to the vpper part of the houseAct. 10.9.: not but that it is lawfull to pray euery where1. Tim. 2.8.. But priuacy is to be chosen, that being sequestred
from company, we may the more fully descend into our owne hearts, and be the freer from o∣stentation and hypocri∣sie, and from discursati∣on and wandring of mind. 2 Secondly, a fit time. All times are for this ex∣erciseEph. 6.18. 1. Thes. 5.17.; euen the night is a sweet time for pray∣er, as Dauids midnights practisePsa. 119.62., and our Sa∣uiours whole nights spent in prayerLuk. 6.12. Lam. 2.19. doe testifie. Thou canst not al∣waies, but at certaine set times speake to great men: but thou maist al∣waies
speak to thy God. Yet for set and ordi∣nary prayer, some choise of time would be vsed: I think it to be most com∣fortable to begin and end the day with praier; as the ordinary sacrifice of the Iewes, was mor∣ning and euening insti∣tuted by God. 3. Thirdly, a freedom of mind from thoughts of the world, and the af∣faires thereof: for earth∣ly things are heauy, and their thoughts depres∣sing, which hinder the as∣cēt of the mind to God. 4 Repentance and a holy purpose of obedi∣ence
Psal. 26.6. and 66.18. Esay 15.1. 1. Tim. 2.18. 1. Iohn. 3 22.. They must needs distrust to receiue that which they desire, who purpose not to doe that which God requires. The cry of our vnrepen∣ted-for sinnes, is louder then the crie of our voyce. As in a wound a plaister preuailes not, while the iron remai∣neth within; so neither praier, while sinne rank∣leth within. 5. Fifthly, Reading; I would aduise that be∣fore prayer, there might be reading of a Chapter in the Bible, or a Psalm, if businesse permit, both for the increase of know∣ledge,
and for the better calling home of the mind to the businesse in hand. 6 Sixthly, Meditati∣on. The Prayers called Eiaculations, which are sudden liftings vp of the heart to God, vpon ma∣nifold occasions occur∣ring euery day, come not within this conside∣ration: but set prayer requires sometime to be specially imployed this way. As the Musitian first tunes his Instru∣ment, before he play vp∣on it: so both the mind would be put in frame, and the matter fore∣thought,
when we peti∣tion to God. Doe no temporall businesse rashly: more especially when thou speakest to God, bee not rash with thy mouth,Eccles. 5.1. lest thou take Gods name in vaine; which many times comes to passe by vaine repetiti∣ons, by words, idle, im∣proper, and: without sense; when we dare so suddenly enter into this action. Meditation therfore is necessary, which must be fiue fold. 1 Of the Maiesty of God no moue reue∣rence.
As mortall men endure not the sawcie and vnrespectfull carri∣age of suiters: so GOD much more requires, that wee should serue him in fearePsal. 2.11., as Dauid in feare will worship to∣ward his holy Tem∣plePsal. 5.7.. 2 Of his mercy, pow∣er, and truth, to breede confidence; for hee that doubteth, receiueth notIames 1.7.. 3 Of the excellencie of the benefits we desire, to make vs willing; which are the fauour of God, forgiuenesse of sin, sanctification, and eter∣nall
life. 4 Of our own neces∣sities and wants to make vs feruent: for as tart sau∣ces sharpē the stomack; so the due pondering and sense of our wants, whets off the dull blunt∣nesse of our affections, and sets an edge on them to prayer. 5 Of the words and whole frame of our speech, that we may of∣fer a reasonable sacri∣fice, and pray with vn∣derstanding.1. Cor. 14.14.15. 7 Seuenthly, Religi∣ous fasting is a notable helpe to prayer, and is often commended to vs
in the Word; which is either publike or priuat. Priuate is a voluntary abstaining from dinner or supper, or both, as our bodies will beare, and from all delicacies for one day or moe, vnder∣taken to make vs the more fit for prayer, and the seuere practice of re∣pentance. But this is a prepara∣tiue and helpe for extra∣ordinary, not for ordi∣nary prayer. When there is occa∣sion of this, remember three things.
1. The time of the vse of it. 2. The ends of the vse of it. 3. The conditi∣ons of the vse of it. 1 The time is, first, ei∣ther of some great cala∣mity; secondly, or of ex∣traordinary repentance for some speciall sinne; thirdly, or when we de∣sire to obtain some spe∣ciall grace. 2 The ends in fasting are two: First, a fitting our selues to prayer, that we may be the more liuely and earnest. Secondly, that it may
bee a helpe and a testi∣mony of our sorrow for sinne, and of our humili∣ation before GodPsal. 35.13.. 3 The conditions are three. 1 That it bee not su∣perstitious, for in it selfe it is no part of GODS worship. The Kingdom of heauen is not in meat and drinkeRom. 14.17.. 2 That it be not with the opinion of merit; for whether we eate or eate not, we are neither the more nor the lesse ac∣ceptable to God1. Cor. 8.8.. 3 That wee fast from sinne, otherwise our fa∣sting is Pharisaicall,
not regardedEsa 58.5.6 Ier. 14.12.. Thus much of prepa∣ration, now of the other part, which is executi∣on. In the execution or performance of this du∣tie of prayer, I consider two things, 1. The matter, 2. The forme. The matter of our prayers must bee onely that which is according to Gods reuealed will1. Ioh 15 14., the summe whereof is comprised in that di∣uine forme, left vnto the Church by our Sauiour Christ, called the Lords Prayer, and may bee re∣duced
to three heads. 1. Gods glo∣ry, with the remouing of the cō∣traries. 2. Our owne saluation, with the remouing of the cō∣traries. 3. The vse of this life. with the remouing of the cō∣traries. The forme is either 1. Inward or 2. outward. First, to the inward, sixe things are requisite. 1 Sinceritie of our desires, that we pray not for fashion like hypo∣crites, but with honest hearts. 2 Feruency. Such
prayers obtaineIames 5.16., which he is not worthie to doe, which askes in that manner, as he cares not to receiue. GOD loues an importunate begger. Prayers are In∣cense which must be of∣fered with fire. 3 Faith, whereby we certainely beleeue and expect the performance of our requests. God is prouoked when we beg that which we looke not to receiue: our faith is grounded; 1 On the promise, truth and power of him who hath promised. 2 On the fatherly af∣fection
of God; for if he bee our Father, hee will much more then our earthly fathers giue vs good thingsLuk. 11.13.. 3 On the merit of Christ, which is infinite. 4 Patience, whereby we willingly submit our selues to Gods wil, both in regard of the things we aske, and of the time and meanes of recei∣uing. Things that directlie concerne Gods glory, and are necessary to sal∣uation we must expect absolutely: but things transitorie, with this cō∣dition (if God see them
to be good for vs). Better knowes the Physition what is good for the sicke, then the Patient: yea many times he bles∣seth vs exceedingly, in not doing our will, but his owne. Wish not that to bee granted which thou wilt; but labour thou to will that, which it plea∣seth God to grant. It is lesse grieuous not to obtaine that which thou wilt, then to will that which is not fit for thee to obtaine. For the time; we must not prescribe vnto God, but waite vpon him.
5 Perseuerance: God sometime deferres the grāting of our requests; not that he despiseth vs, but for our exercise, that we may be the more ear∣nest till, and the more thankfull when we haue receiued. Things deare∣ly bought are dearely esteemed. Somtime God grants vs not that we aske, but that which is better, as in the example of Paul2 Cor. 12.7.89.. Grace to stand in temptation, is better then deliuerance. And faith is a surer rule of our exauditiō, thē our sense. 6 Charity: to pray
for others as well as for our selues: for the King and Queenes most ex∣cellent Maiesties, and for their children, and for all men1. Tim. 2.1.2., for our very enemies and perse∣cutorsMat. 5.44., as did our blessed SauiourLuk. 23.34., and the Proto-martyr Saint StephenAct. 7.60.: for wicked men, as Abraham for SodomGen. 18.. If he for So∣dome, where was but one Lot, much more we for Ierusalem, wherein are so many the sonnes and daughters of God. He that is not with men in the charitie of Brethren, shall not bee
with God in the num∣ber of sonnes. These onely can cry Abba Fa∣ther, and are heard. The whole Church prayeth for thee, pray thou for it. The outward form is in two things, 1 Compositiō. and 2 Dispositi∣on. 1 Compositiō is either 1 Of the gesture of the body. or 2 Of words, to ex∣presse the meaning of our mind. 1 For the first: A di∣uers gesture is descri∣bed, not prescribed in the word: The Publi∣can stoodLuk. 18.13. Mar. 11.25.: Eliah sate1. Kin. 19.4.: Hezekiah layEsa. 38.2.: Peter & Paul kneeledAct. 9.40. and 20.36.:
Moses and Aaron fell on their facesNum. 16.22.: Salo∣mon stretched out his hands1. King. 8.22: our Sauiour lift vp his eyesIoh. 11.41.: the Publican cast them downe, and also smote his breastLuk. 18.13.: Dauid and Christ weptPsal. 6.67. Heb. 5.7.. Of all these diuers ge∣stures, I commend for ordinary, these: 1 A comely and re∣uerent kneeling, which is a signe and helpe of our humiliation. The rude and vnmannerly leaning, lying along, and sitting of many, especially at publike prayers, is worthy to be
censured, and argues an irreligious heart. 2 A lifting vp of the hands and eyes; a signe and a helpe of our con∣sidence and feruency. 3 Sometime a cast∣ing downe of the eyes, and smiting the breast; to signifie and help our deiection, and shame for our sinnes and vn∣worthinesse. 4 Teares also & grones would exceedingly be∣come our prayers and praises, more then Ie∣wels and Pearles our bodies: Teares are trea∣sured vp in the Lords bottelPsal. 56.8.; and are for∣cible.
Psal. 39.12.. As these, and the like gestures issue from the feruent desire of the heart: so they reflect vp∣on the soule, whose in∣uisible affections, by these visible actions are the more inflamed. 2 For the composi∣tion which is of words; it must be remembred, that words are not sim∣ply necessary to priuate prayer: as appeares in the example of MosesExod. 14.15. and Anna1. Sam. 1.13.. For praier is not a lip-, but a hart∣labour; and God heares the heartRom. 8.27.. But it is very conuenient to vse
words. 1 Because the tongue was created principal∣ly for this vse. 2 Because speech moues the senses, being to the deuotion of the mind, as bellowes are to the fire. 3 Because it keepes the thoughts from wan∣dring. In framing the speech, words may not bee af∣fected; but plaine, apt, and significant: Fine words, and eloquent phrases are not that wherein God delights; but reuerence, contriti∣on, faith, and the gro∣ning
of the spirit, how homely soeuer the words be. Striue more to pray with feeling, then to bee eloquent. Wee vse elo∣quence to perswade men; wee pray not to perswade God; but 1 To shew our obe∣dience, because he hath commanded this ser∣uice. 2 To testifie our faith; that wee depend on him, and expect from him all good things. 3 That wee may be fit to receiue according to our need.
Prayer is a golden chaine, which God lets downe from heauen; when we lay hold of it, we thinke we draw God to vs; but indeed, wee are by it drawne vp to him. Eloquent praying is lawfull, if it be not affe∣cted: but verbal praiers are exceeding dange∣rous. Disposition is of the matter of our prayer: In which we con∣sider, 1 An orderly placing of the parts. 2 An inlarg∣ment of them.
1 Order is bea∣full, and very necessa lest wee vse idle repe∣tions and bee confus things to bee auold when wee speake bes wise men, much m when wee speake to infinite God. Forwa of obseruing Order,  goe forward and ba ward, after an vncom∣ly manner, vnseasona∣bly repeating ouer the same things; faring like hounds at a losse; and hauing vnaduisedly be∣gun to speake, know not how wisely to make an end. This kind of praying
n some degree comes der the censure of abling. Some thinke that we must neuer pray, but pon the sudden & ex∣raordinary instinct and potion of the Spirit. This is a fancie, and hose which practice his, cannot auoid the conueniences named. esides, the multiplici∣e of our wants; the slipperinesse of our me∣morie; the slownesse of our conceit; the darke∣nesse of our vnderstan∣ding; the wandring of our thoughts, and the imperfection of our vt∣terance,
require son∣fore-thoughts of th which we are to speak all which weaknesses are by meditation and order much relieued. God is the God of or∣der, and likes not neg∣ligence or vnaduisednes in his seruice. Doe thou studie to serue him. As the wise Preacher speakes not at all ad∣ture whatsoeuer comes on his tongues end, but prepares in his minde the generall parts and heads of his exhortati∣on: so doe thou in pray∣ing, lost thou offer the sacrifice of fooles.
As the Carpenter be∣ing to build a house, ewes not his timber at aduenture; but before hand proiects in his mind the seueral rooms and parts; and accor∣dingly prepares his timber; and layes not sparres in the foundati∣on, nor groundsels, and studs in the roofe; but fits euery one in his proper place, according to the modell and plot fore-conceiued in his mind: So my aduice is, that before thou pray∣est; thou shouldest in thy minde, first pro∣pound to thy selfe, cer∣taine
generall place and heads of prayer with their order; which to bee contriued in the 1. which in the 2. which in the third place, with fore-casting of some comely transitions, as doores to passe from one part to another. Se∣condly, all the seuerall things which thou wouldest mention in thy prayer, to bee with discretion ranged vn∣der their right and pro∣per Generals, as for example: All things concerning faith, to bee referred to that Petitiō which is for faith: and
which concerne repen∣tance, to be marshalled in that Petition which is for repentance, and so of the rest. The generall heades or places in ordinary priuate prayer would be these at the least: 1 Confession of sinne. 2 Peti∣tion, 1 For pardon. 2 For faith. 3 For repen∣tance. 4 For directiō in our perso∣nall calling. 5 For perseue∣rance. 6 For the Church.
3 Thankes-giuing for bene∣fies receed, which are 1. Spirituall, as Election, with the effects, 1 Vocation 2 Iusti 3 Santi∣on. 4 Hope of ∣rification. 2 Temporall, 1 Creation. 2 Prodence in 1 Health. 2 Liberty. 3 Foode. 4 Raiment. 5 Friends. 6 Manifold de∣rances &c. And so to conclude with petition for preser∣uation in the night o day following, as is the occasion. I binde no body to this order, but this
take to be plaine for be∣ginners. I haue referred thanks∣giuing to the last place, which may bee indiffe∣rently vsed in the first: it matters not, so it bee not forgotten. Obserue thine owne heart: if thou finde a cheerefulnesse and re∣ioycing for benefits re∣ceiued, then it's not vn∣sitting that thankes-gi∣uing should bee in the st place: If thou fin∣dest thy heart more af∣fected with griefe for sin, then if thou pleasest, let confession of sin, and desire of pardō▪ precede
Wait vpon God wi an honest and reuer heart, and the anno∣ting will helpe thy  firmities, and teach th to cry, Abba Father. An example of the parts before propounded in their order. O Lord, 1 I confesse; that I am a vile sinner. 2 I beseech thee of. 1 Pardon by Ies Christ. 2 O Lord, giue mee faith, that I may fee this pardon liuelily in my heart.
3 And I beseech thee ue mee true repen∣ance to amend my icked life, that my aith may bee seene in the fruits of holy obedi∣nce. 4 And whereas thou hast called me to this e∣state and calling (...) Direct mee therein I umbly pray thee, by he wisedome of thy spirit, and furnish mee with such necessary gifts, that I may dis∣charge my duty to thy glory, the good of o∣thers, and the comfort of mine owne soule. 5 And because Sa∣tan
is a deadly enemie, and I am weake; O Lord, I beseech the forsake mee not in  houre of tentation;  stablish my heart in grace, giue me perseue∣rance in goodnesse, and in the end victory by Ie∣sus Christ. 6 This which I beg for my selfe, I humbly craue for thy whole Church vpon earth; that it may please thee to performe all thy pro∣mises to thine elect, and to bring vs all to thy heauenly kingdome. O Lord, thy name be for euer praised for
all thy loue, and for all my benefits spirituall, nd temporall, thereby estowed vpon me. And I humbly intreat thee to preserue me in safety this night, through my Lord Iesus Christ, to whom, &c. or, in whose name, &c. praying in the words of the Lords prayer. The same with the thanks∣giuing in the first place. O Lord, I humbly thanke thee for all thy fauours spirituall and temporall, of the least
of which I am most vn∣worthie, by reason of my great sinnes: for I confesse that I am a vile sinner, &c. The enlargement of these parts followeth. Before we particular∣ly sk of enlargemēt, be thou admonished of 2. things. 1 Feruent praying, though short, is more accepted, then long praying with coldnesse The Publicans prayerLuk. 18.13. was short in words, but full of sense and de∣sire; of more worth
with God, then all the long praiers of the Pha∣risies: for God mea∣sures not our deuotions by the length, and by the outward habite of words, but by the in∣ward meaning of the spirit. So our blessed Saui∣our in the gardenMat. 26.39.42.44., vsed but few words, but his desire, and the gro∣nings of his spirit (wher∣in is the power of our prayers) were vnuttera∣ble. Hee that vseth many words, without the de∣sire of the heart, speak∣eth indeed, but prayeth
not: for prayer is the desire of the heart, cry∣ing, Abba Father; words but the expres∣sing of this desire. The noyse of our lips, without the voice of the heart, is no more a true prayer, then ringing of belles, or babling of a Parrot. As a body without a soule, much wood without fire; a bullet in a gun, without powder; so are words in prayer without spirit. Prayers are as gold; in a little quantitie of words, there must bee a great value of spirit.
He that is feruent in the spirit, prayes much, though he speake little. 2 Secondly, when thou prayest, let thy words follow thy de∣sire. If thou findest a dul∣nesse of spirit, and cold∣nesse of thy affections; be the shorter; and con∣clude with a groning of the spirit for thy drow∣sinesse, & with a lifting vp thy heart to God, that hee would looke mercifully vpon thee, and quicken thee. Let this bee an occasion to humble thee the more; and it will be a meanes
to worke thee to more liuelinesse and feruency the next time thou pre∣sentest thy selfe before God. And if thou bee'st truly humbled, it will driue thee to God, and thou wilt thinke long till the time come a∣bout, wherin thou maist complaine and poure forth thy heart before him. If thou findest a vi∣uacity and cheerfulnes of minde, and the desire of thy heart to be strong and feruent, prompting thee with matter and words; conclude not thy praiers and praises
too soone, but let thy soule take her fill of ce∣lestiall delicacies in her familiar conferēce with God. If the desire of the heart be weak and faint, it is not to bee wearied and oppressed with words. The enlargement of the seueral parts in pra∣yer is either 1. Generall or 2. Particular. The generall is that which in common be∣longs to al the parts, and it is twofold. 1 The vsing of some
description of God whom wee inuocate, from his Attributes, Promises, Effects, &c. Such a beginning hath the Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in hea∣uenMat. 6.9.. Thus began our Sauiour in the Gar∣denMar. 14.36 Abba Father, all things are possible vnto thee. Thus lehosophat be∣gins his prayer2. Chron. 20.6.7.8.9.10.. Thus Peter and IohnActs 4.24.25.26.: looke the places which are to long to be transcribed. Such description is to be vsed in the begin∣ning of our Prayers, for the helping of our faith and assurance in which
we ought to pray, and may also be well vsed in any of the seuerall parts when wee would stir vp faith. 2 A begging of au∣dience. So DauidPsa. 5.1.2.3 Psal. 102.1.2. Psal. 140.1.2.. Both these are excel∣lently vsed by Hezekiah2. Kings 19.15.16.. This also may very fitly bee vsed in the con∣clusion of our prayers; as thus Daniel most pas∣sionately and feruently endethDan 9.17.18.19.. The particular en∣largement is of each part by it selfe. The arguments ordi∣narily seruing hereunto, are the causes. The ef∣fects.
The subiects. The adiuncts. The contra∣ries. Similitudes and comparisons. Distribu∣tions. Testimonies. There are certaine ornaments also not to be neglected, for the po∣lishing and beautifying our speech in prayer, as, 1 Comely transiti∣ons and passings from one part to another. 2 Exclamations; whē we speak of the goodnes of God, thus, How great is thy goodnes to them which feare theePsal. 31.19.! When we speake of the promises, thus; How
sweete are thy promises to my mouthPs. 119.103! When wee speake of our owne wretchednesse, thus; O wretched man that I amRo. 7.24.! &c. 3 Interrogations: as when Dauid lay vnder a great affliction of mind, and cried out: Will the Lord absent himselfe for euer? And will hee shew no more fauour? Is his mercy cleane gone for euer? Doth his promise faile for euermore? Hath God forgotten to bee mercifull? Hath he shut vp his tender mercies in displeasurePs. 77.7.8.9? The power of these
Interrogations? Who is able to expresse it? Whose heart ake not in the very reading of them? How doe they in∣crease our feeling, and raise our desires! 4 Options or wishes; as if we begge for grace to obey God according to his commādements, thus; O that my waies were directed to keepe thy statutesPsal. 119.5.. 5 Vowes and promi∣ses, thus;Psal. 51.12.13. Restore vn∣to me the ioy of thy sal∣uation, and vphold mee with thy free Spirit. Then will I teach trans∣gressors thy waies, &c.
And againe;Ʋers. 14. Deliuer mee, O God, and my ongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousnesse. And againe;Vers. 15. O Lord open thou my lippes, & my mouth shal shew forth day praise. So also;Psal. 119.33.34. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I will keepe it vnto the end: Giue mee vn∣derstanding, and I will keepe thy Law; yea, I will obserue it with my whole heart. 6 Ingeminations; thus Dauid also prayeth,Psal. 94.1.2. O Lord God the Auen∣ger, O God the Auen∣ger, shew thy selfe; exalt
thy selfe, O Iudge of the world, &c. And diuers others of this nature, which a de∣uout hart will easily find out: and to this purpose, I am perswaded, its very helpesfull to be familiar∣ly conuersant in the Psalmes, because Dauid was a man of all other, of inflamed affection, and most excelling this way. Hee that desires to make trial of this plaine direction, and to profit by it, may be much hol∣pen by two things. 1. Let him indeuour soundly to vnderstand
the principles of Religi∣on; or else he shall ne∣uer be able to tell what to aske of God. 2 Secondly, if he can write, let him make a book of clean paper, and in sundry leaues, write in the top the particular parts of prayer, with their seuerall branches, allowing a whole leafe to each part & branch; and then whatsoeuer ex∣cellent & speciall phrase or sentence hee readeth or heareth of any of those parts or branches, let him referre it to his proper leafe and place. Which course if it bee
taken, and these plas diligently studied, and now and then reuised & read ouer, wil (in my opinion) much enable a man vpon any occasion to pray with vnderstan∣ding, either alone, or with others to their de∣sired comfort. If any shall think this way to be too busie, and to require too much paines, I desire them to remember, that no ex∣cellent thing can be at∣tained without labour; which, how great soe∣uer it should be, should not be grutched, for the attaining a faculty in
this exercise, which is the refuge, and refre∣shing of the soule: one of the chiefest pieces of a Christians armourEphes. 5.18., and the meanes where∣by all good things are sanctified to our com∣fortable vse1 Tim. 4.5.. Seuen yeere is hol∣den but a conuenient terme, to learne the chil∣dren of men earthly ma∣nuall trades; let not the childe of God account twice so long time to be too much, to learne the heauenly Art of out∣ward crying Abba Fa∣ther.
Here follow some examp of the rules of generall  particular enlargement ∣fore deliuered, (for a taste) to a young be∣ginner. The general enlarge∣ment, from a descript of God,Description from and begging of Audience, thus: OTitle. Almighty God theEffect. Creatour of hea∣uen and earth, and my most mercifullTitle. Fa∣ther in Iesus Christ, which hast gratiouslyPromise. promised to heare thy children when they pray vnto thee; OBegging of Audience. Lord I beseech thee ac∣cept, heare, and grant
e supplication of thy ruant by Iesus Christ;  such like. Examples of particular enlargement. 1 Confession of sin may be enlarged, first, y the Adiunct;1. The ad∣i iunct. second∣ly, by a distribution of sinne; thirdly, by the ef∣fects, &c. Thus, O Lord, I confesse that I am a vile sinner. First, being ashamed to look vp vnto heauen, and vnworthy to liue vpon earth. Secondly,2. Distribu∣tion. for I am guilty of the sinne of Adam, and more also I
haue committed actuall transgressions without number, in breaking thy most holy commande∣ments, omitting my du∣ty, and doing the con∣trary; many sinnes of ig∣norance (which I pleade not to excuse, but to condemne my self, who ought to haue knowne thy will), and often of knowledge, which wounds my soule to re∣member. Thirdly,2. Effect. O Lord in thy iustice I haue defer∣ued such plagues both bodily and spirituall, temporall, and eternall, which thy righteous
omnipotency can in∣flict vpon abominable sinners. Or such like. 2 Petition for par∣don may be enlarged. First, by an ingemina∣tion. Secondly, by the ef∣fects adorned with ex∣clamation. Thirdly, by the con∣trary. Fourthly, by a testi∣mony adorned with in∣rerrogation. Fifthly, by the meri∣torious cause. Thus. First,1. Ingemi∣nation. O Lord par∣don, O Lord forgiue, O Lord be mercifull. Secondly,2. Effects with excla∣mation. blessed is
the man whose iniquity is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered. Blessed is the man that obtai∣neth thy fauour. Thirdly,3. Contraries. O Lord en∣ter not into iudgement with thy seruant, reward mee not according to my ill deseruing. Turne away thine anger, and make thy ioyfull coun∣tenance shine into my soule. Fourthly,4. Testimony with inter∣rogation. is it not thy promise to pardon sin∣ners that seeke thy fa∣uour? and to helpe them which call vpon thee? O make good thy pro∣mise vnto thy seruant.
Deare Father, for Iesus Christ his sake. Fifthly,5. Meritorious cause. remember his obedience, his passion, his blood, the price wherby I am ransomed, and bee reconciled, re∣mitting all mine offen∣ces, or such like. 2 Petition for faith may be enlarged. First, from the effici∣ent cause. Secondly, from the contrary. Thirdly, from the ef∣fects, adorned with vow∣ing, &c. Thus, First,1. Efficient cause. O Lord I be∣seech thee worke in me by thy holy Spirit faith
to beleeue the pardon of my sinnes. It is not in my power to beleeue, it must be thy worke in my soule. Secondly,2 Contrary. make mee to belieue, good Father, and helpe my vnbeliefe▪ Thirdly,3. Effect with vowing. grant mee a feeling of thy loue in my heart, and that peace which passeth all vnder∣standing, then will I confidently come be∣fore thee, and praise thee with ioyfull lips, or such like. 3 Petition for repen∣tance may be enlarged. First, from the cause. Secondly, from a di∣stribution
adorned with exclamation. Thirdly, from the contrarie. Fourthly, from a com∣parison. Thus, First, holy Father,1. The cause. grant that my faith may shew it selfe in the san∣ctification of my life. Secondly,2. Distribution with excla∣mation. and to this end I humbly beseech thee renew in mee thy decaied image, and giue me true repentance, that I may turne from all my sinnes, to serue thee in holinesse and righteous∣nesse all the daies of my life. Make me to vnder∣stand mine owne vile∣nesse,
that I may earnest∣ly pray for renouatiō: Ah wretch that I am! though I know my selfe to be an horrible sinner; and that I haue tenne thousand times deserued damna∣tion; yet such is the flin∣tinesse of my heart, that I am not sensible of my dangerous and fearefull estate. Thirdly,3. Contrary. Abba Fa∣ther, all things are possi∣ble to thee; manifest, I pray thee thy gracious power vpon my heart, in mollifying the hard∣nesse of it. Make me to relent and to haue re∣morse. Worke in mee a
godly sorrow, and such hatred of all sinne, that I may for euer abomi∣nate it. Fourthly,4. Comparison. and grant deare Father, that I may be able as zealously to follow thy commande∣ments, as euer I haue de∣lightfully followed and fulfilled mine owne vn∣lawfull desires: or such like. 4 Petition for dire∣ction in our personall calling may bee enlar∣ged. First, from the cause. Secondly, from the contrarie. Thirdly, frō the effect.
Fourthly, from the Adiunct, thus. First, O Lord in as much as thou hast or∣dained, that wee should all liue in some honest calling, and that therein wee should shew forth our faith and holy pro∣fession. I humbly intreat thee to direct me in this my vocation. (...) Secondly, Lord make me conscionable, and to abhorre idlenesse. Blesse my labours; grant that the world carrie not a∣way my heart, but that I may so care for the things of this life, that I forget not that I am cal∣led
to thy Kingdome. O make me so to liue as one, who through thy goodnesse expects that heauenly inheritance. Thirdly, let my life bee to thy glory, the good of others, and mine owne eternall comfort. Fourthly, and in as much as thou hast ap∣pointed the Crosse to thy Disciples; I beseech thee to sanctifie whatso∣euer trouble it shall please thee to lay vpon me, and to giue me pati∣ence, and such conten∣tednesse with thy holy will, that it may not
draw me from thee, but vnto thee, and that vn∣der the same I may haue cause to reioyce in the experience of thy fauors through Iesus Christ my Lord: or such like. 5 Petition for perseue∣rance may be enlarged. 1 From the cause. 2 From the adiunct. 3 From the contra∣ries, when speciall in∣stance may bee made of that speciall corruption which we are most sub∣iect vnto: thus, 1 O Lord let it bee thy good pleasure,1. Cause. con∣tinually to watch ouer me, and to preserue me
in the zealous perfor∣mance of my duty to the end of my daies, which without thy helpe I can∣not doe. 2 For the daies are euill and dangerous,2. Adiunct. the occasions and examples of sinne are infinite; Lord keepe mee in the faith, that I fall not a∣way, and preserue mee from the sinnes of these times. 3 And more then this,3. Contrary. Satan is my deadly e∣nemie, seeking to de∣uoure my soule, and I am weake, O Lord thou knowest: Deare Father, confound Satan, and
confirme my faith: so bridle him, that he may not haue power ouer me: so strengthen mee, that I may bee alwaies able to resist and repell him: when thou shalt thinke it good to suffer him to tempt mee, O Lord forsake mee not: faile not of thy promi∣sed helpe, that I may not faile in my faith and o∣bedience: make mee to preuaile, and by the might of thy spirit, to haue victory in Iesus Christ. And whereas I am compassed about with many infirmities, specially with (...) O
Deare God and Father, strengthen me here, and giue mee power to rule and gouerne my affecti∣ons, and to subdue them all to the obedience of thy holy word, through Iesus Christ my Lord. Or such like. 6 Petition for the Church may bee en∣larged, 1 Generally. 2 Particu∣larly. 1 Generally, by desi∣ring the fulfilling of all the promises made vnto it; as, 1. Defence. 2 Destruction of e∣nemies.
3 Conuersion of the elect. 4 Confirmation of the conuerted. 5 Comfort of the afflicted, by Common ca∣lamities of Body Mind Speciall, as persen∣tion. In affliction of bo∣dy, as sicknesse. 1 That God would sanctisie it to the fur∣therance of their repen∣tance. 2 That hee would giue them patience. 3 That he would re∣couer them, if it bee his will: if otherwise,
4 That hee would prepare thē for a peace∣able departure. In affliction of mind, that God would, 1 Pardon their sins. 2 Giue them repen∣tance. 3 Encrease their faith. 4 Defend them from Satan, and, 5 Giue them an hap∣py issue. In Persecution, that they may be 1 Assisted with the holy spirit, and that they may 2 Boldly glorifie God, in witnessing to the truth, euen with the
losse of their liues. 2 Particularly, by ma∣king mention of the Churches of England▪ Scotland, and Ireland that God would, 1 Pardon our cry∣ing sinnes. 2 Hold backe his heauie iudgements de∣serued. 3 Continue his Go∣spell. 4 Preserue our dread Soueraigne Lord, King Iames, our Noble Queen the hopefull Prince  &c. 5 Blesse the Honou∣rable Councell, Nobili∣ty, Gentry, Iudges, Iu∣stices;
the Ministers of the Word and Sa∣craments; the Commi∣nalty. And here we are to remember our fami∣lies, parents, friends; yea our very enemies, &c. 2 Thankes-giuing may be enlarged by an enu∣meration of benefits, ac∣cording to the distribu∣tion of them before mē∣tioned; and may be no∣tably amplified, by the contraries, in conside∣ring how miserable wee should be, in the want of those blessings, all or some, &c. In the conclusion we
may remember to aske preseruation for the day or night following aptly falling into it  from the mention of the benefits bestowed vpon our bodies, in the thankes-giuing 1 For the day, taking occasion by similituder▪ to desire grace to walke soberly as in the day. 2 For the night, by similitude to desire to be preserued from the works of darknesse, and from eternall death, and that God would giue protection, and com∣fortable refreshing. Both for night and
day to bee amplified from the shortnesse of ife, and suddennesse of death; and to adde something for prepa∣ration thereunto. For the life of a Christian ought to be a continu∣ll meditation of death. And thus reuerently to shut vp all with the Lords prayer.
A SHORT PRAIER according to the same order, gathered out of di∣uers places of holy Scrip∣ture; by which, as by a p∣terne, may bee conceiued, both the manner, and the vse of a Note-booke, to be made and kept of those things which we reade, concerning the se∣uerall parts of Prayer. OThe preface in a descrip∣tion of God; and a begging of audience. Lord my God, the Father of our Lord Iesus ChristEphes. 3.14.; I beseech thee haue respect to the prayer of thy seruant, and to his supplication, to hearken to the cry, and to the prayer
which thy seruant prayeth before thee this day1. Kin. 8.28.. Confession of sinne. O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift vp my face to thee my God: for ine iniquities are encrea∣sed ouer my head, and my trespasse is growne vp vn∣to heauenEzra 9.6.. 1. Petition, for pardon. O Lord for∣giueDan. 9.19., and cause thy face to shine vpon thy seruant, for the Lords sakeDan. 9.17.. Take away all mine iniquitie, and receiue me graciously; so will I render the calues of my lipsHos. 14.3.. 2. For saith. O stir me vp to take hold vpon theeEsa. 64.7.. I beleeue Lord, helpe my vn∣beleefeMark. 9.24, and encrease my faithLuk. 17.5. Seale me to the day of RedemptionEphes. 4.30., and shed
abroad thy loue in my heart, by thy holy spiritRom. 5.5.▪ I humbly beseech thee.3. For re∣pentance. Turne me O Lord vnto thee, and I shall bee ∣nedLam. 5.21.. Create in me a clea heart O Lord, and rene right spirit within mePsal. 51.10..  take the stony heart out  my body, and giue me  heart of flesh, that I wi walke in thy flatutes,  that I may be thy ser and thou mayst be my  for euermoreEzech. 11.19.20.. 4. For dire∣ction in our personall cal∣lings. A whereas thou hast ca mee to this estate (...  Good Lord grant  grace, therin to worketh  which is goodEphes. 4.28. 2 Thes. 3.12., with qetnesse, and to eate miowne
bread, shewing all good conscience, that I may adorne the doctrine of God my Sauiour in all thingsTit. 2.15.. and in as much as thy dis∣ciples must take vp the rosse and follow theeMat. 16.24.. I way thee, Deare Father, strengthen mee with all might, through thy glori∣ powe, vnto all pati∣ce and long suffering, with ioyfulnesseCol. 1.11.. 5. For perse∣uerance. And because Satan as a rring ion, seeketh to deuour , O my God, tread down atan vnder my feetRom. 16.20.; sta∣blish me in euery good word and work2. These. 17, and pre∣serue my whole spirit; soule and body, blamelesse, vnto
the comming of our,  Iesus Christ.6. For the Church. Doe good thy good pleasure to  on, and build the mall thy IerusalēPsal. 51.18. Good  preser thy little flock whom thn hast pr the kingdomeLuk. 12.32.. Thankes∣giuing. I th thee O Father, Lord▪  heauen and arthMat. 11.25., th thou hast, deliured,  from the power of dar, and translated we into  kingdome of thine  Saue. O Lord, thou  been my God from my ther wmbePsa. 22.10. Thou  pt mee nto this, d thy prdence, thou  giuen me bread to  clothes to put on 28.20.. I h∣ly
praise thy name, and I beseech thee, make me dwel  safetyPsal. 4.8., vnder the sha∣dow of thy wingsPsal. 17.8., this day (or night) through Ie∣is Christ; in whose name, &c. Or, to whom with thee O Father. Amen. Thou maist also make vse of the Lords Prayer, excellently to this purpose. IT was giuen for a pa∣terne, and speciall di∣rection to the Church vpon earth, how to pray. There can be no bet∣ter
direction: for if wee require wisdome; wise∣dome it selfe endited it: if perfection; it com∣prehends all the kinds of all things to be pray∣ed for: if order; the method is diuine: if perspicuous breuity; so much could not by any onely-created vnder∣standing be compacted into so little: if force and power, there can bee none more effectu∣all, then that, which Ie∣sus Christ, the Word of the Father, hath left and commended to his Church. If thou wouldest pro∣fitably
vse it, Obserue bese things. 1 Learne through∣to vnderstand it. 2 Beare in mind the uerall petitions, with e it order. 3 Note downe in thy memory, as thou wert before directed, these graces thou crauest in uery petition, giuing thē their proper place, in thy booke, in thy me∣mory, and in thy prayer. 4 Fourthly, take due knowledge of thy wants in euery petition; vnder their seuerall heads set∣ting downe the phrases and things thou mee∣test
with al concerning them. And specially note vpon thy heart, and imprint in it the graces thou most want∣est, & the wants which most doe trouble thee Principally, meditate of those graces, and la∣bour to bee humbled with the feeling of those wants. To helpe thee to spell  this lesson out of the Lords Prayer. After a description of God, as before, keeping the petitions with their order, in thy minde,
thou maist enlarge thē us. The 1. Petition: Hal∣lowed be thy name. 1 Heere thou maist how how God hath commanded, and it is our dutie to glorifie his name, in regard of our First, Creation. Secondly, preseruati∣on; but specially in re∣gard of our Thirdly, Redemption. 2 Then acknowledge, First, thy negligence and carelesnesse this way. Secondly, thy pride,
in seeking thine owne glory more then Gods. Thirdly, thy want of zeale. Fourthly, such sinnes whereby thou hast dis∣honoured God most, causing his name there∣by to be blasphemed. Thirdly, Desire grace, ye thou maiest, chiefly in all thy thoughts, words, and deeds, propound to thy self to glorifie God, and to respect his glory more then euen the sal∣uation of thy soule. The 2. Petition: Thy Kingdome come. 1 Enlarge this, by a
mour∣ning of thy soule vnto God, for thy bon∣dage vnder sinne and Satan, amplified from the consideration First, of our first Cre∣ation. Secondly, of our pre∣sent traiterous, and re∣bellious disposition, by the power of originall sinne, which hath whol∣ly possessed all parts of body and soule. 2 Desire that God would First, rescue and re∣deeme thee out of the power of Satan, and sinne. Secondly, that hee
would by his spirit rule in thy heart, casting out the strong man, and di∣uiding his spoyles. Thirdly, that hee would make the affecti∣ons subiect to the regi∣ment of his spirit, and renew thee according to his image. Thou maist make this the place of repentance. 3 Here thou maist re∣member the Church, the kingdom of Christ. The 3. Petition: Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. 1 Here confesse and
bewaile, First, thy readinesse to doe thine owne will, yea the will of Satan, making these the rule of thy life, and not the will of God. Secondly, thy igno∣rance of Gods word, which is the copie of his will. Thirdly, thy negli∣gence in hearing of it. Fourthly, thy con∣tempt shewed in conti∣nuance in knowne sins, after admonition. 2 Then desire grace. First, to denie thy selfe. Secondly, to vnder∣stand
the word. Thirdly, to loue and reuerence it more. Fourthly, to make it the rule of thy life, in as much as it is the scepter of Christs kingdome. Fifthly, that thy con∣uersation may bee in heauen, after the exam∣ple of the Angels. Sixthly, whatsoeuer be the will of God for thee to doe or suffer, that thou maist alwaies with patience and con∣tentation say: Thy will be done.
The 4. Petition: Giue vs this day our daily bread. 1 Here acknowledge that thy life, preseruati∣on, and all good things come from God. 2 Confesse and be∣waile thy First, couetousnesse. Secondly, thy vniust dealing, to enrich and maintaine thy selfe. Thirdly,Matth. 6. thy distrust in the good prouidence of God, who feedeth the fowles, clotheth the Lil∣lies. Fourthly, thy earth∣ly
and worldly mind that cannot sauor ought but earth and earthly things. 3 Then desire, First, the prouidence of God to watch ouer thee for thy preseruati∣on and main tenance. Secondly, faith to rest vpon God in all estates & not vpon the meanes. Thirdly, not to vse vnlawfull meanes. Fourthly, that God would blesse his gifts vnto thee, and that thou mayst vse them soberly and comfortably. Fifthly, thou mayst here make vse of the di∣rection
concerning thy personall calling. 5 Petition; Forgiue vs our trespasses, as we for∣giue, &c. 1 Here make vse of the confession of sin, and petition for pardon, for faith and repentance ac∣cording to the former direction. 2 Here also desire a charitable heart toward thy neighbours, as thou desirest to bee forgiuen, so to forgiue others, and to be ready to grant the pardon thou crauest.
6. Petition; Leade vs non into tentation: but de∣liuer vs from euill. Here desire strength against Satan his tenta∣tions, and against all things, whereby thou mayst be drawne from faith in God and holy obedience, making vse of that which is in the Petition for perseue∣rance according to the former direction. And for conclusion, as our Sauior concludes with a kind of praise to God, so doe thou.
The heads of thank∣fulnes thou mayst make the graces which God hath giuen thee, accor∣ding to euery petition. First, for making thee in any measure studious of his glory. Secondly, for giuing thee his Spirit. Thirdly, for his word. Fourth∣ly, for his proui∣dence o∣uer thee; Crea∣ting Preser∣uing thee Fifthly, for pardon of sinne: Iustification, San∣ctification, &c. Sixthly, for strength in any tentation.
If thou wilt bestow some time and study to practise according to this, I cannot but be per∣swaded, that thou shalt find much benefit, which God grant. To conclude, I would admonish a learner, of fiue things. First, enter not vpon the practise here com∣mended, till thou hast these generall proiects perfect in thy head, or some other. Secondly, in the meane time make vse of some good praier-book, and out of it get by hart such prayers as best be∣fit
thy deuotion and ne∣cessities; or if thou canst not reade, vse some o∣thers help to reade thē, or repeate them to thee; at least neglect not to say vpon thy knees reue∣rently the Lords prayer: alwaies prouided, that thou well vnderstand the meaning of euery petition, or otherwise thou shalt take GODS name in vaine. Secondly, giue not ouer this course, though thou findest it hard, but ouercome the difficulty with thy diligence and paines. To giue ouer a good exercise for diffi∣culties,
argues idlenesse and sloth. All good things are hard to vs, because of our corruption, and prayer of all holy exer∣cises the hardest: wee must force nature. Children learne not to speake perfectly in a day, or a moneth; much lesse can wee crie Abba Father perfectly and di∣stinctly vpon the sud∣den. Redeeme some of the time thou bestowest vp∣on thy pleasures and va∣nities, and bestow it this way; it shal neuer repent thee.
Fourthly, remember that the Pharisies could make excellent prayers, and the Reprobate can ie Lord, Lord. A wicked man may attaine thus farre, as to make prayers very nota∣ble: but with feeling and in faith to cry Abba Fa∣ther, a wicked man can∣not. This is prayer, and a certaine token of Ad∣option, the other is not. Fifthly, labor to haue grace in thy heart; and whatsoeuer thou askest in prayer, practise in life. He that prayes for the
pardon of his sinnes, and for grace to liue well, and yet neither en∣deuoureth to auoid sin, or to practise pietie, mockes God, and shall not goe vnpunished. Liue as thou prayest, that thou mayest liue e∣uer. So be it. PSAL. 66.18. If I regard wickednesse in my heart, the Lord will not beare me. 2. TIM. 2.19. Let euery one that calleth on the name of Christ de∣part from iniquitie.
Now to the only wise God, who is able to doe aboue all wee aske or thinke, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, bee praise in the Church throughout all generations for euer. A∣men. FINIS.
Short and godly Admonitions concer∣ning Time, and the v of ingered out of Eph. 5.16. Redeeming the Time; be∣cause the daies are euill▪ Here are two par An exhortation, To  de the Ti. A reason: Because  dayes are euill. Redeeming the time. TIme is the measure of Motion. Opportunity is that
part of time which is fit∣test for our affaires. This is meant here, as it is the measure of good motions, called also oc∣casion, season, due time. It is the beautie of things; for euery thing is beautifull in his timeEccles. 3.11. Meates are welcom∣est, when they are in sea∣son; so a word spoken in due season is comelyProu. 25.11; Euen a refreshing of the wearie souleEsay 51.4.. As some imprison truth in vnrighteousnesRom. 1.18., so doe, they timeHierome.. It is charitie to re∣deeme time, by righte∣ousnes.
Opportunitie of time is a rich commoditie; the couetousnesse of it to doe well, is an honest couetousnesse. As MerchantsAugustine. ob∣serue carefully the sea∣sons of buying in, and venting their Merchan∣dise, so buy thou and re∣deeme time to doe good. They that loose time, are the greatest loosers, and wastfullest prodi∣gals; for of all other pos∣sessions, two may be had together: but two mo∣ments of time cannot be possessed together. This precious com∣moditie
is most out of request with great and rich men; who consume and mispend time, as fast as their vnthriftie children doe their inhe∣ritances. Idlenesse, vanity, and neglecting the pretious time, is the disease of great and rich men, as they say the Gout is: these can find time, to dally, to court, to be rio∣tous, &c. but not to pray and serue God; therfore for the most part, they are most poore in the best things. Time is the price of time; when thy profit,
thy pleasure, thy vaine delights, thy lusts, call thee after them: ex∣change time for time. As thou giuest thy money for meate, and apparrell; so giue these things to purchase the time of prayer, and wel∣doing. Salomon saith, Buy the truthProu. 23.23: but Pilate saith; What is truthJohn 18.38? so Paul saith, buy the time: but our profane wret∣ches say, What is time? let vs spend it, say they, as though it were little worth. Time is Gods crea∣ture, he allowes thee no
time to bee vaine and wicked: but hee giues thee time, that thou mayst repent and doe good. Make thy aduan∣tage of it. Of the time thou be∣stowest, in prayer, sin∣ging of Psalmes, rea∣ding the Scriptures, and good bookes, and in do∣ing good, it shall neuer repent thee. But time otherwise spent, wil one day torment thy con∣science. Thou must giue ac∣count for time; on this moment depends eter∣nitie; of blessednesse if it be well; of miserie, if it
be ill imployed. It is great wisdome to know the time, and to redeeme itEph. 5.15.16. The men of Isachar were in great account with Dauid, because they had vnderstanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; so are they in great ac∣count with God,1. Chr. 12.32 who regard and vse the sea∣son of well doing. When a poore man begs of thee, then hast thou occasion to shew thy charitie: when thou art in tentation, to shew thy faith: when thou art iniuried, to shew thy pa∣tience:
when thou hea∣rest or seest men offend, to shew thy zeale: when there are publike mee∣tings for the worship of God, to shew thy deuo∣tion, &c. Loose not such faire opportunities of weldo∣ing to glorifie God. The time of grace and of the Gospell is an ac∣cepted time, euē the day of saluation. While the dore is open, enter into the Kingdom of heauen. While thou hast the light, beleeue in the light; and walke in the light, that thou mayst be the child of light.Ioh. 12.35.36
To day if thou wilt heare his voyce, harden not thy heartPsal. 95.7. Re∣pe while it is called to dayHeb. 3.13.? The time is short1. Cor. 7.29.: the art of weldoing is long: the worke is great: the labourers are lazie: the Master is at hand: It remaineth that wee vse the world as though we vsed it not, and that wee redeeme the time of prayer, and of the pra∣ctice of godlinesse. Occasions are head∣long; and once past, not to bee recouered. The tide taries for none: take time while it is offered:
while you haue oppor∣tunitie, doe good vnto all; to thy self, to others, specially to them which are of the household of faithGal. 6.10.. The 5 foolish virgins came to late, and were shut outMat. 25.10.11.12.. Ierusalem in her day tooke no knowledge of the things belonging to her peace, and was destroyedLuk. 19.42.. Esau came not in time, and lost the blessing, but found leisure enough to crie bitterlyGenes 37.33.34.. Our life is as a Fayre:Nazian. when the Fayre-day is ouer, there is no buy∣ing the things thou nee∣dest:
so when this life is ended, there is no time of repentance. Repent now; for in death no man remembreth God, saith DauidPsal. 6.5.. As in warre, so in deat, we are not per∣mitted to erre twice: of∣ten doe well, that thou maist once die well, and thou shalt be happy. Liue euery day, as if it were thy last; and as at the last day thou wilt wish thou hadst, or re∣ioyce, thou hast liued. Examine thine houres euery day: how many doest thou spend in ea∣ting and drinking? how
many in sleeping? how many in dressing and trimming thy painted sheath? how many in doing nothing? how many in doing that which is ill? how few or none in prayer and wel∣doing? How ill tenants are we to our grand Lord? wee hold all of him, but we thinke little of yeel∣ding and paying at our due time. Wee receiue all our time from God, and like vnthankefull wretches, serue him with the least part of it, and that com∣monly the last and re∣fuse.
A Heathen EmperotTitus, the sonne of Ve∣spasian. Hierom on the sixth to the Galathians. accounted that day lost, in which hee did no good. How many daies hast thou lost? Account thou likewise that a lost day, in which thou be∣commest not better then thy selfe. Hee that most redee∣meth the time, liues long, though hee fulfill not much time; and he which is an hundred yeeres old, if he haue re∣deemed no time of do∣ing good, hath been (but hath not liued) longSeneca.. The Vsurer sels time to men, and the diuell steales time from men.
He tells the Papists of Purgatory: that painted fire, yeelds but a cold comfort: for by this meanes he leades them to hell in a string: Hee telles our gallants, that its time enough to pray and repent when they are old: And by this meanes, they spend so much time in euill, that they leaue none for re∣pentance, prayer, and for vsing meanes to saue their soules. As doth the Vsurer, so doth the diuel; the Vsu∣rer giues the young No∣uice faire words, till hee hath broken his day,
and forfeited his lands▪ so doth the diuel-stroke vs, till by continuance in sinne we are hardned and past recouery. Pray to day, repent to day: thou art not sure of to morrow; he that is not ready and fit to day, will be lesse to morrow. Thy life is like a ves∣sell of weak wine, which is quicke and liuely at the first broching: but flat and ill tasted when it is tilted. Wilt thou draw out the first, and best of thy life to the diuell, in fol∣lowing drunkennesse, whoredome, and thy
lawlesse lusts? & thē giue the dregs to God, which are fit to be poured out to the hogs? Is it a time then, first to begin to liue, when thou art ready to die? then first to seeke God, when thou commest to thy brothes, and specta∣cles? when vnderstan∣ding, memorie, sight, hearing, & senses faile. For the most part, they which defer the season of seeking God till age; are then iustly giuen ouer to him whō they haue serued in their youth, which is the diuell.
Remember thy Cre∣ator in the dayes of thy youth; while the euill dayes come not, nor the yeeres draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in themEcclesi. 12.1.. Thus did Samuel1. Sam. 1.28; & Timothy2. Tim. 3.15.: God de∣lights in such. Art thou old, and hast trifled out thy Time, neglecting the oppor∣tunity of knowing and seruing God? Dispaire not, but repent; and be the more carefull to re∣deeme the Time that remaines. Let it suffice, that in the Time past of thy life
thou hast walked as a Heathen, in abomina∣ble wickednesse: But now the end of al things is at hand; be sober ther∣fore and watch vnto prayer1. Pet. 4.3.7. Doe here, as thou do∣est in thy iourney. If thou hast ouer-slept thy selfe in the morning; thou makest the shorter bait, and spurrest the harder on: so now, put thy best legge before, make speed, lest thou be benighted, and shut out with the dogs and Sorcerers, and whore∣mongers,Reuel 27.15, &c.
Because the dayes are euil. Time, is called Daies, because it is counted by Dayes. Dayes are not euill in themselues, and as they are a necessary apperte∣nance to the frame of this world,2. Tim. 3.1.2. &c. which is Gods building: but they are so called, from euill persons, and thingsMat. 6.34. which are in those dayes. The time is euill, whē we which liue in such Time are euill; & when by our euill of sin, the e∣uill of punishment is
deseruedly inflicted vp∣on vs. Which punish∣ments no maruell if they continue, when that continues in vs, which deserues to bee punished. The dayes are euill: then great need to vse Prayer: for it shall come to passe, that whosoeuer calles vpon the name of the Lord, shall be safeIoel 2.32. Rom. 10.13. Many men cry out, that the world was ne∣uer worse, saying, O the Times! But are not the Times the worse for thee? If thou beest wic∣ked and prophane; it is
thou which makest thē so bad. Complaine not of the Times, but of thy selfe, and amende the Times by thy amend∣ment. Achan made it an euill day to the Israelites, by his sinneIoshua 7.; and Moses made it a good day by his prayersExod. 17 11 Wouldest thou see many dayes, and good? keepe thy tongue from euill, and thy lips from speaking guile: depart from euil, and do good, seek peace & ensue itPsalm. 34.12.13.14. As a noble RomanLucullus. turned a dismall day, into a successefull, by
his valour: so turne thou euill dayes into good, by thy goodnes. The worse the Dayes and Times be, the more precious let bee euery opportunity of well∣doing. As in times of derth, the poore man picks vp euery kernell of corne that falles beside: O (saith hee) It's deare, none must belost: so lose thou not one crum of Time, wherein thou maiest haue occasion to doe good: For the daies are euill. A man that should in the time of famine giue
his corne to the hogs, were worthy to bee hanged vp at his gate; so art thou worthy to loose the reward of wel∣doing, which throwest away the opportunities thereof. There are millions in hell, who if they had it, would giue all the wealth in the world, for one dayes opportunity of repentance, which they despised and fore∣slowed, when they liued vpon the earth. As the Bee, so soone as euer the Sun breakes forth, flies abroad to ga∣ther honey and wax; so
be thou ready to euery good workeTit. 3.1., wait∣ing the occasion therof. Many say, that they haue no Time to learne to pray, to heare the word, &c. The voice of a beast. Hast thou a time to eate, to sleepe, to liue? Hast thou Time to dance after the diuels pipe? and can'st finde no Time to learne god∣linesse? Many say they would haue prayed, heard, &c. but that they had impe∣diments? Redeem now the time, and step ouer impediments. Hee that obserueth
the wind shal▪ not so and hee that is afraid  euery cloud, shall n∣reapeEcclesi. 11.4: so hee that will not doe good be∣cause of impediment shall neuer doe good for so long as there is a diuell, and a world, and an vnregenerate part there will bee impedi∣ments, euen a thousand when thou wouldest do good, and a thousand furtherances when thou wouldest doe euill. If Paul had censed to preach at Ephesus, be∣cause, of impediments, when such a dore was o∣pened vnto him1. Cor. 16.9., he
had lost the comfort of ring there so famous Church. The more are the ad∣ersaries and impedi∣ments, be thou the more atchfull vpon all occa∣ons of doing good. The dayes are euill, &  men are euill that ue in these dayes. La∣our thou to be good; and so to liue, as thou wouldest wish to bee ound liuing, when Christ shall come to iudgement. Pray, pray, pray; Re∣pent, repent, repent: Blessed is that seruant, when his Lord when he
commeth shall find  doingMat. 24.46.. Amen, Am ROM. 13.11.12. Now it is high time awake out of sleepe. The night is far sp the day is at hand; let  therefore cast off the  of darknesse, and put  the armour of light. FINIS.
