1970 99846179 11129
THE Wonderfull and strange effect and ver∣tues of a new Terra Sigillata lately found out in Germanie, With the right order of the applying and admini∣string of it: being oftentimes tried and experienced by Andreas Bertholdus of Oschatz in Misnia. AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson for Richard Watkins. 1587.
To the right worship∣full, my especiall good friendes M.D. Maister, and M.D. Baylie, Doctors in Physicke attendant vp∣on her Maiestie. WEL knowen is it vnto you both, Right reuerende and learned doctors how carefully our good friende M. Hugh Morgan her Ma∣iesties Apothecarie, hath euermore imployed himselfe and his purse to furnish this Realme with the rarest, perfectest and best sortes of all ma∣ner of Plants, Fruits, Iuyces, Gumes, Mettals, Mynerals, Boales, Stoanes, and whatsoeuer else needfull: For
the either preseruing or restoring of health. Whereby he hath not onely well deserued of his Countrie at home. But is also become famous for sundrie his compounds, special∣ly for his exact Composition of his Mythridat, and his Tyracle of An∣dromachus: throughout France and Italie and manie places further off. It pleased him (I thanke him) of late to send vnto me a new Terra Sigil∣lata, latelie found out in Germanie: which hath not onely beene tryed by the Phisitions of those partes to be most souereigne against all poy∣sons and sundrie deadlie diseases: but hath also in the like cases been here wel experienced by my good & learned friend M. Doctor Hector, Nunnes and diuerse others of your learned Colledge in London, who hath found it most effectuall in sun∣drie dreadfull and daungerous di∣seases. He sent me withall a little booke in latine written by Andre∣as Bertholdus touching the vertues
and the right vse thereof, which I thought good for the benefite of such as bee ignorant in that tongue to put in english and to publish it vnder your learned protection. Accept it I beseech you and vouch∣safe it your fauorable countnance. Aluingham this 14. of August. 1587. Your assured louing friend, B. G.
Of the Vertues, force, and vse, of the right and ap∣proued Terra Sigillata of Germanie. FIrst (which in nature is most to bée wonde∣red at & reuerenced,) it resisteth all maner Poysons or Venoms receiued inwardly, be they neuer so furious or deadly, and spéedily expelleth them by vomit, if either before or presently after the poysons it be taken, if any thing la∣ter, it driueth them out by sweating. Secondly, with the like wonder∣full qualitie of nature, it resisteth the most cruell and horrible infection of the Pestilence, not onely in preser∣uing such as vse it, but also in spéedie curing and calling to life, such as are infected, and halfe dead.
Thirdly, it cureth the bitings or stingings of all maner of venemous beastes, or wormes, and any wounde made with poysoned Darte or wea∣pon. Fourthly, it is founde to haue a singular and most swéete agréement and wonderfull Sympathy with the vitall partes of mans bodie, so as it greatly comforteth the heart, refre∣sheth the brayne, and kéepeth away diseases from all the inward partes besides. It asswageth all manner of headach, paine and trembling of the heart. It helpeth wounded, infla∣med, bleared, and watring eyes. It hath also béene found by experience, that in wounds and inflamation of the brayne and the stones, this excel∣lent earth hath done more good than any other medicine could promise or performe. Fiftly, against all vnmeasurable bléeding, either of veyne, Arterye, or any other part of the bodie, there can∣not a more assured remedie be found. Sixtly, it dryeth vp all manner of
Rewmes, Destilations, and Murrs. Seuenthly, it stoppeth the Laske, Lyentery, bloudy flixe, and all other too much loosenesse of the belly. Eightly, it throughly healeth all burnings, or scaldings, by Fire, Wa∣ter, or Mettal, both keeping them from blistring, and spéedily restoring the hurt parts. Ninthly, it healeth soundly and perfectly all gréene woundes, & rank∣led and rotten Soares. Tenthly, it is against the Quin∣sey and inward Inflamations a most present remedie. The eleuenth, against Itch and Skabs that are hardly cured, this earth is with very good successe vsed. The twelft, it is a most méete me∣dicine against all such sickenesses as are to be auoided by Sweating. The thirtéenth, against the consu∣ming of the Longs, as well in dry∣ing vp the Soare, as in staying the spitting of bloude, it is a medicine most profitable.
A more full and play∣ner declaration, of the maner and order in the vsing the said earth against the disea∣ses before named. FIrst, to speake in gene∣rall of the vse of this earth, and the manner of taking it: It is with most happie successe gi∣uen. In the like sorte, and against the same vnnaturall diseases, as is the earth of Lemnos, which of olde time was so famous, and is at this day so highly of the Turkish Empe∣rour and his Bassas accounted of, as they estéeme it to be farre more pre∣cious than golde: Nay which is more, in the curing of many diseases, it farre excéedeth the saide Lemnian earth, which for the most part coun∣terfette, is yet with such difficultie brought out of Turkie vnto vs (For that which is commonly solde at the Apothecaries, is in comparison here∣of not worthy to bee named.) And
therefore great good reason it is, that wee confesse, and with a thankefull minde acknowledge, the singular li∣beralitie and bountie of that great and most mighty maiestie extended towards our countrymen of Germa∣nie: That where by reason of the Turkish barbarousnesse so godly and blessed giftes of God, as likewise all learning, artes, and liberall sciences, hath béene defaced and corrupted, yet hath it pleased him at this day, so to bewtifie this poore Country of Germanie, not onely with all kindes of good learning and artes, and with the profound knowledge of Diuini∣tie, but hath likewise sent vnto vs such his most rare & excellent gifts, whereby we are sufficiently prouided of whatsoeuer concerneth the health of either soule or bodie. And because I would not haue men be perswaded by my bare wordes (who vpon a cha∣ritable affection haue willingly pub∣lished to the world this worthy bene∣fite of God,) I doe vnto all learned men commit the efficacie, forme, and
vertuousnes of this blessed and neuer sufficienly commended earth, to bée wayed & examined with sound iudge∣ment and consideration, which hath often béene prooued by good tryal and experience. The vertues whereof for their furtherance that haue not béene much acquainted with Phisicke, I will here briefly set downe. First, if poyson be giuen to anie man in meate or drinke or otherwise, or if any haue vnawares, as manie times it chaunceth, tasted any dead∣ly or venemous medicine, as soone as hee perceiueth himselfe diseased, let him take a dramme of this earth, or more or lesse according to ye strength of the poyson, and the age and force of the sicke man, and in some conue∣nient Lyquor let him drinke it vp, and if the poyson haue béene but new∣ly receiued, he shall presently bring it vp by vomit: But if so be through lon∣ger time the Venom haue béeue dis∣persed and carryed to the inwarde veynes yet being well couered in his bedde, he shall happily driue it out by
sweating. The Lyquors that are most méetest to take it with, are these: the water of Carduus benedictus, Dyuils bitt, swallowwort. The water of the rootes of the great brode Clott, Angellica, Pym∣pernell, aud such like: If you haue not these waters at hande, this soue∣rayne preseruatiue may be taken ve∣rie well in white Wine. Secondly, against the plague it may be vsed in the like maner, espe∣cially when it is to be giuen vnto such as are alreadie infected. But if you meane to take it but as a preserua∣tiue, you néede not to take a whole dramme, for halfe a dramme taken in the morning in a little wine or vine∣ger of Marygolds, or any other con∣uenient Lyquor, will very well serue. I my selfe haue alwayes vsed this earth with very good successe, in ma∣ner as followeth, as soone as a man féeleth any paine of his heart or his heade, or perceiueth any anguish, grudging, lothsomnesse, guiddinesse, or other signes of the pestilence, I do
streight disolue in wine, water, or o∣ther lyquor, a dramme of this earth, and giue it to the sicke man in his bedde, casting him in a sweat, where∣with the venome is in a very fewe houres driuen out, without any out∣ward sore or swelling: But if it so fall out as it be not taken in time, the bloud being for the greatest parte in∣fected, there cōmeth out in the swea∣ting either sore or carbuncle. In this case you must open the veyne as nere to the sore as may be: As if it be vn∣der the arme,Or middle veine. open the Mediana of the saide arme, if the botch bee in the flanke or grayne, the great veyne on the inside of the legge is to be ope∣ned, if the sore be vnder the knée, o∣pen the veyne in the soale of the foote. In the meane time bee not negligent in quallifying of euill humors, least the poyson gathering force shoulde strike to the heart, the heart being re∣lieued, will forthwith driue the venom into a sore, which sore being ripe, must by an expert Surgeon out of hand be launced and well healed vp,
neither must you omit to take a little portion of this earth, and stéeping it in vinager with pouder of Cynamon, make it in a playster, and lay it vpon the heart, you shall perceiue a great quantitie of the poyson drawen out by the playster. Herewithall must you remember after the receit of the medicine to take a toste wet in very good vinager, and to cause the patient to holde it to his nose to kéepe him from casting it vp againe. And if he fortune to cast it vp you must giue it againe and againe, till his stomacke doe kéepe it. This manner of vsing of it a man of great authority and calling in the Turkes Court did send to a noble man his friende as a great secret, with this protestation, that a principall Phisi∣tion of the Turkes did leaue this or∣der written in the Arabyck tongue, which the experiences of a great nū∣ber hath since confirmed. Thirdly, against the biting of a madde dogge, the stinging of Ser∣pents, Scorpions, Spyders, or any
other venemous wormes, as also a∣gainst woundes made by poysoned weapons, this earth may in this sort be most commodiously vsed. Take as much thereof as shall suffice for the bignesse of the wound, and with fa∣sting spittle make it into a paste spred vpon Linnen, and lay it to the soare, or being made more thinner a∣noynt the soare with it, whereby the venome shall not all onely be drawen backe, but the force thereof quite aba∣ted, so as in this case it is not possible to haue a better medicine. And if it happen the plasture bee applyed too late, then must you of neressitie driue out the poison by receiuing inwardly a dram of the earth infused in wine or other medicinable Lyquor. Fourthly, it doth wonderfully as∣swage the paynes and raging of the head, whether it come of heate, wind, labour, watching, care, or trouble of minde, and restoreth the consumed spirits if it be taken with good Aqua vitae, the waters of Betony, Rosma∣ry, Mageram, Penyroyall, or such
like, or in great heate a dramme of it taken in the morning with Rosewa∣ter. The paynes and trembling of the heart it asswageth, and the heart it selfe being dumpish it greatly reioy∣ceth, if a dramme of it be taken with the waters of Balme, Salendine, Mother-wort, Buglasse, Borage, or Geliuer Flowers, or dronke in like sort with good white wine. For the burning heat of the eyes, bleerednes, rumes, or any flux, this earth is speci∣ally good, applyed eyther with Rose∣water, the waters of Planteyne, Ey∣bright, Valeryan, Fenell, or any such, and dropped into the eye with the fe∣ther of a blacke henne, or linnen cloth dipped in the water and layde to it, for any stripe in the eye it healeth it, if it be layd to with ye whit of an egge, and any conuenient water as shall séeme good to the Phisition or Surge∣on. It helpeth the wounds of the head or of the stones, if being disolued in Rosewater, a linnen cloth dipped therein be layd to the hurt place, for therby shall the soare be kept from a∣ny
inflamation, flux of euill humors, or hurtfull accident. Fiftly, you may quickely stanch bloud breaking out from any part of the body, if you beate a Trocyse of this earth into pouder, & mingling it with spittle or any other lyquor, ap∣ply it to the place, you shall soone re∣streyne bléeding at the nose if ming∣ling this earth with vinager, ye white of an egge, & the water of Tormen∣tyll, you spreade it vpon linnen cloth and lay it to the temples to the parte of the head, and put it into the nose, you shall easily also dissolue cluttered bloud congealed within the body by any casualty, if you take either this earth alone in warme wine, or if you cause the patient to drink a dramme of the earth and a dramme of that bole which they that digge in quar∣reyes finde in the midst of the stones, and name it it in Dutch of the colour Lyuerstone, and of the place Steyn∣marle, dissolued in the white of two egges and warme vinager, with a scruple of Saffron.
Sixtly, to cure the Rewme, vse of∣ten to drinke this earth morning and euening, eyther in white wine or o∣ther lyquor, whereby you shall imme∣diately sweate and finde great ease. Seuenthly, you shall stoppe any loosenesse of the bodie if you giue a dramme of this earth in the morning and at night in the water of Tor∣mentyll, of Oke leaues, or of the flowers of our Acacia. Eightly, to kéepe any parte of the body that it blyster not after burning and skalding and to skinne it verie spéedily, powre vpon this earth cléere Fountaine water wherein vnquen∣ched Lime hath soaked the night be∣fore, and herewithall with the fether of a blacke henne anoynt often times very tenderly the sore place. Ninthly, if this earth be put in a∣ny playster stéeped in any lyquor, or receiued any wayes into the body, it perfectly cureth al paines, inflamati∣ons, or euill accidents of any wounds or vlcers, especially woundes of the kydneis, stones, or inward parts.
Tenthly, it healeth Itches, Scabs, Rybes, Skuruinesse, Mangies, or o∣ther such filthy diseases of the skinne and maketh the skinne smoth and white, if so be it be dissolued in spring water or plantyne water, if the foule and leprous skinne be often washed therewith and not dryed after it. Lastly, this earth of ours doth helpe the quinsey, inward inflamati∣ons, vlcered Lungs, and such other inward diseases, if a dramme of it be taken in any water proper to the di∣sease, and likewise it cureth all Col∣lickes, and Illyacke passions. These are in effect the vertues of this excel∣lent earth, as farre as I haue hither∣to had experience. Other vertues of this blessed earth doubtlesse there are many, which I leaue to the experien∣ces of the learned Phisitions. Onely this I will tell them, that this earth is of the nature of the Sunne, or of Golde, for it groweth in no place but in the golde mynes in the midst of the rockes, as doth the precious stone. (I meane the yellow earth, for
the white is in the siluer mynes, and likely it is that euery mettal else hath his proper vole or earth as I gesse, for as yet I haue not fully vnderstood it.) Whereupon it is called by Para∣celsus in the first parte of his great Surgery and in other places, the greace of the Sunne, because it hath in it some shewe of fatnesse. Moreo∣uer, I haue had of some skilfull Al∣chymists two sortes of earth, the one drawen from golde, the other from siluer very like vnto these of ours, which so being, out of all doubt that earth of ours being as it ought to be prepared and applyed, will cure all those gréeuous diseases that golde it selfe being prepared according to Art will cure, which I leaue to the search of the wise and learned Phisitions: For my selfe it sufficeth to haue shew∣ed the way to others, whereby they may garnish and aduaunce the glory of God and our Countrey. In fine, these and other many re∣medyes sondry Doctors haue dayly found out, especially in the falling
sickenesse, wherein they haue founde by good tryall and experience that diuers infected with that disease, by taking of this earth gotten in the golden myne, haue béene throughly deliuered, so as they haue not anie time after béene touched with it. And therefore I heartely desire all such to whose handes this earth hath come, and who haue had any ex∣perience of it, that if so be they hap∣pen to haue any other experience of it eyther by themselues or others, than a number of learned men haue tryed (whose witnesse of great credite yea, euen of Magistrates and Prin∣ces before whom it hath béene tryed I haue set downe,) that for the com∣forte of the diseased, brotherly chari∣tie, and commodity of the vniuersall mēbers of Christ, they would vouch∣safe to send mee word of it hither into Silesia, where I remaine in a towne called Kupfferberg, or to aduertise the famous & most learned Philoso∣pher D. Ihon Montanus Doctor in Phisicke, now dwelling at Striga.
Touching the names of both the white and the yellow earth, to speake something thereof, I trust there is no man that can iustly be offended with me, in that I haue termed the white earth digged out of the siluer mines, by the name of mynerall vnycorne, wherein I haue not so much here fol∣lowed mine owne fansie (though it may be permitted to the Inuentors to giue names to such things as they haue found out) as the counsell and aduise of the best Myners, and Doc∣tors of Phisicke, who commonly giue names according to the effect & qual∣litie of the medicine, and not accor∣ding to the outward shape or shewe onely, as the vnlearned vse to doe: Or because I haue called the yellow earth the grease of the Sunne, being gotten out of the golde mynes, and afterwards with great diligence pre∣pared. For I haue found by experi∣ence, that the yellow earth hath the same force and vertue in curing di∣seases that golde it selfe hath: as the white hath the vertues of siluer. So
as good reason to mee it séemes, to name them according to the thinges whereof they take their force. If these names displease any man, the partie may come hyther to the mines where they growe, and consider the place, circumstance, forme, and pro∣pertie, of the thing, before he as vn∣skilfull in Mynerall matters, doe maliciously blase abroad his foolish writings against the secret workes of God, or vpon a couetous conceit, fearing that his Ritchin will be the colder, if out of Germanie that may be had at a small price, which is hun∣ted for out of Araby, Turquy, and the barbarous places there abouts, with so great summes of monie and with greater gaine retayled, al∣though not halfe so good as this which we may haue with lesse cost by much at home: Yet must they in the meane time bee accompted greate Doctors, because they can skill of such thinges as are farre fetched, though they neuer sawe the place where they grew, nor euer haue séene
them gréene or new gathered, as hath itherto happened of that excellent earbe Scordium, which beeing ught by the Merchant out of far Countries and solde at a very high price, yet is now lately founde to haue growen continually in Germa∣nie, both as fayre as that which com∣meth from beyond seas, and of better vse for the bodies of our Germains than the other. In like sort falleth it out with mynerals, mettals, and pre∣cious stones, which as the learned Storie wryter Sebastian Munster affirmeth, are now found all to grow at home with vs, and are sent abroad into other Countries in great abun∣dance, which a hundred & fifty yeares agoe were sought for at straungers handes, and so distributed about. We that doe dayly with infinite toyle and excessiue charges hunt for these hidden treasures in the bowels of our olde mother the earth, doe eue∣ry day finde new kindes both of met∣tals and mynerals, that the olde wri∣ters neuer knew of, nor those that at
this day inhabit those Countryes are yet acquanted with, beside the vn∣skilfull Doctors, and dwellers at home, is it possible that these felowes should haue better knowledge of such thinges, as at home they were neuer acquaynted with? neyther knowe what kinde, sorte, or nature they bée of: than those to whom they be most familiar, and who dayly gather them where they growe: Yet cease they not with their eloquent pennes, im∣pudently to lie & to deface the truth, attributing to euery thing most foo∣lish & feyned names both in Greeke and Latine, not waying the proper∣ties and qualities of euery thing, according to which the Lord God did by Adam from the beginning name them: but as séemeth best to their foolish brayne, which fansie of theirs is as foolishly still mainteyned, and shamelesly defended by their follow∣ers, alleadging onely this slender reason, such and such a Philosopher hath saide it: which for the blind∣nesse sake and vntrustinesse of the
parties they might rather haue dée∣med to haue béene most false. And thus not onely to God and his gifts, but to their owne Countrey of Ger∣manie, these Doctors and Philoso∣phers of Germanie are found to be most iniurious, who despise the rare blessings of God that are proper to them and their Countrey: Onely cōmending and desiring such things as are gotten abroad, suppressing with a vile kinde of minde such thinges as they haue at home, nay, which is a fowler thing, they neyther haue desire to benefite their Coun∣trie nor their brethren, neyther will they suffer others that would doe it, but studie continually how they may with all sortes of raylings and slan∣ders stoppe and deface the good and laudable attemptes of such as they knowe to bee studiously and honestly giuen. Where it had béene a great deale more méete for them first haue giuen most heartie thankes to God that in the latter dayes hath so aboundantly blessed our Countrie of
Germanie in bringing to light such infinite treasures as hauing long lyen hidde, are now through his mer∣cie found out, to the end that by con∣tinuall beholding of them wee may be called from the dungeon of darke∣nesse to light, and to the amendment of our liues. And euen of the verie bountie and goodnesse of their dispo∣sition, thou mayst easily (good rea∣der) perceiue them whom God will haue partakers of his hidden trea∣sures, when as they doe not with in∣iustice kéepe to themselues the se∣cret knowledge which they haue re∣ceiued from God, but séeke by all the meanes they may to make them common to all men, especially to those that be good and godly: and for the others, his good will is they should continually apply their stu∣dies to their priuate contentation, and neuer atteyne to the knowledge of the truth: And these good fellowes vse alwayes to kéepe in their owne custodie such thinges as they them selues haue no skill of, neyther will
they suffer such as are of vnderstan∣ding to haue the vse of them. But let vs leaue this kinde of people as wi∣thered and rotten stockes, neyther profitable to themselues nor others: And according to that which God hath giuen vs, let vs bee fruitfull, alwayes giuing praise and thankes to God our mercifull father, not sée∣king our owne honor or priuate com∣moditie, who shal also make vs profi∣table & fitte for his kingdome: with which he hath promised to giue to vs whatsoeuer we shall haue néede of, so that we séeke for that kingdome be∣fore all other thinges. To this onely God who is & hath béene from euer∣lasting, bee euerlasting honour and glory. THe testimonials of the Prin∣ces & Magistrats, who haue seene before them the experience and miraculus force of the Silesian Terra Sigillata: And there vpon for the acknowledging of such di∣uine benefites, and extolling the
glory of God, haue vnder their great seales confirmed the truth in such order as followeth. FIrst an exemplification, that is an abstract out of the Germaine originall faithfully translated into Latine, that the most noble Prince William Landgraue of Hesse in Cas¦sell Court in Catzenelnbog, Ditz Ziegenheim and Nidda, of his great clemencie, did graunt to An∣dreas Bertoldus of Oschatz, by his Doctors in Phisicke and Chauncel∣lour. BEe it knowen vnto all persons, that an honest man called Bertold of Oschatz, came into the presence of the most no∣ble Prince and Lord, the Lord Wil∣liam Landgraue of Hesse Court of Catzenelnbogen Ditz, Ziegen∣heim and Nidda &c. our gracious Lord and Prince, and in humble ma∣ner declared vnto him, that hee had
found in an olde mine of Golde with∣in the dominion of Schueidnitz, a new kinde of earth, which is a pre∣sent helpe and a most notable reme∣die against all maner of poysons and sundrie diseases, which earth hauing a stampe vpon it he offered to sell vn∣to his Excellencie: who not trusting the man vpon his bare worde, com∣mitted the matter to his Phisitions, Maurice, Thaurern, and Laurence Hyper: Commaunding them to make a perfect tryall of the saide earth, wherevpon the saide Doctors in Phisicke to satisfie their Prince, did make a double proofe of this earth, in this manner. They tooke foure sundrie sortes of the deadliest poysons that might be, which were, Mercurie Sublimate, Aconitum, Nereum and Apocinum, and of some one of these they gaue halfe a dramme a peece to eight dogges, to foure of them they gaue the earth af∣ter the poyson, and to the other foure the poyson alone: Of these foure that tooke it alone, the first that tooke A∣pocynum,
dyed within halfe an houre: the second that had taken Ne∣reum, died within foure houres: the third that swallowed Mercurie, died within nine houres after: And al∣though they all did cast vp some part of the poyson, yet after most cruell tormentes with crampes and trem∣bling they died: the fourth dogge that eat Aconitum, susteyned thir∣téene great panges of the crampe, so as euery man thought hee woulde haue died with his fellowes, yet li∣ued he the first day, and hauing halfe the dose of this medicine giuen him, he throughly recouered. The other foure dogges to whom the poysons before named with the like quantitie of this Terra Sigillata was giuen, for three houres after the receiuing of it, were very sicke and feeble, espe∣cially one of them to whom the dou∣ble quantitie of Aconitum by neg∣ligence was giuen, vomited thrise: the next day they were all well and did eate their meate greedily, so as there appeared scarse any token of
poyson. When thus his Highnesse had séene the experience of this earth to bee so present a remedie against such deadly poysons, & that the saide Andrew Bertold had humbly cra∣ued his letters of credite, both in the fauour of the man and aduancement of the truth, that others might haue knowledge, he denied not to graunt them: But commaunded that his let∣ters testimoniall sealed with his Highnesse his priuie seale, and sub∣scribed with the handes of the fore∣said Doctors, in whose presence this tryall was made, should be giuen vn∣to him. Which we the abouenamed Doctors vpon our allegiance to his Highnesse, and for the furtherance of the truth, because we found it as hath béene declared to be true & vnfeyned, most willingly haue done. Giuen the xxviij. of July, the yeare of our Lord, 1580. Mauritius Thaurer D. Laurencius Hyperius M.D. Iohan Krug.
IN the yeare of our Lord 1580. the day of Saint Iames: In the presence of the most noble and wor∣thie Prince William Landgraue of Hesse there was made of the Terra Sigillata brought vnto him by Andreas Bertholde of Os∣chatz this proffe vpon certain dogs. A redde Dog with a white ring about his necke had giuen him be∣twéene eight and nine in the morniug a scruple of Mercurie sublimed, and a scruple of the Terra Sigillata there∣with: within halfe an houre after the seconde houre he vomited extremely, the thirde houre agayne hee cast vp certaine colloricke matter, so did hée the fourth houre, and without anie great harme he escaped. A yellowe Cur with a whit brest had giuē vnto him a scruple of Mer∣curie sublimed and nothing after it, within halfe an houre after he made water and presently after hee scum∣mered, within halfe an houre after∣wards
he was taken with a Crampe and fell to the grouude, after this Crampe he stode vp a while panting and grinning, and presently after was againe taken with the crampe, and withall swelled in the bellie: at one of the clocke he was taken with a more gréeuous Crampe and lay as though he had beene dead for a quar∣ter of an houre, within halfe an houre after two, he began againe to goe, and for an houre and an halfe afterwards, he stod still without mouing: betwene foure & fiue, he was againe extreme∣ly taken with the crampe and sundrie times after, at last he died in ye night. A blacke little hound with a white taile, had giuē vnto him a great dram of Aconitum, and therewith a dram of this earth, within halfe an houre after¦ward he vomited extremely & within halfe an houre after, he cast vp certain frothie matter, after the first houre he vomited the third time & so escaped. A branded shaghairde dogge with a white tayle had halfe a drame of Aconitum giuen him and nothing herewith, within an hower hee was
taken with a great Crapme and king one houre after that abou of the clocke hee was taken with the crampe sundrie times, wise after one, and halfe an houre af∣ter two hee fell into the Crampe a∣gayne, so did hée at thrée a Clocke, after thrée he was extréemely pulled with the crampe, and by and by after had the like fit wherewith he made a great quantitie of water, that stonke horribly, then was he againe touched with the Crampe, when as there was giuen him at the commandement of our gratious Lord the Landgraue of Hasse halfe the dose of this suffraine medicine whereby he recouered and escaped. A blacke Curre with a white necke had giuen vnto him halfe a drame of Nerium or Oleander & halfe a drame of this earth, within one hower after the taking of it, he vomited extreme∣ly, and within a little after he vomi∣ted gréene bagage, within halfe an hower after he frothed and foomed at the mouth, this was the faintest and
weakest dog amongest them all, yet did he presently recouer and scape. A browne Cur with a white necke had giuen vnto him halfe a dramme of Merium and nothing of the me∣dicine. First he vomited a thin mat∣ter about tenne of the Clocke he vo∣mited againe, after twelfe hee was taken with a great quaking and a terrible crampe, which fit was verie long and extréeme: afterward he was pulled with the crampe till almost thrée, after thrée he was terriblie rac∣ked with the Crampe, and betwéene thrée and fower he died. A gray little begle had giuen vn∣to him a drame of Apocynum halfe leaues and halfe rootes and withall a dram of this Terra Sigillata. This dogge as farre as we could discerne was not al the day long any wise vex∣ed, but escaped verie well. A branded dog had giuen vnto him a dramme of Apocynum halfe roote and halfe hearbe and nothing of the medicine, within halfe an hower af∣ter the receite of the poyson, hee was
taken with an extréeme crampe and quauering, and within a verie smale while after he fell sodenly dead to the great wondering of those that stoode by. Mauritius Thaurer D. Laurencius Hyperius. D. A copie of the Letters Pattents which the noble earle Wolfgan earle of Hohenloe, Lord of Langenburg &c. Had graunted to Andrewe Bertolde of Oschatz, in witnes of the won∣derful vertues of the Terra Sigillata, found latly in Germanie which hath ben tried to be an approued medi∣cine against the strongest poysons, and sundrie other grieues: faithful∣ly translated out of the Germayne Originall. WE Wolfgangus Earle of Hohenloe, Lorde of Lan∣genburg, &c. Do openlie make knowen vnto all men by these my Letters
Testimoniall, that there came lately before me at Langenburg, my welbe∣loued friende Andreas Betholdus of Oschatz, and declared vnto mee that he had a most excellent kinde of Ter∣ra Sigillata, which was not al onely of great force against sundrie diseases: but also a most vndoubted remedy a∣gainst all manner of venemous poi∣sons, as had béene prooued by sundrie witnesses vpon a great number of dogges, which made me also desirous to sée the triall of it. It happened at the same time, that one called Wen∣del Thumblardt was by our Lieuete∣nant of Langenburg for certaine fel∣lonies imprisoned, who being exami∣ned by our Iustices, confessed him∣selfe guilty of a great number of rob∣beries: And therefore brought to the barre was condemned to bee hanged. Being yet deteined in prison, & com∣ming to his eare that there was such a medicine, so soueraigne against sundrie sicknesses, and the most dead∣ly poisons, hee made humble request as well by his parents, as by other
his friends, of which there were pre∣sent no small number, desiring for the mercie of God, & respect of his poore life, that being thus condemned, hee, might haue giuen vnto him the most deadly poison that might be deuised, whereby a perfit triall might bee had of the worthines of this medicinable earth. And in this respect, not onely for this pittifull request of his: but also for the commoditie and benefite of all Christendome, (if so be the me∣dicine prooue answearable to the re∣port) pardoning the offender, wee graunted his life vpon that condici∣on. Therefore the day of the date of these presents, in the presence of our selfe, and our welbeloued Cosin the Countie George Friderick of Hohen∣loe, and Lord in Langenburg, and in the presence of all our Nobilitie and Commons, the said patient receiued a dram and a halfe of Mercurie Sub∣limate, mingled with Conserue of Roses, & immediatly after it he drank a dram of the Terra Sigillata in olde wine. And albeit the poison did in the
iudgement of our learned Phisition George Pistor Doctor in Phisicke, and Iohn Lutzen our Apothecarie, who were both by him all the while, extremely torment and vexe him: yet in the end the medicine preuailing o∣uercame it, whereby the poore wretch was deliuered, and being restored to his health was committed to his pa∣rents. Whereas therefore the fore∣said Andrew Berthold, hath humbly required io haue our Letters Testi∣moniall for his farther credite, wee haue thought good for the furthe∣rance and aduancement of the truth, to graunt him these our Letters, sig∣ned with our seale Manuell. Giuen at Langenburg the 25. of Ianuarie, in the yeare of our Lord. 1581. The copie of the Letters Testi∣moniall granted by the Magistrats of the Citie of Iuliers vnto Maister Crisantus a Cronenbnrg, Citizen of Coleine, in the name and behalfe of Andreas Bertholdus of Oschatz, tou∣ching the force and vertues of the
sealed earth lately found in Germa∣nie. Truely drawen out of the dutch originall. WE the Maior and Alder∣men of the Towne of Iu∣liers doe signifie vnto all to whome this present writing shall come, that there presented himselfe before vs one Crisant of Cronenburg a substanti∣all man, and Citizen of Coleine, de∣claring vnto vs that hee had an assu∣red remedie against all poisons, cal∣led by the name of Terra Sigillata, Axungia Solis, S. Pauls earth, or Adams earth, being made vp in di∣uers trocisks, some of them reddish in colour, some Greyish, sealed with a scutchin wherein is portrayed the Sunne, the halfe Moone, and fiue Starres. In place of the helmet these Letters, A.B. and on the other side V.O. Who beséeched vs to giue him leaue to make triall in our sight of the said earth vpon certaine doggs and beastes. Which when wee had
graunted, the said Crisantus did will to be brought before him two great dogges of like colour and bignesse, and therewithal two Crowns weight of Mercurie Sublimate, which he de∣uided in our presence, and in the sight of Iohn Oitweilers our sworne Sur∣geon, into two equall portions, whereof the one hee gaue alone in a péece of Larde to the one dogge, the other parte of the poison he gaue to the other in a péece of Larde béeing mingled with the quantity of three Trocisks of the Terra Sigillata. Both the doggs in our presence deuoured the portions that were throwen vnto them, and both vomited and grew to be very féeble, sixe houres after the re∣ceiuing of the poison, the first dogge that had taken the poison pure with∣out any of the earth, dyed. The other which had receiued the Terra Sigilla∣ta with the poison, remained safe and aliue, and being shut vp for a day, af∣ter was suffered to goe at large. Sith these things we saw to be true as they bee reported, we thought good to
graunt to the before named Crisanti of Cronenburg these our Letters of Credence, sealed with our common Seale. Giuen at Iuliers in the yeare of our Lord 1580. The xij. of Fe∣bruarie. Subsigned Paulus Herle. THis copie was drawen out in the presence of the honorable Henrie Wendelen, & Theodorck a Bruck, both the Scauins in Dussel∣dorff, was by me Antony Burker chief Notarie there, conferred with the true originall, sealed & subscri∣bed, neither rased canselled, nor to be suspected, which original remai∣neth in the keeping of the said Cri∣santus, wherwith I confesse it agre∣eth word for word, which I the a∣foresaid Anthony Burker do witnes with mine owne hand. Dated the ninth of March, the yeere. 1582.
Andrewe Berthold to the louing Reader. BE it knowen vnto al and singular the studious, and searchers out of the treasures of nature, that for their owne ne∣cessitie or their friends, desire to be perta∣kers of the wonderful & medicinable force of the Terra Sigillata of Silesia: as well for recouering & kéeping of their health, as to be preserued from all deadly poison: That I Andrew Berthold of Oschatz, vpon the mountaine called Kupfferberg, dwelling néere vnto the Golden riuer na∣med in the Germaine tongue the Bober, about seuen miles from the head of the ri∣uer called the Elbe, haue béene earnestly required by sundrie Doctors in Phisicke and other men of name, to leaue some quantitie of this precious earth in some place néere vnto the Rheyn, specially at Franckfort, where in my absence, as oft as occasion serued, it might be had. When as therfore I caused these books to be prin∣ted by that vertuous man Christopher Coruin a Printer, & Citizen of Franck∣fort: I thought it good not any where bet∣ter
leaue it, than with him who might vt∣ter it at a reasonable price to all such as haue néede of it: which I could hardly in∣treate him to trouble himselfe withal, but onely in respect that he had printed the co∣pies. Wherefore I entend, God sparing me life, to send abroad euery Marte not onely good store of this earth, but also cer∣taine precious stones needfull in Phisicke: As Rubyes, Emeralds, Saphyrs, Iacincts, Carnelins, Citrins, Chrystals, Serpen∣tins, Amethists, Garnats, and such like. And whosoeuer lacketh any stones belon∣ging to Phisicke or otherwise, he shall be sure at the saide Coruins to haue not one∣ly them, but also the earth ready prepared, which our mercifull God hath bestowed vpon Germanie, for the common profit of all Christendome. To which almightie Lord be all honour, glorie, and praise, for euer and euer. Andreas Bertholdus of Oschatz. FINIS.
