19937 S106099 99841824 6437
BREIFE MEDITATIONS OF the Most Holy SACRAMENT And of Preparation, for Receuing the same. And of some other thinges apertaining to the greatnes and deuotion of so worthy a Misterie. COMPOSED in Italian By the REV. FATHER LVCA PINELLI of the Societie of IESVS.
A BRIEF TABLE OF THE CONTENTES OF THIS BOOKE. OF the Institution of the most holy Sacrament. Cap. 1 OF the excellencie and dignitie of the Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 2 Of the wonderfulnes of the Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 3 Of the Effects of this most Glori∣ous Sacrament. Cap. 4 Of three diuers manners of recea∣uing the Blessed Sacramēt. A Dialogne betwixt man and his soule. When Christ did communicate his Apostles. Cap. 5 A meditation deuided in to two partes vpon the antiphona of the Church O Sacrum conuiuium. Cap. 6 Of the end which should moue vs to receaue the Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 7
A Spirituall exercise for prepa∣ration vnto the Blessed Sacramēt when we goe to the Church Cap. 8 When we remaine redie to receue the Blessed Sacrament Cap. 9 Vpon the preparation which Saint Paule teacheth vs.1. Cor. 11 Cap. 10 Of the deuout soule fauoured by Christ in his last supper. Cap. 11 Of the hestory of zacheus.Luc. 16. Cap. 12 Vpon those wordes of the Himne. Mors est malis vita bonis. &c. Cap. 13 Vpon those wordes of the Himne. Ecce panis Angelorū &c. Cap. 14 Of frequēting the B. Sacrament. Cap. 15 Of the same Cap. 16 Of the same Cap. 17 Of the same Cap. 18 Vpon some defects which hinder the frut of the B. Sacramēt. Ca 19 Of the holy Sacrament when it is to be giuen vnto the sicke for his viaticum. Cap. 20
A Dialogue betwixt a worlding and a spirituall mā, cōncerning the most Blessed Sacramēt. Cap. 21 Of spirituall receauing. Cap. 22 Of seuen principall figures which prefigured the most holie Sacra∣ment. Cap. 23 Of the reuerence & deuotiō which Saintes haue vsed towardes this most diuine Sacrament. Cap. 24 Of diuers fruites of this Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 25 Of reuerentiall feare which ought to he had of this Blessed Sacramēt Cap. 26 Certaine Miracles of this most ho∣ly Sacrament gathered forth of approued authors. Cap. 27 An admonition to the Christ ā Rea¦der. Cap. 28 Himnes gathered out of S. Tho∣mas de Aquino Opusculo. C. 29 Remembrances of mother Teresa de Giesu, foundres of the bare∣foot Carmelitan Nunnes.
TO THE DEVOVT READER. THIS Sacramēt of the most Blessed body and bloud of our Lord deuoute reader being the Sacramēt of loue & for loue left vnto vs of our most louinge Sauiour: for auoiding of vngrat∣fulnes, it is verie requisite that it should be receaued and admini∣stred with loue: we hauinge in this life no other thinge to recō¦pense the loue which Christ our Sauiour hath euidently shewed vnto vs by instituting for our cō¦moditie so most louelie a Sacra∣ment, sauing loue, whereof god hath made vs maisters & Lords, seeing that we haue Power to place it where it best pleaseth vs. Wherefore as Christ giuing him selfe vnto vs for meate, doth giue vs that which is his owne; and likewise the most pretious Iew∣ell which he hath, euen so by gi¦uinge
our loue vnto Almightie GOD, wee giue vnto him that which is our owne & that which is the cheefest tresure which we haue. From hence it commeth to passe that God worthely ma∣keth more account of this onely thinge then of all other thinges in the worlde: And this is that which he requireth of vs when he sayeth, Praebe,Prouer. 23. fili mi cor tuum mihi. Giue vnto me (my sonne) thy hart. that is, loue, which is thine owne. But consider here the maruailous skill and arte of our most liberall Iesus, who for to giue vnto thee, the greatest perfection which can be giuen vnto any creature, which consi∣steth in the perfect vnion with his creator, giueth thee this most pretious Sacrament, & requireth at thy handes noe other thinge
but loue, for since that it is the propertie of loue to transforme the louer into that which he lo∣ueth; which is Almighty God: And being moreouer the proper¦tie of this heauenly Sacrament, as deuine meate which conuer∣teth into it selfe him which ea∣teth it to vnite vs with God him selfe, it consequently followeth that this Sacramēt and our loue being after this maner conioy∣ned to gither doth vnite vs with Almightie God and maketh vs one soule & one hart with him. But because that mans wil is not moued to loue, if his vnderstan∣ding doth not represēt vnto him a worthy obiect, & the obligatiō which bindeth him to loue the same: for this respect I haue cō∣posed this litle booke, which shal giue thee occasion to know
the greatnes of the gifte which Christ Iesus hath bestoed vpon thee in leauing vnto thee this most maruelos Sacramēt it will also declare the obligatiō wher∣by thou standest bound to loue the gift to gither with the giuer: and this is that which cheifly I desire to the greater glorie of our common Lord in this my li∣tle worke. Therefore I beseech the diuine goodnes as he hath preuented vs with so amiable a gift so to graunte vs ver∣tue to receaue it worthe¦ly and to the saluation of our soules. Amen.
THE FIRST MEDITATION OF the institution of the most ho∣ly Sacrament. CHAP. I. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how our Sauiour insti∣tuting for vs this most maruailous Sacrament decla∣red the cordiall charitie which he had towardes vs, for that he coulde not giue vs any thinge more greate or more pretious; as S. Iohn most plainly signifieth saying. Cum dilexisset suos,Ioan. 13. qui erant in mundo in finem dilexit cos.
2 Consider how that Christ instituted this most louing Sacra¦mēt whā he was to passe frō this world vnto his eternall father, hereby to leaue vs a liuely me∣mory of his passion, suffered for vs, which should inflame our hartes with loue towardes him. 3 Consider that which S. Chri∣sostome affirmeth, saying, that our Sauiour in the institution of this diuine Sacrament shewed his desire to make vs one thinge with him selfe, for that is such a kinde of meate, that it conuer∣teth into it selfe all those which worthely eate the same.Luc. 22. Mar. 26. 4 Cōsider finally how that whē as the Iewes prepared cordes & the Crosse to binde and torment our redeemer, and Iudas went about this treason to deliuer our Sauiour into the hands of his eni¦mies
then did he institute this most gratious Sacramēt to bind vs with the chaines of loue. The Fruit. The friut which ought to be ga∣thered by this meditation is that the person which meditateth, shoulde vse actes of loue: rende¦ring vnto Christ, who hath pre∣uented vs with such loue, as to feede vs with him selfe in this heauenly Sacrament. A discourse in maner of a spirituall speach Is it possible my sweete Iesus, that loue towardes vs hath brought you to this, that being Kinge of eternall glorie & crea∣tor of the vniuersall worlde you would vouchsafe to becom meat for your vile and base creature. O loue; exceeding greate is thy force: I thought that the wise
man had spoken sufficientlye enough of thy force and power when as hee saide Fortis est vt mors dilectio.Cant. 8. Loue is as stronge as death. But now I see ful well that of thy force may be spoken much more; for that thy sharpe and swift arrows passed through the high heauens and arriued vn¦to the very breast of Almightie God, whither the persing darts of death coulde neuer come nor approche any thing neare. And not contenting thy selfe here∣with thou woundest the hart of the louer in such sorte, that thou makest him to do what thou list and by transforming him into the thing which he loueth, thou dost not only seperate him from all created things as death doth: but also from him selfe. It would haue bene sufficient enough my
creator that thou shouldest haue ben giuen vnto vs, for our Lord and our God, which thing your holy Prophet accompted for a greate blessednes when he saide Beatus populus cuius Dominus de us eius.Psal. 148 Blessed is the people whose Lord is God. But loue hath farther inforced thee to doe those thinges which hu∣maine wisdome cannot com∣prehend. It is verily most trew that thou being the God of ma∣iestie, Infinite and Immortall, wast made man, not only to suffer and die for vs, but far∣ther to feede our soules with thy most pure & sacred flesh. Than∣ked bee loue which coulde so prudently finde out this maruai∣lous meanes. Let therfore world¦ly wismē go & masure with their
small vnderstanding the infinit∣nes of this deuine loue.Luc. 10 wher∣fore (my Lord) with verie great reason Abscondisti haec a sapien∣tibus, & prudentibus, & reue∣lasti ea paruulis: Thou hast hid∣den these thinges from wise and prudent men, and hast reuealed thē vnto litle ons. But yet I can∣not o my Sauiour but remaine al¦togither amased with the migh∣tie boldenes of this your loue, since that, at the verie time whē as the torrents of your tribulatiō were so maruilously increased,Luc. 22. that the onely thinking thereof in the garden made you to swet bloud: it made you so forgetfull of your selfe and of the torments which were prepared for you that you thought onely how to prouide for vs this most diuine meate. O most louing Iesus, full
well is it written of this your cha¦ritie. Aquae multae non potuerunt extinguere charitatem,Cant. 8. nec flumi∣na obruent illam. The greate wa∣ters of your passion, & the fludes of your greiues coulde not hin∣der your charitie from bestoing vpon vs, this so pretious and so singuler a gift. O my soule,4. Reg. the Prophet Elizeus made great ac¦count of the cloake which Elias his maister at his departure leaft him, with the which he deuided the waters of Iordaine and pas∣sed through them drie shodd: The Lord and God of Elias, be∣ing to pass from this world vnto his Father, hath left thee not a garmēt, but his most sacred bo∣dy: to thentent he might be thy companion in this painfull pil∣grimage, thy comfort in tribu∣lation, & a most holsome meate
in spirituall life. Iudge now ther¦fore what accounte thou ough∣test to make, & with how great deuotion thou oughtest to re∣ceaue him: Pray therefore vnto this thy most liberall benefactor that the same may not happen vnto thee, which happened vn∣to the people of Israell to whom Iesus our Sauiour was giuen for a maister and a guide, but they making noe account of so wor∣thy a guide nor yet of his hea∣uenly doctrine, remained still with the veale of ignorāce ouer their eies, and that which is worse, adioy∣ned vnto their blind∣nes the vice of in∣gratitude.
THE SECOND MEDI∣TATION. OF the excellencie and dignitie of the Blessed Sacrament. CHAP. II. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how this most venerable Sacramēt is the beginning of all grace & heauen¦ly gifts; for that in it selfe it con∣teineth Christ, from whō as frō the liuely frountaine is deriued al grace & al holines which can be found in the other Sacraments and in the wholle Church. 2 The greate miracles wrought by this misterious Sacrament, & the seuere chastismentes where with God hath punished those which vnworthely hanled it; do euedently declare the great dig∣nitie thereof.
3 Consider how to receaue the other Sacraments, it is sufficiēt to haue contrition, that there may be no let or hendrance of the grace which they conferre: But to receaue this Sacrament (after that one hath fallen into mortall sinne) besides sorow & reuerence, is required another Sacrament, that is, of Confessiō which is an euedent signe of the greatnes thereof. 4 Finally the magnificēce wher with the Church keepeth the sa∣cred Eucharist, the solemne pro∣cessions which are made when it is caried abroade, and the faling down on their knees of all great Princes, at the only sight of this misticall Sacramēt; giue greate testimonies of the dignitie and excellencie thereof. The fruit.
That which is to be reaped by this meditation is deuoutly to reuerence, and humbly to honor with affectiō of hart this so wor∣thy and so excellent a Sacramēt not only with internall but also with externall actes. A discourse in maner of a spirituall speach. REIOYCE & be glad O ho¦ly Church, for this so pre¦tious a gifte which frō heauen hath dscēded vnto thee, for so great and so worthy is this gifte, that nether in earth nor in heauē cā be any greter thing since that it conteineth in it selfe him whō the Apostle calleth,Heb. 8. Splendor gloriae Dei: the brightnes of the glorie of God, although hid∣den and couered for thy greater fa∣uour.
Thou knowest verie well that when Moyses descended frō mount Sinay where he had talked with Almightie God, the sonnes of Isralel could not speke with him for the brightnes of his countināce: for which cause the holie Scripture saieth that Posuit velamen super faciem su∣am:Exod. 34. He put a veale vpon his face that thereby euery one might speake and conuerse with him. After this sorte our heauenlye Moyses hath done with vs, who not contenting him selfe with deliuering of vs from the hard seruitude of Egipt, hath vealed and couered him selfe with the accidents and forme of bread, that by this meanes the bright∣nes of his glory shoulde nether feare vs, nor make vs remaine farr of from him. O vnmesurea∣ble
loue, how much hast thou preuailed with my Lord. Thou holy Church hast good reason to builde riche Altars, to erect goodly Tabernacles, and with many lights to honor this most holy & reuerend bread. Cloath therefore thy walls with preti∣ous tapestries, and make greate Pixes of siluer and of golde for to keepe and place the same: for since that it is the rich Iewell of that ringe whereby thou art espoused vnto Almightie God; it is most fit and conuenient that it should be adorned with all∣kind of rich & pretious ornamēts Albeit whatsoeuer thou art able to doe, it is all litle or nothing in respect of the excelencie and merit thereof, yea when thou shalt haue done asmuch as thou knowest, as much as thou canst
and as much as thou wouldest: thou shalt neuer be able to adde any one thinge to the greatnes of this most glorious Sacrament the maiestie thereof being such that it rather giueth others re∣putation then receaueth any frō others: wherfore by it and by the presence thereof, Preistes, Alters, Tabernacles, and Pixes remaine honored and sanctified And no maruell at all, since that it conteineth in it selfe, him who hathe created the Vniuersall world, from whom the Angels haue had their being, who is the infinite sea of all perfection and so mightie and so greate, that he infinitly surpasseth all hu∣mane capacitie.Psal. 144. After this sorte the Prophet vnderstandeth him whē he saieth Magnus Dominus & magnitudinis eius non est finis
There is no limitts or termes to the greatnes of Almightie God and therefore we can not adde vnto him any perfection at all. And this is the cause my soule, that with the consideration of the excellency of this most mar uailous Sacrament, the eies of mans minde are dimmed and daseled, wherefore now, thou hast no more to maruell at the greate giftes which kinge As∣suerus bestowed (after that he was maried) vpon Hester,Hest. 2. be∣cause they were earthly giftes which gaue noe life of spirite. But rather maruell still at the most pretious gifte, which God hath giuen vnto his millitante Church, after that he was espou¦sed vnto the humaine nature, for this is a heauenly gifte, of infi∣nit valeur, and giueth eternall
life to those which worthely re∣ceaue it. Alas (my Lord) that for to bestowe a gifte on vs con¦formable vnto youre magnifi∣cence, you haue bounde vs in such sort: that vnlesse your selfe helpe and succor vs, we shall re∣maine vngratefull and cōfused. I knowe very well (my Lord) that it is not your custome to confounde those which desire to serue you, with sincere loue; graunt me therfore I beseech you that being holpē with your grace I may alwaies herafter loue and serue you.
THE THIRD MEDITA∣TION. Of the wonderfulnes of the most holy Sacrament. CHAP. III. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER the maruai∣lous wisdome of our Sa∣uiour, who determining to be∣come our foode and knowing how nature abhorreth to eate humaine flesh & to drinke mans bloud; he left him selfe vnder the formes of bread & wine, which are the common nourishments and gratefull vnto euery one. 2 Consider afterward the infi∣nite goodnes of Christ Iesus, who communicating him selfe vnto vs, vnder the forms of bred and wine, doth giue vs cause of
merit, for if Christ our Sauiour should bee seene in the sacred hoast, our merit would cease: but not seeing him, we exercise our faith, which increasing in vs by multiplying of actes, maketh vs to increase likewise in grace, & for to merit greater glory. 3 Consider farther, the greate power which Christ our Sauiour hath shewed in this most maruai lous Sacramēt, since that by the force of those fewe wordes of Consecration, our Sauiour com¦ming into the Hoast, their alto∣gither presently ceaseth the sub∣stance of bread, & the accidents which we see and touch aboue all order of nature are sustained by them selues. 4 Consider how this heauenly meate is not conuerted & chan∣ged into the substance of him
which eateth it, as naturally it happeneth vnto other meates; but it conuerteth vs into it selfe, wherfore because it is a Diuine kinde of meate, it likewise ma∣keth vs diuine and the sonnes of God. 5. Consider how other meates only sustaine the Bodie, but this meat nourisheth the soule in spi∣ritual life. Moreouer when it is receaued, it is al receaued, & vet it is not cōsumed, nor neuer fai∣leth as other meate doth: & one receaueth as much as a thousād. The Fruit. The fruit of this Meditation, is to remaine with admiratiō, that GOD moued with pure loue, hath giuen vnto vs his vngrate∣full creatures such a worthie Sa∣crament: and to be confounded for that we haue neither beene
answerable vnto the gifte, nor yet the loue wherwith our Saui∣our hath bestowed it vpon vs. A spiritual speach. It cannot be denied (my Lord) but that the great workmanship of this huge world, by your om∣nipotēcie produced of nothing, is a marueilous thing. And more ouer I confesse that the compo∣sition of man is a most rare and wonderfull matter, since that in him your diuine wisdome hath so included all other creatures, that with good reason, man is called of the wise and learned, a litle worlde. And yet ADAM was not God, and the world is neither God, nor man. But that which you haue giuē me in this litle HOAST, is both God and man togither. Trewly a moste marueilous worke. O wonder,
aboue all wonders, how well art thou in few words cōprehended of the holy Prophet when he say eth.Psal. 110. Memoriam fecit mirabilitū su¦orū misericons & miserator Doni∣nus scam dedit timentibus se. this meate which our Lord hath ge∣uen vnto those which feare him, is a remembrance and a briefe of all his marueilous workes. I will say more then this, my Lorde, when as with admazement vn∣to the Angelles you Cloathed your selfe with our flesh, You wrought surely a great and mar∣ueilous worke; but this misteri∣ous meate farre exceedeth that other worke; for that in your in∣carnatiō your Apostle saith,Heb. 2 that Semen Abrahae apprehēdisti you tooke humane nature mortall & passible, and vnited the same to your selfe. But when I commu∣nicate,
I receaue you my Christ, trew God & man, immortal and glorious, by means wherof you vnite me, or rather conuert me into you.Hest. 15. for the which very wel agreeth vnto you the saying of Hester. Valde mirab lises Domine & facies tua plena est gratiarum. O Lord thou art exceeding mar∣uailous, and thy Face is full of grace. Yet I will say more then this, when as it pleased you my benigne Iesus, to snffer and die vpon the Crosse for those which most greeuouslye had offended your diuine Maiestie, with great reason you made the Heauens to be amazed with your greate humility, & immeasurable loue; but if for this respect, that work was maruailous and wonderfull yet much more marueilouse is this Diuine Sacramente in the
which you haue shewed more profound humilitie, and more vnmeasurable loue: for that on the Crosse once only as the Apo¦stle S. Paule saieth,Heb. 7 & 5 you offered vp your selfe for sacrifice vnto your heauenly Father, & for the price and redemption of man∣kind: but in this celestiall miste∣rie, you offer and giue your selfe not once, but many times euery day, not vnto your celestiall Fa∣ther, but vnto vngratfull men; not for price and ransome, but for meat & nourishment. Who therfore now seeth not, that this worke farre excelleth the other in wonderfulnes? O how well said King Dauid Magnus es tu,Psa 85 & faciens mirabilia, tu es solus Deus, & non est similis tui Domi∣ne. You only my Lord are great & in doing of marueilous works
there is none like vnto you. Since therfore good Lord, it is proper vnto you, to do greate and mar∣uailous thinges, beholde me a pore & weake creature, bringe to passe I most humble beseech you that I by meanes of this most glorious Sacrament, become riche with your heauenly giftes, and strong in the aduersitie of this life. THE FOVRTH ME∣DITATION. Of the effectes of this most glori∣ous Sacrament. CHAP. IIII. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how this glo¦rious Sacrament doth in such sorte lighten manes vnder∣standing
that it maketh him to knowe God, for which cause those tow Disciples which went to Emaus,Luc. 24. presently as sone as they had communicated, had as the sctipture saieth their eres o∣pened, and knew our Sauiour. 2 It remitteth veniall sinnes, & as corporall nourishment, doth restore that which naturall heat hath cousnmed; so this heauen∣lie nourishment reneweth that which the soule hath lost by sin∣ning venially through the heate of concupiscence. 3 It conioineth vs with Christ our head, and with our neigh∣bours which are his members, mouinge vs to loue them as we ought for this respect it hath bene called of the holy fathers the Sacrament of vnion, and of charity & therfore S. Augustine
affirmeth that for this, it was instituted vnder the formes of bread and wine, that as bread is made of many cornes of wheat, so this Sacrament of many harts maketh one will. 4 It giueth vs force to walke well in this daungerous pilgri∣mage: and for this cause it is cal∣led our viaticum our voiages pro¦uision. It helpeth vs likewise to gaine eternall felicitie,Ioan. 6. and ther fore our Sauiour saieth He that eateth my flesh hath life euerla∣sting. The fruit. The profit of this. 4. Meditation shalbe to desire with our whole hart, and to procure moste e∣fectually a good disposition to be made partakers of the wor∣thy effcts of this most holsome Sacrament, and to pray vnto
God to make vs worthy therof. Adnotations. Of three maners of receauiug the blessed Sacrament and of the fruit which is receaued by euery one of these. Taken out of S. Thomas De Aquino. Opusculo. 58. cap. 17.18.19. Of che which the holy Councel of Trent likewise intrea∣teth. ses. 13. cap. 8. 1 SOME communicating doe receaue only the Sacramēt these are notorious sinners, who receuinge the Most Holy Sacra∣ment vnwhorthely, not only re∣ceue not any of the most holsō ef¦fectes therof but) as the Appostle well sayeth) Iudicium Sibiman∣ducant.Cor. 11. that is, they make them selues whorthy of Damnation this also the Church signifieth when as in her Hunne she saieth Mors est malis, vita bonis. that is
the Sacrament is life vnto the good, and death vnto sinners: I here call al those sinners which hauing their conscience defiled with mortall sinne, are not con∣fessed, when as they may; or are excommunicated, or else do re∣ceaue for some euell intention. 2 There are others which com∣municate spiritually, and these are such, as with a liuely faith do beleeue that in the consecrated Hoast, is our Lord Iesus Christ, and therefore they desire to be vnited with him, and so they cō∣municate with affection and de∣sire preparing them selues vnto this spirituall receauing with hu¦mility and dtuotiō such as these, receaue not all the effects of this Sacrament, but some parte of them. 3 Others finally, being well prepared,
and beawtifully adorned with the wedding garment of charitie, and puritie, do not on∣ly communicate spiritually with desier, but also Sacramentally, by receauing the most sacred bo¦die of our Lord. And these togi∣ther with the Sacrament receue all the effectes thereof confor∣mably vnto their preparation, the which looke how much grea¦ter it is, so much more capeable the soule is made, of the vertue, giftes, and graces which this Sa¦crament giueth and conferreth. this Almighty God doth signifi when as by his holy Prophet he saieth, Dilata os tuum et implebo illud. Open wide the mouthe of thy soule and I will fill and re∣plenish it. A spirituall speach in manner of a Dialogue, betwixt man and his Soule.
MAN. It is trew my soule, that this sacred meat is giuen thee of our most louing Iesus, but tell me trewly, what help can meate doe vnto a dead man, albeit that it were verie precious? SOVLE. Nothinge. M. and ther¦fore the holy Sacrament willnot helpe thee yf thou shalt be dead S. It is trew, but how can I die beinge immortall? M. Trew it is, that thou canst not die of corpo∣rall death, as brute beastes doe die, but thou mayst die by spiritu all death which consisteth in the separation of the grace of God from the soule as corporal death consisteth in the separation or the soule frō the bodie: S. Then doth the grace of God giue life vnto the soule? M. Noeorherwise then the soule giueth life vnto the bodie. S. And what can de∣priue
the soule frō grace which is her life? M. Mortall sinn,Ezech. Cap. 18. wher¦fore the Prophet Ezechiel saieth Anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morie tur. The soule which sinneth shal die. That is, shall be depriued of grace. S. From whence hath sinne such powre? M. From the ordination of Allmighty God, for that the soule consentinge vnto Mortall sinne, rebelleth a gainst God. And therfore as a re∣bell is iustly depriued of his goodes, soe the soule by sinning cometh to be depriued of grace which is an inestimable good giuen vnto the soule by All∣mightie God. S. If therfore to receaue the effectes of this Hea∣uenly meate, it is necessarie, that the soule liue in grace, this SA∣CRAMENT doth not reuiue the soule by raysinge it from death to life.
M. Ordinarily noc; but beinge spirituall meate, it presupposeth spirituall life, and beinge rece∣ued by the soule it nourisheth it and prescrueth it from vice. S. But tell me I pray you, what is conuenient to be don for to tast this facred meate, & to be made partaker of the worthy effects thereof? M. First it is necessary to bee hungrye because our Lord Animan esurient em satiat bonis,Psal. 106 will fill the hungrie soule with good thinges: & afterward with contemplation to ruminat and chewe this celestiall meate, considering the greatnes and ex¦cellencie thereof. S. Alas, that the poison of pleasures and de∣lightes haue cleane taken away my tast, Alas, that the vanities of the world doe soe occupie & possesse my hart, that they nei∣ther
suffer me to tast, uor yet to consider this most maruelous meate wretch that I am wretch that I am. M. Lett vs torne our selues my soule, vnto him who is able for to healpe vs. To my Most mrcifull IESVS, who will draw forth from this my poore soule all deadly poyson, to thend that I remaine not de∣priued of the tast, and of the e∣ffectes of so holsome a SACAR∣MENT? who will prepare for me this Notable Medicine? O my LORD I will noe other healpe but you, since that your heauēly Father hath sent you from hea∣uen to be our Phisitian. O holy Kinge Dauid, how much more greate is our fauour then thine: when thou were poisoned with thy aduoutrie of Bersabee,1 Reg 11. & 12 and with the death of Vrias her hus∣band,
Nathan the Prophet was sent vnto thee for to draw forth from thy soule that poison: but vnto vs commeth the Lord of al Prophets, who for the exceding loue which he beareth vnto vs, hath vouchsafed to be both our Phisitian & our medicine. Praise and glory be therfore vnto thee my benigne Iesus, and since that thou art a Phisitian noe lesse po∣tent then louing: I hnmbly pray thee that by this sacred medicin of the blessed Sacrament thou wilt make me become an other Dauid, conformable vnto thy hart. O heauēly father, the flesh of the first Adam, is such, that being vnited with the soule, it in fecteth & impoisoneth the same bringe to passe I beseech thee, that the life of the second Adam Christ our sauiour being vnited
with my soule may both heale purge and purifie the same, this flesh being without all compa∣rison more potent and mightie then the other. Graunte me I be seech thee O Lord, that as man being vnited with olde Adam by meanes of his corrupted flesh is partaker of all his euells; so I being vnited vnto Christ by the new Adams meanes of his sacred flesh may be made partaker of the grace & good nes of Christ. Amen.
THE FIFT MEDITATI∣ON. When Christ did communicate his Appostles CHAP. V. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how Iesus, foreseeing the tribulati∣ons of the Apostels in his passiō; to comfort and strengthen them determined to giue thē the bles∣sed Sacrament by the vertue wher of they shoulde receaue helpe and consolation. 2 Cōsider how our Lord for the better disposing of the Apostles to receaue worthely such a Sa∣crament.Ioan 13. firs washed their feete and afterwards exhorted them vnto humilitie and charitie, for that, the filthines of the flesh, pride of harte, and hatred of o∣thers,
are deadly enimies vnto this diuine misterie. 3 Consider the wonderfull ioy & gladnes of the Apostles, who hauing harde the magnificencie of this Sacrament and that they were to be the first tasters ther∣of, by thinking of this most spe∣ciall fauour, neuer graunted be∣fore to any of the Saints nor yet to the Angells of heauen, they wonderfullye exulted in spirit. 4 Contemplate with what de∣uotion and teares, the Apostles receaued the blessed Sacrament at our Sauiours handes,Mat. 26 and how only Iudas remained with his eies drie with out teares & with his hart wholie attentiue to be∣tray Chirst. 5 Contemplate the greate a∣mazement of the Angells, by see¦ing, the word incarnate, their
Lord & God, beginning to geue himselfe vnto man for meate. The Fruit. The fruit of this meditation, shal be: before thou receaue the Bless¦ed SACRAMENT, humbly to begg at Gods hands, and dili∣gently to procure cheefe puritie greate humilitie & charitie with thy neighbours, vnto the which vertues Christ exhorted the A∣postles before he did communi∣cate them. A spirituall speach. I confesse my sweet Iesus that your loue towardes vs, farre ex∣cedeth the limites and signes of all greate charitie, for that ma∣king noe account of the tormēts hanging ouer your owne head, you were wholy attētiue at your sacred table, to comfort the A∣postles, and vs in their persons
against the outrages of our eni∣mies. O how well may euerie one of vs pronounce this saying of thy Prophet: Parasti in con∣spectu meo mensam aduersus eos,Psa. 22 qui tribulant me. Thou hast pre∣pared a table against thos which trouble me. But if it be necessary (my Lorde) to come vnto this your table with cleane feete; who shall wash mine? who shall cleanse me frō the filth of earth∣ly affections? which doe not on∣ly defile my soule, but farther draw me downeward: Alas that neither man nor Angell is siffi∣cient to make mundum,Iob 14 de im∣mundo conceptum semine, nisitu qui soluses. You only my redee∣mer are able to doe this, to whō the Father hath giuen all power.Mat. 28 But poore and miserable, that I am, for that when you my Lord
of your infinite charitie wash my feete, I want the water of teares which is very necessary for such an effect: wherfore I shall be cō∣stained with sobbes and sithes to crie out with the Prophet Hie remie.Hier. 9 Quis dabit capiti meo aquā et oculis meis fontem lachrimarū? Who will giue water vnto my head, and a fountaine of teares vnto my eies? And when as you my Lord moued with my cries, to cōpassiō wil vouchsafe to strik the rock of my hard hart to giue me water of tears; how yet shall I presume, although I am washt to approche vnto this thy sacred table, for that when as Iosue cō∣ducted the Arcke towardes Ior∣daine,Iosue. 5 thou gauest commaunde∣ment that the sonnes of Israell should not a proch so neare vnto the Arcke as to be within the
space of. 2 thousand cubits of it least therby they should happen for to die, as in an other voiage it chaunced vnto Oza who cō∣ing vnto the Arke & houlding it with his hands fearing least that it should fall downe:2. Reg. & presently fell starke dead? which suddaine action feared Kinge Dauid in such sorte, that he durst not to receaue this Arcke of God into his house. And shall I, who am not like Dauid, agreable vnto the harte of God, presume to ap¦proch vnto this sacred table, in the which is that cheife and su∣preame Lord for whose honour and reuerence the Arcke was made? How is it possible my sweet Iesus that I should bee so boulde as to touch thee with my sinfull mouth, since that you saide vnto your most deare Dis∣ciple
Magdalene,Ioan. 20 when she de∣sired for to haue touched you: Noli me tangere. Touch me not: And shal I who as yet haue shed no teares nor any pretious oint∣ment on your sacred feet, not haue bene at the foote of your Crosse on mount Caluerie nor at your sepulcher with pretious ointments, be so bolde as to ap∣proch & come neare vnto you? It will be greater securitie for me good Lord to stay stil a while vn¦till you shoote at me with one of your dartes of loue, that being wounded there with, in maner of the hart, I may runne vnto you the foūtaine of life.
THE SIXT MEDI∣TATION. Deuided into two partes vpon that Antheme of the Church. O Sacrum Conuiuium in quo Chri∣stus sumitur, recolitur memoria passionis eius, mens impletur gra∣tia, & futurae gloriae nobis pignus datur. Taken out of S. Thomas Opusculo. 57. CHAP. VI. Pointes to meditate in the First parte. 1 CONSIDER fiue speciall differences, betwixt this banquet of Christ and those of the worlde all which are com∣prehended in the aforesaid An∣theme. First the banquets of the
worlde are prophane, in the which is giuen no sacred meate neither are they cōmonly insti∣tuted either for the helth of the soule or for the glory of God: but this of Christ is called Sacrū Conuiuium. In respect of the ho∣lines of the meate which sancti∣fieth the soule, to the glory of God the creator thereof. 2 In the banquets of the world is varietie of meates, and the gre¦ter that the diuersitie of meate is so much more sumptuous in the banquet, for that one forte of meate not conteining the taste and perfection of the others can not content or satissie the guests: But in this sacred banquet, In quo Christus Sumitur: In which Christ is receaued; is present one only kinde of meate, which is Christ Iesus, who because he is
infinite, conteineth in him selfe all perfection; and this alone is able to satissie and content man: A figure whereof was Manna, the which had all kinde of de∣light and all sweetnes of taste. 3 In the banquets of the worlde men are accustōmed to talke not of death neither of suffering tra∣uel and tormēts, but of ioyfull & cheerfull matters. In this Christ; Recolit ur memoria passionis eius: Is renewed the memorie of his Passion, & of the death of Christ suffered for our loue and salua∣tion. 4 Mens impletur gratia the mind is filled with grace. In this ban∣quet of Christ the soule is filled with grace, which bringeth sal∣uation and increase of heauenly giftes; but in the banquets of the worlde the body is in such sorte
filled with meates, that often times they bring diseases vnto the body, and spirituall dam∣mage vnto the soule. 5 The banquets of the worlde by meanes of the greate disor∣der and excesse which is vsed in them, send soules into hell and so they are as pledges of eternall paines: But the sacred banquet of Christ, laieth heauen open vnto vs, being the pledge of eternall felicitie: for which cause in the Antheme it is saide. Et futura glo∣ria nobis pignus da∣tur: The pledge of future glorie is giuen vnto vs.
Pointes to meditate vpon the Second Parte. 1 CONSIDER how louing Iesus is content that in this his holy banquet we doe so much as a guest inuited by some Prince vnto his banquet is ac∣customed to do: for this guest be sides the desire which hee hath that the time of the banquet should quickly come; endeuou∣reth to appeare decently appar∣relled, & cōmeth not with a full stomake, that he may better taste the meates: knowing well, that it greatly pleaseth the feastema∣ker, when his guestes cate with good ap etite those meats which he hath prepared for them. 2 He taketh diligēt heed not to do or say any thing which may
offend the Prince which hath in uited him: and the banquet be∣ing ended: hee goeth not pre∣sently awaie but accompanieth the Prince some while in his conuersation, some times prai∣sing his great liberalitie, other-times the magnificence of the banquet. 3 When he is to departe hee thanketh againe the Prince for this fauour which he hath done him and hartely offereth him selfe vnto him to yealde him all dewtifull seruice, If he therfore which cōmunicateth shall per∣forme the like, spiritually with Christ, who hath inuited him to this his sacred banquet: I thinke that he shall satisfie in part his office and dewtie. The Fruit. The profit which may be rea∣ped
by this meditation, shall be to procure gratefullnes towards such a liberall Lord, who hono∣reth vs and bestoweth much vp∣on vs, and little requireth at our handes. A discourse in manner of a Colloquium. It is no maruell my Lorde if the magnificencie of youre sacred banquet doe make me remaine amazed, since that the Prophet Esay soreseeing it many ages be fore as an shadoed picture stode astonished therewith, & in prai∣singe the beawtifulnes thereof saide: Facit Dominus exercituū omnibus populis in monte hoc,Esa. 25 con∣uiuium ping uium. A greate ban∣quet shall this be, O holy Pro∣phet because it shal not be made by a meane person but by the Lord of Hoastes: and he will not
make it for some perticuler per∣sons but for all the people of the whole worlde; neither will hee make it in euery place, but in the mountaine whereon shall stand the Church of God which is Ciutt as supra montemposita, a citie placed vpon a hill,Mat. 5 finally it shalbe a banquet of fatte things for Christ our Sauiour shalbe the meate who is annointed of the Holie Ghost. Reioice and bee glad therefore O holy Church, because thou art that mountain of God, which he hath chosen for this diuine banquete, in thy armes standeth readie prepared this heauenly table, & thy deare sonnes Sicut uouellae oliuarum in circuitu mensae tuae,Psal. 127 stand at this table in manner of new Oliue plantes, Rise vp my soule & spe∣dely departe from the obscure
valle of thy selfe, because our Lord vpon the mountaine ex∣pecteth thee to come to his hea∣uenly banquet,Exod. 9 not now thun∣dering and lightining as he did in time past to the children of Is∣raell: but inuiting vs to come vnto him with most beninge & louinge wordes saying:Mat. 18. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, & one∣ratiestis & egoreficiā vos: Come vnto me all ye that labour & are burdened, and I will refresh you Lett vs therefore goe securelye for that lawe is now noe more of force, which said,Exe. 19 Qui tetige∣rit montem morte morietur: Hee which toucheth the mountaine shall die: but rather hee which shall come vnto this mountaine and shal eat of this holy banquet Viuet in aeternum shall liue for euer.Ioan. 6 But consider well my soule
that not all can ascende but on∣ly as the Prophet saith, Innocens manibus & mundo corde,Psa. 23 there is neede of the Innocency of life and puritie of harte: this is the wedding garment, where with we must be adorned in this sa∣cred banquet of Christ. Other∣wise we shall heare these terri∣ble and dreadefull wordes Liga¦tis manibus, & pedibus eius mit∣tite eum in tenibras exteriores.Mat. 22. binde his handes and feete and cast him into vtterdarknes. Woe is me, my Lorde, that by liuing licentiously like an other prodi∣gall sonne, I haue defiled and torne the garmēt of Innocencie which I receaued in holy bap∣tisme,Luc. 15 Alas if you helpe me not I can not appeare at this your sa∣cred banquet, what shall I doe good Lorde if for my demerits
and faultes I shallbe reiected by you? what shall I doe? shame forbiddeth me to come without apparrell.Gen. 3 Shall I peraduenture make me a garment of leaues as Adam did after he had lost the garment of Innocencie which God gaue him? Alas, this will helpe me no more then it did Adam him selfe who daringe not to appeare before Almighty God with this garment did hide him selfe: and if I hide my selfe, shall not I remaine depriued of your most holsome banquet? To you therefore O father of mercy doe I conuert my selfe: humbly confessinge that I haue in such sorte offended your diuine ma∣iestie that Non sumdignus voca∣ri filius tuus I am not worthie to bee called your Sonne.Luc. 15 but ha∣uing onely trust in your infinite
pietie I humbly beseech you not to regarde my sinnes but the greatnesse of your accustomed mercie: I remember well my Lord that the prodigall sonne, was not onely receaued of his father but was prouided of a garment and adorned with a ring that ther∣by he might come vnto the banquet of the fatte calfe prouided for him.
THE SEVENTH MEDI∣TATION. Of the end & intent which should moue vs toreecaue the sacred Communion. CHAP. VII. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how this most diuine Sacrament, being instituted of Christ our Sauiour as a medicine both to preserue vs from euill, & like wise to nou∣rish our soule in spirituall life; it is verie cōuement, that this selfe same as the next and proper end doe moue vs to Communicate which afterward we must direct to the glorie of God, as to the last end. 2 Cōsider how that which God
cheefly intendeth by this spiri∣tuall nourishment, is, that wee by meanes of the holie Eucharist shoulde be transformed into him, liuinge conformably vnto his diuine will, which is none o∣ther but to haue god to liue in vs 3 Consider the louinge desire which the father and the sonne haue of our saluation, and per∣fection: the father sent vnto vs his onely begotten sonne, to the entent that we should immitate him in humilitie, patience, obe∣dience, in contēpt of the worlde The sonne lefte vs this most lo∣uinge Sacrament. to helpe vs to obtaine the a foresaid vertues, and to liue as Christ liued: and this ought to be the cheefe end and intent which shoulde moue vs to communicate.
The fruit of this meditation shal be diligētly to endeuour to trans forme our selues into God, by imitatinge the vertues and life of Christ: and this was the mea∣ning of Almightie God, when he saide vnto Moyses.Exod. 23 Fac secun∣dum exemplar quod tibi in monte monstratum est. doe according vnto the example which I haue shewed thee in the mountaine. An Annotation. Of the end and intention which they ought to haue, which doe communicate. For to receaue, to the intente that we may feele comforte and spirituall sweetnes, so that this be the principall end of our re∣ceauing: it is not well because it proceedeth of selfe loue, yea, we
should rather be moued with de¦sire to suffer with Christ, this Sa∣crament being a memorie of his passion. Neither is it well ro receaue principally for to obtaine of god earthly things, for this heauenly SACRAMENT being a spiritual foode of our soules ought not to bee directed principallie vnto things of the earth, yet is it not forbidden to demaund of God some temporall benefit, and to receaue with this intention, con¦ditionally, if it be for the best, and for the greater glory of god 3 For to receaue, thereby to be accounted spirituall, and to gett the name of a Sainte: is verie naught, for it were hipocrisie & an abuse and iniury of so greate a Sacrament.
Of the good intentions and endes which may be pretended by those that receaue. Besids the proper end for which this Sacrament was instituted and for which intent euery one ought cheefly to receaue this Blessed Sacrament: hath bene al∣readie declared in the pointes of meditation: there be tenne others are set downe of S. Bona∣uenture. Tom 7. in opusc. de Prae∣paratione ad Missam. cap 8. 1 We may communicate to ob∣taine remission of our sinnes for that this Sacrament is a most gratefull sacrifice vnto Almigh∣tie God, and a very effectuall meane to haue our sinnes par∣doned. 2 We may communicate to get remedie of our infirmities and
weakenes, that by meanes of this holy medicine, we may be kept and preserued from all kind of greate euell. To be deliuered from any tri∣bulation or tentation. 4 To impetrate & obteine some grace or spirituall benefite for that in this holy Sacrament is he to whome the heauenly father denieth nothing. 5 To thanke God both for the temporall and spirituall benefits which he hath either bestowed vpon our selues or vpon any o∣ther:Psa. 115 and this is, Sacrificare ho∣stium laudis & pro omnibus, quae retribuit nobis, calicem salutaris accipere, to sacrifice vnto God, the Hoast of praise, & in lieu of all that which he hath rendered vnto vs, to take the chalice of health and saluation.
6 To helpe our neighbours as well dead as aliue:Ro. 8. for that he re¦maineth in this Sacrament. Qui interpellat pro nobis who praieth for vs. 7 To praise and honour God & his Saintes: this being the grea∣test and most glorious sacrifice which may be. 8 For loue & affection towards our Sauiour, that by receauing of him in this blessed Sacrament wee might familiarly conuerse with him. 9 For desire of increassing in grace because that the fountain of all grace remaineth in this Blessed Sacrament. 10 To be vnited with Christ in such sorte, that hereby we may be made all one with him, and may be keept and preserued in his loue for euer.
A Colloquium. Verie excessiue is your loue my sweete Sauiour, it had bene suf∣ficient enough for vs if you had prouided vs some good remedie and helpe by some one or other of your creaturs, and we should haue accounted the same for no small fauour: but this seemed not to satisfie and content your flagrant and inflamed charitie, & therfore you your selfe would be the medicine of our soules: for which thing, verie well is ful filled in you the saying of the wise man. Amicus fidelis medi∣camentum vitae, & immortalita∣tis, a faithfull frend is a medicen of life and immortalitie. Who is a more faithfull frend then you? And what medicine is of greater force and efficacie then this ho∣ly Sacrament which giueth life
euerlasting; but besides all this, you haue shewed euer greate kindenes in that you would that the effect therof should greatly depend of vs: if corporall medi∣cines should worke cōformably vnto the entent and desire of sicke and diseased parsons, they woulde bringe forth greate ef∣fects, and the sicke woulde be greately behoulding and bound vnto the composer and maker of chem. How greate then is our bonde vnto you, who with such infinite loue haue prouided for vs such an effectuall and whol∣some medicine, that of it selfe it is able to worke much more thē we can possibly wish or desire? O my Lord how greate is the difference betwixt the rules of humaine Philosophie, and be∣twene the rules of your charitie?
What Philosopher of this world woulde haue euer spoken or thought, that God the king of maiestie, and the immensible sea of all perfection, would pro∣uide for his base and vile crea∣ture? What wise man of the earth would haue euer imagined that God the Lord of all glory would become meate for man, that thereby he might vnite man vn∣to him? But your inestimable charitie thought and intended farr otherwise. Rise vp therfore my soule, and now make an end of these thy mornefull teares: & lament noc more, thy basenes & debilitie: for that three deare sisters our aduocates, baue plea∣ded our cause before Christ our Sauiour. Mercie hath presented our infirmities and hath demaun¦ded help: Wisdome hath found
out the meane for to helpe vs; Charitie hath enforced Iesus our Sauiour to effect it, the maner is this, that by meanes of this most potent Sacrament. Christ Iesus will so vnite vs with him selfe that therby we become all one with him, for to this end do we receaue him. I most hūbly thank you our heauenly Adam; who haue repaired that, which earth∣ly Adam destroied, hee with his meate made vs to be alienated and to stand farre of from Al∣mightie God. whereof did arise our basenes, infirmities & other miseries: but you my sweet Sa∣uiour by this celestiall meate do reunite vs with God, frō whence ariseth our nobilitie, our strengh and fortitude, & spirituall giftes. I praie you therefore most be∣ninge Iesus that, this vnion may
be soe, and so sure that neither death nor life, nor tribulation nor any creature may be able to seperate me from you. Graunte me good Lord, that I may in such forte be vnited with you that I may glorie with the Apostle and say:Gal. 2 Vino au¦rem, am non ego, viuit vero in me Christus. I liue not, but Christ liueth in me.
THE EIGHT MEDI∣TATION. A spiritual exercise to prepare our selues for receauing, when wee goe to the Church. CHAP. VIII. Pointes to meditate. THAT day wherein thou determinest to commu∣nicate in the morning assone as thou wakest, thinke that our Sa∣uiour with greate desire expect∣eth thee in the Church, that for to come and repose him selfe in thy soule, wherfore thou like vn to a spouse for to please him, oughtest to vse more dligence in the inward adorning of thy soule, where with he is well plea sed: then aboute the externall trimming of the bodie.
2 By the way as thou goest vn∣to the Church, consider what mirth and cheerfulnes thy good Angel keeper feeleth seing thee go to receaue his and thy Lord, and thou shalt pray that he will helpe thee to receaue himwor∣thely. 3 Being entred in to the Church praie vnto the Blessed Virgine, or to some other thy deuoted Saint, to accompanie thee in re∣ceauing of Iesus thy Sauiour, who will be thy guest. 4 Assone as thou beginnest to see the Altar, where the Blessed SACRAMENT remaineth make humble reuerence there vnto, with thy harte, and esteeming thy selfe farre vnworthy of soe greate a maiestie,Euc. 18 say with the Publican, Deus propitius esto mi∣bi peccatori. God be mercifull
vnto me a sinner. The Fruit. The fruit of this eight meditati∣on shalbe to procure a spirituall reioicing in thy soule, by cause thou art to receaue thy heauen∣ly spouse, for this kinde of reioy∣cing greatly pleaseth our Lord. A Colloquium. Kneeling downe before the Altar make this, or some such like speach vnto our Sauiour, before thou doest com∣municate. HOVV greate fauour is this my beninge Iesus, which you now yeald me? Am not I that miserable creature which so often and by so many meanes haue most impudently offended you? What goodnes is there in me that with particuler inspi∣rations
you should drawe mee vnto your sacred table, If Dauid O Lord, made lame Miphibo∣seth to come vnto him, & would haue him to eate at his Regall and kingely table,2. Reg. 3. and to be v∣sed as a Kinges sonne: because he was the sonne of Ionathas his speciall frend, of whom Dauid had receaued many benefites; But if you my Lord beholde me you shall finde me lame, both hand and foote, hauinge neuer done any thing well and wor∣thie of praise and if farther you consider my first father Adam you shall finde disobedience & rebellion; Now that you my so∣ueraigne Lord, infinitely more wise and more mightie then e∣uer kinge Dauid was, make me an vngratefull worme of the earth to come vnto you, that I
might be fedde with the most pretious meate of your heauēly table, is a thinge of such excee∣ding greatenes, that it confoun∣deth me ouermuch; for that I am not onely vnworthie to ap∣proch nere vnto your sacred Al∣tar, but also worthely deserue to be repelled farre of from you, as one that is colde, and vngratfull beholde O Lord I am come to receaue you in to the house of my soule. But O Alas, Salomon the wise, hauinge spent many yeares, & bestowed greate char¦ges in building vp of a most rich & sumptuous Temple, Maruelled much with him selfe, that the God of maiestie would vouch∣safe to come and dwell therein, wherefore being amased, and as it were besides himselfe saide Si enim caelum, & caeli caelorū te ca∣pere
non possunt, quanto magis do∣mus haec, quam aedificaui?3. Reg. 8 If hea∣uen and the heauen of heauens can not cōprehend you, how wil this house which I haue builded for you vpon earth, now, what shall I say who haue scarcely spent two howers to prepare my soule for you? O my Lord, since that it pleaseth you to come and repose your selfe in the house of my soule, I humbly beseech you to make my soule a house of prai¦er and consecrated to your hea∣uenly father, to thentēt you may repose therein, and I remaine comforted: & singe with the Prophet: Virga tua, & ba∣culus tuus ipsa me consola ta sunt.Psa. 22. your rod and your staffe haue comforted me.
THE NINTHE MEDI∣TATION. CHAP. IX. When we are readie to receaue. Pointes to meditate. 1 BEFORE that thou dost cō∣municate, consider well these wordes of the Blessed Vir∣gine, which she spake vnto the Angell whē as the sonne of God was incarnate in her.Luc. 10 Ecce Ancil la Domini fiat mihi secūdū verbū tuum. Behold the handmaid of our Lord, be it donne to me ac∣cording to thy word. Since ther¦fore that thou art to receaue the selfe same Sonne of God, thou oughtest to account thy selfe as a seruāt, remēbring wel that the seruant dependeth of his master desiring that only which his ma∣ster
desireth, and neither more nor lesse. 2 When as thou doest cōmu∣nicate, thinke that euen then, thy LORD doth enter into thy soule, to whom thou shalt do all reuerence by adoring of him as thy God and most deare Master. 3 Consider afterward how thou art compassed round about with Angells, adoring & doing chefe reuerence vnto their Lord, who really remaineth vnder the form of Bread which thou euen then hast receaued. 4 Finally thinke, that now thou art no more thine owne, neither art thou to vse thy selfe as a thinge of thine owne but as a thinge of Gods. The Fruite. The fruit of this Ninthe medita∣tion shalbe to make a firme pur¦pose
to be faithfull affectionate, and diligent towardes God him selfe and likewise towardes all thinges which belonge vnto his diuine maiestie. For with-out those qualities noe seruant can be acceptable vnto his Lorde & master A Colloquium, O my Lord, how greately haue you humbled your selfe by cō∣minge vnto the poore house of my soule? it should haue bene sufficient enough for your loue,Luc. 2 to cause you to be borne for me in a stable and not so often to make you enter and repose in a stable. That you my beloued Ie∣sus, woulde come downe from heauen to rest your selfe in the sacred wombe of Blessed Marie. was not so maruailous, because it was a virginlike wombe and
more pure then the most pure Angels of heauē.Luc. 1 O holy Eliza∣beth thou being visited & saluted of the mother of this same Lord considering her greatnes criedst out saying Whence is this to me (or how haue I deserued this) that the mother of my Lord doth come to me? And now what shall I say to whom the king of Maie¦stie infinitly more worth then Blessed Marie is now come? & he is come not only to visite me but farther to vnite me to him selfe, and to enrich me with hea¦uenly giftes and benefites. O my soule I am glad that willingely thou hast giuen vnto Iesus the scepter and possession of thy self But be thou well aduised that by this selfe same acte, thou hast bounde thy selfe to make open warre against all sinne & iniqui∣tie
for that they are enimies of this thy Lord, to whome thou hast giuen thy selfe; and there∣fore thou canste not with out plaine rebellion permite sinne to haue anye entrance into thy house now deuoted and con∣secrated vnto Christ. Be thou al∣so further aduised, that it is not Conuenient that thou which hast eaten the bread of Angels,2. Par. 8. shouldest now any more eat the meate of beastes. Thou knowest full well, that the wise kinge Sa¦lomon woulde not permit, that the daughter of Pharao (albeit she was his wife) should dwell in the same house whereas re∣mained the Arcke of God, for that he accompted it for a very vnseemely matter that a woman descendinge frō Gentills which were enimies vnto God, should
abide in place wheras the Arcke of God had ben. But how much more vnworthy a thing is it that sinne should haue any entrance into that place where is GOD him selfe, the Lord of the Arcke? It was a speciall fauour, O my soule, that our Lord wolde ac∣cepte thee for his seruant, wher∣fore thou oughtest to enforce thy selfe to be most diligent in his seruice, as he most worthely deserueth: Call thy selfe to re∣membrance, how the Patriarke Iacob,Gen. 29. first serued Laban seuen yeares that he might haue his daughter Rachel for his wife & after that he had married her he serued him other seuen yeares, which time seemed vnto Iacob very short by means of the great loue and affection which he had vnto Rachel his wife. Muchmore
short and litle ought that time seeme vnto thee which thou spendest in the seruice of this thy Lord, and all labours & tra∣uells taken for his sake ought to be accompted as light and easie since that he is infinitely more beautiful & amiable thē any cre¦ture whatsoeuer. Happie shalt thou be my soule if thou maiest knowe what it is to serue this master. Remember how that in times paste when as thou wickedly waitedst vppon this vaine world thou wert subiect to diuerse passions tossed with ma∣nie suspicions tormēted with en∣uious emulations & many sharp soure and bitter morsels thou swallowedst vp most gredelie: But now by the healpe of this thy heauenlye master which this morninge thou hast receaued,
thou maiest easely tread vnder thy feet the vanities of this life, and become Lorde and ruler ouer all thy passions, yea also ouer the world since that Seruire Deoregna re est to serue God is to be a King.
THE TENTH MEDI∣TATION. Of the preparation which Saint Paul teacheth vs 1. Cor. 11 CHAP. X. Pointes to Meditate. 1 CONSIDER how the A∣postle, requireth, three things for preparation to recea∣uing The First is that euery one should well examine his consci∣ence before he goeth to com∣municate,1. Cor. 88 and this is signified by these his wordes Probet au∣tem seipsum homo & sic de pane illo edat And if hee finde him selfe to be defiled with any Mortall sinne; let him before he receaue goe to confession and with tears of his harte clense and purge his conscience.
2 The Appostle woulde haue this sacred Communion to bee receaued worthely, otherwise he saieth Iudicium sibi mandu∣cat. That is to saie, who soeuer without humility, or with a guil¦tie conscience, or with euell in∣tention receaueth the sacred bo¦die of our Lorde, maketh him selfe worthy of eternall damna∣tion; and this is signified in these wordes Qui manducat indigne, iudicium sibi manducat. 3 Finally S. Paule would, that he which cōmunicateth should make difference betwixt this sa∣cred table and other prophane tables; betwixt this heauenlie meate and other common or or∣dinary meates; & this is to iudge Corpus Domini the Bodie of our Lord. For he which trulie beli∣ueth that in the sacred Hoaste is
really present Iesus our Saui∣our trew God & trew man; will receaue it with all humilitie and reuerence, and from his wholle hart will say with the good Cen¦turion:Mat. 8 Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum: Lord I am not worthy that thou shoul¦dest enter into my house. The fruit. The fruit of this Tenth Meditati∣on, shalbe to make actes of con∣trition, and to be often sorow∣full euen from the harte for all sinnes past,Psa. 50 Because Cor contri∣tum & humiliatum Deus non des∣spiciet: God will not despise a contrite and humble hart: And after this, with most affectuall desire to aske of our Sauiour an exceeding puritie, Crying with the Prophet: Cor mundum crea in me Deus: Create in mee (O
God a new harte. Annotations. These three thinges which the Appostle requireth for prepara∣tion vnto the sacred Communi∣on, were trewly seene in the Pro¦digall sonne, when his father re∣ceaued him, to the banquet of the fatt calfe. 1. First the prodigal sonne examined him selfe, and perceauing his vnhappie estate rose vp sorowfull for the errors which he had committed and of the bade life which he had lead went to his Father, confessed his sinne, and making promise to change his life and to be obedi∣ent vnto him, was reconciled vnto his father, in which actes, is verie well designed confessiō. 2 He was newly appareled and adorned with a ringe, by these ornaments are vnderstoode the
which are necessarielie quired for thew orthie recea∣ing of the sacred Euchariste: as faith, loue, humilitie and deuo∣tion. 3 He sate downe at the table & eate of the fatt calfe, and know∣ing that it was killed for his sake and that there was difference betwixte that table and others. Here, further it is to be noted that he which hath committed a mortall sinne, must first be con¦fessed before that he come to re∣ceaue the most sacred bodie of Christ, albeit he seeme to him selfe to be contrite: And if any Preiste vpon vrgent necessitie should celebrate, not hauing made his confessiō before hand for want of a confessor, hee is bound afterward to goe to con∣fession assone as he can thus the
holy Councell of Trent hath  dained & decreed. Sess. 13. cap  And if any one presume to teach preach, or obstinatly affirme or publicklye disputing to defend the contrarie he is excommuni∣cated ipso facto that is presently Idem Concil. Trid. Sess. 13. can. 11 Moreouer the holie Romaine Catholicke Church hath appoin¦ted for the greate respect and re∣uerence which is to be had vnto this so worthy a Sacrament, that who soeuer goeth to celebrate or to communicate, shoulde be fasting that is shoulde neither haue eaten or dronke since mid∣night last passed, so it is ordai∣ned De consecrat. dst. 2. Can. liquido vnlesse it be some sicke person when he receaueth this Blessed Sacrament for his viati∣cum. De consecrat. dist 2. can. Presbiter.
A Colloquium. Although O Lord, your Ap∣postle had neuer made mention of the purity of cōscience which the receauinge of this Blessed Sacrament requireth, yet who would not haue iudged that you the fountaine of all puritie and cleanenes ought to be receaued with a pure and cleane hart. If your most sacred bodie,Mat. 27 Luc. 23 albeit that it was then dead, was wrapt in a cleane sheete and buried in a new sepulcher,Ioan. 19. where in none before was euer buried: how much more now that your most holy bodie is glorious, ought to be receued & placed in a cleane and pure hart? well was this sig∣nified by your prophet when as he saide Lauabo inter innocentes manus meas:Psa. 5 & circundabo Alta∣re tuum Domine It be houeth vs
first, to wash our handes, that is to cleanse awaie the faultes of our euell workes, and after this to approch vnto the Altar of God, to tast this heauenly bread But how litle O eternall father doe you require at our handes the eatinge of the immaculate Lambe, which you sent vs from heauen to redeeme vs from the seruitude of sinne? When the Iewes were to eate the Pascall Lambe which was a shadow and figure of this which lieth hidden vnder the forme of bread; were bounde to prouide a Lambe, which should be but one yeare olde, and with-out any spotte, to eate him rosted,Exo. 12 and in hast with vnleuened breade, & with wilde and bitter lettesse, with their Loines girded, with shooes on their feete, and with a staffe
in their hande. Alas how heauie & troublesome a yoke was this? S. Peter saith that it was such a one that Neque patres nostri, ne∣que nos portare potuimus.Act. 15. neither our fathers nor we haue bene a∣ble to beare. But in the lawe of grace to eate the trew Lambe, qui tollit peccata mundi,Ioan. 1 which taketh awaie the sinnes of the world, is required no more, but puritie of conscience and deuo∣tion of hart. O my beninge Iesus how trew is that which you said of this your law:Mat. 11 Iugum meum suaue est, & onus meum leue: My yoke is sweet & my burden light yea it is so light and so sweet,Psa 39 that if it were not that Fingis la∣borem in praecepto, you feigne la∣bour in the precept, as your Pro¦phet saith it would not deserue the name of burden nor of yoke
O my soule see how litle thy Sa∣uiour Christ hath bounde thee. vnto, to giue thee in this life by meanes of the most venerable Sacrament, a boundāce of grace and afterward to croune thee in Heauen with eternall Glorie. Looke well therefore vnto thy selfe, that our Lord hauing of his infinite goodnes made this in∣estimable gaine so light and ea∣sie for thee, that by thine owne negligence iturne not to thy e∣ternall paine; waigh well that which thou hast in hande: Not to receaue such a beninge Lord, who cōmeth to replenish thee with his heauenly giftes, is a greate discourtesie vnto him, & infinite hinderāce vnto thy selfe: and to receaue him vnworthiely through thy owne fault, & retch lesnes is to doe vnto him iniurie
and to burthen thy selfe with paines. It will therefore be ve∣rie good for thee: to doe as the poore Countrie man doth when he vnderstandeth that his King will come to lodge with him in his house: This man with greate carefulnesse doth remoue forth of his litle cottage all whatsoe∣uer may either hinder or offend his King; with greate diligence maketh cleane his house, and al¦though hee cannot possiblie a∣dorne it conformablie vnto the greatenes of his guest yet neuer thelesse he doth doe his whole indeuour to receaue him wor∣thelie. After this with greate haste, he goeth forth to meete his King; and hauinge founde him out, with all hartie affection he thanketh him for this speciall fauour, and with greate cheere∣fullnes
he receueth him into his house: Now then if all this is to be done for an earthly prince, what oughtest thou O my soule to doe for the heauenly kinge, who commeth not to spend thy wealth but to bestowe on thee his: Endeuour therefore to the vttermost of thy power, to clēse and dispose the house of thy hart, for before he commeth he will send his Harbenger with Princely furniture to beautifie & adorne the lodging, where he vouchsafeth to rest, and that comming he will say vnto thee, Tota Pulchra es Ami∣ca mea, & ma∣cula non est in te.
THE .XI. MEDI∣TATION. Of a deuout person inuited by Christ to his Last supper. CHAP. XI. Pointes to meditate. 1 IMAGINE thy selfe to haue bene in the cittie of Hieru∣salem, when as Christ our Saui∣our instituted this pretious Sa∣crament, & that he for a speci∣all fauour towards thee, woulde vouchsafe by some one of his Apostles to call thee to be pre∣sent at this so greate a misterie: Now then consider what glad∣nes thy soule woulde haue fealt and how willingly thou woul∣dest haue laide a side all other busines that thou mightest haue gonne presently,
2 Imagine, that comming vn∣to the sacred chamber; our Sa∣uiour did presentlie wash thy feete, and sheeding teares vp∣on thē, saide these wordes vnto thee: I do this to take awaie the offences which thou hast cōmit∣ted against thy Creator, by wal∣kinge in the wicked waies. I wash thee also that thou maist better dispatch the labors which thou shalt vndertake for my loue by walkinge in the waie of spirituall life. Cōsider now what streames of teares thou woul∣dest then haue powred forth, what great confusion thou woul¦dest then haue had of thy selfe, and what courage woldest thou haue had to fulfill alwaies the will of God for the rest of thy life. 3 Finally, Imagine, how after∣wards
our Sauiour causeth thee to sit downe at the table, & often turning vnto thee those his lo∣uing eies saieth these wordes vn to thee. I haue preuented thee with so speciall fauours, and I am determined to bestowe on thee farre greater, it behoueth thee therefore to perseuer in my loue: Consider now what mo∣destie, thou wouldest then haue vsed at that sacred Table, with what setled attentiō thou woul∣dest then haue harkened vnto those diuine words of Christ Ie∣sus, what firme pruposes thou wouldest then haue made of ex∣ecuing his counsailes, and final∣ly with what deuotion wouldest thou then haue receaued? The fruit. The fruit of this XI. Meditation shalbe with thy wholle harte to
thanke our Lorde; and to pray him that he let thee not die vn∣gratefull. A Colloquium. As with out all doubt my Lord, this would haue bene such a spe¦ciall fauour, and such exceeding loue, that it might well haue mo¦ued thy Angells with great ad∣miration and amazement. So it is very certaine, that I shoulde haue remained most bound, not onely to walke in the waies of your commaundements, and to obserue your holye counsailes, but also for your sake, most wil∣lingly to spend my life. But O my Lord, euen then you should haue geuen me no better meate nor no greater gifte, then that which you now geue vs in the Blessed Sacrament, since that in this little consecrated Hoaste,
which from your holie Altar is geuen vs, miraculously lieth hid¦den your Diuinitie, your Soule, and your humanitie. If therfore the gifte be the same, and from the greatnes of the gift, procee∣deth the greatnes of our bondes and obligations, who seeth not that I am exceedingly bound vn to you my Benefactour? And who seeth not that I should be very vngratefull and altogither sottish, if I should not acknow∣ledge so singuler and notable a fauour. Open wide thy selfe my hart, and shew forth this obliga∣cion wherwith thou art bound to loue thy louing Iesus. O my God how different is the māner of your proceeding from that of worldly Princes;4. Re. 20 Kinge Eze∣chias to do greate fauour vnto the Embassadors of the kinge of
Babilon,Isa. 39. shewed them his riches and his treasors with-out giuing them any parte or parcell there∣of. But you (my Lord) doe not content your selfe with bare shewes, but giue most liberally not only your heauenly trea∣sures but likewise your selfe: O Loue,Mat. 6. O liberalitie; I see not, O my hart, how thou canst in any wise be aunswerable vnto this inestimable fauour. vnlesse thou whollie giuest thy selfe to the loue of thy Creator,Luc. 16. seeing that it is not possible for any on with loue to serue two masters, as it was not possible for the Idoll of Dagon and for the Arck of God to remaine on foote in one Tē∣ple.1. Reg. 5. Resolue therefore, to whom thou wilt whollie giue thy selfe, whether to Iesus thy Sauiour, who hath first giuen him selfe
vnto thee, being borne for thy guide and companion and di∣ing for thy ransome & redemp∣tion: who in this sacred table giueth vnto thee him selfe for meate, and afterwardes in hea∣uen will giue him selfe vnto thee for rewarde: Or else al∣togither forgettinge this greate obligation thou wilt giue thy selfe to the loue of cretures? Alas thou shouldest be ouer much vngratefull vnto thy God, and ouer hard wold be thy seruitude besides the greate losse which thou shouldest sustaine if by lo∣uing any creature thou shouldst make thy selfe subiect therunto. Remember my soule, that we are created to loue and serue God, Call to remembrance that by the grace of our Sauiour, and by neanes of this heauēly meate
we are made sonnes of God, & partakers of his diuinitie, it is therefore against all reasone, that thou shouldest make thy selfe slaue vnto this vaine world or settle thy loue vpon any crea∣ture: since that no one of them nor yet all of them togither, are able to content thee, seeke as much as thou list thou shalt ne∣uerfind any thing that can satisfy thy desires, nor shall thy minde be euer quiet, vnlesse by loue thou reposest thy selfe in him which hath cre∣ated thee.
THE .XII. MEDITA∣TION. Taken out of the Historie of Zacheus, Lucae, cap. 19. CHAP. XII. Pointes to meditate. The first parte conteineth the historie it selfe. 1 ZACHEVS beinge desi∣rous to know Christ our Sauiour, when as he coulde not for the multitude, because he was of a litle stature; running be¦fore, he went vp into a Sycomore tree, that he might see him: be∣cause our Sauiour was to passe thereby. 2 Christ passing by & lifting vp his mercifull eies vpon Zachaeus saide vnto him, Come downe
in haste, because this day I will come vnto thy house, Zacheus therfore in haste came downe & with greate reioicing receaued Christ into his house, accoun∣ting this a speciall fauour. 3 When the Iewes sawe that Christ was gōne in to the house of a siner, they murmured; which Zacheus perceiuing, he turned him selfe vnto Christ and saide vnto him: behoulde the halfe of my goodes, Lord, I giue to the poore, and if I ane defrauded any man of any thinge I restore foure folde as much, Iesus saide vnto him, this day saluation is made to this house.
Pointes for the second parte which conteineth the appli¦cation hereof. 1 Who soeuer will be made par¦taker of the spirituall helth and saluation which this blessed Sa∣crament bringeth, it is necessa∣rie to desire to know & to taste our Sauiour, whoe is in the Sa∣cred Hoast: For to know him it is necessarie, first that we haue our minds lifted vp on high, con¦sidering the greatnesse of God: Hauing for that time, all earthly thinges vnder our feet, as Za∣cheus had, whē he was vpon the tree, that is, when we are to cō∣municate, we must diligently la∣bour to haue our worldly busi∣nes vnder vs, and not ouer our heades to distract our deuotion.
2 Secondly, we must receaue our Sauiour, not with melanco∣lines of mind, or with affliction of scruples, but with cherfulnes as Zacheus did, which procee∣deth from a louing affection to∣wardes this most blessed Sacra∣ment. 3 Consider how it sufficeth not to receaue our Sauiour into our house, & afterwards to remaine with our handes in our bosome: but we must accompanie our re∣ceauing with good workes, re∣leeuinge the necessities of our neighbours as Zacheus did: and who shall do after this manner, shal heare our Sauiour saying vn to him: Hodie salus domui huic facta est. This day saluation is made vnto this house. The Fruite. The fruit of this XII. Meditatiō,
shalbe to desire & aske at Gods handes great affection towardes this Blessed Sacramēt, from the which springeth forth spirituall gladnes very necessary for recea∣uing. A spirituall speach or Colloquiū. How liberall are you, O my be∣nigne Iesue, vnto those which desire and seeke you, Zacheus desired you, but it was only that he might see you, & you did not only shew your selfe vnto him, but farther you called him, you inuited your selfe vnto his house to which, for a speciall fauour you gaue saluation: O how well saide the holy Prophet of you: Exultent & laetentur super te om∣nes quaerentes te & dicant,Psa. 39 sem∣per magnificetur Dominus, qui diligunt salutare tuū. They may
all exult and reioice who seeke you, and do loue your saluation. Thou hast good reason O Za∣cheus to reioice, for that thou hast receued him into thy house who reioiced the verre Angels. Enioye therefore thy gladnes, & care not a whit although the enuious Iewes doe murmur and say, that thou art a sinner; since that he is present with thee who is able to defend & iustifie thee; adioine thy selfe vnto him, and he will be thy buckler: and thou shalt withall tast Quam suauis est Dominus How sweet our Lord is.Psa. 33. O my soule thou also hast good cause to reioice and happelie more then Zacheus had since that this morning the fountaine of all trew ioy hath come vnto thee;Zac. 9. Heare that the Prophet Zacharie saieth vnto
thee: Exulta a filia Sion, iubila filia Hierusalem: Ecce rex tuus venit tibi iustus, & saluator. Reioice O my soule for that the king which is come vnto thee this morning, is not come to exact any tributs nor to impose any new taxes vp on thee, but for to worke thy saluation & to defend thee from the force and furie of thy eni∣mies: nor thinke that greater fa∣uour was shewed vnto Zacheus then vnto thee; for that by re∣ceauing of thy Sauiour lyinge hidden vnder the accidents of bread, besides the greate merit of fatih which thereby thou re∣ceauest; he giueth thee to vn∣derstand that he commeth not onely to conuerse with thee and to giue thee saluation as he did to Zacheus his hous-holde; but farther to vnite thee with him
selfe & make thee al one with himselfe which is the cheefe af∣fect of this most heauenly meate And who seeth not that this is greater fauour. Ah my beninge Lord, since that you haue vouch safed to enter into this my poore house,Mat. 22. graunte me grace that the same may neuer happen vn∣to me which happened vnto the vngratefull Iewes, who vpon Palme Sonday receaued you in∣to Hierusalem with greate ioy∣fulnes and triumphs,Luc. 23 Ioan. 19. but with in few daies after they cried out vn to Pilate Crucifige crucifige Cru¦cifie, crucifie him and with a Crosse on your shoulders they cast you forth of the cittie let me first die (good Lord) yea die a thousande times, before that I should euer driue you from me, for this would be to driue you from your owne house.
The XIII. MEDITA∣TION. Vpon these words of the Himne of the most holy Sacramēt Mors est malis, Vita bonis: vide paris sumptionis quam sit dispar exitus. The Blessed Sacrament, is death vnto the wicked, and life vn∣to the good. S. Thom. opusc. 57. CHAP. XIII. Pointes for to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how that this most diuine Sacrament,Mat. 26. euen from the very beginning of the institution thereof did worke these two contrarie ef∣fects for that in the eleuen Apost es it brought forth fruites of lifeAct. 5.
but in Iudas by means of his per∣uers will, it wrought his ruine death, and damnation. 2 Consider how that our Lord gaue this condition and proprie∣tie vnto this Blessd SACRA∣MENT for our greate profitte; to the entent that this Blessed Sa∣crament should be both loued and also feared of vs, and that Christians should be carefull to communicate with greate puri∣tie and cleanenes of conscience. 3 Consider how the hurt which this sacred meate bringeth vnto such as vnworthely receaue the same, proceedeth not from any defect of this Blessed Sacrament but from the euell disposition of those which receaue it, where∣fore the Apostle faith vnto the Corinthians,Cor. 11. for this cause, there are many amongest you infirme
and weake, and many die be∣cause they receaue this Blessed Sacrament vnworthelie. 4 Consider how that albeit the eleven Apostles (as S. Iohn affir∣meth) were pure and cleane yet neuerthelesse our Lord woulde wash their feet therby to declare vnto vs the greate puritie wher∣with this holy Sacrament ought to be receaued,cap 13. cap. 15 that it might bringe life to the receauer. The Fruit. The fruit which may be gathe∣ted by this xiii. Meditatiō shalbe to demaund of our Lord a holy feare of reuerence which proce∣deth from loue and is a girte of the holy Ghost; which retith vs backe frō offending of the di∣uine goodnes & causeth vs for∣ward toremoue far frō our selues what soeuer may be displeasing
vnto the eies of this most holy Guest. Annotation. We ought not to maruaile, that this great sacrament which of it seife is wonderfull, holesome, and profitable, should neuerthe lesse bee occasion vnto some of hurt: since that we see the same daily practised in naturall things, as for exāple the warmth and heat of the Sunne is profita∣ble vnto healthfull persons, but the same is hurtfull vnto sicke & aking heades: Againe, meate is holesome vnto a good disposed stomacke, but it bringeth infir∣mitie and death vnto a stomack full of bad humors: In like ma∣ner Phisicke being taken in dew time, is very holesome vnto him which taker it but being recea∣ued out of feason it is hurtfull
and daungerous, finally faith a Doctor: Euen as the liuelie and well rooted plant commeth to his perfection, & bringeth forth abundance of fruit, by the bene fit of the heat of the sonne and of the raine of the heauens: Euen so the soule which liueth in cha∣ritie, and is well rooted in Corist by the helpe of this holy Sacra∣ment, and by the deuine grace which it bringeth from heauen, increaseth in perfection and be∣commeth verie fruitfull: And contranwise, as when a plant is dead of full of wormes by the shi∣ning of the sone it is soner dried vp, & by the falling of the raine itsouer rotteth and becommeth fit fewell for the fire: Euen so the most Blessed Sacrament coming into a soule which is eaten with the sharpe gnawninge wormes
of sinne or els corrupted intenti∣ons maketh the same sooner to drie and wither away, and to be apt for nothing els, but to burne eternally in hell fire. A Spirituall speach in maner of a dialogue Betwixt, Man, and his Soule. Soule. Shall I be so boulde to approch neare vnto the sacred Altar, and there to receaue the Lord of glorie? Man. Whie not? So. Because I am miserable in firme, wretched & euel inclined. Ma. But he is both the Phisici∣on, and the medicine, and hee hath saide. Non est opus valenti∣bus nyedicus, sea male habentibus: They that are in health, neede not a Phisition, but they that are ill at ease.Mat. 9. So. But if he bee occasion of death he must bee feared and
therefore I must not come neare him, but abide far of from him: Ma. But he like wise is occasi∣on of life, & therefore thou ough∣test to loue him and not to flie from him: only dispose thy selfe to receaue him worthely and he will be vnto thee saluation; let thē feare death who vnworthe∣ly approch to receaue him.Mar. 1. So. If S. Iohn Baptist, who was sanctified in his mothers womb, accounted him selfe not worthie to vnloose the latchet of our Sa∣uiours shoes:Luc. 3. And S. Peter repu¦ting him selfe vnworthie to re∣maine in the presence of Christ,Luc. 5. said vnto him: Go forth fromme because I am a sinful man O Lord How shall I being a miserable sinner, presume to receaue my Creator, without danger of eter nall damnation?
Ma. If his comming from hea¦uen was to call sinners vnto him for to giue them grace,Mat. 9. and to worke their iustification, whie shouldest not thou goe to him? So. But who will warrant and assure me, that I shall not be pu∣nished? Ma. Humilitie and loue will worke thy securitie, through the one thou shalt be exalted, and through the other, thou shalt be rewarded. So. Alas, God seuerely puni∣shed the Bethsamites,1. Reg. 6 because they beheld the Arcke: and shal I be so bould as to receaue the Lord of that Arcke? M. The Bethsamits with great reason were punished, because that for curiositie they behelde the Arcke and vsed not dew re∣berence therunto: but thou my
soule, being accompanied with humilitie and loue,Iob. 26. wilt not do as the Bethsamites did. So. If the Angells of heauen tremble at the presence of this great Lord, how wouldest thou that I a vile creture & worme of the earth, shoulde dare to place him within my body? Ma. If thou likewise conside∣rest well the infinite Maiestie of this most Soueraine King which lieth hidden vnder the forme of bread, thou shalt finde iust cause of feare and trembling, but this feare ought to spring forth from loue, that is, thou oughtest to be afraide euer any more to offend so amiable a Lord, and therfore being stirred vp with loue and accompaned with humilitie, go on forwarde a Gods name, be∣cause thou shalt be so farre of,
from offending of him thereby, that thy most louing Iesus will most beningly intertaine thee. So. Aie me, I knowe my selfe to be farre vnworthy thereof. Ma. The Centurion likewise did acknowledge him selfe vn∣worthie to receaue Christ our Souiour into his house;Ioan. 9. But our Lord Iesus maketh them worthy to receaue him who acknow∣ledging their great vnworthines doe come vnto him with greate humilitie: So. Who knoweth that in me is no such euell disposition, by meanes whereof this diuine Sa∣crament may be cause vnto me of death. Ma. If thou knowest any such remoue it awaie, but if thou knowest it not, vse such diligēce that thou maist knowe.
So. Omercifull Iesus, trusting in your infinite goodnes, I come vnto you humblie befeeching you to anert your eies from my miseries,Psal. 29. for that Si iniquitates ob seruaueris Domine: Domine quis sustinebit? If thou O Lord wilt obserue iniquities who shallbe able to sustaine thee? But if it shall please you to beholde thē doe it I praie you not as a Iudge to punish thē, but as a mercrfull phisition to beale and redresse them, and graunte me Lord that these my miseries may serue for your greater glorie and honour,Mat. 8. like as the infirmity of the blind∣borne man, for by your deline∣ring of me, from them; so much more apparently will your mer∣cie & valor shine in me, by how much more miserable and vn∣worthie I was before.
THE XIIII. MEDI∣TATION. Vpon these words of the Himne Ecce panis Angelorum, factus cibus Viatorū. Behold the bread of Angels, is made meate for Trauellers. CHAP. 14 Pointes for to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how traiuell and teares was the ordi∣narie meate of man, after that for his finne he was cast forth of Paradise. Consider the estate in which man was, in this desert of lamē∣ting, for that he was constrained to wander in this world, with∣out any sure guid or sufficiēt pro¦uision, wherefore for want of the
one he might easelie haue gone out of the way: and for want of the other defecisset in via,Mat. 15. hee would haue fainted in the way. 3 Consider the louing careful∣nes, which our most mereifull Sauiour had of him, since that he him selfe would vouchsafe to become a guide and meate for man in banishment. 4 Confider how that the meate of Angells is no other but God the King of glorie, with whom the Angels in heauen are nou∣rished and by contemplatinge him they enioie him. Now the selfe same meate our most lo∣uing Redeemer hath made the meare of man, and therefore it is saide in the Himne Eoce panis Angelorum, factus cibus viatorn̄. The fruit. The fruit of this xiiii. meditation
shalbe to practise louing actes of gratitude towardes our Lord who hath so greatly fauored vs; and to pray his diuine Maiestie to make vs fully to vnderstand how infinitely we are bounde for this vnto our Sauiour Iesus. The Colloquium. It is possible O Lord that you be so inamoured of man, that you would feed him with the foode of Angels? is it possible that you seeke by the means of this An∣gelicall meate to make him all one with you? Reioice O sonnes of Adam, because this saying of the Prophet is no longer agrea∣ble vnto you: Fuerunt mthi la∣chrimae meae panes die ac nocte,Psa. 41. dū dicitur m bi quotidie, vbi est De∣us tuus: My teares haue bene bread vnto me day and night, whilest that they said vnto me,
where is thy god? for that now your meat is no more teares, but the food of Angells; and your god is not angrie, nor farre frō you, but is present vnder the forme of bread which he often giueth. O heauenly spirits assist me, that I may knowe so greate a benefactour. O holy Angells teach me I pray you: (but perti∣culerlye yee Scraphines) how I ought to loue my Redemer, who by giuing me to eat your bread, hath shewed me fauour farre a∣boue my desert. O my Lorde, your holy Prophet being astoni∣shed reioriced saying:Psa. 77. Panē Ange lorū māducauit homo: Man hath caten the bread of Angels: spea king of Manna which was made by the worke of Angells. But what glorie and what admirati∣on should I haue, who may say
with all veritie Mauducat Do∣minum pauper seruus & humtlis? Ores mirabilis: The poore and humble seruant eateth his Lord. O maruailous matter? What re∣compēce am I able to giue you my most beninge Iesus, for that the more I doe for your loue, the more fauour I continually re∣ceaue, since that it wholly re∣doundeth vnto my good? Ah, hard and peruerse hart how dost thou, beinge fed with this hea∣uenly meate remaine so earthly when wilt thou become hea∣uenly? How art thou so sensuall and with out spirit being nou∣rished with Angelicall meate? How is it possible that thou art not inflamed and dissolued with the sacred presence of most be∣ninge Iesus, who is become thy meate and is a flame of loue, is it
peraduenture because thou art of earth? Call to minde O sweet iesus, vour owne words,Luc. 12. ignem veni mittere interram, & quid volo nisi vt accendatur? I came to cast fire on the earth: & what will I but that it be kindled? Let this fire therefore bee kindled within me to the intent that the earthlines of my hart being bur∣ned and consumed, I may in ma¦ner of a fierie flame, ascend on high to search quae Sursum sunt;Col. 3. the thinges which are aboue, for that they only are able to con∣tent and quiet me. O my soule how is it possible that thou re∣mainest aliue at the comming of so greate a Maiestie? how is it possible that with the diuine pre sence of the King of glorie thou art not dissolued into thy no∣thing? Ah, Alas from whence
cometh this to passe that an An∣gell comming vnto Daniell,Dan. 10. he like vnto a withered plant, in such sorte fell downe vpon the ground, that as the Sacred Scrip∣ture saith, there remained in him no strength but lay prostrate vp∣pon the earth, hauinge lost his speach & his breath: And thou at the coming of the Lord and creator of the Angells dost nei∣ther tremble nor shake? The pil∣lers of Heauen (saieth Iob) doe tremble and quake at euery litle looke of this self same God:Iob. 26 and thou standest firme and nothing moued? Ah my Lord, you are the cause of this, since that the loue which you shew vs in this Sacrament is so great, that it ra∣ther inuiteth vs to loue you a∣gaine, and to be glad & reioice, then to be moued with feare &
trembling; for that the propertie of loue is, For as mittere timorem:1. Io. 4. to put feare forth of dores. THE XV. MEDITA∣TION. Of frequentinge the Blessed Sacrament. CHAP. XV. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how that in the primitiue CHVRCH which was gouerned by the A∣postles the Christians did often Communicat, and that from re∣ceauing did proceed the greate holines & feruor of spirit which was then: it is most certaine for that by experience we haue ben taught, that as this vse beganne to decrese and be diminished so
likewise did sanctitie and feruor decay & waxe lesse in the Chri∣stian people. 2 Consider how that in this our agean the which God of his good¦nes hath stirred vp greater deuo∣tion & more often frequentinge of this venerable Sacrament, is seene greater goodnes & perfe∣ction in those which frequent the same, and the Catholicke Church is greatly increased by many new & holy orders of re∣ligion. 3 Cōsider how that this diuine Sa¦crament being the meat of mans soule which comforteth and su∣staineth the same in spiritual life it cōsequently foloweth that the more often the soule is fed with this pretious meate, the more strong and more perfect she re∣maineth in spirituall life.
4 Consider more-ouer, that as this heauenly Sacrament is the fountaine of all perfection and holines, & imparteth most hol∣some effectes to all those which worthely receaue the same; so is it certaine that the oftener that any person doth communicate, the more he is made partaker of the graces therof: for this cause all the holy Fathers of the Ca∣tholicke Church do earnestly ex¦hort vs often to frequent this B. Sacrament. The Fruit. The fruit of this 15 Meditation shalbe to make firme purpose, both of making worthy prepa∣ration for this diuine Sacrament and alsO of often frequēting the same, for such as the one is, such wilbe the effect of the other. In preparing our selues we ought
principally to procure soundnes of loue, the which will cause out often receauinge to be pleasing and gratfull vnto God. A Colloquium. O my sweet Iesus, what greate fauour and grace is this which you do vnto me, for you vouch∣safe not onely to discouer vnto me that pretious mineral which remaineth in the field of the ho∣ly Catholicke Church, & is that Thesaurus absconditus, hidden treasure, which maketh the man which findeth it to sell all that euer he hath for to buy the field: But farther you innite me that I should often digge forth of this mine this most pretious treasure, therby to enrich my soule: And this maketh me to maruel much that for the obtaininge of this field, and for taking forth of this
treasure as oftē as I list, you haue graunted me such a wonderfull commoditie that I need not to sell any kind of thing for the by∣ing therof: Blessed be you my SAVIOVR, that for my greater good it hath pleased you to hide your glorious Bodie vnder the forme and accidents of bread to thentent that I should often re∣turne to tast the same,Isay. 45 & should say with your holy Prophet Vere tues Deus absconditus Trewlye you are a hidden God. O my Lord if for the taking forth of this diuine treasure, you should haue ordained sharpe fastinges, long pilgrimages, sheding forth of blood & other such like hard penances, yet all these paines & labours shold haue ben well imploied to haue once only ta∣sted your most sacred bodie; But
O vnspeakable charity, you haue vouchsafed to make it both ea∣fic and delightfull vnto me, that by this meanes I shoulde often come vnto this diuine minerall. O Adam, how much better is the condition of thy posteritie, then was thy owne? Thankes be therfore to our bening and libe∣rall Iesus:Gen. 3. Thou wert cast forth of Paradish & to the entent that thou shouldst not return to eate of the tree of life therby to haue liued for euer: God most iust pla¦ced a Cherubine with a fierie sworde to keepe thee from en∣tring in: but we thy sonnes and offprings, remaining within the Paradise of the holie Church, are not onely not prohibited of an Angell with a fierie swoord, but farther, the Lord of the An∣gells with fire of loue, most ear∣nestly
inuiteth vs often ro come and eate of the tree of life, or ra∣ther to receaue him who gaue vertue vnto that tree of life, and who giueth vs most happie and eternall life, for thus he promi∣seth vs, inuiting vs to come vn∣to him: Qui manducat meā car∣nem,Ioan. 6. viuet in aeternum: He that eateth my flesh shall liue for e∣uer. Awake a litle my soule and magnifie thy God. Qui fecit tibi magna, qui potens est.Luc. 1. Because he that is mightie hath done great thinges vnto thee, dust thou not see how that for inriching of the he hath made him selfe thy trea∣sure? Come therefore often to digge it forth, for since that he is a most pretious treasure he wil giue thee good contentment, & seeing that he is infinite, he can neuer by drawing forth, faile or be wanting vnto thee.
THE XVI. MEDITA∣TION. Which is the second cōcerning often Receauing. CHAP. XVI. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how that the Deuill in no wise can a∣bide and endure the vse and fre∣quenting of this most holesome Sacrament, for that he knoweth very well, how greatly it hel∣peth man to the obtaining of e∣ternall blessednes, which he him selfe lost by his pride. He more∣ouer detesteth it, because it liue∣lie representeth the Passion of Christ our Sauiour, whereby he was vanquished and spoiled of his dominiō which he had ouer humaine kind.
2 Consider, how that for these causes the deuill enforceth him selfe by diuerse meanes to with∣draw men from often teceauing whereby we may well perceaue how profitable it is vnto our soules often to be fed with this heauenly bread, since that it so much displeseath the Deuil, who is a mortal enemie vnto our good 3 Consider, that since our na∣ture of it selfe is very feeble and weake, ill inclined, and often by the Deuill solicited to do euell, the best and surest remedie is of∣ten to communicate: it beinge the propertie of this blessed Sa∣crament, to giue force vnto the soule to resist all kind of tentati∣ons and vniting the same with Christ who is the guide and rule of all good, it commeth to be directed by him to good works
as is plainly seene in those which often and worthely do receaue. The Fruite. The fruit which ought to be rea∣ped by this XVI. Meditatiō shal be to demaunde of Almightie God force against so craftie an aduersarie, and then to do actes of hamilitie, which doth disco∣uer the deceits of the deuill, and maketh him with confusion to runne awaie. A Colloquium. See good Iesus by how manie means this infernall enimie see∣keth to diuert mee from your most sacred table. Some times he tempteth me in faith concer∣ning the hidden misteries of this diuine Sacrament, some times he tormenteth me with fearefull scruples, some times he woulde drawe me backe for some hu∣maine
respect & vaine speches of the world: other times he would entertaine me with hope of grea¦ter commoditie and deuotion. And when by these meanes he faileth of his wicked purpose & intent then he maketh the body lament that it is ouer trouble∣some to frequent often the re∣ceauing of the most Blessed Sa∣crament. O my soule if most lo∣uing Iesus remained not hidden in this holy Hoast or if it were not profitable vnto vs, often to be fedde with this most holie bread; with-out all doubt the deuill would let vs alone or ra∣ther he wold much reioice, that herein we should vainely loose our time: But this maligne spirit knoweth full well who lieth hid¦den vnder the forme of bread, he also well knoweth the greate
profit and commoditie which we receaue thereby, & therefore being pricked forward with en∣uie and hatred against vs he see∣keth by all meanes possible to let and hinder vs. And whie dost thou (o peruerse and deceitfull body) murmur and grudge? Is it possible that for obteininge of thy poysoned delights and plea∣sures, thou regardest no kinde of paine or trauaile, and thou ca¦rest not to aduenture any kinde of daunger and becōmest thou¦sad and sorowfull to yeeld vnto thy soule so easie and so whol∣some a comfort. See good Lord what warre the enemies of my saluation doe waige against me to skirmish and encounter with thē all, I require no other thing of you,Iob. 17. thē that which your faith full seruant Iob demaunded and
obteined. Pone me tuxta te, & cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me, place me neare vnto your selfe, and then lett any fight against me, take thou my parte O Lord: and I shalbe secure that nothing can be able to hinder the fre∣quentinge and often receauing of this heauenly Sacrament. I praie you therefore my beninge Iesus, that as by your bountie & goodnes you haue inspired me to beginne for to taste this most pretious meate; so you will giue me grace to frequent the same with louelie perseuerāce. Grant me (good Lord) that I neuer be vnmindefull of this most holie Sacrament, for els my hart will faint and languish,Psa. 101 and with sor∣row and bitternes I shalbe enfor¦ced to saie with your Prophet Aruit cor meum quia oblitus sum
comedere panemmeum: my hart is withered away because I huae forgotten to eate my bread, Amen. THE XVII. MEDI∣TATION. Which is the third concerning often Receauing. CHAP. 17. Pointes to Meditate. 1 CONSIDER how not with¦out good cause, our Re∣demer instituted this diuine SA∣CRAMENT vnder the forme of bread; to giue vs to vnderstand hereby, how that we ought of∣ten to be fed therwithall: for as ordinary bread being often re∣ceaued doth maintaine our cor∣porall life: soe the often recea∣uing
of this blessed Sacrament, preserueth our spirituall life, and of this heauently bread many ho¦ly Doctors do vnderstand that,Luc. 11. Panem nostrum quotidianum da¦nobis hodie. But if we should re∣ceaue it seldome how could it be our daily bread. 2 Consider how that by frequē∣ting of this blessed Sacramēt, the partie commeth to be deuout & spirituall: for besides that which this diuine Sacrament worketh of his owne nature, herevnto is al¦so adioined deuout preparation which consisteth in actes of ver∣tue, as of Faith of Contrition, of Paier, of charitie, and of such like; which actes if they be often frequented will bring forth in vs many vertues whereby the body wil become chast and obedient vnto the soule; and the soule vn∣to
Almightie God; and this is to be deuout and spirituall, which wee obteine not if we seldome communicate. 3 Consider how that by recea∣uing of Christ in this blessed Sa∣crament with dew preparation, wee doe honour vnto him and make great accoūt of him; wher¦fore he which more often recei∣veth, more often doth honour and reuerēce him; but he which honoreth Christ on earth shalbe honoured of his father in heauē; and this was pretended by the Blessed Virgin our Ladie, who (as some holy fathers affirme & as afterward we will say more at large) did often cōmunicate. The Fruit. The fruit of this XVII. Medita∣tion shall be to demaund grace of our Lorde that this heauenly
meate may neuer come to be lothsome vnto our soule, as this earthly bread bringeth no fasti∣diousnes vnto our bodie. A spirituall speach. What shall I do my sweet Iesus, since that two most valiant Cap¦taines doe very fiercely assaulte me? that is, Feare, & Loue; Feare, setting downe before my eies, the greatnes of this maiesticall Sacrament, maketh me to retire; Loue, shewinge me the impor∣tance of the vnion which this di∣uine Sacrament causeth me to haue with you, vrgeth me vehe∣mently with louing desire to go forward. But alas what shall I do, if Feare ouercome me, and make me remaine farre of from your most sacred table? and you hauing said. Nisi manducaueri∣tis carnem filij hominis,Ioan. 6. non ha∣bebitis
vitam in vobis: Vnlesse you eate the fleshe of the sonne of man, you shall not haue life in you; how shall I liue without this vitall and holesome meate? And, if loue ouercome me, shall I be soe audacious as with-out feare to receaue this Sacrament of so great Maiestie? I being not worthy to behold it, much lesse often to receaue it? What shall I therefore do O my Sauiour? I knowe very well,Mal. 1. that the one pleaseth not you without the o∣ther, for that you being our fa∣ther, we ought for to loue you; and you being also our Lord it behoueth vs likewise to feare & reuerence you: wherefore I re∣solue to yeeld my selfe ouer∣come vnto them both, with this condition that the one and the other do keepe me companie,
Loue will cause me to come of∣ten and cheerfullye: and Feare will make me come considerat∣ly. And you (most mercifull Re∣deemer) since that you vouch∣safe so oftē to call me vnto your Sacred banquet; graunt me this fauour, that these two valiant Captaines whoe are vnder your commaund, do neuer leaue and forsake me. Oh, heauenly father seeing that you haue bound me with such benefittes, and with such chaines of loue; I beseech you for that loue, which you al∣waies haue borne vnto your on∣ly begotten and beloued sonne, that you will not leaue me thus bound, but that it may please you to draw me vnto your sone, because you haue so promised me by your Prophet saying: Tra ham cs in vinculis charitatis. I
will draw thē with the chaines of charitie. Remember likewise sweet Sauiour that you also pro∣mised to draw vs vnto you, whē you said:Ioan. 12. Ego si exaltatus fuere a terra ōnia trahā ad meipsum If I shalbe exalted frō the earth I wil draw all vnto me. Now O Lord you haue bene already exalted; it remaineth therfore that now you drawe my harte vnto you, who finding no other place to rest it selfe, like an other Doue returneth vnto the arcke of sal∣uatiō.Gen. 8. But if you my Lord do not stretch forth your holy handes, and draw it vnto your selfe with in your Arke, it will remaine abroad & be casely drow∣ned in the stinking wa∣ters of this life.
THE XVIII. MEDI∣TATION. Which is the fourth concerning often Receauing. CHAP. 18. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how that be cause this Sacrament is one of the greatest benefittes, which God hath bestowed vp∣on vs in this life, there is no one thing which can more freely de∣liuer vs from ingratitude, then often receauing, for besides this that hereby we do an acte most gratfull vnto God our benefa∣ctor, we doe farther often here∣by renue the memorie of him, which thing he requireth of vs when as he saieth:1 C. 11 Hoc facite in
meam cōmemorationem. Do this for the commemoration of me. 2 Consider,Luc. 22 how that the not frequenting this blessed Sacra∣ment (when opportunitie ser∣ueth) cōmonly proceedeth for want of loue, because it is im∣possible that any one doth loue Christ trewly,Ioan. 6. and doth not re∣ceaue him often, especially since that he desireth that we would receaue him, and inuiteth vs so affectuouslye, that therefore he promiseth vs life euerlasting. 3 Consider how that it is pro∣per vnto the Grace which this diuine Sacrament imparteth, for to vnite vs with Christ; where∣fore the oftener that one recea∣ueth it, the more grace he ob∣taineth, and so much more firm∣ly is he vnited with his Creator, then the which, I know not if
any greater thing can possiblie, be either desired or wished for, in this mortall life. The Fruit. The fruit of this XVIII. Medi∣tation shalbe to desire and pray our Lord to giue vs internall af∣fection towardes this diuine Sa∣cramēt, because that from affe∣ction proceedeth perseuerance in frequentinge of it. A Colloquium or spirituall speach. Reioice and be glad my soule be¦cause we haue a Lord who in gi∣uing is verie liberall, and in ex∣acting is very sparing, Reioice and be glad for that the magni∣ficence and mercie of our Saui∣our hath valourously foughten for vs Magnificēce hath brought to passe that our Lord regarding the greatenes of his celistiall
treasures, & our necessities, hath bestowed most largely and libe∣rally vpon vs: And mercie hath wrought that the self same Lord considering our weakenes and pouertie, hath taken compas∣sion of vs, and requireth litle or nothinge at our handes. Who would euer haue thought, that a Lord of such maiestie, after that he had trauailed and spent the whole time of his life for one benefit and commoditie, would in the end, not for any interest of his owne but for pure loue to∣wardes vs become our meate? Who woulde haue immagined that for recompence of this so worthie a gift he would receaue of vs, neither Iewell nor gould, nor yet any other thinge which should cost vs labour or sweat: but hauing giuen him selfe vnto
vs for meate, desireth that we should oftē strenghen our selues therewithall. O vnmeasurable liberalitie? O charitie without bond or limitt. Goe to my soule be thou not affrighted, for albeit with giftes; bondes and obliga∣tions are incresed, & the greater that the gifte is, so much more dangerous is the abhominable vice of ingratitude: yet thy most louing Iesus by his infinite grace hath deliuered vs from such pe∣rill and daunger by requiring at our handes no other then litle & easie thinges, And this O Lorde is nothing els but whollie to con¦found me, seeing that to receaue you often in this venerable Sa∣crament, is both easie and de∣lightfull, and also redoundeth to my good, by getting of great grace on earth, & glorie in hea∣uen.
And what els is this but to heape one benefit vpon an other But what will become of me O Lord, who hauing receaued at your handes such benefites doe still requit you with vngrateful∣nes? and who for this pretious meate which your grace giueth vnto me, do render againe vnto you gall & vinegre? Worthelie therefore may you to my confu∣sion obiect againste me, that which by your Prophet Isay you obiected against the people of Israel saying Quid est quod debui vltra facere vineae meae & non feci ei? What ought I farther to haue done vnto my vineyard, & haue not done? An quod expectaui, vt faceret vuas, & fecit labrus∣cas? In place of sweet grapes it hath yealded me soure wine. I confesse my beninge Lord that
I iustly deserue for my greate ingratitude, all those euels wher∣with you threatned that vngrat∣full vineyard of Israell: but re∣member most mercifull Iesus, that this vineyard hath cost you deare, for that you haue planted it by sustaining infinite labours and paines for the space of thirty three yeares; and you haue wa∣tered the same with the sweat of your browes, with the teares of your eies, and with the most pre¦tious bloud of your sacred body if therfore you now prohibit the raine to fall from heauen and do teare vp the heades thereof.Psa. 79. Sud¦danly there will come Aper de silua the Boare of the wood to tread it downe and roote it vp, enter rather O Lorde your selfe & visiting the same Perfice eam quam plantauit dextera tua.
THE XIX. MEDI∣TATION. Vpon some defectes which hin∣der the fruit of the blessed Sacrament. CHAP. 19 Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how that be∣sides mortall sinne, there are other impedimentes, which albeit they take not cleane away yet they abate very much the fruit of this diuine Sacrament, as for example, to be ouermuch imploied in busines, and to haue ouermuch conuersation before we goe to receaue, which al∣though they are not of thēselues euell, yet notwithstanding they take from vs that recollectiō of mind which is required for so
greate a misterie, wherefore by these meanes we remaine depri∣ued of the spirituall tast and fee∣ling which God is wont to giue vnto those which deuoutlie re∣ceaue him. 2 It is also an impediment to go to receaue with out making re∣flection ouer him selfe, by con∣sidiring whether he goeth, what he pretendeth, whome he hath to receaue, and what preparati∣on he hath made. And since that in all our small affaires we consi∣der before hand all the circum∣stances thereof, it is very conue∣nient that likewise we shoulde well consider all circumstances which appertaine to this diuine busines beelonginge vnto our soule. 3 Finally it is an impedimente when as one hauing scarce re∣ceaued
falleth to reasoninge or other busines, for by these things the spirituall heat and feruour which by receauing we haue ob¦tained easely vanisheth awaie: and we doe a certaine kinde of iniurie vnto the Blessed Sacra∣ment as it would be a greate in∣ciuilitie to receaue a great Lord into our house and shortly after to goe forth of the doares lea∣uing him in our house all a lone. In like maner doe they who af∣ter receauing goe to talkinge or reasoning, either for recreation or for other busines. The Fruit The fruit of this XIX. Meditatiō shalbe, to be sorie, and to lamēt these and such other defectes, with purpose of amendment. A Colloquium. Doest thou not plainely see, O
my soule, how verie little our Lord requireth of vs, for to giue vnto vs the great & most hole∣some fruit of the venerable Sa∣crament? it behooueth thee ther¦fore to go therunto with great deuotion & recollectiō of mind for this he requireth of thee. Re∣member whē God was to speak with Moises in the mountaine,Exod. 19 he cōmaunded that nether man nor beast should approch neare vnto the mountaine, to the in∣tent that Moises should not be distracted by any kind of crea∣ture: yea to the end that Moises should remaine with greater at∣tention and recollection, the whole mountaine was couered, with a great and obscure cloud: Euen so my soule doe thou dili∣gently procure that (to the Al∣tar where God expecteth thee)
no kind of creature may accom∣panie thee, thereby to distracte thy deuotion and attention, for that thou hast not only to talke with, but also to receue thy God and thy Creator, and be tho surelye perswaded that he will neuer desire and loue thee, vnle thou cleane forgett all created thinges when as thou comest  to this sacred Table to receau thy Creator, whom onely tho oughtest then to remēber.Psa. 44. Har∣ken what the kingly Prophete saieth vnto thee. O daughter af∣ter that thou shalte forget thy people and the house of thy fa∣ther, then Concupiscet Rex deco∣rem tuum: will the King desire thy comelines: And most wor∣thelie O Lord, for since that you are cheefe goodnes, and infinite lie to be beloued, it is not con∣uenient
that you should be ina∣mored of that soule which be∣ing intertained of creaturs by o∣uer much affection towards thē, commeth not freely vnto you, neither seeketh after you with whole affectiō of hart. But what shall I doe O Lord to obtaine this deuout attention. My minde by the greuoues wounde which she receaued in terrestiall Para∣dise remaineth disordered in such sort, that ordinarily against my wil she goeth forth of the dores like a vagabone? What shall I do since that the infernall enimie to with drawe me from you and from your holie table doth so ouerthwart my heade with such terrene thoughts, that I can not keepe my hart firmely setled vpon you? Now you see most mercifull IESVS in what
state I remaine weake by nature and in such sort wraped & ouer∣whelmed with earthly thinges, that vnles you help and succour me, I shall remaine depriued of the comfort of this most holie meate, helpe I praie you with your grace my weakenes, and remoue from me all impedi∣mentes that like a hungry Falcō, I may flie vnto your most sacred bodie, which it hath pleased you to giue me for meate,
THE XX. MEDITA∣TION. Of the most holy Sacrament: when it is giuen vnto the sicke for a viaticum CHAP. XX. Pointes to meditate. 1 CONSIDER how that e∣mongst many other most worthie effectes of this celestial Sacramēt, one is to render those stronge and valiant (against ep¦tations) which worthelie do re∣ceaue the same: wherefore in auncient times it was giuen vn∣to those which were to suffer matirdome, that they might re¦maine firme in the Confession of Christ. And for that in the pas∣sage
from this life vnto the other the diuells doe assaulte vs with diuers tentatiōs, for this respect the holy Church vseth to fortifie & strengthen vs with this most holie Sacrament of eternall life. 2 Consider how it helpeth like∣wise to obtaine the health of bodie when it is expedient for the saluation of our soule, for if so be by the onely touch of the garment of Christ manie recea∣ued their helth,Mat. 9. et. 14. what will Christ him selfe do, when as by this bles∣sed Sacramēt he entreth into the soule of the sicke? 3 Consider finallie that Christ hauing instituted this most holy Sacrament for the spirituall help of our soule, it is to be thought that when wee haue greatest neede (as is went to be in daun∣gerous sicknesses) that then this
blessed Sacramēt worketh most effectually his most wholesome fruies, for that it is proper vnto our Lord which therin lieth hid¦den to healpe where is greatest necessitie. The Fruit. The fruit of this last meditation shalbe, to doe louinge actes of gratefulnes, by hartely thanking of our Lord for the great care & solicitude which he hath had o∣uer vs by helping and releeuing our spirituall neede and necessi∣tie, with this most louing Sacra∣ment. Annotation. 1 Here it is to be noted, that this most holy Sacrament is to be receaued for a viaticum, whē there is daunger of death & not to expect, vntill the sicke person
be halfe dead, (so that he is vna∣ble to do actes of deuotion and contrition) because this Sacra∣ment worketh most effectuallie when as it is accompanied with our contrition and deuotion. 2 The priuiledge of this blessed Sacrament, when it is receaued for a viaticum, is this, that the sicke partie may communicate at all times, albeit he be not fa∣sting, this the Church graunteth De consecr. dist. 2. Caa. Liquido & Can. Presbyter. 3 If the sicknes be long and lin∣gting, the diseased partie after that he hath communicated for his viaticum, may often times af∣terward communicate for deuo∣tion: but then he must be fasting from midnight last past, as I haue saide before in the tenth medi∣tation.
The Colloquium. A wake O my soule, and con∣template this new fauour which thy bening Iesus doth vnto thee whereby ariseth in thee a new bonde. Dost thou not see, how that in this last conflict thou hast to fight & make combate with the hatefull enimies of of thy sal∣uation, and since that thou art altogither vnable to goe vnto his holie Altar, there to bee ar∣med, fortified and strenghned with heauenly meate, he vouch∣safeth to come home into thy house? O louing humilitie, thou hast good cause to exult and re∣ioice my soule for that the Lord of Maiesty vouchsafeth to come vnto my house, to honour thee, to comfort thee, and to be thy companion, as well in this thy last conflict and assault with the
diuells of hell will giue thee to trie if they can get thee for their prisoner as also in the last pas∣sage which thou hast to make from this life vnto the other. Be therefore of good courage, for although thou thy self art weake and infirme and thy enemies stronge and mightie, yet neuer∣thelesse hauing receaued the cō∣fort of this most holy meat thou maiest boldly say with the bles∣sed Apostle S. Paule. Omnia pos∣sum in eo qui me conforta:Phil 4. I can all thinges in him that strength∣neth me, place therefore all thy hope in thy Iesus, and thou shalt not be ouercome nor confoun∣ded.4. Reg. 13. Thou knowest well that the dead bodie of Eliseus brought life vnto an other body by onely touching of it: But if so bee the bones of a dead Prophet had
such force and vertue that they were able to recall a dead man vnto life, and the theeues which stoode about the sepulcher of Elizeus amased at the matter durst not do him any harme at all? What will not the liuelie & glorified bodie of Iesus be able to doe, comming to dwell and remaine within thee? Past all doubt hee will giue thee farre greater force and vertue; he be∣ing God omnipotent and Lord of the vniuersall worlde. And all the diuells of hell by his onlie presence shall remaine confoun¦ded and vanquished. O holy Da¦niell instruct me, how I ought to thanke my most louing Lorde, who seing me in this my simple bead, compassed rounde about with feirce lions of hell: altogi∣ther fainting for want of foode,
hath not sent me meat by Aba∣cuc,Dan. 14. his Prophet nor yet by his Angells from heauen: but he him selfe vouchsafeth to come, and giueth me meate, not pre∣pared by the art of man, nor yet sent for reapers or haruestmen, but prepared by the wonderfull worke of Almighty God, for his faithfull seruants and louing fronds Qui de spiritu metent vi∣tam aeternam.Gal. 6. Who of the spirit (of God) shall reape life euer∣lastinge. O Marie Mother of my lastinge. O Marie Mother of my Lord O my good Angell and keper, and all other my deuoted Saints, since that I neither know how, nor yet can render such hartie thanks (as is conuenient) vnto this my heauenly benefa∣ctor, thāke him I pray you on my behalfe. And thou my soule ne∣uer cease from thankinge our
Lord,Luc. 1. for that Fecit tihi magna qui potens est, he that is mightie hath done greate things to thee See and consider that hee hath not only loued thee at his owne end, when as passing from this life vnto his eternall father, he instituted for thee, this so wor∣thie a Sacrament:Ioan. 13. but farther he most singulerly loueth thee at thine owne end, when as thou being to passe from this life vn∣to the other, he giueth him selfe vnto thee for meate and a com∣panion. O loue with-out mea∣sure. O my Lorde, since that in this world I can neither receane nor desire any thing more greate and more beneficiall; it only re∣maineth that with holie olde Simeon I crie out and demaund of you saying Nunc dimittis Ser uum tuum Domine in pace, quia
viderunt oculi mei salut are tuum, Now thou doest dimisse, thy ser¦uant O Lord according to thy word in peace, Because mine eies haue seene thy saluation. Go to my soule Conuertere in requiem tuam quia Dominus be∣nefecit tibi, turne quickly vnto thy creator because in him thou shalt finde such re∣pose that thou maist iust∣ly say Haec requies mea, in saeculum saeculi. This is my rest for e∣uer and euer.
A DIALOGVE BE∣twixt a worldly and a spiritu∣all man, concerninge the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar. In the which is disputed whether it be better to Communicate of∣ten or seldome, supposing that both the one, and the other be dewlie done; that for loue and deuotion; and this, for humili∣tie and reuerence. CHAP. XXI. VVORLDLING. I knowe not for what end & pro∣fit thou shouldest so often com∣municate because that I alwaies see thee with the same defectes, often disdainefull, and alwaies full of threatnings.
Spirituall. I know that others by often receauing are much amended of their defects, and if I should not often cōmunicate, with-out all doubt I should bee much worse, and peradueuture euen at this instant I should haue bene burning in hell fire. W. How knowest thou, that thou shouldest be worse? S. Because experience teach∣eth me, that when I am shortly to communicate, I am more ad∣uised in my actions, and I keepe my selfe more diligently from committing of sinnes, be they neuer soe small. Contrariewise when as I am not of a long time to communicate, I am not soe watchfull ouer my doings, and I finde my selfe sloe in my deuo∣tions, and easely readie to fall in to imperfections, wherefore if
my soule reaped no other com∣moditie, this alone were suffici∣ent enough, to make me to fre∣quent this diuine Sacrament. W. I doubt, that by receauing of our Lord so often, I shoulde loose both loue and feare of him which commonly proceedeth from ouer greate abundance, of familiaritie. S. Nay rather it happeneth cleane contrarie, for if so be that by familier conuersation, and by often receauinge of our Lorde, should be laide open and disco∣uered some imperfection of his, you had good reason to thinke that thereby would be dimini∣shed our loue & feare of him, as it often happeneth in humaine things; but here is no such mat∣ter, for that he being the infinite sea of all perfection, by how
much more a man conuerseth with him, so much the more he perceueth his goodnes and his perfection, & therfore so much the more is increased in vs our deuotion, loue and reuerence towards, his diuine maiestie. W. Be it as you would; yet ex¦perience teacheth that the often frequenting of any thing, albeit neuer so good, yet in the end it breedeth loath somnes. S. This is trew in temporall thinges, and in sensuall delights but as S Gregorie verie well no teth: In spiru ualibus delitijs satu∣ritas appetitum parit In spirituall delightes plentifulnes causeth appetite, for that thē their good∣nes is better knowne, & for this cause the more they are posses∣sed, the more they are desired, for this respect also the diuine
wisdome saieth Qui edunt me adhuc esurient,Eccle. 24. & qui bibunt me adhuc sitient. They which eate me shall still hunger after me, and they which drinke me, shall still thirst after me. W. Saint Paule saith that hee which receaueth vnworthely re¦ceaueth the same to his eternall damnation,1. Cor. 11 but if thou receaue euerie Sonday, it is a signe that thou accomptest thy selfe wor∣thie, but is not this manifest pride? And therefore thou recea¦uest vnworthely? S. As though seldome recea∣uing did make vs worthy, it is not so, but if by being worthie you vnderstand that one should be equall in perfection with this Sacrament, then it is certaine that no creature albeit most ho∣lie, no nor yet all creatures to∣gither
are worthy of this Sa∣crament. Yea if such worthines were necessarie; no body could communicate; for that no crea∣ture can come vnto that per∣fection which should be equall with this Sacrament. In like sort that a man should receaue wor∣thely is not necessarily required that he should be of excellent perfection and of rare and sin∣guler vertue; for this is obtained by ferquenting this diuine Sa∣crament, therefore for to bee worthy, it is sufficient accor∣ding vnto S. Paule that the par∣tie which receaueth haue that disposition where-with God is contented; that is beforehande to examin his cōscience, to haue contrition and to confesse his sinnes; and so to receaue the B. Sacrament is not pride.
W. If this be sufficient, what is the reason that some Saintes for reuerence of this so greate a Sacrament, refused to be made Priests, as did S. Frances?In vita eius. And Marke a holie Anchorite, out of one of his fingers because he would bevnable for Preisthood? S. The Saints of God haue had diuerse giftes of the holy Ghost, frō the which gifts haue spronge forth diuerse deeds, all which are to be praised, but all are not to be imitated of vs, that these Saints shunned Preisthood for humilitie was well done. Other Saints haue bene, who either for deuotion or for obedience, or els for some other good end haue bene made Preistes, and haue celebrated euery daie; and these also haue done well. More ouer those saints did ab∣staine
from the dignitie of Preisthoode, but not from often receauing wherof we now rea∣son, & it is an ancient vse, where with the Church of Christ be∣gan;Act. 2. as S. Luke the Euangelist reherseth. W. Yet neuerthelesse, because that we haue not in these daies such feruour and deuotion as was thē in the primitiue Church it seemeth more secure to ab∣staine from the Bressed Sacra∣ment, then to receaue often, least we be not so well disposed to receaue our Sauiour often & we ought alwaies to followe the secure waie. S. Yea rather, because wee haue not such feruour as they then had, we ought more effe∣ctually to be moued often to fre¦quent this most holsome Sacra∣ment,
which is able to heate and inflame our deuotion, for that colde persones haue more need to approch neare vnto the fire then those which are hoate, and euerie time that we are rightly confessed and goe with good intention, there is no daunger at all; and therfore we may secure∣ly communicate. W. I haue alwaies heard saie, that the Sacraments were insti∣tuted of Christ as medicines, but medicines must not be taken so often. S. If men were seldome spiri∣tually sicke your argument were of force, but because our nature is so weake and infirme, that it often fainteth and falleth sicke, it is very requisite that it should be often helped and strenghned with this most sacred medicine
Moreouer for that this holy Sa∣crament preserueth our soule frō spirituall euells, it is much bet∣ter therwith to preuēt those ma¦ladies, then after their comming to cure them, finally there is greate difference betwixt corpo¦rall medicines, and this spiritual medicine, for they expell sick∣nesses from the body, and often times together with bad hu∣mors doe take awaie also the good but this bringeth vnto the soule Grace, Fortitude, & other heauēly gifts. for these respectes they ought seldome to be taken and this ought often to be recea¦ued: Hereunto may be added that not with-out good cause corporall medicines most com∣monly are bitter and loathsome that therefore they shoulde be taken as seldome as might be.
But this spirituall medicine be∣ing both sweete and delightfull should conformablle to the in∣stitution of Almightie God be often reecaued, W. But can you denie that it is a good and vertuous acte to abstaine from receauing, for re∣uerence of this most worthy Sa∣crament? S. I do not say, that this acte is not good, but I affirme that to frequent the Blessed Sacrament for deuotion and for desire to be vnited with Christ, is much bet∣ter, for this springeth forth from loue, and that from feare: and euerie one knoweth that loue is more perfect then feare, where∣fore you should do verie well to beginne to communicate also euerie eight day as manie one most worthe he doe.
W. I am altogither vnworthy to receaue so often, S. Wherefore are you vnwor∣thie? W. Because that euerie daie I fall into many sinnes. S. If the sinnes of eight daies do hinder you from receauing the Blessed Sacrament; much more the sinnes of a whole mo∣neth or of a whole yeare, will let and hinder you, and so you shall neuer communicate. W. Nay rather by communi∣catinge seldome I shall haue more time and leasure to exa∣mine and prepare my selfe. S. O Brother thou much de∣ceauest thy selfe, for since that our nature is of it selfe inclined vnto euell, the longer that sinne reigneth in it the worse alwaies it becommeth, and the longer
time that our reckonings are de∣laied, the harder they become. Wherfore my deare Brother, if thou wilt prouide well for thy selfe, refourme thy selfe with all speed possible, for the longer that a tree groweth crooked, so much more badly & more hard∣ly is it brought vnto any straight¦nes. W. I vnderstand not what de¦ceite this is, for that I see that they which communicate often go coldly therunto without de∣uotion, & as it were of custome and they which seldome go, cō∣municate with great reuerence and deuotion, therfore it is bet∣ter to cōmunicate seldome then often. S. First this is false, for rather many of them, which for folfil∣ling the precept of the Church
do receaue once a yeere, do cō∣municate without any affection of loue, very coldly, & as it were by constraint. Moreouer if there be any which without deuotion do frequent the holy Eucharist, they do naughtilie: and I reason not of them, but of such as goe well disposed to receaue. W. If as you say, it be better to receaue often then seldome, how hapneth it that some men (which are also learned) do not praise often receauing. S. I haue neither seene nor heard that any one of iudgment and deuotion did euer dispraise this action, so holy, so profita∣ble, and so gratefull vnto God: But it may well be that some vi∣cious and sensuall persons doe not praise the often receauing of our Lord, for that thy thinke
him to be vnworthely receaued iudgeing those which frequent this Blessed Sacrament to liue as badly as they them selues do. W. You haue said well, and I know trewly that it is more se∣cure, often to cōfirme & strēgh∣then the soule with this heauen∣ly bread: but I do it not for auoi¦ding the speach of the worlde, which vseth to scorne & scoffe at those which often vse to com¦municate. S. If you will make account of that which the world saith, you shall not only loose your soule, but also your braines and your wit: do you not know how that it is the propertie of the world, as beeing ignorant of spirituall thinges, to cherish the wicked and to barke at the good? W. Neuerthelesse as long as
we remaine in the world it is ne∣cessarie to accommodate and conforme our selues vnto the world. S. Now this is meere madnes: for if the world bee one of thy three deadly enimies, how woul¦dest thou with out thy owne ma¦nifest ruine, accommodate thy selfe vnto the world and follow his liking? Doest thou knowe what a thing it is to with drawe thy selfe from frequenting the Blesled Sacrament for the vaine pratling of the world? It is no o∣ther then to be ashamed and to account it dishonour vnto thee, for to be a good and vertuous Christian,Luc. 19 wherefore with good reason Christ will be ashamed to receaue then in to heauen. W. If I should often commu∣nicate, I must necessarily giue
good example vnto others, I must be watchfull ouer my selfe, I must depriue my selfe of recre∣ation and sports, and this would make me loose my libertie, and consequently it would bring me into a consumption, or to bee old before my time. S. Albeit you do receaue but once a yeare, yet not withstan∣dinge you are bound to giue good example vnto others, and you know how great offence it is to giue scandall vnto any one. Moreouer often receuing taketh not away recreations and sports but rather it doth blesse & alow them, so that they by lawfull & honest, and where as you say that thereby we loose our liber∣tie, it is false, for that if you thinke by not communicating you may lawfully do what you
list, you deceaue your selfe, for whether you receaue often or seldome, you are bounde to shunne and auoide sinne, yea ra∣ther whosoeuer for recreation & sporting doth offend his crea∣tor looseth trew libertie by ma∣king of him selfe a shame vnto sinne, and he looseth trew mirth which proceedeth from a good conscience, which this foolish world vnderstandeth not. W. To receaue this holy Sa∣cramēt it is necessary that the par¦tie which receueth, should haue a quiet and contented minde, but this can not be often had, for the greate aduersities and ma¦nifold troubles of this life, wher¦fore it is not conuenient to re∣ceaue so often. S. The troubles and aduersi∣ties of this life & miserable ba∣nishment
ought rather to pricke vs farward to frequent this Bles∣sed Sacrament, which emongest many other effectes, giueth vs force and strength to resist all ad¦uersitie, as the Kingly Prophet well signifieth saying Parasti in conspectu meo mensam aduersus eos qui tribulant me.Psal. 22. Thou hast prepared in my sight a table a∣gainst those which trouble me for which cause in auncient time the holy Eucharist was giuen vn¦to such as were to suffer Martir dome, that they might be valiant in their torments. W. If I should once perceaue that God did cal me to commu∣nicate often, I would do it very willingly. S. But tell me I pray you when you say the Rosarie of our Bles∣sed Ladie, Visite the Churches or
els do other your deuotions, do you perceue your selfe to be cal∣led of God to do those deuotiōs W. Noe. S. Whie therefore doe you them? W. Because these things seeme good vnto me, & the Preachers do often commend and praise them. S. But receauing the Blessed Sacrament without all compari∣son, is farre better, and more pro¦fitable then all these, and it is so greately praised of all Saints and holy writers and so greatly heal∣peth vs to the obtaining of eter∣nall glorie, that most worthely the holy Church calleth it, Pig∣nus futurae gloriae the pledge of future glorie,Antiph. what calling wold you haue more then this. W. Yet notwithstāding I dare
not go often vnto this sacred ta∣ble, because I haue so many wic∣ked habites, that they make me often to commit a thousand im∣perfections. S. This I haue alreadie answe∣red in my former words: either thou doest trewly desire to haue those wicked habits taken from the, or not: If thou earnestly de∣sirest it, the most holy Sacramēt being receaued with dew prepa¦ration will giue thee such force and vertew, that thou maist ea∣silie plucke vp by the rootes all euell and wicked habits, as it is very plainly to be seene in many who by frequenting this beauen¦ly meat, of sensuall are become most spirituall persons. W. Your reasons do plainely conuince me, and very willing∣ly I would communicate, but I
feele inmy selfe no deuotion. S. You would with tendernes of hart sigh, weepe, and lament, but this is not altogither neces∣sarie, neither in this consisteth trew deuotion, which maketh any one to receaue worthelye: teares of hart are sufficiēt which are sorow for our offences pas∣sed, and a firme purpose of ab∣staining from them from hence forward: And he is trewly de∣uout who in all thinges confor∣meth him selfe to the will of Al∣mightie God, wherfore I would not haue you to abstaine from receauing because you feele nei¦ther sithes nor teares, for these (as before I haue saide) are not necessarie, and God giueth thē to whom it pleaseth him. W. To tell you the truth, I rest wholie persuaded that it is much
better to receaue often then sel∣dome but to speke sincerely that which I thinke, it is tedious vnto me, to go so often vnto confessiō, & to make other preparations to receaue worthelie the most sa∣cred body of our Lord, moreo∣uer my busines are many and some hinder me to performe this worke. S. This is a manifest temptatiō of the deuill who to depriue you of the fruit of this diuine Sacra∣ment maketh both Confession and other preparations for the blessed Sacrament, to seeme te∣dious vnto you, furthermore bu∣sines doe not hinder our good workes, but when we will our selues, for when we resolue, to frequent this sacred table, we shall easely find time enough to do our affaires with out abstai¦ning
frō this blessed Sacrament And when as we should find any difficultie wisdome willeth vs, that matters of greate impor∣tance should alwaies be prefer∣red before things of lesse mo∣ment: now then I leaue you to consider with your selfe, of what importance it is to receaue our Sauiour into our soule, Finallie remember how that the King∣dome of heauen (as our Sauiour him selfe sayeth) suffereth vio∣lence and therefore to obtaine the same,Mat. 11 we must needes take labour and paines. W. It is trew as you say and therefore I yeeld my selfe ouer come: and resolue to frequent this most wholsome Sacrament, but yet I would gladly knowe your opinion how often Ishould communicate.
S. In this you shall doe much better to take counsaile and ad∣uise of your spirituall father, and to be obedient vnto that, which he shall aduise you, and so doing you shall accompanie the recei∣uing of this Blessed Sacrament with the vertue of obedience, which is very gratefull and plea¦sing vnto Almightie God. W. But I pray you faile not to tell me your opinion therof. s. My opinion is all one with that, which is extāt in the booke de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, the author wherof was Alcumus, an ancient writer, and not S. Au∣gustine, as it is commonly cited, where it is writtē in the 53 chap∣ter after that he had said, to re∣ceaue euery day, I neither praise nor blame, he presently adioi∣ned these wordes. Omnibus ta∣men
diebus Dominicis Communi∣candum suadeo, & hortor, si tamē mens sine affectu peccādi sit. I per∣swade & exhort men to receaue euery Sonday, so that their mind be without affection & purpose of sinning: And thus it seemeth vnto me that it should be suffici∣ent for thee to receaue euery 8. day, and in the more principall feasts which happen within the weeke. If at other times thou findest deuotion and desire of communicating, thou maiest de¦maund leaue of thy Confessor, and if he shall denie thee, thou must not be so importunate, as to enforce him thereby to geue thee leaue; but it shall be much better, by obeying of him prōpt¦ly to mortifie thy selfe: Other daies and lesse principall feastes, thou maist communicate spiritu∣ally
for that therby thou wilt feele great help for thy soule. Of spirituall receauing the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. CHAP. XXII. FOR that spirituall receauing is very fruitfull and profita∣ble for soules, I will here breefly intreat therof; that deuout per∣sons knowing what it is, & how it ought to be donne, may like∣wise comfort and profite them selues therby. I will speake ther∣fore offower thinges. First wher in cōsisteth spirituall receauing. Secondly, what fruit it bringeth vnto the soule. Thirdlye, what preparatiō it requireth, and the maner how to practise it. Fourth¦ly
how gratefull it is vnto Al∣mightie God. 1 Concerning the first, it is to be noted that as well spirituall receauing, as Sacramentall com∣municating, are gronnded vpon faith: because that a partie be∣leeuing that in the Blessed Sacra¦ment remaineth our Lorde, au∣thor of all our good, he is moued to receaue him seeing that for this end he hath lefte him selfe vnder the forme of bread that we therby shold feed our soules, wherfore when as really we re∣ceaue the cōsecrated Hoast, it is called Sacramentall receauing, but when we receaue it onely with affection & desire, it is cal∣led Spirituall receauing. To re∣ceaue therfore Spiritually is no other, then to desire with affe∣ction of hart the Blessed Sacra∣ment,
that by meanes therof we might be vnited and incorpora∣ted with Christ our Lord. And after this maner are to be vnder∣stood these words of S. Ambrose Non manducans māducat. Some which eate not the body of our Lord Sacramentally, do eat the same Spiritually. 2 Concerning the second, it is to be noted that the fruit which Spirituall receauing bringeth vn¦to our soule, is the grace of the felfe same Sacrament with some other effectes, for as he which being moued by the holy Ghost beleeueth, repenteth him of his sinnes, and louin gof God, desi∣reth to be baptised, receaueth the grace of Baptisme, and this desire to be baptised is called of diuines, Baptismus flaminis; euen so the like is also in this Sacra∣ment.
It is very trew as the holy Councell of Trent noteth, Ses. 13. cap. 8. that he which com∣municateth spiritually receiueth not all the effectes of the blessed Sacrament, as he doth which be¦ing worthely disposed and pre∣pared receaueth also Sacramen∣tally, wherof I haue spoken be∣fore in the Annotation of the fourth Meditation. S. Thom. O∣pusculo. 58. cap. 19. towards the end maketh mention of three effectes of spirituall receauing. The first is remission of sinnes; The second is, deliuerie from e∣ternall death. The third is trew participation of the sacred body of our Lord to eternall saluation 3 Concerning the third, it is to be noted that the preparation and manner of spirituall recea∣uing, cōsisteth in these 5. points.
First when as the partie is readie to heare Masse, let him purpose in minde to communicate spiri∣tually praying vnto our Lord to vouchsafe to make him partaker of the fruit of this venerable Sa∣crament. Secondly brefly let him examine his conscience repen∣ting him of his defectes, and de∣maunding pardon of Almightie God, with purpose of amending & of confessing of them at dew time, and of him selfe he may do some little pennance. Thirdly, when the Preist is at the Offerto∣rie, he shall also offer vp him self vnto our Lord, praying him a∣gaine to make him partaker of the vertue of the most holy Sa∣crament, and for this end he shal pray vnto the most B. Virgin or some other of his deuoted Saints to be his intercessors. Fourthly,
when as the Priest is ready to cō¦municate, let him recollect him selfe as if he would communicat Sacramentally, and afterwarde with deuout affection let him re¦ceaue the holy Eucharist men∣tally into his soule. Fiftly & fi∣nally, let him giue thankes vnto Almightie. God. That which is here spoken of the holy Masse, is not said, for that it is necessarie for the partie which would com¦municate spirituallye, to heare Masse or to do these thinges in the time of Masse, because that he may do thē in his chāber out of Masse, & diuerse times in the day. But I haue spoken this for that spirituall receauing is more easelie donne and with greater deuotion in the time of the holy sacrifice of the Masse. 4 Concerning the fourth thing
which is, how gratfull vnro Al∣mightie God is spirituall com∣municating or desire of Recea∣uing the holy Eucharist, this I say may easely be vnderstood by these miracles. 1 S. Ambrose drawing neere vnto death, was much afflicted for that he carnestly desired to communicate, and could not ex∣presse the same by wordes, be∣cause he had lost his speach: But Almightie God three times in the night called vnto Honoratus the Bishop of Vexcells, and wil∣led him to go and giue the bles∣sed Sacrament vnto Ambrose his seruant; who seeing the sa∣cred body of our Lord, exulted in spirite and receaued the same deuoutly. 2 Marullus writeth in his 4. booke and 12 chapter, that whē
as S. Onufrius liued in the wil∣dernes of Egipt, and was most desirouse to communicate: Al∣mightie God euery eight day, sen tone of his Angells to bring him the B. Sacrament, and so he communicated at the hand of the Angell with his greate con∣tentment and comfort. 3 A Souldier called Segundo, being conuerted and baptized of the holy Martirs SS. Faustinus and Iouita, desired most earnest∣ly for to be cōmunicated: these two Saintes praied vnto God for him, and behold there came a faire Doue, which brought in her mouth a consecrated Hoast, which Faustinus (because he was a Priest) tooke with great reue∣rence, and therwith communi∣cated Segundo the Souldier. Ita Vigl. de fruct. sanct. discor. 27.
4 Iacobus de Voragine in a Ser∣mon of the holy Sacramēt, wri∣teth rhat a certaine woman ha∣uing demaunded the blessed Sa∣crament of her parish Preist and not obteining it at his handes, remained much discomforted, and retired her selfe into a cor∣ner of the Church, where shee wept and lamented bitterly: but behold a venerable Prelate en∣tered into the Church accompa∣ned with diuers Clearkes, who demanded of this woman wher¦fore she wepte, and vnderstan∣ding the cause, he willed her to come vnto the place where as the blessed Sacrament remained where taking forth a consecra∣ted Hoast, he cōmunicated her saying: Let this my body giue thee true saluatiō. By which wordes the woman vnderstood that this
Prelate was Christ our Sauiour the Curate comming afterward vnto the Altar, & finding in th Pixe but two litle Hoastes, wh as he had left three: remaine therwith much amased, and th woman exceedingly comforted Vigl. de fruct. sanct. discor. 27. 5 It is writtē in the life of Sai Laurēce the first Patriarch of  nice that the virgins of a certain MOnastarie hauinge no mean to communicate in the feast the most holy Sacrament, se humblie vnto the foresaid Patr arch to desire him in his Ma to recommend them vnto o Lord, which thing the Patriar most willingly performed, a in the middest of Masse bec rapt besides him selfe, witho being perceaued of the heare of his Masse, he went and com∣municated
one of those Virgins who being retired vnto her Cell emained in praier desiringe to eceaue the holy Eucharist. this Virgin alone receaued the bles∣sed Sacramēt, because the other Virgins were busied with other exercises. Of the principall figures of the most holy Sacra∣ment. CHAP. XXIII. 1 THE first figure of this ve∣nerable Sacrament is in the 14. of Genesis when as Abra∣ham had that notable victorie o∣uer those Kinges, and returning victorious, Melchisedech King of Salē being a Preist of Almightie
God, offered bread, and wine, & Blessed Abraha: that Melchi∣sedech was the figure of Christ proueth S. Paule Hebre. 7. that the bread and wine which he offered were figures of the body and bloud of Christ, that he also (being a King & a Preist Secun∣dum ordinem Melchisedech. Ps. 109.) offered vp to Almightie God, and afterwards left vnto vs his body vnder the forme of bread, and his bloud vnder the forme of wine, the holy fathers do generally say. This figure gi∣ueth vs to vnderstand, that to re∣ceaue Christ in the most holy Sa¦crament, and to be blessed of him, it is necessarie that we haue fought against our inordinate passions, and with Contrition & Confession drinen away sinne, as valorous Abraham draue a∣way
those Kinges his enimies. 2 The second figure of this most holy Sacrament was the bread of proposition, which was kept on the table of the Tabernacle in the sight of god. Exod. 25. Leuit 24. It was not lawful for any one to eate of this bread vnlesse he were cleane and sanctified, for which cause 1. Reg. 21. Mat. 12 it was called holy bread; and sanctified bread. By the which is signified vnto vs, that for to eate the most holy meate of the lawe of grace figured thereby, it is necessary that the partie be chast, & haue a pure conscience. 3 The third figure of this diuine Sacrament, was the Subcineriti∣all bread, which the Angell brought vnto Elias, who being comforted with the vertue of that bread, as the scripture saith
3. Reg. 19. walked fortie daies and fortie nights, euen vnto the moūtaine of God, Horeb. where afterwards he sawe our Lorde. This figure signifieth vnto vs the force and vertue which the Bles∣sed Sacrament giueth vnto vs, to walke in this laborsom pilgri¦mage, euen vnto the mountaine where we shall see God to our incredible contentment. Now then, as ordinary and common bread, 1. conserueth our tempo∣ral life. 2. augmenteth & strengh theneth vs. 3. albeit we often eate whilest we are in health, yet it is neuer loathsome: yea rather it is an ill signe when any one li∣keth not bread 4. without bread the banquet is neuer perfect al∣though it abound with all other pretious meate: Euen so this hea¦uenly meate vnder the forme of
bread, conserueth our spirituall life 2. cōferring or giuing grace which is the life of the soule, it augmenteth the same and ma∣keth it more strong against all assaultes of the deuell 3. this sa∣cred meate is neuer loathsome vnto spirituall men, and if so be that it pleaseth not the sicke, it is because that Animalis homo non percipit quae Dei sunt. 1. Cor. 2. the sensuall man perceiueth not those things that are of God. 4. Let a Christiā haue al the goods of this mortall life. yet if he haue not there with all, that which is conteined in the sacred Hoast, it is worth nothing, or rather he may trewly be accounted most miserable. Finally bread before that it commeth vnto his per∣fection, suffereth very much, for corne which is the matter of
bread, first is sowne in the groūd harrowed & couered with earth afterwards it is reaped, threshed in the flower, winnowed with the sieue, grounde in the mill, moulded or made into loaues finally it is baked in the hoate fierie ouen, wherefore it verie well agreeth with this B. Sacra∣ment, which representeth vnto vs the passion of Christ our Lord which suffered so much for vs. 4 The fourth figure was the pas¦call Lambe Exod. 12, whose ceremonies were these. The Lambe ought to bee with-out spot, of male kinde, and one yeare oulde, It was to be eaten rosted, and in haste, with wilde lettice and also with vnleuened bread, and they which did eate it, should haue their loines gir∣ded, with staues in their hand, and with shoes on their feete, by
which ceromonies God signifi∣ed vnto the Iews that they were pilgrimes and waiefairing men S. Crisostome Homelia. 83. in Matheum. Inferreth that we al∣so, ought to do after this maner If the Iewes (saith he) being on∣ly to go into Palestine did eate the Lambe with such obseruan∣ces; what vigelance oughtest thou to obserue when as thou eatest in this Blessed Sacrament the immaculate Lambe, hauing to go into heauen? So much the more, (saith the same Saint) in that most greate paines are ap∣pointed for those which vnwor∣thely do eate the same. 5 The fift figure was the Manna Exod. 16. which God gaue to the people of Israel in the desert after they had passed the red sea whilest that they went vnto the
land of promise. S. Augustine Tractatu 10. in Ioannem writeth, that the ho∣ly Eucharist is also giuen vnto vs in the desert of this life: whi∣lest that being washed with the water of holy Baptisme we go towardes heauen which is the land of promise & our countrie. That the Manna was a figure of the most holy Sacrament and the red sea a sigure of Baptisme S. Paule affirmeth. Cor. 10. The Manna had these proper¦ties. First, some gathered much and other some gathered little; but yet afterwards all found the selfe same measure. Euen so the selfe same Sacrament, and the selfe same vertue is in the whole consecrated Hoast, and in euery little particle therof. Wherfore in the Himne made
by S. Thomas it is said: Tantum esse sub fragmento, quantum toto tegitur. There is as much in eue∣ry fragment, as in the wholle. Secondly, the Manna might be gathered euery day, sauing the Saboth day: Euen so this vene∣rable Sacrament may be recea¦ued any day whensoeuer, vntill the eternall repose, signified by the Saboth, when as with hap∣pie quietnes we shall see God. Thirdly the Manna had all sorts of taste according as he desired which did eate it. Sap. 16. An∣gelorum esca nutriuisti populum tuum, & paratum panemde coelo prestitisti illis sine labore, omne delectamentum in se habentem, & omnis saporis suauitatem. O Lorde thou hast nourished thy people with the breade of An∣gels, and without labour thou
hast giuen them food from hea∣uen, which hath in it selfe all de¦light and all sweetnes of taste. 4. Many of the Iewes were pu∣nished seuerely because they dis¦pised the Manna, saying. Ani∣ma nostra nauseat super cibo isto leuissimo. Our stomake loatheth this most light meat. Euen so it hach happened vnto many, who hauing dispised the most holie Eucharist, are become either he retickes or bad Christians: And therfore S. Paule 1. Cor. 11. re∣counteth that euen in his time many died because that of este∣ming little this diuine Sacramēt they receaued it vnworthely. 6 The sixt figure was the Arke wherof S. Thomas intreatinge: sayeth.I. B. q. 102. ar. 4. ad 6 Exod. 25 Euen as the Arcke was made of wood of Sethim that is of pure & shining Cedar; euen so
the body of Christ our Lord cō∣sisteth of moste pure members. Furthermore the Arcke was gil∣ted both within & without, the which gilting signified the wis∣dome and charitie of Christ our Lord. In the Arcke were three thinges. First there was a gol∣den potte, wherin was kept con∣teined Manna, and was a figure of the soule of Christ which con¦teineth all fulnes of sanctitie and diuinitie. Secondlye, there was the Rod of Aron, the which sig∣nified the Preistlike power and authoritie of CHRIST. Thirdly ther were the two tables, which signified that Christ should be a lawgiuer. And as the Arck stood in the tabernacle couered with a vealc.Exod. 26 30.40 Euen so Christ lieth hid den in this diuine Sacrament, couered with the formes and
accidents of bread and wine. Two speciall things besides many others, the holy scripture reherfeth of the Arke, the which are also maruailously seene in this Sacrament. The first is, that God by means of the Arcke bestowed innume∣rable benefittes vpon the sonnes of Israell, not only in perticuler to that house, which receaued the Arke worthelie, as he did vn to the house of Obededō; which by the coming of the Arcke was blessed of God,3. Reg. 6 but also in ge∣nerall to all the wholle people, who passed ouer the riuer of Ior∣dan drie shod, because the Arke going before them made a way for them, and the water which came downwardes at the pre∣sence of the Arke remained firm & became like vnto a high wall.
In like maner this diuine Sacra∣ment, not onely bringeth bles∣singes to all those which wor∣thelie receaue the same into the house of their soule, but also to Prouinces & whole Kingdomes ouer whose wicked sinnes and offences God taketh not gene∣rall reuenge in respecte of this most venerable Sacrament. The second thing is that God greuously punished those which did not reuerence the Arke as in dewtie they ought: or else vsed the same vndecētly, as it is writ∣ten. 1. Reg. 4. The people of Israell hauing in one battell, which they had with the Philistians, lost fower thousand fighting men, they made meanes that the Arcke should bee brought into their tentes, thinking that by the
presence of the Arke they shold get the victorie. But it hapned cleane cōtrarie, for that the arke was taken by the enimies, and of their owte armie were killed and slaine thirtie thousand; for punishment of their little deuo∣tion and bad life. The Philisti∣ans likewise because they vsed vnworthely the Arcke of God, putting the same in their abo∣minable Temple neare vnto the Idoll Dagon were so greeuously punnished, especially the A∣zotians, that the holy Scripture saith. Aggrauata est manus Do∣mini super Azotios, & demolitus est eos.1. Reg. 5. In such sort the hand of our Lord was so aggrauated vp∣on the Azotians that it ruined them all. Furthermore the Beth samits for that they did not dew reuerence vnto the Arcke, and
because they behelde the same with curiositie, the Scripture saith.1. Reg. 6. Percussit de populo sept uagin a viros, & quinquaginta milia plebis. He strooke seuentie men of account, and fiftie thousand of the cōmon people. The selfe same hapneth vnto those which vnworthely vse and practise this dreadfull and Misterious Sacra∣ment, by receauing the same in mortall sinne, which is signified by the Idoll Dagō, because these can not dwell togither. 7 The seuenth and last figure, was the meale or flower of Eli∣zeus, for that this Prophet ha∣uing sodden certaine herbes to giue vnto the sonnes of the Pro∣phets for to eat,4. Reg. 4. and they tast∣ing of them, presentlye found them so exceedinge bitter that they cried out saying vnto Elias
Mors in olla, vir Dei. O man of God death is in the potte. For which cause the holy Prophet tooke meale and mingled the same in the pipkin and it tooke away all bitternes frō that meat, Christ of this meale being made bread, and a Sacrament: doth sweetten the bitternes of all our tribulations, and afflictions, and eauseth that they bring vnto vs not death, but life. Of the reuerence, and deuotion which auncient Saints haue vsed towardes this most diuine Sacrament. CHAP. XXIIII. THAT we may begin with the Queene of all Saintes the most B. Virgin Marie, S. Bo∣nauenture
writeth that shee was most deuout towards this de∣uine Sacrament, and that S. Iohn (to whome our Sauiour com∣mended the Blessed Virgin his Mother) said Masse and cōmu∣nicated our Blessed Ladie, who with greate humilitie and deuo∣tion receiued the most glorious body of our Lord, not for remis∣sion of her sinnes who neuer cō∣mitted any one, but to honour and thanke our Lord for the in∣numerable benefites which she had receiued, and also to impe∣trate abundance of grace and of celestiall giftes, for the new and late made Christians. S. Luke also in the Actes of the A∣postles Chapter. 2. verie suffi∣ciently declareth the reuerence and deuotion with those Chri∣stians of the Primitiue Church,
vsed towards this heauēly meat of the Altar, for that with great deuotion they often vsed to re∣ceaue the same: from hence sprang the great holines and fer¦uour of those Auncient Christi∣ans who by this meanes had got¦ten a facilitie and delight, in gi∣uing their goods vnto the poore in sustaining of iniuries, and of shedding forth their blood for the loue of Christ. It is written, of that, no lesse godly thē valiant Emperor Con∣stantine the Greate that he had such deuotion and confidence in the vertue of this misterious Sacrament, that he would neuer put his souldears into bartell a∣ray for to fight, vntill they had first done reuerence, and had a∣dored the most holy Eucharist which was consecrated in the
Masse which he caused to be said vnto his wholle armie vpon a portable Altar stone Eusebius in vita Constantini. S. Augustinae in Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium, saieth that our Saui∣our for this respect, deferred to institute this Maiesticall Sacra∣ment vntill the end of his life, to the entent that the greatenes & magnificencie therof should re∣maine better imprinted in the hartes and memorie of his Di∣sciples, and herewith should be inflamed with loue and deuoti∣on towards him. S. Hierome a litle before his death demaunded the most ho∣ly SACRAMENT, which being brought vnto him, he caused him selfe to be placed on the grounde vpon a sacke where kneeling, hee communicated,
with many teares, Eusebius i eius vita. S. Iohn Crysostome in his sixt booke of Preisthood, writeth that in his time, a venerable and deuout oulde man sawe a great multitude of Angells with great brightnes to stand about the most holy Sacrament, and bow∣ing downe them selues they did reuerence thereunto, in maner of souldiars when as their Cap∣taine is present with them, or else passeth by them. The same S. Crisostome Ho∣melia 60. ad populū Antiochenū speaketh vnto vs after this man∣ner. Thinke O man how much thou art honoured of God, and what table thou enioiest when as thou doest communicate, for that the Angells seeing it doe tremble, and by reason of the
greate brightnes which com∣meth frō thence, they dare not freely to behold it: he saith yet farther. Vnus sit nobis dolor: hac mensa priuari: For no one thing we ought to be so much greued, as when we are depriued of this table. And the same Saint Homelia. 61. calleth this Blessed Sacra∣ment, the Miracle of misteries, of the lawe of CHRIST in the which our Sauionr hath giuen vnto vs his body, to shew vnto vs the desire which he hath to∣wards vs, for to make vs the selfe same thing with him selfe which is only proper vnto those which loue most intierly: And in Ho∣melia 45. in Ioannem. he saieth that by receauing of this blessed Sacrament, we become terrible vnto very deuills, and that we
ought to rise vp from this table, in maner of Lions which brea∣theth forth fire. S. Cirill Bishoppe of Alexan∣dria, In Ioannem lib. 4. cap. 17. exhorting vnto deuotiō to ward this B. Sacrament saieth: that it doth not only driue away death, but also deliuereth vs from sick∣nes, quieteth the crewell & dis∣ordinate lawes of our members, strengtheneth our deuotion, and pacifieth the perturbatiōs of our soule. And Christ being receaued of vs, as a good Pastor which yeel deth his life for the safegard of his sheepe, deliuereth vs from the perilles of this trouble some life. S. Thomas of Aqune, Opus. 57. after that he had called the B. Sacrament a pretiouse ban∣quet, marueilous, wholsome, &
full of all sweetnes, to induce vs o deuotion towardes the same, e adioineth these wordes, say∣ng that no one Sacramente is ore holesome thē this, for that ereby sinnes are purged, ver∣ues do increase, and the soule is atted with the aboundance of ll spirituall goodnes, the sweer∣es wherof no one is able wor∣ely to expresse, for that in it irituall sweetnesse is tasted in is owne proper fountaine, He aieth moreouer, that CHRIST nowing that his disciples wold e sad and sorowfull for his de∣arture from them, he left vnto hem this Sacrament, as an only olace & consolation vnto them nd also to the wholle militant Church. Againe he affirmeth, hat this Sacramēt doth not on∣y helpe the liuing but also the ead.
S. Ignatius in Epist. 10. ad E∣phes. saieth that by this blessed Sacrament is expelled and dri∣uen away the power of Sathan, who directeth his actions, like so many fierie dartes, to induce vs vnto sinne. Cap. 25. OF the fruites of this mar∣ueilous Sacrament, many haue written. as Richardus in 4. sent. dist. 11. S. Thomas Opuse. 98. from the 21. chapter vntill the 25. But yet all may be redu∣ced vnto these twelue pointes. 1. it reuiueth, 2. it releaseth, 3. it inflameth, 4. it giueth pati∣ence, 5. it nourisheth, 6. it re∣storeth, 7. it vniteth, 8. it Com∣municateh, 9. it healeth, 10. it conscrueth, 11. it streng theneth 12. it conducteth. S. Bernard. saieth that it is the proprietie of
the holy Eucharist, to make man meet to receaue correction, pa∣tient in traiuells, ardent in loue, prompt to obey, and douout in thankes giuing. S. Vincentius, addeth an other which is, that this diuine Sacra∣ment is the best remedie of all others, to escape the paines of Purgatorie, for that by frequen∣ting of this blessed Sacrament it diminisheth the paines dew vn∣to sinnes that are past. S. Laurentius Iustinianus here noteth, that as corporall meate doth nourish vs, and causeth vs to increase, albeit that we doe not perceaue it: Euen so this di∣uine Sacrament comforteth and strengthneth oursoule with in∣crease of grace although we per ceaue it not. Cap. 26.
Now, concerning the reue∣rentiall feare which ought to be had of this so greate & so dread∣full a Sacrament, I haue haue no∣ted some things. First S. Luke in the Actes of the Apostles cap. 1. Math. cap. 27. do write, that sacrilegious Iudas, hauing alrea die suiour, and now going about to deliuer him into the Iewes handes, and did not withstanding commu∣nicate with his peruerse intenti∣on, at the end, seeing that Chirst our Sauiour was condemned, Laqueo se suspendet, crepuit me∣dius, & essusa sunt viscera eius. He hanged him selfe with a hal∣ter, burst in the middest, and all his bowels gushed forth, which were so crewell against his be∣ning Maister and benefactor. S. Paule likewise. 1. Cor. 11. writeth of the Corinthiās, that
many of them were sicke and di¦seased, and many died (not only spiritually, but also corporally) because they vnworthely recea∣ued the body of our Lord. S. Iohn Crisostome. Homeli. 6. Adpopulum Antiochenum. saith If thou art offended against Iu∣das, because he betraied Christ our Sauiour, & likewise against the Iewes because they crucifi∣ed him: what wilbecome of thee if after so many benefites which Christ our Lord hath bestowed vpon thee, by being made man, by suffering and by dying for thy loue, thou neucrthe lesie re∣ceauest him with a soule defiled with sinne? Et Homelia. 83. in Mat. he saith that God will vse great reuenge, not only against those which vnworthely do cō∣municate, but also against them
which knowing such to be wic∣ked and vnworthy do commu∣nicate vnto them the blessed Sa∣crament; furthermore he saith. Eucn as corporall meat finding the stomacke full of bad humors doth hurt and greately offend him, which receaueth it. Euca so the most holy Sacrament be∣ing spirituall meate finding ma∣lignitie and wickednes in the soule, doth ruine and destroy the same; which proceedeth by the fault of him which recei∣ueth the same with an ill dispo∣sitiō. S. Augustine affirmeth the like, in the place before cired; saying, that they sinne no lesse who receaue Christ with a hart defiled with sinne, then they did, who deliuered Christ vnto me Iewes that they should cru∣cifie him.
S. Hierome in a certaine Epistle vnto Preists, hath these words. Tell me wicked catiue (saith he) who receauest the B. Sacramēt; how darest thou with those lips tokisse the sone of God with the which thou hast kissed a strūpet? O Iudas, with a kisse betraiest thou the sonne of man. S. Bernard tractatu de modo viuendi ad sororem sermone de communione. Saith: The body of our Lord is life vnto them, in whome Christ doth liue; and it is death vnto them who by their owne faulte are members of the deuill, receauing the blessed Sa∣crament to their owne damna∣tion. Et sermone de caena Domini he saieth, they which wickedly doe communicate, with Iudas the traitor receaue poyson. And an other Doctor saith to com∣municate
in mortall sinne is no other, then to kisse Christ, after∣wardes that he hath solde him for sensuall delight. S. Thomas opuse. 58. cap. 28 de claring the great ingratitude of those which receaue our Lord in mortall sinne, speketh after this manner. Tell me (saith S. Tho∣mas) If a slaue had a Lord so lo∣uing, that besides other infinite benefits which he had done vn∣to him, should afterwards with his owne death deliuer him from hanginge: and this slaue receauing afterwardes his Lord into his house, shoulde thrust him into a filthy stable, deliuer him vnto his enimie, and they togither should tread and tram∣ple his Lord vnder their feete, would not this be ouer excee∣ding in gtatitude? But the selfe
same doth he which receaueth the B. Sacrament vnworthely Now. if you aske me, who are they which communicate vnworthely? I answere that they are all such, as being in mortall sinne, with-out Confession, or without repenting them of their sinnes, or without firme puposes of finning no more mortally, or being excommunicated, or els with euell intention do commu∣nicate. The reason is, because they do iniury vnto this so great a Sacrament, which containing Christ, who is the fountaine of all holines & puritie, ought tobe receaued with cheefe sanctitie and puritie, and this our Lorde would fignifie vnto vs, when as he washed the feete of his A∣postles before that he would cō∣municate them. Ioan. 13.
S. Cyprian sermone. 5. de Lap∣sis rehearseth. 4. Miracles which happened in his time, for cha∣stisment of those which vnwor∣thely had receaued or handled this most diuine and venerable Sacrament. S. Iohn Chrysostome Homilia 5. in Epist. ad Timothoum. saith to this purpose. Nonest audaciae saepius accedere ad Dominicā men sam; sed indigne accedere, etiam si semel quispiam in toto vitae tem∣pore accedat: It is not presump∣tion to go often vnto the table of our Lord; but it is presumpti∣on to go vnworthely, albeit one go but only once in the wholle course of his life. Et in oratione de. B. Philogom, he saith Com∣munionis Tempus non est Festum nec celebritas sed conscientia pura vit aque a peccat is repurgata. The
time for to be communicated, is not the feast nor celebritie, but a pure conscience, and a life purged from sinne. S. Hilarius, vt refertur de con secrat. dist. 2. Can. Timendum est. saith, Ne diu abstractus a corpore Christi, alienus remaneat a salute: Vnder qui peccare quieue∣rit, communicare non desinat. It is to be feared least that the ouer long deferring of the blessed Sa∣crament, should alienate a man from saluation, wherfore let him not faile from communicating, who hath rested from sinning. S. Ambrose de Sacrament is: lib. 5. cap. 4. exhorting to fie∣quent the receauing of this most holesome Sacrament, saith these wordes: Sic viue, vt merearis quotidie accipere: qui emm non meretur quotidie accipere, non me
retur post annum accipere. Liue in such manner that thon maist deserue to receaue euery day for he which is not worthie to re∣ceaue (our Lord) often, shall be lesse worthie to receaue him af∣ter a wholle yeere. The very same saith S. Angustine ist Epistola ad Ianuariū, & Sermone 28. de verbis Do∣mini. CERTAINE MIRA∣cles of the most holy Sacra∣ment, gathered out of ap∣proued Authors. CHAP. XXVII. 1 SAINT Gregory the POPE, communicating the peo∣ple, when as he came vnto a cer∣taine
Matrone, and putting out his hand to haue communicated her, said (as is also the vse at this present) Corpus Domini nostri Ie∣su Christi &c. the woman began for to laugh, but this holy Pope perceauing her laughter, drew backe againe his hand and pla∣ced that Hoast vpon the Altar. when Masse was ended he cal∣led the woman vnto him, and in the presence of the people he demanded of her, wherfore she laughed in so holy and dreadfull an action? Shee answered that she could not beleeue how that Hoast should he the body of our Lord, since that she had made the same with her owne hands. Saint Gregore presently kneeled down with the people & praied vnto Almightie God, and sod∣dainly that consecrated Hoast,
was miraculously changed into flesh: wherwith they all were a∣mazed, the woman was conuer∣ted vnto the faith, & the wholle people were much confirmed in their faith; afterwards praier be∣ing made againe, that same flesh became an HOAST againe as it was before, and the woman re∣ceaued the same with greate consolation. Ioannes Diaconus in vita Gregory Libro 2. Cap. 41. 2 S. Gregorie Naztanzene in his Oratiō of the death of Gorgo∣nia his Sister, writeth how that she being sicke of an incurable disease and hauing lost all hope of humaine healpe and remedie went secretly in the night into the Church, where prostrating her selfe before the most blessed Sacrament, she praied in such sort, that shee rose vp againe
wholle and sound with great ad¦miration vnto the whole house∣hold. 3 Venerable Bede, in Historia Angl. lib. 4. cap. 22. writeth that a yong English man called Imma was taken in a battell, and the man to whom he was prisoner, kept him fast bound in chaines vntill his ransome shold be paid him; But yet euery day at a cer∣taine hower his bandes were vn∣loosed of them selues, and Imma with great marueile vnto them all remained free. Afterward he vnderstood, that a brother of his being a Priest thinking that Im∣ma had bene slaine in the bat∣taile said Masse euery day for the deliuery of his soule out of Pur∣gatorie, and therby, at the time of the Eleuation of the sacred Hoast and Chalice, the chaines
of his brother Imma were losed. 4 A noble man of Germanie cal¦led Oswald Mulcer: When he was to communicate at Easter, was not contented with a little Hoast as other did communi∣cate, but woulde needes haue: great one. The Parish Preist for feare consented to his demaund. But at the very time of hiscōmu∣nicating when as the Preist was putting the great Hoast into his mouth, the Earth miraculously opened vnder the feet of the no∣ble man and began for to swal∣low him vp, wherewith laying his hand vpon the Altar (which was of stone) for to hold vp him selfe, the very stone became so softe that he could take no hold therby, wherfore this miserable wretch perceauing this reuenge of Almightie God, demaunded
at his hands pardon for his pride and arrogancie, and being not able to swallow downe the sa∣cred Hoast, the Preist reserued the same, and vntill this day it is kept, being coloured something with bloud, hauing also some signe where his spittel did touch it, and likewise is kept the stone of the Altar wherein is plainely to be seene, the impression of his fingers when as he woulde haue staied him selfe thereby. This Miracle happened in the villadge of Stefeild in Germanie three miles distant frō Oenipont, But some yeares past, the sacred Hoast and the Altar stone were transported to Isprug for feare of heretickes, who being enemies vnto this most venerable Sacra∣ment seeke by all meanes they can to hide & suppres the wor∣thie
miracles therof. Tilmannus Bredenbachius lib. 1. Sacrarū col∣lationum. cap. 35. 5 When as s. Iohn Chrisostome did conuert by his learned Ser∣mons and preachinge a cheefe and principall Hereticke, who had so wonderfull desire to re∣duce his wife also vnto the trew faith, that for seeing her obsti∣natly to resist it, he told her plain¦ly that vnles she would become a Catholicke he would be sepa∣rated from her. The wife fear∣ing to be diuorced from her hus∣band, feigned her selfe to be cō∣uerted, and to shew her selfe a Catholicke, went to communi∣cate with other Catholickes. But because she was afraide to receue the sacred Eucharist, she procured that a faithfull hand∣maide of hers should secretlie
bring from her house a particle of bread verie like vnto that which was giuen vnto the com∣municantes, and when it was time she couertlye tooke that bread of her seruant, and feig∣ning that it was consecrated, she put the same into her mouth, which miraculously was turned into a stone. This woman being affrighted and terrified with this Maracle, went presently vnto the holy Bishoppe S. Chrysostome, made manifest this fact vnto him and shewed him the stone, in the which was to be seene the bi∣ting of her teeth: the substance of which stone was no com∣mon matter, but altogither vn∣knowne, and the color thereof was maruailous faire: this wo∣man therefore casting her selfe downe at the feete of this holy
Bishoppe, with teares demaun∣ded pardon, and being repen∣tant for her obstinacie and wic∣ked dissimulation, was trewly conuerted, wherefore she was reconciled vnto the Church & liued Catholickely with her hus∣band. This miracle is writen by Nicephorus Calistus lib. 13. cap. 7. and by Sozomene lib. 8. cap. 5. 6 Rodolph Conte of Aspurge be∣ing one day a huntinge, there came a great tempest of raine, and meeting by chaunce with a Preist that went alone, he asked of him whether he went in that greate raine? The Preist answe∣red that he went to carrie the Blessed Sacrament vnto one of his parishioners lying sicke in the country Rodolphe presently dis∣mounted from his horse & knee ling downe vpon the ground,
he humbly adored the most ho∣ly Sacrament: Afterwardes he tooke of his owne cloacke and put it vpon the Preist, to whom also hee gaue his horse and he him selfe went by a foote to ac∣company the blessed Sacrament vnto the poore sicke countrie mans house. The good Preist, admiring the piety and courtesie of the Countie, gaue him very harrie thanks, & humbly beseech¦ed the diuine goodnes of Almigh¦ty God to rewarde him for it. (amaruailous thing) within a smal time after, Radolphe the County was chosen Emperor, his Suc∣cessors Arch-Dukes of Austria, Princes, and Kings of innume∣rable Countries. Wherefore it may trewly be saide, that the greatnes of the house of Austria sprang forth from deuotion and
pietie towardes the most holie Sacrament. Theatr. vitaehum. vo lum. 27. lib. 3. titulo Sacrorum. 7 Pascasius libro de corpore Do∣minicap 14. writeth how that a Preist very godly and holy, did pray instantlye ynto Almightie God, that for his owne comfort he might see our Lord in the cō∣secrated HOast; he obteined this fauour, and sawe our Sauiourin the forme of a most faire young child, with which sight he recei∣ued incredible consolation. The same Paschasius saieth that God is wont to do the like miracles, either for the confirmation of simple persons, as was the aboue saide miracle of S. Gregory the Pope; or els for the consolation of those, which loue him most ardently, as was the example of this good Preist.
8 S. Ambrose in the funerall Oration of Satyrus his brother saith, that as Satyrus sailed, the shippe being broken, he made shipwracke, fell into the sea, and was accounted for dead, but be∣cause he had communicated be∣fore, he was imbarked, by the vertue of the most blessed Sacra¦ment he was saued, otherwise he would haue bene drowned, as were the rest of his company. 9 A Iewe being desirous to see the misteries of Christians, went into their Church and heard de∣uoutly the Masse of S. Basill, & at the Eleuatiō of the sacred Hoast he saw therin the litle child Ie∣sus, very gratious and amiable to behold, with which vision he was incrediblie comforted, and when as the people did commu∣nicate, he also did the like, and
reserued a peice of the cōmuni∣chine for to shew vnto his wife, and telling her also the vision which he had sene of the childe Iesus, and praising the misteries of the Christians he endeuoured to cause her to beare good affe∣ction vnto them. The day folow¦ing without any longer delay, he went forth to seeke out Saint Basill, and rehearsing vnto him, the wholle successe of this mat∣ter woulde be baptised of him. Amphilochius in vita Basilis & Cirus Prodroma in his Epigrames 10 In the time of S. Bernard, there was a poore man, but a good Christiā, who by the witch crafte of his aduoutrouse wife, was greatly tormēted both day and night, by means wherofnis flesh was wholly cōsumed: This poore man was brought vnto S.
Barnard, who vnderstāding the paine which he suffered tooke compassion vpon him, making his brethren to bring him into the Church. and taking in his hand the Pixe wherin was reser∣ued the B. Sacramēt, he put the same vpon his head & presently the poore man was deliuered from all witchcraft, & made al∣togither whole that by himselfe hee went well home vnto his house. Gulielmus in vita Sancti Bernardi. lib. 1. cap. 10. 11 In the booke called Pratune Spirituale. cap. 30. It is written how that in Dade a citie of Ci∣prus was an hereticle called Isi∣dorus, who would by no means that his wife (who was a Catho∣licke) should communicate; for which cause he sett spies ouer her: vpon a time hee knowing
that his wife was gone into the house of one of his neighbours to communicate, the hereticall husband ranne forth and came vnto her, when as she had euen then communicated, wherfore being altogither furiouse, hee tooke his wife by the throate & did so gird the same, that by tou¦sing and tossinge of her to and fro hee enforced her to cast vp the blessed Sacrament, and not contented here withall, for grea¦ter contempt & dispite, be trod & trāpled vpon the B. Sacramēn but presently he saw a flame of fier which carried one high the sacred Hoast. where-with the Hereticke remained some∣what a mazed: Two daies after this fact was done, appeared vn¦to him a very blacke & terrible man, saying vnto him. Isidoro. I
and thou, are condemned vnto the one & selfe same punishmēt. But who art thou said Isidorus? he answered and said, I am he which buffeted Christ in the pre sence of Anna, wherwith Iside∣rus being afraid, he gaue him∣selfe to do very hard and sharpe penance. 12 It is written in the life of S. Clare that whē as Frederick the Emperor afflicted the Church, the Sarecens entring into Assisia had already scaled the walles of the monastery to haue dishono∣red those holy Nunnes. But S. Clare being aduised who was then Abbas of the said Nunrie, albeit she was weake and sicke neuerthelesse with sounde and firme faith she tooke the Pixe wherein was reserued the B. Sa∣crament, and placing the same
towards the place whereas the enimies were to come she prai∣ed after this maner. O Lord pre∣serue these your seruants, who for to do you seruice haue forsa∣ken the world, & for your loue are here inclosed, defend them your selfe good Lord, because that I can not defend them: and she had scarcely said these wor∣des whē as a voice was heard to say I will gard and defend you, & presently the Saracens began to slie away with such feare and dreadfulnesse,Sur. To. 4. Vial. de fruct. sanct d s. 27. that manye fell down from the walles & others were stroken so blinde that they saw not whether they went. 13 S. Malachia Bishop labou∣red much with prinate reasons to conuert a Clerke which deni∣ed that in the consecrated Hoast was Christ our Lord: but he pre∣uailed
nothing. Afterwardes he twise disputed with him, and al∣though that in both of these two disputatiōs the Clerke was plain¦ly conuinced, neuerthelesse he remained obstinate in his errors, wherfore then the good Bishop was constrained to declare him for an heretike: which thing the Clerke taking in great disdaine, said that he would neuer change his opinion, (which he said was the gospell.) Then the holy Bi∣shop with great zeale and with a loud voice said vnto him, since therfore thou wilt not confesse the truth with a good will, God make the to confesse it by force. To whom the Hereticke answe∣red, Amen. (A marueilous thing) The selfe same day the Clearke fell sicke vnto death, perceiued his error, and the chastisement
of Almightie God, caused the Bishop to be called for, confes∣sed that in the cōsecrated Hoast was Christ our Lord, both God and Man, and receauing absolu∣tion,In vita S. Mala∣chiaescrip ta per S. Bernard. and being reconciled vnto the Church hauing bewailed his errors past, & giuing God most harty thanks for this benefit, he ended his life. 14 Cesarius in sua historia. lib. 9 cap. 12. writeth that in his time certaine heretickes called Albi∣genses by their deuilish art did work diuers stranges things: & e∣mongst others, this was one, that thy walked vpon nuers without sincking, and with this wicked art they drew many simple peo∣ple vnto their heresie: wherfore a certaine zelous Preist beeing much moued, tooke the Pixe, wherin was kept the blessed Sa∣crament,
and with aloud voice spake these wordes. I coniure thee, thou wicked Deuill, in the power of him which I holde in my hand that thou leaue of these thy deceitful illusions wherwith thou ruinest these people. And when as this feruent Preist saw them not with standing to walke pon the water, he cast the Pixe ogither with the blessed Sacra∣ment into the same riuer. (A mar ailous matter) presently after hat the B. Sacrament touched he water, the riuer opened and wallowed vp all those deuilish nd wicked heretikes, by which Miracle, the people remained much confirmed in their faith. But the good Preist remained so browfull, that the wholle night e lamented his throwing of the blessed Sacrament into the riuer
Yet in the next morning he war greatly comforted, for that en∣tering early into the Church, he found vppon the Altar the Pixe with the venerable Sacrament brought thither by a Angell of God, which he with incredible ioy saw and adored, and hauing afterward made a solemne Pro∣cession with his wholle parishio∣ners, with aboundance of ioifull teares and admiration, he pla∣ced the blessed Sacramēt againe in the Tabernacle. 15 In Oruieto a Cittie in Italiey a certaine Preist saying Masse doubted whether that in the Hoast which he had consecra∣ted were our Lord, and going forward with Masse, in the brea∣king of the Hoast (as is wont to be done) there issued forth such abundāce of bloud, that it blou∣ded
the whole corporall, by the occasiō of this miracle Vrbanus guartus who was then Pope in∣stituted the feast of the most B. Sacrament cōmonly called Cor∣pus Christi day: which is vsual∣ly celebrated the next Thursday after the weeke of Pentecost: and a most faire Church was builded in the saine Cittie, where vntill this day is kept & often shewed with great solemnity, the afore∣said Corporall died with bloud. 16 Nauclerus in the Cronicle.Anno Domini 1280. writeth that in a Cittie of Flaun∣ders, called Mastrich, were a∣bout two hundred men and wo∣men a dauncing vpon the Bridg of the riuer called Mosa, who when as the blessed Sacrament passed by thē, did not only keep on their daūcing, but farther did no reuerēce vnto our Lord. and
behould at the same instant the Bridge fell downe, & of all that vnhappie multitude, was saued but one man, who was witnes of this miracle, all the other were either killed with the breaking of the Bridge, or els drowned in the riuer. 17 Optatus Episcopus Mileuita∣nus writeth a maruailous thing which happened in Africa vnto Vrbanus Formensis and vnto Fa∣lix Idecrēsis,Lib. a in Parmē. both being wicked Heretickes and Donatistes: these two wicked caitiues thinking to take away from the people all deuotion towardes the blessed Sacramente, caused before the wholle people that the holy Eu∣charist should be cast vnto their dogges, that they should eat the same (a marueilous matter) these dogges by the iust iudgment of
Almighty God, leauing the holy Eucharist vntouched, ranne pre∣sently vpon their owne maisters these two heretickes, and most miserablie mangled, and killed them, as if they had ben theeues and neuer seene before. 18 In the citie of millan was a woman which was many yeeres possessed with a Deuill, which had depriued her, both of her sight and of her hearing, and her tongue came so farre forth out of her mouth that it seemed a horrible thing to see it, like vnto the troncke of an Elephant. This woman was brought to S. Ber∣nard into the Church, wher was n very great concourse of peo∣ple. S. Bernard taking the sacred Hoast vpon the Patene, and hol∣ding the same ouer the head of the possessed partie, saied these
wordes: Wicked spirite I com∣mand thee, in the power of this our LORDE, who is thy Iudge and died for vs, to depart and to touch no more this seruant of God.In vita S. Ber∣nardi lib 2. cap. 3 Presently the Deuell de∣parted and the woman was de∣liuered. 19 Palladius in vita. S. Macharis writeth that a vertuous woman by negligence for some weekes did not communicate as before she was wōt to do, in the which time a wicked man did solicite her vnto sin, & whē as she wold not consent vnto him, for dispit and disdaine therof, he went to a Nigromant and inchaunter to work the woman some mischeif This man by his inchauntment brought to passe that this womā seemed vnto all men sightes to be a Mare, and after this maner
she remained the space of three daies with out eating, wherfore her husband and her kindred brought the woman vnto S. Ma¦charius, who first praying for her and afterward by sprinkling of holy water vpon her, she pre∣sently was free from that illusiō, and he exhorted her to frequent the B. Sacramēt: telling her, that God had permitted this trouble & affliction to happen vnto her, for that she remained .5. weeks without being communicated. 20 Anno Domini 1556. In Sa∣chazeto in the kingdome of Po∣lonia, it happened that a Christi∣an seruant called Dorothe La∣zezka after that she had recea∣ued our Lord, she presētly took the Blessed Sacramēt out of her mouth, put it into her handker∣cheif & gaue it vnto her Master
that was a Iewe, who had indu∣ced her to do this wicked fact, by promising to giue her after∣wards a new gowne, and some money besides. Now then this Iewe called vnto him .3. other Iewes Michaleco Sacao and Iose∣pho, and these foure carying the sacred Hoast into their wicked Synagog, there with daggers & kniues gaue many blowes and stroakes vpon the consecrated Hoast, from the which miracu∣ously issued forth such abun∣dance of bloud that gathering it from the ground with a spone they filled a greate vessell. But this Sacrilegious acte was pre∣sently discouered and the fower perfidious Iewes were sone ap∣prehended, who by commaun∣dement frō Sigismond then King of Polon were al burned. At that
time in the same country were many which demaunded to re∣ceaue the B. Sacrament, not on∣ly vnder the Hoast but also in the forme of wine,Surius in appen dree Che¦ronologiae Naucle∣ri prope finem. but the fame of this miracle being spred abroad they desisted from this demaūd, saying that because in the sa∣cred Hoast is seene to be bloud, it was sufficient for the Laietie in communicating, only to re∣ceaue the sacred Hoast. The like miracle happened in Flaunders in a cittie called Brus¦cels,Anno Domini. 1396. where in the Church cal∣led S. Gudula, is shewed a con∣secrated Hoast, in the which vn∣till this day is to bee seene the stroakes of a knife which Abra∣ham a Iewe gaue vnto the Bles∣sed Sacramēt vpon good Friday & as yet the bloud is to be seene in the Hoast. Of which Miracle
hath also written Guicciardinus in descriptionc Germaniae inferi∣oris: In many other citries of Europe hath happened the like as is noted in Theatro vitae hu∣manae. to. 17. lib. 9. pa. 3225. col. 1 21 Venerabilis Beda in collecta. neis sub finem. writeth how that Bonifacius the Pope cōmunica∣ting the people, a certaine yong Iewe which was there present, did communicate likewise a∣mongest the rest, who presently after that he had receaued the B. Sacrament, cried out with a loud voice saying, runne Boni∣facius to Baptise me, for that the bread which I haue receaued doth burne & cōfound me. The Iewes hearing of this matter did raise such an vprore that the fa∣ther of this young child hauing a house of fagotts, put his sonne
therin and set it on fire, which, his mother seeing began to crie out & call vpon the blessed Vir∣gine Marie that shee woulde vouchsafe to helpe and succour her sonne: but the furious Iewes cast like-wise the mother into the fire after her sonne: the ru∣mor hereof presently came vn∣to Saint Bonifacius, who in his Preistlie vestimentes (for as yet he had not put them of) came and entered into the sire and de liuered the mother & the sonne safe and sound from all hurt of the fire. 22 S. Antonie of Padoua being in the cittie of Tolosa, disputed with an heretike about the bles∣sed Sacrament, who being alto∣gither vnable to answere the argumentes of this Saint: spake these wordes. O Antonie thou
confoundest me with thy words and therfore let vs now come to some triall of deedes. Let it be done I pray you said S. Antonie: the hereticke replying saied. I haue a Mule, whom I will cause to remaine three daies without eating any meate, & afterward I will bring her into the market place, whither thou shalt come with thy Sacrament, and I with my prouender, if my Mule lea∣uing her oates shall come to a∣dore thy Sacrament, I will be∣leeue in it, and I promise thee to adore it also: In the name of our Lord let it be done said S. Anto∣nie; In the meane time this mat¦ter was published through out the wholle citie and into many places in France. The third day beeing come, both the parties came into the place appointed
with a great multitude of peo∣ple. Here S. Antonie had cau∣sed to be made an Altar, vpon the which he said Masse hauing about him very many Lords and noble men, standing with their torches ready lighted and being desirouse to see the end of this matter. S. Antonie before he did cōmunicate, stood holding the sacred Hoast in his hand, and then the heretike began to take forth his oates out of his sacke and put them before his Mule, who with greate greedines be∣gan for to eate them: But Saint Antonie turning him selfe about, full of firme faith said vnto the Mule, in the power of this Lord which remaineth in this sacred Hoast I cōmand the to leaue thy oates, and to come presently to acknowledge & adore thy Ma∣ker.
(a maruailous thing) he had scarcely spoken these wordes, whē as the Mule presētly left the prouender before her, cast forth that which was in her mouth, bowing downe her head, appro∣ched vnto S. Antonie, & knee∣ling vpon the ground made re∣uerence and adored our Lorde which was in the consecrated Hoast,S. Anto¦nius n summa hst. part 3. tit. 24 Surius Tom. 3 where with the here ticke was conuerted and the Catho∣licks exulted with ioy & gladnes 23 S. Augustin writeth how that in his time the house of Hes¦perius Tribunitius was so trou∣bled and afflicted with maligne spirits that nether man nor beast could remaine therin,22. de ci¦uitate Dei. c. 8. and how that a Preist saying Masse therin with the presence of the blessed Sacrament, freed the house alto∣gither from them. The owner
of the said house reported this miracle vnto S. Augustine. 24 Cesarius in sua historia wri¦teth that an heretike which was an inchanter being condemned to die, went away laughing, and being bound vnto the stake and in the middest of the fire wher∣with he was to be burned, He called vpon the Deuill with his wicked arte, who suddainly put out the fire, wherat the Negro∣mancer laughed much more thē before he did; But the Bishoppe being informed of this matter, brought with him the blessed Sacrament and made the fire to be kindled againe: wherfore the hereticke called vpon the Deuill againe for to helpe him, but he answered him saying, now I can not helpe thee, for that he is here present which can do more then I am able to doe.
25 In London a cittie of Eng∣land it happened that in the Church of S. Paule, a certaine Tailor being an hereticke was accused before the Archbishoppe (who thē was Thomas Arundell of Canterbury) for that he made not reuerence vnto the B. Sacra∣ment, the Archbishop most lo∣uingly exhorted him to honor so worthie a Sacramēt and the he∣reticke answered him most im∣pudentlie that the spider was more worthy to be honored thē the Eucharist, which wordes he had scarcely ended, before that an horrible spider of vnmeasura∣ble greatnes miraculously fell downe frō the roof of the church by his thred which he weaued, and went towards the sacrilegi∣ous mouth of the hereticke for to enter therein & to do reueng
for such wicked blasphemie,Tom. 2 cap. 63 contra VVicle∣sum. Thomas waldensis who with di∣uerse other Prelats was thē ther present writeth this miracle. 26 In Constantinople it was vsed that when as any consecrated particles did remaine, to call frō the schoole pure and innocent childrē to whom they gaue the particles which were left. It hap¦ed vpon a time that emongest these childrē was also the sonne of a iewe a glassmaker a cheefe enimie vnto Christians. This Iew vnderstāding that his sonne had receaued the most B. Sacra¦ment came to be so furious that being blinded with passion he cast his owne sonne into the fur¦nace of glasse which burned ex∣tremely, the mother not know∣ing of this wicked facte of her husband, went vp and downe
the Cittie searchinge for her sonne with sheding many teares and making much lamentation, the third day standinge at the dore of her shop neare vnto the fornace shee be wailed her lst sonne, and with sorowfull sithes she often named him: at length the sonne hearing the voice of his mother answered her out of the slaming fornace,This Miracle is writ∣ten of Euagri∣us. l. 4. c. 36. & of G. egori¦us Turo∣nensis & of Ne∣phrus Calistus. li. 17. c. 25. wherefore the mother ranne presently vn∣to him and seeing her sonne in the midest of the flame miracu∣lously kept and preserued was much moued with this miracle, and knowing the cause thereof she left her Iudayisme and be∣came a Christian: and this mat∣ter being related vnto Iustinian the Emperor, be caused the fa∣ther being a Iewe to be punni∣shed as a killer of his owne sone.
27 In Bauaria neare vnto In∣olstade was a certaine simple contrie man, but deuout, who by meanes of keeping of his cat¦tell could not go euerie feast to dore the Blessed Sacrament in he Masse: wherfore he secretly rocured a consecrated particle nd put the same into a hole in is staffe, which he had made or this end and purpose, and on he feasts when as he could not go vnto the Church he sticked is staffe into the grounde, he neeled downe vpon the earth with his knees, he adored the B. acrament, he said the Rosary of our Lady, and did other his euotions: he had also an other affe which serued him to guid nd direct his cattell: It happe∣ed vpon a time, that the beasts hich he kept being moued ei∣ther
with the change of the we∣ther or els by some other acci∣dent, did runne vp and downe hether and thether, he for to ga∣ther them togither first cast af∣ter thē his ordinary staffe & af∣ter that hastely the other wherin was the Blessed Sacrament, but presently perceiuing of it he be∣came very sorowfull for this fact and kneeling downe to take vp the staffe, the earth where the staffe lay suncke lower & lower & the more that he bended him selfe to it, the more it still did sincke, at length sorowfully rai∣sing vp him selfe, he saw all his cattel kneeling round about the ditch adoring our Lorde, with which Miracle this good man was much amazed, & with great lamētation went to declare this wholle matter vnto his Parish
Preist, who related it vnto the Bishoppe which presently came with solemne Procession vnto the place and with great reue∣tence and humility tooke vp the staffe wherin was the blessed Sa¦crament, and in this place for memory of this Miracle builded a goodly Church, which was cal¦led the Church of our Sauiour, hether came greate concourse of people who tooke for deuo∣tion some small quantitie of the earth of the ditch. I knowe not what Author hath written this history in Italie. But I haue ben in this place I haue sene the ditch, I haue visited this Church In the which I thinke that as yet is painted this miracle. 28 In the Citie of Nouiamage in Gelderland, In the way as the Parish Preist carried the blessed
Sacrament vnto a sicke woman, were two yong heretickes play∣ing with egges of Easter which should more speedely swallowe vp their egges. And the blessed Sacrament being past by, one of these two yong men said, I will sooner swallow vp this egge thē that wench will, that Diastro God: for so in dispite he called the B. Sacrament, and presently therewith put the egge into his mouth, which miracuously did sticke fast in his throate; and this miserable wretch fearing least that he should be choaked ther∣with, tooke a tallowe candell & put the same into his throat for to make the egge go downe (a maruailous thing) all the tallow of the candel went frō the weke and was setled round about the egge and moued it nothing at
all,This miracle hapned Anno Domini 1561. 8. die A∣prilis, et scribitur a Tillma no Bre∣dēhachio lib. 7. Sa¦crarum collet. c. 60. and ass he drew forth againe the weeke this miserable here∣ticke fell down dead, & became so blacke and so brutish that he seemed to be rather a diuel then a man. Afterwardes his throate was opened and they found the egge towards the rout of his tongue, with which chastisment Christ shewed him self to be the trew God, and not a Diastro as that wicked heretike called him 29 It is written in the booke called Promptuarium Exemplo∣rum, and Cesarius rehearseth it also, how that a certain woman perceauinge that her Bees did yeeld her litle fruite but died pi∣tifully: through the counsaile of an other, she put the Blessed Sa∣cramēt into one of her Bee hiues and coming afterward to see if her Bees had gathered any more
store of honie then before they did: she found in that hiue a lit∣tle Chappel of most white waxe which the Bees had made with marueilous arte, in the middest wherof was an Altar, with a Pie wherein was the Blessed Sacra∣ment. The Bishoppe being ad∣uertised hee of came in Proces∣sion to take forth the Blessed Sa∣crament, and caried the same in to the Church with cōmon ioy & reioicing of the whole people 30 Vnto that which now last∣ly I meane to speake of, I my selfe haue bene an eie witnesse: In Rome Anno Domine 1563. In the Hospitall of S. Iohn Lateran A young Turke about twentie yeares oulde hauing remained some yeares in Ancona with his father a marchant of Turkie, in the end fled from his father vnto
Rome where finding no other re∣fuge, he put him selfe to serue a Gentlemā, with whom he went to Church, heard Masse, and be∣cause he had perfectlye gotten the Italian tongue, he was com∣monly accounted for a Christiā: After some fewe monethes this young Turke fell sicke, and his maister sent him vnto the Hospi∣tall, where he was receaued and also aduised by the master of the Hospital to prepare him selfe for to be confessed & to receaue, for so was the order of that house, The young man for feare least that he should haue bene cast of and reiected, promised to do so, and did it without any discoue∣ring of him selfe to be a Turke, (a marucilous matter) presently after that he had receaued the Blessed Sacrament, he demaun∣ded
to be Baptized, with such zeale and feruour that he could hide him self no longer but pub∣lickly affirmed that hee was a Turke. The master of the Hos∣pitall thinking that he had not bene well in his wittes, sent me who came as a companion of a Father (which preached on the festiuall daies in the said Hospi∣tall) to quiet and pacifie him. The yong man rehearsed vnto me all that which heere I haue said, and desired me to solicite his baptising, affirming vnto me that he foūd great burning with in him, and that therfore he was not able to rest or repose him selfe. The Chapline hauing well examined the matter, and fin∣ding that he had bene circumci∣sed, did baptise him, who hauing receaued holye Baptisme, was
quiet & died the next day. An Admonition to the Christian Reader. Cap. 28. REMEMBER (Christiā Rea∣der) that as thou art com∣posed of Soule & of body; euen so thou hast two liues; the one temporall subiect to a thousand casualties: The other spirituall, subiect also to many imperfecti∣ons and miseries. That consist∣eth in the vniō of the soule with the body which was made in the wombe of thy mother: when as God creating thy soule, did v∣nite it vnto thy body: This con∣sisteth in the vniō of grace with thy soule, which is made in the lappe or bosome of the Church our mother, when as in the Sa∣cramēt
of Baptisme, God infu∣sed grace into thy soule. Both the one & the other life, as they haue their contraries & enemies so haue they conuenient reme∣dies. God therefore foreseeing, that the enemies of our spirituall health & life (which are sinnes) would often times preuaile; As a Phisition no lesse skilfull then mercifull, emongest many other helpes hath instituted two Sacra¦ments for remedie of our spiri∣tuall life. One of holy Confessiō, An other of the B. Sacrament; that to giue spirituall life (which is none other then to liue in the grace of God;) and it is perfor∣med by driuing away sinne and by conferring of grace: This: to conserue the same life; which is done by feeding our soule & by giuing it force to resist tentatiōs.
But that which now a daies is greatly to be lamented, is, that albeit the spirituall life of our soule is more worthy & of grea∣ter importance then the tempo∣rall life of this miserable body, yet neuertheles men make little account thereof, and diuersly prefer the other before it; What oth not a sicke person for the ecouery of his corporal health? He spareth no charges, he regar∣eth no traiuells, he careth for o bitternes of medicines, and e easely endureth the launcing f sharp rasors, and the burning f hoat irons; he seeketh out and ndeth for most skilfull Phisiti∣ns, and he procureth to haue all nd of most exquisit medicines: nd all this he doth for getting f corporall health, which whe∣er he will or no indureth for a
small while, and that, with in∣finite labour and trauaile. Tell me now therfore O Christian Reader, if for the recouery of our spirituall health thou vsest so greate diligence? Iudge then if this be not a matter worthely to be lamented: I will not here by discoursing search and seeke out the cause of this greate careles∣nes, whether it be for want of beleefe or else for want of consi∣dering those thinges which our holy faith teacheth vs: But for cōclusion of this my smal worke I do giue thee this aduise and counsaile; if thou desirest as thou oughtest to desire, to obtaine spi¦rituall health and life go often to Confession: and if thou desirest to keepe and preserue this life, do thou also cōmunicate often: for beleeue me, in the Church of
Christ is no better meanes, nor yet any more forcible reason, to haue security of sauing thy soule (as farre as possiblie it may be had in this daungerous life) then to frequent (as they ought to be) these two Sacraments in confor∣mation whereof I will here set downe that which is written in the booke called Promptuarium Exemplorum. Two yong studi∣ents, being deuout and deare frendes, bargained together, that the first of them which died (God permitting of it) shoulde ome and giue notice vnto the other of his estate: One of these happened to die, and seuenteene daies afterward appeared most right vnto his Companion say∣ing vnto him. I by the grace of God am saued, and enioy alrea∣die the glorie of heauen: the o∣ther
saying vnto him, in what thing didest thou please God most whilest that thou liuedst vpon earth; he answered, in fre∣quenting of the Sacraments, and cheefly by often recea¦uing the B. Sacrament with deuotion & be∣ing farre from all sinne. Vigl. de fruct. san. dis. 27.
THIS WHICH FOLOW¦eth is takē forth of S. Thomas de Aquino Opusc. 57. In the which is the Office and the Masse of the most holy Sacra∣ment. the one and the other were cōposed of him by the commaundement of the holy Pope Vrban the 4. which in∣stituted the feast of the most holy Sacrament. The Himne at the first Euensong. PANGE lingua gloriosi, Corporis mysterium, Sanguin: sque pretiosi, Quem in mundi pretium, Fructus ventris generosi, Rex effudit gentium. Nobis datus, nobis natus, Exintacta Virgine.
Et in mundo conuersatus, Sparso verbi semine, Sui moras incolatus, Miro clausit ordine. In supremae nocte cenae, Recumbens cum fratribus, Obseruata lege plene Cibis in legalibus, Cibum turbae duodenae Se dat suis manibus. Verbum caro panem verum; Verbo carnem efficit, Fitque sanguis Christi merum Et si sensus deficit; Ad firmandum cor sincerum, Sola fides fufficit. Tantum ergo Sacramentum Veneremur cernui: Et antiquum documentū Nouo cedat ritui: Prestet fides supplementū Sensuum defectui. Genitori, genitoque
Laus, & iubilatio, Salus, honor, virtus quoque, Sit, & benedictio, Procedenti ab vtroque Compar sit laudatio. Amen. The same in English. OF Christ his body glorious Sing my tong the mistery And also of his pretious blood, Which the worlds price to be, The king of natiōs did shed forh Fruit of noble wombe was he. On vs bestowed & for vs borne, Of a maid vntoucht indeed, Conuersant vpon the earth, Sowing of his word thee seed, And of his time of being here, Strangely he the end decreed. The night he with his brethren sate: And his supper last did make:
In full obseruance of the law, Law-assigned meates did take, Himself food to Apostles twelue With his handes he did betake. The woord now being flesh be∣come, So very bread flesh by the word And wine the Blood of Christ is made, Though our sense it not affoord: But this in hart sincere to fix: Faith sufficeth to accord. Wherfore a Sacrament so great, Humbly prostrate we adore, And vnto rites begun of late, Sawes must yeld that were be∣fore: And where our sence is seene to false There must faith supply restore. Vnto the Father and the Sonne Ioy and praise ascribed be,
And sauing health honor and power, As also benedicite: And to him that from both pro∣ceedes, Praises like acknowledge we. Amen. The Himne at Mattens. SAcris solemnijs iuncta sint gaudia, Et ex praecordijs sonent praeconia, Recedant vetera, noua fint omnia, Corda, voces & opera. Noctis recolitur cena nouissima, Qua Christus creditur agnum, azima Dedisse fratribus, iuxta legitima Priscis in dulta patribus. Post agnum typicum expletis epulis, Corpus dominicum datum disci∣pulis,
Sic totum omnibus, quod totum singulis, Eius fatemur manibus. Dedit fragilibus corporis fercu∣lum, Dedit, & tristibus sanguinis po∣culum, Dicens, Accipite quod trado va∣sculum, Omnes ex eo bibite. Sic sacrificium istud instituit, Cuius officium committi voluit Solis presbyteris, quibus sic con∣gruit, Vt sumant, & dent caeteris. Panis angelicus sit panis hominū: Dat panis caelicus figuris termi∣num, O res mirabilis manducat Domi num, Pauper seruus, & humilis. Te trina deitas, vnaque; poscimus Sic nos tu visita, sicut te coli∣mus,
Per tuas semitas duc nos, quo ten∣dimus, Ad lucem quam inhabitas. Amen. The Himne at the Laudes. VERBVM supernū prodiens, Nec patris linquēs dextrā Ad opus suum exiens, Venit od vitae vesperam. In mortem a discipulo, Suis tradendus emulis, Prius in vitae ferculo, Se tradidit discipulis. Quibus sub bina specie, Carnem dedit, & sanguinem, Vt duplicis substantiae, Totum cibaret hominem. Se nascens dedit socium, Conuescens in edulium, Se moriens in pretium. Se regnans dat in praemium.
O salutaris hostia, Quae coelis pandis ostiume Bella praemunt hostilia, Da robur, fer auxilium. Vni trinoque domino, Sit sempiterna gloria: Qui vitam sine termino, Nobis donet in patria. Amen. The sequence after the Epistle of the Masse. LAVDA Sion Saluatorem, Lauda ducem & pastorem, In hymnis, & canticis. Quantum potes, tantum aude, Quia maior omni laude, Nec laudare sufficis. Laudis thema specialis, Panis viuus, & vitalis, Hodie proponitur. Quem in sacrae mensa cenae, Turbae fratrum duodenae,
Datum non ambigitur. Sit laus plena, sit sonora, Sit iucunda, sit decora, Mentis iubilatio. Dies enim solemnis agitur; In qua mensae prima recolitur Huius institutio, In hac mensa noui regis, Nouum Pascha nouae legis, Phase vetus terminat. Vetustatem nouitas, Vmbram fugat veritas, Noctem lux eliminat. Quod in cena Christus gessit, Faciendum hoc expressit, In sui memoriam. Docti sacris institutis, Panem vinum in salutis, Consecramus hostiam. Dogma datur Christianis, Quod in carnem transit panis Et vinum in sanguinem. Quod non capis, quod non vides,
Animosa firmat fides, Praeter rerum ordinem, Sub diuersis speciebus; Signis tantum, & non rebus, Latent res exineiae. Caro cibus sanguis potus, Manet Christus tamen totus, Sub vtraque specie. A sumente non concisus, Non confractus, non diuisus, Integer accipitur. Sumit vnus, sumunt mille, Quantum isti, tantum ille; Nec suptus consumitur. Sumunt boni, sumunt mali, Sorte tamen inaequali, Vitae, vel interitus. Mors est malis vitabonis. Vide paris sumptionis, Quam sit dispar exitus. Fracto demum Sacramento, Ne vacilles, sed memento, Tantum esse sub fragmento,
Quantum toto tegitur. Nulla rei fit scissura, Signi tantum fit fructura Qua nec status, nec statura, Signati minuitur. Ecce panis Angelorum, Factus cibus viatorum: Vere panis filiorum, Non mittendus canibus. In figuris praesignatur, Cum Isaac immolatur: Agnus Pascha deputatur, Datur manna patribus. Bone pastor panis vere, Iesu nostri miserere: Tu nos pasce, nos tuere: Tu nos bona fac videre, In terra viuentium. Tu qui cuncta scis, & vales, Qui nos pascis hic mortales, Tuos ibi commensales, Cohaeredes, & sodales, Fac sanctorum ciuium. Amen.
The same in English translated by the Reu. Fa. R. S. PRaise, O Sion, praise thy Sa∣uiour, Praise thy Captaine and thy pa∣stour, With hymnes and solemne har∣mony. What power affords performe indeede, His workes all praises farre ex∣ceede, No praise can reach his dignity. A speciall theam of praise is read A liuing and life giuing bread, Is on this day exhibited Within the supper of our Lord, To twelue disciples at his bord, As doubtles twas deliuered. Let our praise be loud and free, Full of ioy and decent glee, With minds and voices melody, For now solemnize we that day, Which doth with ioy to vs dis∣play,
The priuy vse of this mistery, At this borde of our new ruler, Of new Law, new pascall order, The ancient rite abolisheth, Old decrees by new annild, Shadows are in truth fulfilled: Day former darknes finisheth. That at supper Christ performed To be done he streightly char∣ged, For his eternall memorie, Guided by his sacred orders, Bread and wine vpon our Altars To sauing host we sancttifie, Christians are by faith assured, That to flesh the bread is chan∣ged, The wine to blood most preti∣ous, That no wit nor sence concea∣ueth, Firme and grounded faith beli∣ueth,
In strange affects not curious. Vnder kindes two in appearāce Two in shew but one in substāce Be things beyond comparison: Flesh is meate, blood drink most heauenly: Yet is Christ in each kinde whol¦ly, Most free from all diuision. None that eateth him doe chew him, None that takes him, doth de∣uide him, Receiued he whole perseuereth, Be there one or thousandes hou soled, One as much as all receaued, He by no eating perisheth. Both the good and bad receue, him, But effectes are diuers in them True life, or true destruction, Life to the good, death to the wicked:
Marke how both alike receiued With farre vnlike conclusion. When the Priest the hoast deui∣deth, Know that each parte abideth: All that the wholle hoaste co∣uered, Forme of bread not Christ is bro¦ken, Not of Christ but of his token, Is state or stature altered. Angels bread made Pilgrimes feeding, Truly bread for childrens eating To dogs not to be offered: Signd by Isaake on the Altar By the Lambe and paschall sup∣per, And in the manna figured, Iesu foode and feeder of vs, Heere with mercie feede and frinde vs, Then grant in heauen felicitie,
Lord of all whom heere thou fee dest, Fellow heires, guests with thy dearest, Make vs in heauenly company. Antiphona. Ego sum panis viuus, qui de coelo, descendi, si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in aeternum. V. Panem coeli dedit eis. R. Panem Angelorum mandu∣cauit homo. Oratio. ECclesiae tuae quaesumus Domi∣ne vnitatis, & pacis propitius dona concede: quae sub oblatis mu∣neribus mystice designantur. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Chri∣stum, &c. Antiphona. O sacrum cōuiuium, in quo Chri∣stus sumitur; recolitur memo∣ria Passionis eius; mens imple∣tur
gratia, & futurae gloriae, no∣bis pignus datur. V. Educas panem de terra. R. Et vinum laetificet cor hominis. Oratio. FAc nos quaesumus Domine di∣uinitatis tuae sempiterna frui∣tione repleri, quam pretiosi corpo∣ris, & sanguinis tui temporalis per ceptio praefigurat. Qui viuis & regnas cum Deo Patri, &c. ANima Christi sanctifica me Corpus Christi salua me, Sā¦guis Christi inebria me, Aqua la∣teris Christi laua me, Passio Chri∣sti conforta me: O bone Iesu exau∣dime, intra vulnera tua abscōde me, ne permittas me separari a te, Ab hoste maligno defende me, In hora mortis meae voca me, & iube me venire ad te, vt cum sanctis tuis laudem te in saecula saeculo∣rum. Amen.
REMEMBRANCES OF Mother Teresa di Iesu: whoe was foundres of the barefooted Carmelitā Nunnes for her mo∣nasteries translated first out of Spanish into Italian, and now in to English for the profit of euery deuout Soule. 1 THE earth vntilled being neuer so fertil bringeth forth but brambles and thornes: euen so is the vnderstanding of man. 2 To speake well of all spiritual thinges: as of Religious persons and Preists. 3 Emongst a multitud to speke alwaies litle. 4 To be modest in euery thing
which thou shalt doe, or man∣nage. 5 Neuer to be ernest in things of small importance. 6 To reason with euerie one with moderate cheerfulnes. 7 To scoffe or iest at nothing. 8 Not to reprehend any, with∣out discretion humilitie, and thy owne confusion. 9 To accommodate thy selfe to the Complexion of the partie with whom thou hast to deale, for the seruice of God, with the cheerefull to be merrie, with the melancholie, sad; finally to be all, vnto all, to gaine all. 10 Neuer to speke vnles thou hast first well thought of it, and cōmended vnto God our Lord what thou mindest to say, to the entent that thou speakest no∣thing that may offend him.
11 Neuer to excuse thy selfe without very probable cause. 12 Neuer to speake any thing of thy selfe that maye deserue praise, as of thine owne know∣ledge, vertue, linage, vnles thou hast some probable hope to reap therby some commoditie; and then doe it with humilitie, and consideration, because they are gifts which come frō the handes of God. 13 Neuer to amplifie any mat∣ter, but moderatelye to speake what thou thinkest. 14 In all thy conferences and cōuersations, to mingle alwaies some spirituall thing, & so thou shalt auoide many idle wordes, and murmurations. 15 Neuer to affirme any thing before thou knowest well. 16 Neuer to intermedle to giue
thy opinion in any thing, vnles thou art desired: or els charitie requireth it. 17 When as any one speketh of spirituall thinges, to harken vn∣to it with humilitie, and like a scholler to learn that for thy self which he shall speake well and maketh for thy purpose. 18 To discouer and open vnto thy Confessor and Superiour all thy tentations, imperfections & repugnances, that he may giue the remedie and counsaile to o∣uercome them, 19 Neuer to remaine out of the Cell, neither to go forth therof without cause, and when thou goest forth to demaund helpe of Almightie God that thou maiest not offend him. 20 Neuer to eate nor drincke but at thy vsuall times, and then
to geue great thankes vnto Al∣mightie God. 21 To do all thinges as if thou wert in the presence of Almigh∣tie God, and by this means thou shalt gaine much vnto thy soule. 22 Neuer to harken vnto him, which speaketh ill of any one, neither to say euill of any but of thy selfe, and when thou reioi∣cest rhereat, it is a good signe that thou doest profite. 23 To direct euery work which thou shalt do, vnto Almightie God, by offering it vp vnto him, and desiring that it may be to his honour and glory. 24 Let not thy mirth be with immoderate laughing; but with cheerfulnes, that is humble, mo¦dest, affable, and of good edifi∣cation. 25 Alwaies to imagin that thou
art a seruant vnto all men, and in all and euery one to consider the person of Christ our Lord; that therby thou maist beare re∣spect and reuerence towards all. 26 To be alwaies readie to doe obedience, as if Christ Iesus in the person of thy Prior or Prelat should commaund thee. 27 To examine thy conscience in euery worke which thou shalt doe, & in euery hower, & know¦ing thy defects, to procure with the helpe of God, to amend thē, and by this way thou shalt ariue vnto perfection. 28 Not to thinke of others im∣perfections, but to cōsider their vertues, and thy owne defectes. 29 To haue alwaies a great de∣sire to suffer some thing in euery matter & occasion, for the loue of Christ.
30 Euery daye to offer vp thy selfe many times vnto Almigh∣tie God, and this with great fer∣uour and desire of God. 31 That which thou medita∣test on, in the morning to haue it present with thee, the wholle day afterwardes, and to vse all diligence herein, because it is a thing of great profite. 32 To cōserue diligently those good motions which our Lord doth send thee, and to put in ex∣ecution those desires, which he shall giue thee in praier. 33 Flie alwaies singularitie as much as is possible, because it is a great hurt for the whole cō∣munaltie. 34 To read often times the or∣ders and rules of thy Religion, & to be very carefull to obserue them.
35 To consider in all created thinges the prouidence & wis∣dome of God, and in them all to praise him. 36 To seperate thy harte from the loue of all thinges, and to indeuour to find Almighty God 37 Neuer to make shewe out∣wardly of deuotion which thou hast not inwardly: thou maiest very well keepe secrete thy in∣ward deuotion. 38 Neuer to shew but in case of necessitie thy internall deuotion because as S. Frances and S. Ber¦nard do say, Secretū meum mihis My secret is to my selfe. 39 Not to cōplaine if thy meat be not well dressed, rembringe the gall and viniger of CHRIST IESVS. 40 Sitting at the Table not to speake to any person, neither to
lift vp thy eies to behold others. 41 To consider the table of hea¦uen and the meat therof, which is Almightie God, & the guests which are holy Saintes and An∣gels, to cast vp thy eies vnto this table and earnestly desire for to sitte therat. 42 In the presence of thy Supe∣riour (in whome thou oughtest to consider Christ Iesus) not to speake, but for necessitie, and with great reuerence. 43 Neuer to doe any thinge, which may not be done before all men. 44 Not to make comparison be¦twixt this man, & that man, be∣cause comparisons are odious. 45 When thou shalt be repre∣hended by any: to harken vnto him with humilitie both inter∣nally & externally, and to pray
for him that hath reprehended thee. 46 When one Superiour com¦maundeth any thinge, not to say that an other hath comman∣ded the contrarie, but to thinke that both of them haue good in∣tentions, and obey them both as much as thou canst. 47 Not to be curious in speak∣ing or demaundinge of thinges which belong not vnto thee. 48 Let thy life passed be present before thy eies, for to lament it, and also thy present coldnes, & how much thou wantest to be fitte for to go to heauē, because these are causes of great good∣nes. 49 To doe alwaies what those of the house shall require thee; so that it be not against obedi∣ence; and to answere them al∣waies
with humilitie and meek∣nes. 50 Neuer to demaund without greate necessitie, any perticuler thinges, either in eating or clo∣thing. 51 Neuer to cease from hum∣bling and mortifyinge thy selfe in all thinges vntill death. 52 To get a custome to do ma∣me actes of loue towardes thy Neighbour and God, because they inflame and make tender thy hart, and to do the like of all other vertues. 53 To offer vp all thinges vnto the eternall Father, in vnion of the merittes of Iesus Christ, his onely begotten sonne. 54 To be meeke and courteous with all others, and sharpe and rigourous vnto thy selfe. 55 In the feastes of Saintes to
consider theire vertues, and in grace to demaund thē at Gods hand. 56 To haue greate care euery euening to examine well thine owne conscience. 57 The praier which thou hast to make the morninge before that thou receauest, shall be to consider how that thou which art a most vile & miserable crea∣ture, hast neuertheles to receaue thy God: and the night folow∣ing it shall be to remember how that thou hast receiued thy Lord and maker. 58 If thou art a Superiour ne∣uer reprehend any one in choler but when as it shall be past, and by this meanes thy reprehensiō will be profitable. 59 Earnestly to procure to get perfection & deuotion, & ther∣with
to dispatch all affaires. 60 To exercise much thy selfe in the feare of God, and it will bring thy soule to compunction and humilitie. 61 To consider well how soone mens mindes are changed, and how litle thou oughtest to trust vnto them, and therfore to haue great confidence in God, who is neuer changed. 62 To deale those things which belong vnto thy soule, with thy Spirituall and learned Confessor and to communicate with him all: folowing his aduise & coun∣faile in all thinges. 63 Euery time that thou doest communicate to demaunde of God some gift, for that his great mercies sake wherwith he vout∣safe to come vnto thy soule. 64 Albeit thou hast many ho∣ly
Saintes for thy Aduocates, yet in perticuler be thou deuo∣ted vnto S. Ioseph who will ob∣taine of God great grace for the 65 In time of melancholines & perturbation, neuer to leaue of thy accustomed good workes of penance & praier and such like: because the Deuill will disquiet thee to thentent that thou shoul¦dest leaue them: wherfore fol∣low them more at such times, & thou shalt see that our Lord will soone fauour thee. 66 Not to communicate or im∣parte thy temptations and im∣perfections with weaklings and imperfect persons in the house; because it will harme thy selfe and hurt others, but with those which are the most perfect. 67 Remember that thou hast but one soule, that thou art to
die but once, that thou hast but one short life and that perticu∣ler to thy selfe, neither is there more then one glorie, which is eternall. 68 Thy desire shall be to see God; thy feare shall be to loose him; thy greife shalbe that thou doest not possesse him: and thy ioy in that which bringeth thee vnto God; and so thou shalt liue in great peace. He that will reape fruite by these Documentes, must read them once ouer euery weeke.
Certaine Iaculatorie praiers writ∣ten by the Reu. Fa. R s. GRatious Lord and sweete Sauiour, giue me a pure in∣tention a cleane hart, and a re∣gard to thy glory in al my actiōs Iesu possesse my minde with thy presence, and rauish it with thy loue that my delight may be to be imbraced in the armes of thy protection. Iesu be thou light vnto mine eies, musicke to my eares, swet∣nes to my taste, & contentment to my hart. Iesu I giue thee my body, my soule, my substance, my fame, my frends, my libertie, and life, dispose of me & all that is mine as shall be most to thy glory. Iesu I am not mine but thine, claime mee as thy right, keepe
me as thy charge, loue me as thy child. Iesu fight for me when I am assaulted, heale me when I am wounded, reuiue me when I am spirituallye killed, receaue mee when I flie, and let me neuer be quite confounded. Iesu giue me patience in trou¦ble, humilitie in comfort, con∣stancie in temptations, & victo∣rie against my ghostly enemies. Iesu giue me modesty in coū∣tenāce, grauity in my behauiour deliberatiō in my speaches, pu∣ritie in my thoughtes, righteous¦nes in my actions. Iesu be my sunne in the day, my food at the table, my repose in the night, my clothing in na∣kednes, my succour in all needs. Iesu let thy blood runne in my mind as water of life, to cleanse
the silth of my sinnes, & to bring forth the fruit of life euerlasting. Iesu stay my inclinations frō bearing downe my soule: bridle mine appetites with thy grace, and quench in me the fire of all vnlawfull desires. Iesu keep my eies from vaine sightes, my eares from hearing euill speaches, my tongue form talking vnlawfull thinges, my sences frō euery kind of disorder Iesu make my will pliable to thy pleasure, & resigned wholly to thy prouidence, and graunt me perfect contentment in that which thou allottest. O Lorde make me strong a∣gainst occasions of sinne, & sted fast in not yelding to euill, yea rather to die then to offend the. Iesu forsake me not lest I pe∣rish, leaue me not to my owne∣nes,
lest I fall without recouery. Iesu graunt me an earnest de∣sire to amend my faultes, to re∣nue my good purposes, to per∣forme my good intentions, and to be ginne a fresh in thy seruice Iesu directe mine intention, correct my errors, erecte my in∣firmities, protect my good en∣deuours. Iesu make me humble to my Superiors, frendly to my equals charitable to my inferiors, and carefull to yeld dew respecte to all sortes. Iesu graunt me sorow for my sines, thankfulnes for thy bene∣fittes, feare of thy iudgementes, loue of thy mercies, and mind∣fulnes of thy presence. Amen. Laus Deo Opt. Max. Bea. Virg. Mariae omnibus{que} Sanctis. Amen.
