20098 99851267 16537
THE HISTORY OF POLYBIVS THE MEGALOPOLITAN. The fiue first BOOKES entire: With all the parcels of the subse∣quent Bookes vnto the eighteenth, according to the GREEKE ORIGINALL. Also the manner of the Romane encam∣ping, extracted from the discription of POLYBIVS. Translated into English by Edward Grimeston, Sergeant at Armes. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes for Simon Waterson. 1633.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM LORD CRAVIN, BARON OF HAMSTEED∣MARSHALL, &c. MOST WORTHY LORD, PArdon I beseech you, if (being a stanger and vnknowne vnto you) I haue presumed to inscribe your title on the Frontespiece of this Booke, to publish it to the world, vn∣der your Lo, fauourable protection. I confesse my disability might well haue deterred me: But the reason which induced me to this presumption, was your noble and generous inclination to Armes (being the subiect of this Hi∣story) wherein you haue carried your selfe so worthily in many great and dangerous exploits, in forraine parts, vnder two of the greatest Commanders of Christendome, as you haue done great honour to your Country, and won vnto your selfe perpetuall fame and reputation. This Conside∣ration hath made me confident, that during your vacancy from Military actions, your Lordship will vouchsafe to cast your eye vpon this History written by Polybius, who (in the opinion of most men of Iudgement) hath beene held to be very sincere, and free from malice, affection or passion. And to iustifie the truth thereof, he protests that he was present at many of the actions, and receiued the rest from confident persons who were eye-witnesses. It is a generall History of his time, of all the warres which past
in Asia, Greece, and the Romane State, against the Gaules, and Carthaginians, which two Citties contended for the Empiry of the world: which warre was of longer conti∣nuance, and had more cruell and variable encounters and battailes than any that hath beene written of: For the first Punique warre (where they fought for the Con∣quest of Sicily) lasted foure and twenty yeeres; and the second in Italy vnder Hannibal, Generall for the Carthagini∣ans, continued seuenteene yeeres, to the subuersion (in a manner) of the Romane State, had not Scipio forced Han∣nibal to returne home to defend his owne Carthage, where in Battell he lost the glory of all his former Victories, and brought his Countrey into the subiection of the Romanes. This worke I present vnto your Lordships fauourable Censure, humbly praying that you will be pleased to beare with my harsh and vnpolished stile, and to pardon the errors committed at the presse during my absence: for which fauour I shall hold my selfe much bound vnto your Lordship, and will alwaies remine Your LordPs. most humbly deuoted to doe you seruice, EDW. GRIMESTON.
Levves Maigret a Lionnois to the FRENCH Nobility. GEntlemen, wee are all borne by nature to so much po∣uerty, and inuolu'd in so many miseries, as there is no worke of Man, how small soeuer, which giuing order to his meanest actions, doth not minister oc∣casion of some Esteeme. So as whereas his diligence guided by reason, shall finde it selfe crost, I know not by what power, which commonly fortune vsurpes ouer the iudgement and considera∣tion of Man, wee may (as we thinke) iustly blame it, in excusing with compassion the workeman and his misfortune. And if on the other side, to shew her great magnificence and bounty, she imparts her fauours  r∣der or faire course, seekes to bring some Enterprize to an end, so as that notwithstanding his ouer-weaning and folly shee makes it per∣fect: Then we hold her prodigall, detesting her vnreasonable and inconsiderate bounty, grieuing at her benefits so ill imployed. Behold how, (I know not by what law receiued among men) wee commend or blame euery one in his profession and workes, so farre forth as they see his industry and diligence imployed or defectiue. If wee haue reason then in so great Esteeme, as wee seeke it in all our actions, and in matters of the smallest consequence, blaming him that neglects it: How infamous wee hold the carelesnesse and neglect of a man in the order and conduct of affaires, wherein not onely the ruine of his estate, life and honour, but also that of his Countrey, Parents, and Friends, and finally of his Prince and Soueraigne, is many times brought into great danger? But if there be no Enterprize among those which Men pursue, wherin such things ought to bee drawne into Consideration, as proper and ordinary vn∣him, and without the danger whereof hee can reape no benefit, I am of opinion that that of warre ought in reason to bee preferred be∣fore
all others: Although there bee many, which cannot alwaies be brought to a good end, without the hazard and danger of those which pursue them. In truth it is a profession, which experi∣ence hath taught in all Nations, to bee so rough and fierce, and finally so difficult to mannage, as neuer man could carry him∣selfe so discreetly, nor with so great fortune, nor recouered such rich spoiles, nor obtained such Triumphant victories, but they haue purchased him new causes of Care and feare, not onely of great Enuie, and of new Enemies, but also losse and ruine. I will not speake of the irreparable defeate of the brauest Men in an Armie, which a Victory worthy of renowne requires, as it were by aduance, when as the Enemies performe the Duties of good souldiers. The Carthagians thrusting an Army into Sicily, at their first entry obtained some Conquests, so soone after they prouoked hatred of the Romanes: which was but the beginning and prefage of a future ruine. But when as the fortune of the warres beganne to smile vpon Hanibal, and to giue him a full Gale, so as his exploits were so great in Spaine, as afterward hee presumed to force Nations, Mountaines, and riuers, and in the end to fight with the Extremity of the weather for the Con∣quest of Italy: Then, as it were, fearing her owne power, to bee in a manner vanquished, shee beganne to practize and forge meanes, not onely to ruine her so much fauoured Hanibal, but the whole Carthaginian Empire. And therefore it is credible, that (I know not by what inconstancy, or rather extrauagant and sauage Nature) shee makes friends of Enemies, and ene∣mies of her owne friends; so much shee feares (as I imagine) the ease and rest of those whom shee fauours. It is true that traf∣fique by Sea is not without great terrour, amazement and hazard, for the danger of the waues, Tempests and stormes, with a thou∣sand other accidents. But if warre once set vp her sailes, being accompanied with rage, fury, and many other disasters, which the malice of Men haue inuented to make vse of, beleeue mee that these other furies, which the winds procure at Sea and in the Aire, which many times are more fearefull than mortall, will not seeme in regard of those of warre, but a light amaze∣ment, and, as it were, a false allarum. What torment at ea, or violence of the winds hath euer beene so soddaine, which the
long experience of a wise Pilot, could not by a thousand signes and tokens foresee, deuising sufficient remedier to auoid it? But when a warre is mannaged by Iudgement and discre∣tion, as it is requisite, the shewes are commonly contrarie, to that which they pursue. Wherefore the more an Enterprize is dissembled and keept secret, the more easie it is to put in execution. Finally, if wee will confesse the truth, it is a pro∣fession which among all others, requires the greatest vigilan∣cie; a continuall Care, with an incredible diligence: where∣of a good Iudgement must haue the conduct, that by con∣iecture drawne from things formerly practized, or from a probability of that which hee sees, hee may soone after iudge of the Enemies resolution, and finally attempt and hope for a victory. And although it hath beene alwaies held, that Money is the sinewer of Warre; yet I hold its force without Conduct▪ like vnto that of a strong, able Man, opprest with a deepe sleepe, whose senses haue made their retreate for his rest. So there is nothing so strong, nor so quicke in this world as the sense of man: Nor any thing so powerfull and terrible, which the vnderstanding doth not master and subdue. And therefore wee say commonly in France, that wit is better than force. Yet I know that Courage is a great aduantage; and necessary for a souldier, but especially for a Generall: But I feare that for want of Iudgement and a good conside∣ration, it makes them not sometimes ouer-weening and care∣lesse of danger. So as many times it giues occasion to a weake and cowardlie Enemie, to vndertake a Victory, and to performe the Act of a valiant man. Wherefore courage without conduct, and vigilancie, is alwayes subiect to Am∣bushes and shamefull flights: which are inconuentenees, whereof a Coward is alwaies warie, for that feare makes a Man vigilant and carefull. But was there euer Nation more hardie, nor more warre-like, nor that more care∣fully obserued the ordinances of warre than the Romanes? How then did Hannibal defeate them so often, not onely in Encounters, but in pitcht Battailes, and in the open
field, by his great Iudgement, and his subtile pollicies? In what feare, and with what admiration hath the fury of the Gaules, beene held in old time by all Natios, who parting from their owne Countrey and Townes, to seeke new habita∣tions, haue conquered land in diuers Countries by Armes, building Townes not onely in Italy their Neighbour, but also in Germany, and in the end in Greece, and Asia? Who hath defeated and quite ruinated them in a short time, but their owne Consideration, and an ouer-weaning confidence in their force and courage? I hold for certaine, which you know well, that it is not sufficient for a Prince or Generall to haue his Armie compleate with foote and horsemen, how reso∣lute soeuer, and with all necessary prouisions for a warre: No more than for a Souldier to haue youth, strong and actiue Members, a daring courage, and compleate furniture. Hee must haue to vanquish (the which many times the vanquish∣ed improperly call mis-fortune) that piece of harnesse so well steeled, which wee call Iudgement▪ or a good conduct. Beleeue mee that like vnto a horse, when hee hath taken the it be∣twixt his teeth, forcing his Master, flies without feare tho∣row Woods, Rockes, and Precipices, with the danger of his life, bee hee neuer so nimble and couragious; so a hardie and resolute souldier doth easily his owne ruine, if hee wants con∣duct and Iudgement. You must vnderstand that as the body requires Exercise to preserue in health, and to make it actiue, and hardened to indure labour and paine; so the vnderstand∣ing in like manner desires to bee exercised and imployed, ei∣ther by the consideration of things past, or by those which are visible. It is true, that those which are seene by the eye, haue a greater viuacitie, and a stronger impression, than those which are past: For that liuing things are of greater force than dead. Yet, if we shall duely consider the length of time, which the experience of a thousand kind of pollicies, which warre requires before that a wise Man will dare to aduenture himselfe in a bold and hardie Enterprize, wee shall finde that the knowledge of the antient warres, which haue beene
left vs in writing, will bee of no small consequence vnto him. For besides the assurance of danger, hee may in a short time see by Historiographers, the great and wonderfull exploits of the Antient in a manner since the Creation of the world, to pleasure and contentment from them, with some Encourage∣ment to doe aswell or better hereafter. You know well that the warre which is seene by the eye, is not alwaies made be∣twixt warre-like people, nor vnder resolute Commaunders, that are skilfull in their profession: so as it is a difficult thing vnder such to see any valiant exploits, nor Enterpri∣zes attempted with good inuention, nor well executed. Wee say commonly in France, that the Combate is dangerous, when as courage fights against courage. So is it credible▪ that when an Army consisting of warre-like men, is vnder the leading of a wise and resolute Commander, hauing in front an Enemy equall vnto him in all degrees, there must needes bee valiant exploits performed, with hardy Enterprizes wisely mannaged. If there haue beene any warres, attempted by fierce and warlike Nations, and gouerned by wise and famous Captaines, beleeue me this present Historiographer hath vsed great diligence to set them downe in writing: Labouring on∣ly to mention the deedes and valour that was most worthy of Relation, that with the pleasure and contentment which they may reape in reading them, they may draw some instructions and meanes, not to fall into the inconuiences of warre, into the danger whereof many times both Captaine and souldiers may bee ingaged, through want of experience, good aduice and coun∣cell. So as among others, you shall see Enterprizes of the Ro∣manes against the Carthaginians for the conquest of Sicily. During the which there were many Encounters and cruell bat∣tailes, as well by Sea as land. You shall likewise reade the furious Combat of the Gaules against the Romanes: And moreouer the warre betwixt Cleomenes and Antigo∣nus, for Morea, the which Philip the Sonne of Deme∣trius tooke afterwards. And besides many other notable exploites, (which at this present I will forbeare)
you shall see the Conquests which Hannibal made in Spaine, with his incredible voiage into Italie, performed in his younger yeeres, and his victories gotten of the Romanes with such pollicie and wisedome, as it is a difficult thing (if wee shall consider the people and number of his Armie, ha∣uing regard to courage and power of those with whom hee had to deale) to iudge truely, whether there were euer Captaine in the memory of man, that may with reason bee compared vnto him. Finally my Masters, I doe not promise you in this History, those miraculous Battailes, which ex∣ceed the apprehension of man, performed in the Kingdome of Logres, nor I know not what Quest of that barking Beast. Make your accompt that you shall not finde any Tract or marke of a Beast, nor finally any thing that holds of it. Beleeue mee in times past, Men did not feede their vnder∣standings with dreames, nor fables inuented in barbers-shops, without any colour of Truth. It is impossible an ignorant Master should make a learned disciple. Finally they are dis∣courses fit for old womens tongues to entertaine little child∣ren, whilest that for weakenesse of their Age, their vnder∣standing hath no apprehension, nor sufficient Iudgement of rea∣son, Wherefore wee may with reason say, that such as co¦sume their yeeres, and grow old in such dreames, haue a will to continue still children. And although they commonly saie, that warre is mannaged by the eye: So as it seemes they will thereby inferre, that wee must not thinke of it, but when necessity doth force vs: And that peace should procure no benefit to a Souldier, but idlenesse; yet he must fore-see long before, part of that which afterwards he must gouerne by the eye. And as a horse which is pampered and not ridden, growes restit; and proues vnprofitable to his Master for trauaile: so the vnderstanding of a souldi∣er, idle during peace, or fed with dreames and foolish in∣ventions, will faile him at neede; and in the end purchase him dishonour and shame; Yet do not imagine my Masters, that I haue vsed this speech as blazoning you, and hold∣ing you for men of so poore an Enterprize, whose principall
study and affections is the reading of such Bookes, rather then in some worthy recreation and exercise. My meaning was onely to aduertise you, that Histories, from whence with pleasure you may draw great profit, as these are which this Historiographer imparts vnto you ought to bee in greater recommendation than those Fables, which haue no grac, but when they are most without reason or any shew of truth. Finally, I hope you shall finde such sufficiencie in our Polybius, as you will make no question to preferre him as the paragon before all others, aswell Greekes as La∣tines, which are come to the knowledge of men. Of whom I haue presumed to translate in the best sort I could, those fiue first Bookes, which of Fourty which hee hath written, haue beene preserued halfe ruined by the negligence of time: Hoping you will receiue them as willingly, as I offer them with a good heart. When as after the Printing of these fiue first Bookes, I had recouered some Latine Translations, of three par∣cels of the sixt, whereof the first and the third had not a∣ny GREEKE Coppie, And likewise afterwards an∣other of the sixteenth, both in Latine and Greeke, I imployed my selfe to put them into French, adding there∣unto the forme of the Romanes Campe, as I could con∣iecture it, by the discription which Polybius maker, in the parcell of the sixt Booke. And when as the Printers successor had a desire afterwards to print the whole, and intreated mee to spend some time in the Remainder of that which was newly published of Polybius his workes, which are certaine parcells, and as it were Reliques (besides the a∣boue named) of the seuenth and eighth, and of all the sub∣sequent Bookes vnto the seauententh inclusiue, it was not in my power to deliuer him any other but those of the seuenth and eighth, being afflicted with a quartane Ague, besides his obstinacy in vsing a small Character, for the sparing of Paper distasted mee: Expecting that which afterwards fol∣lowed, that few men would rest satisfied, for that all things
how good and excellent soeuer, are thereby found without grace, dull and vnpleasing. For this cause desiring that so excellent a writer, should not remaine disdained and with∣out grace for want of an honourable Impression, and that the studios of Histories should bee the more incouraged, I resolued to adde the remainder of that, which at this day is come to our knowledge, assuring my selfe that the Printer for his part will haue a care that for the sauing of his mo∣ney hee will not doe wrong to his honour, nor loose his char∣ges instead of gaine. TO GOD alone be all honour and glory.
The Printer to the READER. COurteous Reader, I desire your charitable censure in that there bee some litterall faults escaped, to the griefe of the Author being not able to at∣tend the Presse, and likewise being absent at that time from London, and ha∣uing but a yong Corrector which took too much vpon him. Errata. PAge 27. line 21. for report read support, p. 27. l. 9. for wridgt r. rigg, p. 33. l. 28. for ready the r. ready for the, p. 34. l. 27. for nor bee r. nor to bee, p. 35. l. 39. for them r then, p. 40. l. 19. or yet began r. yet it began, p. 45. l. 38. for had been r. had not been, p. 51. l. 44. for Hanniball r. Aicar, p. 62. l. 37. for Arcanians r. Acarnaniens, p. 68. l. 18. for ssire r. Assi, p. 79. l. 37. Rhine r. Rhosne, p. 105. l. 30. r. time to passe, p. 133. l 7 for and past r. be past, p. 131. l. 4. r stuff their plaies, p. 132. l. 38. r. strucke dead or hurt, p. 15 l. 47. r. Romanes, l. 18. r. vnto the Adriatiqe, p. 177. l 20. r.  as without, p. 6. l. 43. r. in common assemblies, l. 45. r. dancas, p. 189. l. 12. r. raiseth his Campe, p. 193. l. 44. r. did not openly. p. 194. l. 15 r. creat a King, p. 198 l. 9. r. with great ships, p. 220. l. 24. r to bring him, p. 230. l. 40 r. not executed, p. 23. l. 28. r. against them, p. 240. l. 2. 1. no way, p 246. l. 10. r. which the , p. 249. l. 25. borne away by the riuer, bid. l. 38 r. was, p. 254. l. 44. 1. parted from Lydi, p. 264. l. 3. r. as his, p. 266. l. 46. r. arriued, p. 267. l. 38. r. which Ptolomy was, p. 274. 134. r. of the Phantensi, p. 278. l. 6. r. greater danger, p. 279. l. 3. r. for all them which.
THE FIRST BOOKE of the History of POLYBIVS. IF the Commendation of the ex∣cellency of Histories had beene omitted by such as before vs haue written the Worth and Prowesse of Men, happily it should bee necessary to vse some Arguments to make it to be generally Accep∣ted and Receiued: For that there is no way more easie to reforme and better Men, then the Know∣ledge of things past. But seeing that not onely some, but in a manner all, begin thereby and finish it amply, so as they are of Opinion that the Knowledge of Hi∣stories is a true Discipline and Exercise for the Conduct and managing of the Affaires of a Common-wealth, and that she onely is the Mi∣stris, and meanes to beare the Variety and inconstancy of Fortune pa∣tiently, by reason of the example of another mans aduersities, it is apparent that no man will hold it necessary to renew the Discourse of things, which haue formerly beene so well deliuered by others: Espe∣cially by me to whom the newnesse of Actions, whereof wee intend to Write, is much more then sufficient to perswade and draw the hearts of men, aswell both Young and Old, to read our History. For where is any man so depraued or silly, which desires not to vnderstand
the meanes and manner of Gouernment, by the which the Romans haue subdued and brought vnder their Obedience in a manner, all the Nations of the World, within the space of fifty and three yeares? the which in former times was neuer heard of. Or what is he so much giuen and desiring to know other things worthy of admiration and o∣ther Disciplines, but will conceiue that there is not any thing in this world worthy to be preferred to this knowledge? I hope they will see how great and excellent our Worke is, if wee make comparison of o∣ther Principalities with the excellency of the Romane Empire, and namly of those which haue beene in great honour and glory, whereof Historiographers haue written much. Behold those which are most worthy to be compared. The Empire and power of the Persians for a time hath beene great,The Persians. but whensoeuer they did aduenture to passe the bounds and limits of Asia they were in danger to lose not onely their Empire, but their liues. The Lacedemonians made a long warre for the Empire and command of Greece,The Lacedemonians. but they could hardly keepe it twelue yeeres quiet after their Conquest. It is true,The Macedonians the Macedonians haue domineer'd and rul'd in Europe, from Adria to the Danowe, which is but a small portion thereof. And since they haue held the Empire of Asia, after they had ruined the Mo∣narchy of the Persians. And although that these haue in shew beene great Lords, and enioyed large aud spacious Countries, yet they ne∣uer toucht the greatest part of the World. As for Sicily, Sardinia, and Affricke, they neuer made shew to challenge any thing. In regard of other Nations, the most Martiall of Europe, and the most Westerne, they hardly in my opinion did euer know them:The Romans. But the Romans haue not onely conquered a part of the World, but in a manner all. They may also know by our sequell, how great the profit will be to such as af∣fect the knowledge of History. Finally,The beginning of the History. the beginning of our Worke shall be according to the time, since the hundred and eight and forty Olimpiade: As for the Actions, and first of the Grecians, wee will begin with the sociall warre, the which Philip (who was Sonne to Demetrius, and Father to Perseus) attempted first with the Acatans, against the Etlians, and in regard of those which inhabite Asia, the beginning shall be at the Warre which was in the Valley of Syria, betwixt Antiochus, and Ptolome, Philopater. But as for Italy and Affricke, wee will begin with that betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians, which many call the warre of Hanniball. The History shall begin at the end of that which Sicionius hath left in writing. Before these times the affaires of the world were without Ciuillity. Since it hath happened that the History is in a manner drawne all into one, and that the actions of Italy, and of Affricke, are mingled with those of Greece and Asia, and that all tended to one and the same end. And therefore wee haue begun our worke in those times, when the Romans had vanquished the Carthaginians in this war, thinking they had performed their greatest taske, and to be able to as∣saile the whole world, they presumed presently after to fall vpon the
rest, and to passe into Greece and Asia with great forces. But if we had seene and knowne the manner of liuing, and the Lawes of Common-weales contending for the Monarchy, happily it would not be needfull to make any great search, to what end, nor vpon what power relying, they haue entred into such great actions. But for that the manner of liuing, the precedent forces, and the actions of the peo∣ple of Rome and Carthage are vnknowne to the greatest part of the Gre∣cians, I haue held it necessary to make these two first Bookes, be∣fore I enter into the History, to the end they should haue no occasion to wonder nor inquire in reading our Worke, what Councell, what Forces, and what Treasure and Wealth the people of Rome had to vn∣dertake the warre and conquest of the whole Earth, and of all our Sea: Considering that they which shall require it, shall see plainely by these first Bookes of our Preparation, that the Romans had reasonable cause to vndertake the Empire and Soueraignty of all things, and to attaine vnto their ends. Beleeue that the proper obiect of our Worke, and the excellency of the Actions of our time, consists principally in this, that as Fortune hath in a manner reduced all the affaires of the world into one, and hath forced them to draw to one and the same end: So the force which shee hath vsed for the perfection of all publicke gouernment, must be reduced and propounded to the Reader in one briefe History. This hath chiefely incited and vrged mee to the enterprise thereof, especially for that none of our time hath vndertaken to write a generall History: neither would wee haue attempted it: But seeing that many had written some particular Warres, and their priuate Actions, and that no Man (to my knowledge) hath hitherto made an vniuersall and generall commemoration of things past, neither when nor how they began, nor how they were executed and performed, nor what issue they had: I conceiued it would be well done, if by our meanes our Countrey-men might read a worke of Fortune excellently good and profitable: For although shee had done excellent things and worthy of admiration among man: yet shee hath not done any thing vnto this day, nor purchased the glory of victory comparable to our times. The which they that haue written the particular Histories cannot make knowne, but that some one who peraduenture for that hee had liued in some renowned Towne, or for that they had seene them in picture, imagine presently they know them: and consequently the scituation, the forme, and the order of the World, the which is not probable nor likely. They which are of Opinion that a particular History is sufficient for the vnderstanding of the generall, in my Opinion stray no lesse from the truth,A good Com∣parison. then if some one considering the parts separated of a liuing Body, thinke by this meanes to haue the knowledge of all the perfecti∣ons and graces of the Creature. There is no doubt; but if any one takes these distinct and separated parts, and doth presently ioyne them toge∣ther, and make a perfect Creature, giuing it forme and life, and then presents it vnto him, hee will soone confesse that hee hath beene de∣ceiued,
like vnto them that dreame. It is true, we may haue some apprehension of the whole by the parts: But it is not possible to haue a true and certaine Science and Knowledge. And therefore you must imagine that a particular History is of small vse for the knowledge of the generall: And that by the cnnexion, comparison and similitude of actions, there will be no Man found, who in reading, will not reape singular profite and pleasure by History. Wee will therefore make the beginning of this Booke at the first Voyage which the Romans made by Sea,Timerus an Historiogra∣pher. which is subsequent to those things which Timerus hath last writ∣ten: which was in the hundred and nine and twentieth Olimpiade. We must therefore relate how, and what time they ended their Quarrels in Italy, and what meanes they had to passe into Sicily: For this is the first voyage they euer made out of their Territories, whereof wee must set downe the reason simply and without disguising: to the end that by the search from one cause to another, the beginning and consideration of the whole may not proue doubtfull. The beginning also must bee a∣greeable to the Time and Subiects, and that it be knowne to all: the which they may consider by themselues, yea, in seeking out those things which were past long before, and in the meane time relate the Actions summarily: For it is certaine that the beginning being vn∣knowne or obscure, its continuance cannot perswade, nor purchase be∣leefe: But if the Opinion of the beginning be true, then all the subse∣quent Narration doth easily content the Auditors eare. Nineteene yeeres after the battell wone vpon the Riuer Aegos, and sixteene yeeres before the Warre of Leuctra, where the Lacedemonians treated a peace with Analcides King of Persia, when as Denis the old held the Citty of Rhegium in Calabria besieged,Dnis. after that hee had de∣feated the Grecians inhabiting vpon the limits of Italy, neere vnto the Ri∣uer of Elleporis: and that the Gaules hauing wholy ruined Rome, held it, except the Capitall: During which time the Romans hauing made an accord with them, which they found good and profitable, and had recouered their liberty contrary to their hope and expectance, and had in a manner taken a beginning of their increase, they declared Warre a∣gainst their Neighbours. As soone as the Latins had beene vanquished, aswell by their prowesse as by the fortune of the Warre, they turned their Armes against the Tuscans, then to the Celtes which are in Italy, and finally vpon the Samnites which confine the Region of the Latins, towards the East and North. Sometime after, the Tarrentines seeing the outrage which they had committed against the Romane Embassa∣dours, not relying much vpon their owne forces: they called in King Pyrrhus the yeere before the Descent of the Gaules into Italy, and be∣fore the Retreate of those which were defeated in Battell neere vnto Delphos. Then the Romans after they had vanquished the Tuscans and Samnites, and beaten the Celtes often, began to make warre against the rest of Italy, not as contending for another mans Lands, but as for their owne, and formerly onging vnto them, being now growne warlike by the Warres which they had had against the Celtes and Sam∣nites.
The Romans then after that Pyrrhus and his forces had beene chased out of Italy, taking this Warre to heart, they pursued such as had fol∣lowed his party. Being suddainly become Maisters of all according to their desires, and that all Italy was wholy subdued,Rhegium be∣sieged by the Romans except the Celtes, they presently besieged some of theirs which held Regium. One and the like fortune befell two Citties scituated vpon the Straight of that Sea, that is, Messina and Rhegium.The taking of Messina by some Campa∣nois. Some Campanois hauing beene lately in pay with Agathocles in Sicily, wondring at the beauty and wealth of Messina, they suddainly when they found an opportunity, assailed it, breaking their Faith, they hauing beene receiued into it by Friendship: where they expell'd some of the Cittizens, and slew others. After which wicked act they shared their Wiues and Children among them, as their fortunes fell out during the Combate: Then they diui∣ded their goods and lands. But after this suddaine and ease Conquest of so goodly a Countrey and City, they soone found others that did imitate their villanies. They of Rhegium amazed with the descent of Pyrrhus at such time as he past into Italy, and fearing in like manner the Carthaginians, be∣ing then Maisters of the Sea, they craued a Garrison and men from the Romans. Those which they sent vnto them, were to the number of 4000. vnder the command of Decius the Campanois, they kept the Towne for a time, and their faith in like manner with the Cittizens, in defending them; but in the end moued by the example of the Mamer∣tins, who solicited them to cōmit this base act, they falsified their faith, being aswell incited by the opportunity of the deed, as by the wealth of Rhegium, and chased away some Cittizens and slew others,The taking of Rhegium by some Campa∣nois being there in Garrison. finally, they seased vpon the Citty as the Mamertines had done. And al∣though the Romans were discontented at the misfortune of the Rhegins, yet they could not relieue them, for that they must settle an order for their precedent VVarres. But after they had ended them, they be∣sieged them of Rhegium, and afterward they entred it by force,The taking of Rhegium by the Romans. where∣as many were slaine: who being certaine of the punishments they were to endure, defended themselues valiantly to death. Aboue three hun∣dred were taken aliue, who presently after their comming to Rome, the Commanders of the VVarre commanded them to be brought into the Market-place,The punish∣ment of Tray∣tours. where they were whipt, and in the end their heads strooke off, after the manner of the Countrey. They did vse this pu∣nishment to the end that their Faith (as much as might be possible) might be confirmed towards their confederates. Presently after they caused the Towne and Countrey to be deliuered to the Rhegins. But whilest that the Mamertins (youmust vnderstand that the Cam∣panois caused themselues to be so called after the taking of Messina) were relieued by the Romans which held Rhegium by force,The Campanois . they not onely enioyed the Countrey and Towne peaceably, but they commit∣ted great spoiles vpon many other Townes their Neighbours, aswell of the Carthaginians as of Saragosse (otherwise Siracusa:) The grea∣test part of Sicily was tributary vnto them. But soone after when they were depriued of those succours, and that they which held Rhegium
were besieged, they were in like manner by them of Saragosse, for the causes which follow: As a little before the men of warre of Saragosse camping neere vnto Mergane, being in dissention with the Goutrnours of the Common-weale,Hieron chosen King of the Saragossins. they chose for their Captaines Artemtdore and Hieron, who afterwards was their King, being yet very young: But finally so well endowed with all the graes of Nature and Minde, as hee wanted no Royall conditions but the Crowne. Hauing accep∣ted the Magistracy, and made his entry into the Towne very well ac∣companied by his Friends, where hauing vanquished the Burgesses of the contrary faction, hee vsed the Victory with so great clemency and modesty, as by a common consent of all in generall he was chosen their Commander, although they did not allow of the Election made by the Souldiers. It is true that Hieron made knowne to men of iudgement and vnder∣standing, that he had conceiued greater designes in his minde then to be their Leader. First knowing well that the Saragossins were muti∣nous and desirous of innouation, whensoeuer they sent their Souldiers and Commanders out of the Countrey, and that Leptine was a man of great reputation, and of more credit then any other of the Cittizens, and that he was very pleasing vnto the Multitude, he held it fit to make an alliance with him, to the end he might leaue some report in the Cit∣ty for him, whensoeuer he should goe to the VVarre, and lead an Army out of the Countrey.An alliance made by Hieron with Leptine. Hauing therefore taken the Daughter of Lep∣tine to VVife, knowing well that the old band of forraigne Souldiers were changeable and subiect to mutinies, he led his Army of set pur∣pose against the Barbarians,The pollicy of Hieron. who held the Citty of Messina: And hauing seated his Campe neere to Centoripe, and put his men in battell close vpon the Riuer of Ciamossure,The Riuer of Ciamosure. he stayed in a place apart all the Horse and Foote of his owne Nation, as if he meant to charge the E∣nemy on the other side: suffering the forraigne Souldiers to be defea∣ted by the Barbarians, and whilest the others fled, he makes his re∣treate safely with all the Saragossins to the Citty. When he had by this pollicy brought his designe vnto an end, and had freed his Army of all the Mutines, hee makes a great leuy of Souldiers. Soone after when as all things were settled in good order, Hieron seeing that the Barbarians were growne too audacious and proud of their late Victory, he parts from the Citty with an Army of his Countrey souldiers, well trained and disciplined, and making dilligence, he came to Myle, where along the Bankes of the Riuer of Longane, he fought with them with all his forces. Hauing vanquished them and taken their Captaines, see∣ing their pride much abated by this Victory, he returnes  Saragosse with his Army, and was by the generall fauour and consent of all the Cittizens saluted King by the Allies.The Mamertins deliuor their Towne and Fort vnto the Carthaginians. The Mamertins as we haue sayd, being depriued of the succours of of the Romane Legion, and hauing lost so great a Battell, their hearts being broken, they retire for the most part vnto the Carthagi∣nians, and yeeld themselues and their Fort:Succours re∣quired from the Romans by the Mamertins. The rest sent vnto the Romans, deliuering their Towne vnto them, and requiring succours
as to those that were of the same Nation. The Romans were long in suspence what to doe: For they found it strange, hauing lately punished their Cittizens so seuerely, for violating their faith with the Rhegins, to send succours now vnto the Mamertins who were guilty of the like crime. They were not ignorant of all these things: Yet considering that the Carthaginians had not onely drawne Affricke vnder their obedience by force of Armes, but also many places in Spaine, and moreouer all the Islands of the Sea of Sardinia and Italy; they doubted that their Neighbour-hood would be dangerous, if they made them∣selues Lords of the rest of Sicily. They likewise vnderstood, that it would be easie to effect, if the Mamertins were not relieued: And there was no doubt, that if Messina had beene deliuered vnto them, they would presently haue recouered Saragosse, for that they held all the rest of Sicily. And as the Romans considered these things, they were of opinion that it was necessary not to abandon Messina, nor to suffer the Carthaginians to make vnto themselues as it were a Bridge, to passe into Italy at their pleasure. This was long in debate, yet it was not concluded in that assembly: for it seemed vnto them as vnreasonable as profitable to relieue the Mamertins. But as the Commons much weakned with their former Wares, seemed to haue need of rest, so the Captaines shewing the great profit that might ensue,The Romans resolue to suc∣cour the Ma∣mertins by Ap∣pius Claudius they resolued to succour the Mamer∣tins. This Opinion being confirmed by the Commons, presently they appointed Appius Claudius, one of the Consuls, to passe the Army into Sicily, and to relieue the Mamertins, who had put out of their Towne, aswell by threats as pollicy the Captaine of the Carthaginians which (as we haue sayd) held the Fort.The Mamertins recouer the Fort from the Captaine of the Carthaginians. And they called vnto them Appius Claudius, deliuering the Citty into his hands. The Carthagini∣ans hung him on a Crosse which had had the Guard, supposing that he had yeelded it basely for feare and want of Courage. Then suddainly they drew their Sea-army neere vnto Pellore, and that at land about the Countrey called Sene, holding by this meanes Messina streightly be∣sieged. In the meane time Hieron thinking to haue found a good opportuni∣ty to chase the Barbarians which held Messina out of Sicily, followed the Carthaginians party. And going from Saragosse,Hieron follows the Carthagini∣ans party. he takes his way to the Towne, and layes his Siege on the other side neere vnto Mount Calshidique: By this meanes he tooke from the Townesmen all meanes to sally forth on that side. But the Consull passing the Sea by night with great danger, in the end he arriued at Messina: where seeing the Enemy round about it, and that this Siege was as dishonourable vnto him as dangerous, for that the Enemies were the stronger both by Land and Sea, he desired first to try by Embassies sent to both Camps, if it might be possible to pacifie things, so as the Mamertins might be freed. But the Enemies not vouchsafing to heare them, he was in the end forced to vndergoe the hazard, and resolued first to giue battell to the Saragossins. He therefore causeth his Army to march, and put it in battell: to the which the King likewise came speedily. But after that
Appius had fought long,The defeate of Hieron by Ap∣pius. in the end he preuailed ouer his Enimies, pursuing them into their Fort. The Consull after the spoile of the dead, retires into the Citty: and Hieron being frustrate of all hope, recouered Saragosse speedily the Night following. The next day Appius Claudius aduertised of the flight of the Sara∣gossins, and hauing resumed courage and confidence,The defeate of the Carthagini∣ans by Appius. he had no will to stay, but to goe and fight with the Carthaginians. Wherefore he commanded his men to be ready, and the next day he past early and chargeth his Enimies, whereof some were slaine, and the rest forced to saue themselues in the neighbour-townes. By this meanes the Siege being raied, he rauaged and spoyled the Countrey to Saragosse and their Allies without danger: And after that he had ruined all, in the end he besieged Saragosse. Behold then (for the causes aboue menti∣oned) the first Voyage which the Romane Army made out of Italy. And for that we haue held it fit for the entrance of our designe, we haue made it our beginning, in looking somewhat backe to the times past, to the end we may not leaue any occasion of doubt vpon the causes we shall yeeld. And in truth I haue held it necessary to declare first at what time, and by what meanes the Romans being in extreame danger to lose their Countrey, began to grow fortunate: And when likewise after they had subdued Italy, they began to conquer other Countries; to the end that the greatnesse of their Empire, which was since, may seeme more likely in knowing the beginnings. No man must wonder when as we speake of Townes of Note, if happily wee seeke for things farther off, in that which we shall relate hereafter: For we doe it to the end that our beginnings and grounds may be such, as they may plain∣ly vnderstand the meanes and reasons, by the which euery Citty is come to the estate wherein it now stands, the which we haue done here of the Romans. It is now time that in leauing this Discourse we returne to our de∣signe, in shewing first summarily and briefely the things happened be∣fore the times, whereof we meane principally to Write: Among the which the Warre betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians in Sicily is the first, then followed the Punique: In the which the deeds first of Amilcar, then of Asdruball, are ioyned with those of the Carthaginians: At what time the Romans began first to sayle into Slauonia, and other parts of Europe. Moreouer their Battels against the Gaules, who at that time made a discent into Italy: The Warre also which was in Greece at the same time, called Cleomenique, to the which all this relation▪ and the end of the second Booke tend. Finally, I haue not held it necessary nor profitable for the Reader, to relate things in particular: Neither is it my intention to Write them, but onely to touch that summarily which may concerne our History. And therefore in relating briefely, we will indeauour by an order of continuation, to ioyne vnto the beginning of our History the end of those Actios, which we shall deliuer by way of preparation. By this meanes in continuing the order of the History, they shall see we haue toucht that which others haue left in Writing: and also made an easie and open way for all subsequent things, to those
which desire to know. It is true that we haue had a speciall desire to write somewhat at large this first Warre of the Romans in Sicily against the Carthaginians, for that they shall hardly finde a longer Warre, nor greater preparations and expence, nor more encounters, nor grea∣ter diuersity of fortune on eyther side; For these two Nations in those times liued in their lawes with meane wealth and equall forces. Where∣fore if we shall consider the Forces and Empire of these two Citties, we cannot so well make a Comparison by the other subsequent Warres as by this. But that which hath most incited me to write this Warre,The blame of Philin and Fa∣bius istorio∣graphers. was for that Philinus and Fabius, who are esteemed to haue written well, haue in my Opinion strayed too much from the truth: Yet I would not taxe them to haue done it maliciously, considering their life and intenti∣on: But I conceiue, the affection which they beare vnto their Countrey∣men, hath deceiued them after the manner of Louers. In regard of Phi∣linus, for the affection he beares to the Carthaginians, hee is of Opinion that they did all things with good Conduct, Prudence and Courage; and the Romans the contrary. As for Fabius he holds the contrary par∣ty. Peraduenture a man would not blame this manner of doing in other courses of life. In truth it is fit and commendable for a good man to loue his Friends and Countrey, and to be a friend to the friends of his friends, and to hate his Enemies. But he that takes vpon him to Write a History, must vse such things with discretion, sometimes commending his Ene∣mies, when their actions require it, and blaming his Friends and Neigh∣bours when their faults are blame worthy. Beleeue me, as the remainder of the Body of a Beast, which hath the eyes pul out, remaines vnprofi∣table: So if truth be wanting in a History, the Discourse prooues fruit∣lesse. And therefore when occasion is offered, he must not forbeare to blame his Friends, nor to commend his Enemies, nor to hold it a disho∣nest thing to praise those whom we haue sometimes blamed. Neither is it likely, that they of whom we write, haue alwaies done well, or err'd continually. We must therefore in leauing the persons, iudge and speake of their actions sufficiently in our Comentaries. To prooue my assertian true,Philin. we shall easily see it by that which Phi∣lin writes. Who in the beginning of his second Booke saith, the Cartha∣ginians and Saragossins held Messina besieged, and when as the Romane Army, after they had past the Sea, was arriued, they made a suddaine sal∣ly vpon the Saragossins, where they were vanquished and defeated, and so retired into the Towne▪ they made a second vpon the Carthaginians, where they were not onely defeated, but most part of them taken: Pre∣sently after this Speech he saith, that Hieron after this Encounter had so great a feare, that he not onely set fire of his Lodgings and Tents, reti∣ring by night to Saragosse, but moreouer abandoned the strong places, lying betwixt Messina and Saragosse. He relates also that the Carthagini∣ans being in like sort amazed, dispersed themselues here and there throughout the Townes of Sicily, and that they durst neuer after that keepe the Field, and that moreouer, the Captaines seeing their men dis∣couraged, gaue aduice that they should no more run into the danger of the war, nor hazard any thing. He saith moreouer that the Romans in the
pursuit of the Carthaginians, not onely ruined their Prouince, and that of the Saragossins, but also layed siege to Saragosse. This Speech is so farre from reason, as it were but lost time to seeke to confute it: For he pretends that they which besieged Messina, (to whom he giues the Victory) presently after abandoned their Campe, and that they fled, retiring into the Citty with great feare, and that finally they were be∣sieged. In regard of those he affirmes were besieged by the Carthagi∣nians, after the battell lost, he makes them suddainly Victors, and be∣sieging Saragosse, hauing taken their Camps, and made courses into the Enemies Countrey. Doubtlesse these are discourses which cannot well be reconciled; for either that which he saith first, is false, or that which followeth: But it is certaine, and knowne to all men, that the Carthagi∣nians and Saragossins abandoned their Campe, and raised the siege reti∣ring into their Towne, and that the Romans vsed great dilligence to be∣siege Saragosse: Wherefore the probability is great, that his first Speech is false, and that notwithstanding the Romans had gotten the Victory before Messina, yet this Historiographer hath supposed that they were defeated by the Carthaginians. You shall often see Philin in this errour: and Fabin no lesse, as we haue obserued in many places. Wherefore to returne where we left, we will vse all possible indeauour to make the truth of our History cleere and plaine, for those that desire to vnderstand it. After that the newes of Sicily were come to Rome of the Victory of Appius and his men,Marcus Valeri∣us and Octocili∣us Consuls. Marcus Valerius and Octacilius being newly cho∣sen Consuls, they were sent thither with all their Roman power. The Romans had foure Legions in their Army of their owne Nation,The order of the Romane Armies, and the number of men in a Le∣gion. besides the succours which they drew from their Allies. Euery Legion con∣sisted of foure thousand Foote, and three hundred Horse. By this meanes at the Consuls comming, many Citties aswell of the Carthaginians, as of the Saragossins, yeelded to the Romans. But when as Hieron saw that the Sicillians fainted, and that the Roman Army was great, and their forces increased, he held it better to follow their party, then that of the Carthaginians. He therefore sends an Embassie to the Consuls, to treate of Peace and Friendship. The Romans seeing the Carthaginians Maisters of all the Sea, fea∣ing likewise that the passage for their Victuals might be interdicted, for that their Armies which had formerly past, had suffred great wants and necessities, they found the friendship of Hieron to be of great conse∣quence for them in this regard.An accord be∣twixt Hieron and the Romans and what it ntaines. Wherefore they treated a peace with the Saragossins vnder these following Conditions. First, that the King should free the Roman Prisoners without Ransome, and moreouer should pay a hundred Tallents of Siluer, and that hereafter the Sara∣gossins should terme themselues Allies and Friends to the Romans. Af∣terwards Hieron, who of his owne free will put himselfe vnder their protection, succourd them with men and victuals when need required: So as afterwards he past the Remainder of his life with as great happi∣nesse and fortune that euer Grecian had done. And in my Opinion this was an excellent man amongst others, who had beene alwayes happy in good Councell, aswell for the affaires of the Common-wealth, as for
his owne particular. When as the newes of this Treaty came to Rome, and that the people had confirmed it, they did not thinke it necessary hereafter to send all their forces out of Italy: Wherefore conceiuing that two Legions would suffice there with the alliance of King Hieron, they made their reckoning, that the Warre would be more easily man∣naged, and that by this meanes the Army would be the better suppli∣ed with all things necessary. But when as the Carthaginians saw that Hieron was become their Enemy, and that the Romans held the greatest part of Sicily, they knew well that they must haue a greater power to resist them;Supplies which the Carthagi∣nians put into Agragas. Wherefore they made a great leuy of Geneuois and Gaules likewise of Spaniards to fortifie them: And after they had caused them to passe into Sicily, and seeing the Towne of Agragas very fit for the preparation of this Warre, and that it was a frontier place, and strong to∣wards the Enemy, they put into it all the men they could draw toge∣ther with store of Munition, making vse of it against the Enemy as of a Fort for the Warre. After the accord past by the Consuls with Hieron, they left the Pro∣uince; in whose place Lucius Posthumus, and Quintus Emilius newly chosen Consuls, come into Sicily with an Army: who after they had carefully considered of the Carthaginians Designes, and their prepara∣tions for Warre made in the Towne of Agragas, they were of opinion to mannage the affaires of Sicily with greater courage and resolution then the last Consuls had done:Agragas besie∣ged by the Ro∣mans. Wherefore they drew together all their Ar∣my, and besieged Agragas within eight Furlongs, and so kept in the Enemy. The time of Haruest was come, eliery man made his recko∣ning that the Siege would be long; wherefore the Souldiers straying from their Campe, aduentured somewhat too farre in the gathering of Corne. When the Carthaginians saw their Enemies thus dispersed; run∣ning here and there confidently throughout the Prouince, they conceiued a great hope that they should one day be able to defeate them; wherupon some of them assaulted the Campe with great fury, and the rest charged those which gathered Corne.Seuerity of the Romans to∣wards their Souldiers. But the diuersity of the action saued the Romans for that day, as it had done many times before; they hauing a custome to put those to death, which abandon the place which is appoin∣ted them during the fight, or which flye from the Campe vpon any oc∣casion whatsoeuer. By this meanes although the Carthaginians were farre greater in number, yet the Romans resisted them valliantly, who with great losse of their men made a greater slaughter of their Enemies. Finally, they not onely repulsed them from their Campe, but pursued them, illing part of them, and forcing the rest to retire in a thrung into the Towne. Moreouer that day was so dangerous to both Armies, as af∣terwards their feare was great, so as the Carthaginians durst no more assault the Romans Campe inconsiderately, nor the Romans suffer their men to gather Corne rashly. But for that the Carthaginians made no more sallies, but did onely fight a farre off with casting of Darts and Stones, the Consuls deuided their Army in two: whereof the one was planted on the side of Esculapius Temple, and the other on that side which doth looke directly vnto Heracleum: And that
which remained betwixt the two Camps of either side of the Towne, was rampered with a double ranke of Piles: Then they made a Trench betwixt them and the Towne, to guard themselues from the Enemies sallies, and another without the Campe, to hinder the succours which the Neighbour-townes doe vsually send to the besieged. The places which were betwixt the Trenches and the Campe were well guarded. Moreouer all the Allies vsed great dilligence to bring into the Towne of Erbese, victuals, and all things necessary for the Campe; so as the Souldiers liued at more ease, for it was not farre off. The Romans and the Carthaginians were fiue Moneths in this estate, fortune shewing herselfe no more fauorable to the one then to the other: But what happened by their shooting and casting of Darts: But when as hunger began to presse the Carthaginians,Fifty thousand men within A∣gragas. by reason of the great multitude of Men which were coopt vp within the Towne, (they were in truth aboue fifty thousand Men) Haniball who was Generall of the Army, hauing no more hope, sends speedily to Carthage, to acquaint them with the Rampire and Pallisado made about the Towne, and to demaund succours. The Carthaginians moued at this Newes, raised an Army with a great number of Elephants, and sent them by Sea into Sicily to Hanno, who was another Captaine Generall for them: who after he had drawne together his whole Army, marcht to the Citty of Heracleum, and at the first (after he had considered what was to be done) he tooke the Towne of Erbese by Treason, the which vntill that day had beene a Store-house to the Romans. By this meanes he depri∣ued them of Victuals and  things necessary for their Campe: wherefore the Romans were no lesse besieged, then they that were be∣sieged. The want of Victuals did often force them in a manner to re∣solue to raise the Siege: the which vndoubtedly they would haue done, if Hieron King of Saragosse had not vsed great diligence to furnish the Army with Victuals and other necessaries. But when that Hanno (after all these things) saw that the Romans were much opprest with diseases, and want of all things (without doubt the plague was great in their Campe) and that his Men were fresh, and resolute to fight, he drew together aboue fifty Elephants: And when as all the bands of Souldiers were assembled, he drawes his Ar∣my out of Heracleum, and causeth the Numidian Horse-men to march before, giuing them charge to skirmish, and to doe all their indeauours to draw the Romane Horse-men to fight, vpon whose charge they should turne head, and not cease to flye vntill they were returned vnto him.A skirmish of∣fered the Ro∣mans by the Numidians. The Numidians failed not to execute the Command of their Cap∣taine, nor to skirmish with one of the Camps to draw them to fight. Presently the Romane Horse-men charge them, and pursue them indis∣creetly: But the Numidians obseruing the Commandment flye backe to Hanno, and re-charging the Enemy againe, slew many, chasing the rest vnto their Campe. After these things the Carthaginians marched, and planted them∣selues vpon Mount Tor, which was not tenne Furlongs from the E∣nemies Campe. Continuing in this manner for the space of two
Moneths, they attempted not any thing, but skirmished daily with their Arrowes and Darts. In the meane time Haniball made fires often in the Night, and sent men to Hanno, to aduertise him that the Army could endure hunger no longer, and that many of his men were reti∣red to the Enemy for want of Victuals. Finally, Hanno moued by these reasons,A battell be∣twixt the Car∣thaginians and Romans. put his men in Battell: wherein the Consull vsed no lesse dil∣ligence in regard of their necessities. Either Army drew forth in Bat∣tell into an equall place: Then they came to combate, whereas they charged one another with great fury. The Battell was long and cruell: Finally, the Romans brake the Vanguard, and forced them to fly among the Elephants: who being terrified, opened the rankes of the Carthagi∣nians. The Captaines of Hundreds following the Route of the Ele∣phants, forced the Enemies to turne head. By this meanes the Cartha∣ginians hauing lost the Battell, and part of them shine, the rest retired to Heracleum:The Carthagi∣nians lose the Battell. and the Romans after the taking of most of the Elephants, and all the baggage of the Carthaginians, retired to their Campe. But for that they were negligent to keepe a good Guard the night follow∣ing, aswell for the great ioy which men vsually haue for their good for∣tune, as for the toyle of the Battell past; Haniball being frustrate of all hope,The Retreate of Haniball from Agragas. thought this a fit and conuenient time to saue himselfe and his Army, for the reason aboue mentioned. Wherefore he drew all his forces out of Agragas, and passed thorough the Enemies Trenches, fil∣ling them with straw: By this meanes he escaped without any losse, and without their priuity. At the breake of day, when as the Romans  advertised of this Re∣treat, they followed the Enemy a little; but returning soone to take the Towne, they gaue an assault vnto the Gates, where they found no re∣sistance. The whole Army entred and spoyled: It was a rich Towne, where as the Souldiers tooke many Slaues,Agragas spoiled by the Romans. and got great Wealth. When as the newes came to Rome of the taking of Agragas, after the defeate of the Carthaginians, the Romans lifted vp their Heads, and beganne to conceiue greater Designes. They did no longer insist vp∣on the reasons for the which they were first mooued; neyther were they satisfied, for that they had preserued the Mamertins and Messina, or to haue much weakned the Carthaginians in Silily: But hoping for grea∣ter Matters, they desired to chase them away wholly, which done they had a great Hope and opinion to inlarge their Empire much. They were therefore very attentiue to this businesse, and had no thoughts but of Sicily: knowing well that they were vndoubtedly the stronger at land. After the taking then of Agragas, Lucius Valerius, and Titus Octa∣cilius being chosen Consulls they were sent into Sicily with a great Army. Thus the Warre was in a manner equall, for that the Cartha∣ginians were Maisters of the Sea without contradiction; whereof this is the reason; for after the taking of Agragas, most of the Townes which were in the heart of Sicily, yeelded to the Romans, fearing their Ar∣my at Land: But when as the Carthaginians Army by Sea was arri∣ued, many more Sea-townes yeelded for feare to their Obedience.
Thus their forces were equall. Many times also the Sea coasts of Italy were spoyled by the courses of their Army at Sea, the which Affricke did not suffer. The Romans considering carefully of these things, resol∣ued to fight with their Enemies by Sea. This is the thing which hath mooued me most to Write this present Warre more at large, to the end the Reader may not be ignorant of this beginning, that is to say, in what manner and for what causes, and in what time, the people of Rome were induced to put an Army to Sea,Sixe score vessels for the Sea made spee∣dily by the Ro∣mans. and to fight with their Enemy. Seeing then that there was no probabillity that the Warre should be otherwise ended, the Romans speedily made sixe score Vessels for the Sea, whereof a Hundred were Quinqueremes or of fiue bankes, and the rest were Triremes. It is true that the Quinqueremes were more difficult to make, for that they had neuer vsed any such Vessels in Italy vntill that time. Wherein the excellency and great courage of the Romans is worthy of admiration, considering they had neuer beene inclined to actions by Sea, neyther had they euer thought of it vntill that day; yet they aduentured it with such courage and resolution, as they had sooner fought with the Car∣thaginians, then made triall of the dangers of the Sea. Although the others held at that time, in that circuite of the World the princi∣pallity and commaund of the Sea, as formerly gotten by their Prede∣cessours, and left it vnto them as an hereditary right: which is a singu∣lar testimony of the things which we haue Written, of the Romans boldnesse and courage. Beleeue me, when they first aduentured to passe their Army to Messina▪ they were only a Hundred ships of War, and moreouer they had not one Galley nor one Briggandine. It is true when they vndertooke the Voyage of Sicily with an Army, they made vse of the Quinqueremes and Triremes of the Tarrentines, Locreins, and Neapolitans. At that time many Carthaginian Ships scoured the Seas about Sicily, whereof a Quinquereme straying farre from the rest, was broken by casualty, and afterwards taken by the Romans, which afterwards ser∣ued them for a patterne to make the like, so as all their ships were made in that manner. Wherefore if this had not hapned, they would haue ound themselues much troubled in their enterprise.The Romans inuention to invre their men to the Oare. Whilest these were a making, they did practise a number of men to the Oare after this manner. They did set bankes in order vpon the Sand, vpon the which the men that were to Rowe were placed, being attentiue to the voice of the Patron or Gouernour, who was in the middest of them, where as they did learne to stretch foorth, and pull backe their armes altogether, and did draw their Oares in the Sand; finally they beganne and ended altogether according to the Patrons whistle. By this meanes hauing learned the Arte to Rowe, and their ships finished, they put to Sea, and within few dayes after made a Tryall. And when as the Consull Cornelius, lately appointed Commaunder of the Sea Army, had giuen charge to the Sea Captaines, to draw vnto the Port assoone as the Vessels should be ready, he went directly to Messina with sea∣uenteene ships, and left the rest vpon the Italian shore, whereas ha∣uing
made prouision of things necessary for the equipage of his ships, he sailes vpon necessity directly to Lipparo sooner then was needfull. At that time Haniball Commaunder of the Carthaginians, kept his Sea Army at Palermo, who being aduertised of the Consuls comming, sent one Boodes a Senator of Carthage, with twenty ships to draw into that Quarter: Who arriuing by night, found the Roman ships, and be∣sieged them in the Port, so as at the breake of day, the multitude got to Land. But Gneius Cornelius thus vnfortunately surprised,Certaine of the Roman ships with their com∣maunder Sur∣prised by a Car∣thaginia Con∣sull. could finde no o∣ther meanes but to yeild himselfe vnto the Enemy. The Carthaginians after this prise returned to Haniball; soone after this apparent and new defeate of Cornelius, Haniball (to whom Fortune was at that time gra∣cious) receiued as great a losse. He had intelligence that the Romanes Army at Sea, which coasted about Italy, was not farre from Sicily. Wherefore desiring wonderfully to see their number, and their order, and the manner of the trimming of their ships, he takes fifty Vessells and sailes into Italy. But for that he had a contrary VVind, the which was fauourable to the Romanes by the reason of the Coast of Italy,A defeate of Hanibals ships, for want of a good Wind. he fell vnaduisedly into their Army, which was in order and in Battell, where he was suddainly charged, so as he lost in a manner all his ships, and saued himselfe with very few contrary to his Hope, and the opini∣on of all the VVorld. The Romanes after this defeate, approached neerer vnto Sicily, and being aduertised by the Prisoners of the Consuls ouer-throw, they sent speedily to Caius Duellius Consull▪ hauing at that time the charge of the Army by Land: Where hauing attended some space, and recei∣ued newes that the Enemies Army at Sea was not farre off, they all prepared to battell. They planted vpon euery one of their ships, (for that they were ill built and heauy,) a kind of Engine,An Engine in∣uented by the Romans called a Rauen. which was after∣wards called a Rauen; behold the fashion of this Engine. They did set a Pillar or Mast of foure fathome long, and nine inches thicke vp∣pon the Prowe, the which had also a pulley on the top, and one the side was made an assent of boards all along, the which was foure foot broade and foure fathome long; the passage was turning about the pil∣lar, in the two first fathomes of the assent: About the which were barres of eyther side to the height of a mans knee, and they had set at the end of it an Iron like vnto a pestell, which went vp streight, the which had on the top of it a King, so as altogether seemed as an Engine wherewith they pound things. To this Ring was fastned a cord, by meanes whereof at the encounter of the ships, they fastned the Ra∣uens by the pulley, and let them fall vpon their Enemies ships. Some∣times at the Prowe, sometimes on the side in turning, when as they could not assaile them by the flanke; and after that the Rauens were fastned within the bands of the ships, and that the Vessels were grap∣led and fast, if they found themselues vpon the side, they entred it of all sides: And if it were by the Prowe, they marcht by the bridge two and two to the Combate, whereof the first couered their bodies with their Targets, and they which followed defended the flankes,
and held their Targets euen with the bars. When as this Equipage at Sea was ready, they attended a conuenient time for the battell. When as Caius Duelius had beene suddainly aduertised, of the mis-fortune of the Commaunder at Sea, he left that at Land to the Tribunes of the men of Warre, and makes hast to that at Sea. And being aduerti∣sed that the Carthaginians spoyl'd the Country of Myles, hee drew thither with his whole Army: But when the Enemy was certayne of his comming, they were in great hope, thinking the Romanes vnder∣stood not any thing in Sea-fights. Wherefore they drew out to Sea, with an Equipage of sixe score and ten Vessels, thinking this War not worthy of any order of battell, as if they had gone to a certaine booty. Whereof this Haniball who (as wee sayd) retyred his Army by night, and past ouer the Enemies Trenches,) was Commaunder. He had a Vessell of seauen bankes which did sometimes belong to Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes. When as the two Armies beganne to approach, and that their En∣gines called Rauens were discouered, the Carthaginians were a time in suspence for the nouelty. Finally whatsoeuer it were, without any further reckoning they charge with great fury. The ships ioyn'd and grapled,A battel at Sea betwixt the Carthaginians and Romans. so as the Romane souldiers by meanes of their Engines called Rauens, entred their enemies ships, where there was a great slaughter made of the Carthaginians. The rest being amazed at this kind of En∣gines, yeilded: you would haue sayd it had beene a battell at Land, where the danger is not lesse. The thirty Vessells of the Carthagini∣ans, which gaue the first Charge were taken, among the which was that of the Captayne, which we haue sayd had belonged vnto King Pyrrhus. Haniball whose Fortune was otherwise then he expected, sa∣ued himselfe in a little Skiffe: The rest of the Carthaginian Army came with great fury agaynst their Enemies, as the former had done; but when they were aduertised that their first ships had beene taken by the meanes of the Engines, they did not charge in Front, thinking to a∣uoyde them, but came vpon their flanke, trusting to the lightnesse of their Vessels, thinking by this meanes to auoyde the violence of their Engines;The flight of the Carthagini∣ans. but they were made in such sort as of what side soeuer the E∣nemy approached, they could easily grapple with them. Wherefore the Carthaginians amazed with the strangenesse of these Engines, in the end fled, after the losse of fifty of their ships. The Romans being now become masters of the Sea, contrary vnto▪ their Hope, sayl'd about the Sea towards Segestane, and raysed the siege which lay before the Towne.Macelle taken by assault. Then parting from thence, they tooke the Towne of Macelle by assault. After this battell at Sea, when as Amilcar (being then Captayne Generall in Sicily of the Army by Land) was aduertised, remayning at Panorme, that there was a great quarrell betwixt the Romanes and their-Allies, touching the prowesse and glory of the Combate,A defeate of foure thousand men, allied to the Romans by Amilcar. and that the Allies after they had beene beaten, were retired apart betwixt Prope and Termine, hee marcht with all speed to the Allies Campe, and slew foure thousand by surprize. Haniball after all these Fortunes, retyred to Carthage,
with those few ships which he had remaining at the battell. Within few dayes after he was dispatch to goe with an Army into Sardinia, with some excellent Sea Captaines, but he was soone inclos'd in a Port by the Romans, and in a manner lost his whole Army: And as he had escaped the Enemy, he was suddainly taken by the Carthaginians which had saued themselues, and was crucofied.Haniball cruci∣fied. Moreouer the Ro∣mans imployed all their care to seize vpon Sardinia, being now Ma∣sters of the Sea. The yeare following there was not any thing done worthy of Me∣mory in Sicily by the Roman Army. Caius Sulpicius, and Aulus Ru∣tilius were afterwards made Consuls, and sent to Palermo, for that the Carthaginians forces wintred there. And after the Romans had past, they put themselues in battell before the Towne: But the Carthagini∣ans being within it, presented not themselues to battell.Hippane and Mysistrate taken with many o∣ther Townes. The which the Romans seeing, they left Palermo, and went to Hippane, the which soone after they tooke by assault: The Towne of Mysistrate was taken likewise by the Consuls, hauing held out sometime by reason of the scituation of the place. And as they had besieged the Citty of the Camerins, which had lately abandoned the Romans, it was ta∣ken by force by the meanes of their Batteries and breaches: After∣wards Ata was carried by assault with many other Townes of the Car∣thaginians; Lippare was also besieged. The yeare following, the Sea-army of the Romans lay in the Hauen of the Tindaretins vnder the charge of Aulus Rutilius,Aulus Rutilius Consull. who seeing the Carthaginian Army neere the shore, he sent word vnto his ships to make haste to follow him▪ In the meane time he▪ put to Sea before the rest, only with ten Vessels: But when as the Carthaginians saw that some did but imbarque, others began to set saile, and the first were farre from their Fleet, and neere vnto them; they turned with incredible swiftnesse, and compast them in, so as most part of them were sunke, and the Consuls ship had like to haue fallen into the Carthaginians hands, with all that were within it: He hardly esca∣ped by the force of his Oares and lightnesse. In the meane time the rest of the Romane Army, which had gotten into the open sea, encountred the Enemy, whereof ten ships were ta∣ken, and eight sunke, and the rest recouered the Islands called Lippa∣rees. But howsoeuer either of them parted from this Combate with an Opinion to haue gotten the Victory: Wherefore they were more eager to continue the War by Sea, and were more attentiue to Marrine affaires. As for their Armies at Land, during this time, they did no∣thing worthy of Note, busying themselues about small things, and of little esteeme. But the Summer following hauing giuen order for their affaires, (as we haue said) they prepared to Warre.The Romans Army by Sea. The Promon∣tory of Pachi∣na. In regard of the Romans, they made their assembly at Messina, to the number of three hundred and thirty Vessels armed; and sayling from thence leauing Sicily on the right hand, and passing the Promontory of Pa∣china, they sayled to Echnomn,The Carthagi∣nians Army of three hundred and fifty sayle. whereas the Army by Land at∣tended them. The Carthaginians in lie manner put to Sea, with three hundred and fifty Sayle armed, and stayed at Lilybeum, and
from thence went to Heracleum, and so to Minoe. The Romans intention was to passe into Affricke, and there to make their chiefe War, to the end the Carthaginians should not onely run the hazard of the War of Sicily, but also haue it at their owne Houses. On the otherside the Carthaginians considering how easily their descent would be into Lybia, and what little defence the Countrey-men would make when they should be once entred, they desired to fight presently with the Romans, and by that meanes to hinder the descent into Affricke. Wherefore the one being resolued to defend themselues, and the other to assaile them, considering the obstinacy of either party, there was like∣ly-hood of an vndoubted battell. When as the Romans had giuen order for all things necessary for the equipage of their Sea-army, and to make their descent into Affricke, they made choice of the ablest men in all their Army at Land, and imbark'd them, and then deuided their Army into foure, whereof either had two Names. The first was called the first Bat∣talion, and the first Army: So were the rest according to their order, but the fourth and the third were called Triarij, as in an Army at Land. Al this Army at Sea amounted to aboue 140000.An Army of 140000. Ro∣mans and more Carthaginians. men. Euery Vessell had three hundred Rowers, and sixe score Leginaries. In regard of the Carthaginians, they were furnished onely with men accustomed with Sea-fights, being in number aboue 150000. men, ac∣cording to the order of their Vessels. Wherefore they that were present and saw the great danger, and power of the two Armies, the great char∣ges, the multitude of combatants, and of ships, they did not only wonder, but they also who heard speake of it. The Romans considering that vp∣on necessity they must goe vpon the side, and that their Enemies sayl'd more lightly, they imployed all their Art to make their battell strong and inuincible. For the effecting whereof they set two Vessels in front of sixe Bankes in equall distance, in the which were Marcus Attilius, and Lucius Manlius. After which march'd the first and second Battalion of either side, their ships following one another, so as the distance of the two Battalions did still inlarge themselues. The stems of their ships loo∣ked outward. By this meanes the Battalions drawne thus in length, made the two parts of a Triangle, to the which they added the third Battalion in the same fashion, as a foundation, so as the three Battalions made a perfect sigure of a Triangle. After the third Battalion the ships which carried the Horses, were ordered one after another, seruing as a Rampie to the third Battalion. The Triarij followed after in their order, making the fourth Battali∣on, euery Vessell being ordered in such sort, as they past the precedent on either side. All the Romane Army was thus ordered, whereof the first part, that is to say, the two sides of the point of the Triangle, were empty in the midst: but the sides following after the foundation were better supplied.A Remon∣strance made by the Cartha∣ginian Cap∣taines to the Souldiers of their Army. By this means their Army was firme and hard to breake. In the meane time the Commaunders of the Carthaginians drew their Souldiers together, and put courage into them, letting them vnderstand, that if they wone the battell, there would be no more War but in Si∣cily: But if the Romans had the Victory, they must expect not to
fight for Sicily, but for their owne Countrey, their Houses and their Children. After this exhortation, they make them imbarque; the which they did resolutely, and prepared to fight, thinking of the time to come, ac∣cording to the discourse of their Captaines: Who seeing the order of the Roman Army, deuided theirs likewise into foure; whereof three gay∣ning the Sea, making the Right-wing longer, stayed as if they would in∣viron their Enemies, against whom they turne their beake-heads; and they make the Fort to looke towards the Land, by a circuite of the Left wing of the whole Army. Hanno and Amilcar were Commaunders of the Carthaginians, Hanno (who was defeated at the battell of Agragas) had the leading of the Right wing, with the lightest Vessels, and Amilcar of the Left. This is he who as we haue sayd, fought at Sea neere vnto Tyndaris, who hazarding then the middest of his Army, vsed this kind of Stratagem of War for the Combate. The Romans seeing at the first charge, that the Battalion of the Car∣thaginians was weake, forc'd resolutely thorough them: But the Car∣thaginians obseruing the Commaundment of Amilcar, left the place presently, making shew to flye, to the end the Roman Army should se∣parate it selfe, whom the Romans followed with too great heate: And therefore the first and second Battalion sayl'd with too great Courage after the Enemy, but the third and fourth were stayed, drawing after them the ships that were laden with Horses, with whom the Triarij remained for their Guard.A Battell at Sea betwixt the Romans and Carthagi∣nians. When as the two first seemed to be farre from the others, the Carthaginians  signe giuen them by Amil∣car, as he had instructed them, turning the Prow suddainly, they all assault the Roman Vessels which followed them. The Combat was cruell; It is true, the Carthaginians had a great aduantage by their lightnesse, and their pollicy in turning: But when as they came to fight, and that the Armies affronted one another, the Romans had no lesse hope then the Carthaginians, for the Force and Prowesse of their men; and by the staying of their Ships, and casting of their Engines, and finally by the Combate of the two Commaun∣ders, and the hazard they were in their fight. This was the estate of the Battell: Presently after Hanno, who as we haue sayd had the charge of the Right wing, and did not budge before the first charge was giuen, seeing the Battell begun with the Romans, went to Sea and charged the Triarij, where there was a great fight, the which was long in suspence. In the meane time the fourth Battalion of the Carthaginians, which continued neere the shore, turning the Prow vpon the Enemy, assaulted the Battalion in front, by the which the ships which carried the Horses were towed▪ who suddainly slipt the Ropes and fought with great fury. There they saw three parts of the Battell, and three Com∣bats at Sea at one instant, in three diuers places, and farre remote. The Combate was equall, for that the Ships of eyther side were of the like number. Without doubt euery man performed his Duty in fighting, so as all was indifferent and equall. Finally,
Amilcar was defeated, and forced to flye with his Squadron.Amilcar van∣quished. And Lucius Manlius towed away the ships that were taken. In the meane time Attilius seeing the Combate of the Triarij, and of the ships wherein the Horses were, came presently to succour them with the Vessels of the second Battalion, which were yet whole and entire: But when as the Triarij who had beene long and violently charged by Han∣no, so as they were in great danger, saw the Consull come, they re∣sumed courage, and recharged him resolutely: And then then the Carthagi∣nians being much discontented to haue an Enemy in front and behinde, and to be inuested by succours contrary to their expectation, gained the open Sea, relying vpon the lightnesse of their Vessels, and saued themselues by flight. And Lucius Manlius in the meane time seeing the third Battalion prest neere the shore by the left wing of the Carthagi∣nians, and Marcus Attilius in like manner, leauing the ships with the Horses and the Triarij in safety, resolued both together to succour those that were in danger: For they were in a manner besieged, and almost at the last gaspe, and had beene defeated, if the Carthaginians had not feared to ioyne with them by reason of their Engines or Rauens: Neither did they presse vpon them, but onely to chase them to the shore. Finally, the Carthaginians were suddainly compast in by the Consuls, whereof fifty of their ships were taken with the men.A Victory of the Romans a∣gainst the Car∣thaggnians. Some being driuen vnto the shore, saued themselues. Behold the three se∣uerall Combats which the Romans and Carthaginians had in one day: Yet the Romans in the end had the Victory of the whole Battell: In the which 24 of their ships were broken▪ and aboue thirty of the Carthagini∣ans. There was not one Roman Vessell taken whole by the Carthaginians with the men. But the Romans tooke three score and foure of the Car∣thaginians with all the men. Soone after this battell, the Romans par∣ted with an intent to sayle directly into Lybia, after they had made pro∣uision of Victuals, and all other munition, ioyning to their Army the ships taken, being well repaired. There is a place in Affricke which they call the Cape of Mercure, run∣ning farre into the Sea,The Cape of Mercure. and is directly against Sicily, where the Ro∣mans arriuing and receiuing their Vessels, repaired all: Then passing this strond, they sayled vnto the Citty of Aspis, where they put their Army in Battell neere vnto the Towne, and retired their ships, rampe∣ring them with Ditches and Pallisadoes, resoluing to besiege it, for that they which held it would not yeeld to the Romans. It is true that the Carthaginians who a little before had escaped from the Battell at sea, and recouered Carthage by flight, furnished the most necessary places be∣longing to their Citty, with Horse and Foo, and with necessary ship∣ping, supposing that the Roman Army after the Victory would come di∣rectly vnto them. But when they were aduertised of their descent, and of the siege of Aspis, they leuied men, and regarding no more the landing of the Romans, but hauing an eye aswell to forreigne affaires as to their owne Countrey, they omitted nothing of that which was necessa∣ry for the Guard of the Citty and Prouince.Aspis taken by the Romans. In the meane time the Consuls after they had taken Aspis by assault, and
put a Garrison into it, and in the Country, and had sent vnto Rome to aduertise the Senate of their successe, to the end they might consider what was afterwards to be done,Courses made by the Romans in the Cartha∣ginians Coun∣trey. they drew the whole Army into the Carthaginians Country, where they found no Resistance, spoyling and setting fire on their goodly and glorious buildings, so as they carri∣ed away a booty of all sorts of Beasts, with aboue twenty thousand Prisoners, which were Embarked. In the meane time they receiued newes from Rome, by the which the Senate sent them word, that one of the Consuls should remayne in Affricke, with sufficient forces, and that the other should Returne with the ships. The pleasure of the Senate being knowne, Marcus Attilius Regulus stayed in Affricke with forty ships, fifteene thousand foote, and fiue hundred Horse, and Marcus Manlius set sayle with the rest of the ships and Army, hauing the Prisoners with him, and arriued first in Sicily, and then at Rome without any mischance. But the Carthaginians fore-seeing that the Romans War would be long,Asdruball, Bo∣star, and Amil∣car Comman∣ders of the Carthaginians Army. they first made two Generall Captaynes in their Army, which were Asdru∣ball the sonne of Hanno, and Bostar: Moreouer they sent for Amilcar, who was in Heracleum, who Embarking presently with fiue thousand foote, and fiue hundred Horse, came to Carthage, and was constitu∣ted the third Captayne of the Army, taking the Conduct of the War with Asdruball and Bostar. When as these Captaynes had held a Councell, concerning the Affayres of the War, they were of opinion that it was necessary to re∣lieue the Prouince, and not to indure so  a pillage and spoyle of the Country. Marcus Attilius some few dayes before marching in∣to the Country, razed the weaker Castles, and besieged the stronger. But when he was come to the Citty of Adis which was worthy of a siege, he plants himselfe before it, and indeauours to force it. The Carthaginians uertised hereof made hast to succour it, desiring to Raise the siege. And therefore they march with all their power against the Romans, Recouering a little Hill to the preiudice of their Enemies, and very commodious for themselues: Whereon planting their Camp, they hoped for an absolute Victory, by the meanes of their Horse and Elephants. Leauing therefore the playne, they drew  high and vneuen places, as if they would aduertise the Enemy what they had to doe, the which vndoubtedly they effected. For when the Romanes had considered the little vse of Elephants, for they were in a Mountai∣nous and Hilly Country, in the which the Enemies had setled their chiefe hope, as of great effect and terrible, they aduised not to attend their Descent into the playne: Wherefore vsing the opportunity of the time, they shut them vp at the breake of day in the Mountayne of all sides. By this meanes their Cauallery and their Elephants were altogether vnprofitable: Their aduenturers onely did their duties in ighting on the top, and had already forced the Roman Leginaries to giue backe a little, when as suddainly the rest which had gayned the top of the Mountayne shwed themselues. The Carthaginians seeing themselues inclosed of
all sides, abandoned their Fort, and fled into the deserts of the Moun∣taines. The Elephants and Horses recouered the Playne, and saued themselues without danger. The Romans made some little pursuite after the footemen, then they spoyled the Campe, and ouer-ran the whole Country, wasting all, and ruining the Towne. Some few dayes after they besieged Tunes,Tunes taken by the Romans by assault. which they tooke by as∣sault, where they planted their Campe, for that the place seemed conue∣nient vnto them to mannage the Warre, being a frontier to Carthage and to the whole Prouince. The Carthaginians hauing a little before beene defeated at Sea, and now by Land, not by the cowardize of their Souldiers, but by the basenesse of the Commanders, they fell into a mi∣serable and desperate estate: For after their last defeate and flight by the Romans, a great Troupe of Numidians, gaping after spoyle, fell vpon them,The Nunidians great robbers. doing them in a manner as great harme as the Romans. It is a wandering and vagabone Nation and great theeues, carrying away all they finde. The Carthaginians▪ terrified by the Numidians abandoned the Country, and retired to Carthage, where they suffered much, aswell by famine, as for their owne cowardize, and moreouer the multitude being great they feared a long siege: And although that Marcus Attil∣lius was perswaded that the Carthaginians were wonderfully weakned, aswell by Land as Sea, being in hope that the City would be in short time deliuered vnto him: yet fearing that the new Consull, whom they expected soone in Affricke,Embassadours sent by the Car∣thaginians to Marcus Atti∣lius. would reape the honour of his prowesse and valour, he began to treate of a peace with them, whereunto they willingly . Wherefore they sent the chiefe of their City in Embassie to the Consull, to make this treaty. But when as they were arriued, they were so farre from agreeing, as they could hardly without choller heare the vnreasonable things that were enioyn'd them. Make your account that Marcus Attilius did hope that his offer would bee accepted as a thing of grace, for that he had preuayled in all his affaires: The Carthaginians on the other side, thought that when as fortune should reduce them to extremity, the Consull could not make them a more bitter answere. Their Embassadours therefore returned, not onely without any agree∣ment, but dting wonderfully the Consuls answere, as to hard and proud. The which being heard by the Senate of the Carthaginians, they entered into so great an indignation vpon the Consuls demaund, and resumed such courage, that although formerly they were out of hope, yet then they resolued to attend all extremities, and rather to trye their fortune, and to attend the time, then to suffer so ignominious a thing and vnworthy of their valour. It happened a the same time, that some one of those which had beene sent into Greece, in the beginning of the warre to Leuie Men, returned and brought with them a good number of Soul∣diers: among the which there was one Xantippus a Lacedemonian,Xantippus a Lacedemonian. a man of Iudgement, and practised in the warre: who after that hee had heard a relation of the defeat of the Carthaginians, and the manner▪ the place, and that what time it happened; hauing also considered the equipage of
the Carthaginians, with the number of their Horses and Elephants, he returned suddainly to his Companions, saying, that the ignorance of the Captaines, not the Romans, had defeated the Carthaginians. This speech ran presently thoroughout the whole Citty, and came vnto the Princes. The Carthaginians caused him to be called, and resolued to vse his Councell, who in their presence deliuered plainly the Reasons of his speech, and the cause of their Defeate; and if they would follow his Councell, and hereafter keepe the Plaines, leauing the hilly Coun∣try, and there plant their battell, hee would teach them how their Army should be out of danger, and their Enemies Vanquished. The Captaines mooued with the words of Xantippus, presently Resigned vnto him the Conduct of all this Warre,The Leading of the Cartha∣ginians Army, giuen to Xan∣tippus. and now there ranne a bruite throughout the whole Campe of Xantippus speech, with great Hope and Ioy. But after that all the Companies of the Army were drawne into the field, and that hee had put them is order, there was so great a difference betwixt his and that of the other Captaines, who vnder∣stood not the Art of Warre, that presently the common cry deman∣ded nothing but to fight, so much they were assured vnder the leading of Xantippus. This done, the Carthaginian Captaines seeing the courage of their Men, exhorted them a little according to the opportunity of the time, and within few dayes after they marched to find out the Enemy. There were in the Carthaginians Army aboue twelue thousand foote, foure thousand Horse, and neere a hundred Elephants. When as Marcus Attilius heard of the comming of the Enemy, and that the Carthagi∣nians kept their Horses vpon an euen Country, camping contrary vnto their custome on the plaines, hee wondred as at a new accident: Yet hee marcht directly to them desiring battell, and lodged within twelue hundred paces of their Campe. Three dayes after the Carthaginian Captaines held a Councell what was to be done: But the multitude de∣siring the combate, turned towards Xantippus, calling him by his name, with a countenance seeing to be willing and ready to vndergo all dangers, and intreated him to lead them speedily vnto the battell. When as the Carthaginian Captaines saw their Men thus resolute, and desirous to fight, and that Xantippus sayd the time was itting and con∣uenient, they suffred them to prepare to battell, and gaue him leaue to do all at his pleasure. Who after he had taken charge of the Cap∣taines, hee orders the battell,The order of the batell by Xantippus. before the whole Army hee sets the Elephants one after another. After which hee causeth a Legion of Car∣thaginians to march, with some distance, and placeth the strangers vpon the Wings. Then he ordereth the brauest among his foote, to fight of eyther side betwixt the Wings of the Horse-men. The Romans seeing the Carthaginians in battell, stayed not to doe the like; yet fearing the Violence of the Elephants, they set in Front the most actiue of their men, re-inforcing their Reare with many En∣signes, and diuiding their Horse-men vpon the Wings. Their Ordo∣nance was lesse then formerly, but more close, for feare least the E∣lephants
should open them. But as the Romans had set a good order a∣gainst the Elephants, so they had neglected to keepe themselues from inclosing. For as the Carthaginians had a greater number of Horse, so the close Ordonance, gaue them an easie meanes to breake and seperate them. The two Armies being in battell,Battell giuen by the Romans to the Cartha∣ginians. either attending who should first Charge; suddainly Xantippus causeth the Elephants to beginne the Charge, and breake the Enemies rankes, and that the Horse-men of both Wings should withall charge furiously. The Romanes cause their Trumpets to sound after the manner of the Country, and charge where the Enemies forces were greatest. It is true that the Roman Horse-men terrified with the multitude of their Enemies, abandoned the two Wings: And the Foote-men of the lest Wing wauing from the Fury of the Elephants, and making no account of the forreigne Souldiers, charged the right Wing of the Carthaginians with great fury, and put it to flight, pursuing them vnto their Fort. On the other side, they which indured the charge of the Elephants, were broken and trodden vnder their feete by heapes. It is true that the whole Ordnance conti∣nued for a time in battell, for that their supplies beeing in the Reare were very close. But after that the Romane Legions, set in the Reare∣ward, and compassed in of all sides by the Carthaginian Horse-men, were forced to make resistance there, and that they (who as wee haue sayd) were appointed to make head against the Elephants, were by them repulsed into the thickest of the enemies Battalion, where they were defeated and slaine, then the Romans beeing assaulted on all sides, some were beaten downe and slaine by the intollerable fury of the Ele∣phants, and others by the Horse-men, in the same place where they had their first posture giuen them, some few of them seeing no more hope,Marcus Attilli∣us taken with 500. Romans. sought their safety by flight, of which (considering that the Country was very plaine) some were defeated by the Elephants, and the rest by the Horse-men: And some flying with Marcus Attilius, were taken to the number of fiue hundred. The Carthaginians lost that day but fiue hundred Aduenturers stran∣gers, whom the left Wing of the Romanes had defeated: But of all the Romane Army there escaped but two thousand with their Ensignes, who (as we haue sayd) pursued a troupe of enemies into their Fort. All the rest were cut in pieces, except Marcus Attilius and a few Men which fled with him; in regard of those Ensignes which beyond all hope es∣caped, they came vnto Aspis. Finally the Carthaginians after the spoile of the Dead retired to Carthage, with the Consull and other Prisoners, making great ioy and tryumph. If we shall duely consider this,Aremonstrance of Polybius. we shall finde many things profitable for the conduct of Man. First, Marcus Attilius serues for a faire exam∣ple to all the World, that it is a great folly and indiscretion, to put his Hope in Fortune, vnder the colour of good successe and enterprises brought to an end according to our desire: Who of late after so many tryumphant Victories, had not any compassion of the Carthaginians, being reduced to extremity, refusing to grant them peace, which they
craued with so much humility, hath beene presently after reduced to that constraint, as to make the like request. Moreouer that which Euripides hath formerly spoken so well, that the good Councell of one man alone doth vanquish a great Army, hath beene this day verified by that which hath happened. In truth one man alone, and the Councell of one man, hath vanquished and defeated an Army, formerly invincible; raising and restoring a Towne lost, and the hearts of so many desolate men. Beleeue mee▪ I haue thought good to relate these actions for the benefit and instruction of the Readers of these Commentaries. For as there are two meanes easily to correct and amend our errours, whereof the one is his owne Misfortune, and the other the ex∣ample of another mans Miseries; there is no doubt but the first hath greater efficacy, but it is not without the losse and preiudice of him to whom it happens: And although the second be not of so great force, yet it is the better for that they are out of danger, and therefore no man imbraceth the first meanes willingly, for that they cannot helpe it without their owne trouble and losse. As for the second, euer man fol∣lowes it willingly; For wee may see by him (without any hazard or losse) what wee ought to follow for the best. Wherefore if wee consider it well, we shall finde that experience (by the remembrance of another mans faults) seemes to be a very good doctrine of a true life: Without doubt it is that alone which makes the good Iudges of reason without any losse: But wee haue discour∣sed sufficiently of this Subiect. The Carthaginians hauing ended their affaires happily, and to their content, they reioyced in many sorts, both in giuing thankes vnto God; and sacrificing after their manner, or in vsing amongst them∣selues a mutuall beneuolence and courtesie. Soone after that Xantippus had raised the hearts of the Carthaginians,Xantippus re∣turnes into his Countrey. hee returned into his Countrey, as a man well aduised: For the Prow∣esse and Valour of men, and their Vertues, are many times the cause of great enuy and detraction: Against the which Cittizens that are well allied, and haue many Friends, make easie resistance: But strangers which haue not that support, are easily ruined and defeated. They say hee went away for some other reason, which wee will deliuer when it shall be fitting. After that beyond all hope the Romans had receiued Newes of the defeate of their Army in Affricke,Aspis besieged by the Cartha∣ginians. and the taking of the Con∣sull: And that the remainder of their men was besieged in Aspis, consulting presently of the safety of those which were remaining in Affricke, they appointed an Army to bee raised to goe thither with all speede. In the meane time the Carthagaginians besieged Aspis, striuing to force it, with hope soone to haue this remainder of the Battell: But the Vertue and Courage of the Romans which defended it, was so great, as all the Enemies attempts could not preuaile. Wherefore being out of hope to enter it, they rais'd the Siege. Soone after
Newes came that the Romans prepared an Army at Sea to send into Affricke: For the which the Carthaginians being mooued, they v∣sed all dilligence to repaire their old Vessels and to make new. Present∣ly after they laboured to stand vpon their guard, and to hinder the de∣scent of the Romans into Affricke, with two hundred Vessels armed and well furnished: But when as the preparation of three hundred and fifty Roman Vessels was ready, they sent Marcus Emilius and Seruius Fului∣us with the whole Army into Affricke in the beginning of the Spring. When as the Consuls had set sayle, to draw first into Sicily, and from thence into Affricke, they were not farre from the Cape of Mercure, but they presently discouered the Carthaginian Army: the which (as wee haue said) watched their comming at the passage,One hundred and fourteene Vessels of the Carthaginians takn by the Romans. and charged them suddainly with great fury, taking a hundred and foureteene Ves∣sels armed: sailing from thence to Aspis, they retired their Men, and after they had stayed some time in Affricke, they returned into Sicily. But when they had past the Sea betwixt Affricke and Sicily with a prosperous Winde, and had anchored neere vnto the Camarins Towne, it is not possible to deliuer the greatnesse of the torment and misery that befell them. Hardly could they preserue foure score Vessels whole of foure hundred three score and foure which were in their Army.A great num∣ber of the Ro∣mane ships perished by a Tempest. All the rest (either sunke in the Sea, or split against the Rocks) fill'd all the shore with wracks, or dead Bodies. It is not in the memory of man of any such shipwracke by a tempest. This miserable misfortune happened not casually and by chance, but by the ouerweening of the Consuls, considering that the Marriners had let them vnderstand, that they must auoid the Coasts aboue Sicily, for that it was not to be approached, being bad and difficult to sayle in, e∣specially at that season, for they sayled betwixt the Starres of Orion and the Dog-starre. Whatsoeuer it were the Consuls disdaining the admonition of the Marriners, made hast with a glorious confidence of their late Victory, to surprize some Townes a long that shore: where as they fell into extreame calamity vnder the shaddow of a poore hope. Then they knew their folly, carrying the repentance of their presump∣tion. Defacing by this wracke the things which formerly they had done well. And although that in all things the Romans relye vpon their forces, and thinke whatsoeuer they resolue, must be put in execution, holding nothing impossible when they haue once vndertaken it, and that this obstinacy doth many times turne to good. Yet sometimes they fall in∣to great and apparent errours, especially in Sea-matters. It is true that in Battels at Land fighting with men, it is not so strange if they van∣quish: For the Combate is equall, although they bee sometimes vanquished: But as for the Sea, for that they thrust themselues into hazard, and without consideration, they fall many times into great inconueniences. This happened at this time, and hath done formerly, and will be∣fall them many times hereafter, vntill they haue supprest and
reformed this ouer-weening, thinking they are able to goe to Sea at all seasons. The Carthaginians being aduertised of the shipwracke of the Romane Army, they had the greater desire to raise an Army both by Land and Sea: For that their force seemed as great at Land, as that of the Romans, by reason of the defeate of Marcus Attilius: The like they conceiued of the Sea, after the great losse the Romans had indured. Wherefore they presently sent Asdruball into Sicily with the old Bands, and a new leuie of the Men of Heracleum, with an hundred and fifty Ele∣phants. They wrigd out a Fleete of two hundred Vessels,Asdruball sent into Sicily by the Carthagini∣ans. and other Equipages necessary for Nauigation. When as Asdruball landed at Lylibeum with his whole Army, he trayned his Men, and exercised his Elephants, making roads into those Countries which were allied vnto the Romans. Finally, he was very watchfull and dilligent. And although the Romans losse had much abated their courage, yet they v∣sed all possible diligence to rayse a Fleete of two hundred and twenty Vessels with a Pallisado: the which they effected within three Moneths, and put it to Sea, the which is difficult to beleene, to the end the World should not thinke they would strike sayle vnto the Carthagini∣ans. Lucius Aquilius, and Caius Cornelius Consuls, were appoin∣ted to leade this Army, to fight with the Carthaginians in Sicily, who passing the Sea presently, arriued at Messina, where they receiued the Remainder of the ships, which had beene preserued in the storme. By this meanes their Army consisted of three hundred Vessels. From thence they tooke their Course to Palermo, the chiefe Towne of the Carthaginians, the which they assailed vigourously,Palermo besse∣ged by the Ro∣mans, and ta∣ken by assault. erecting two sorts of Engines, and other preparations to that effect, so as they easily ouerthrow a Tower seated vpon the Sea, by the which the Soul∣diers entring by force, tooke that part of the Towne which was cal∣led Naples. After this the Burgesses dying for feare, yeelded vnto the Consuls the other part which they called the old Towne. After the taking of Palermo, the Consuls put in a good Garrison, and then returned to Rome. The yeare following, Gneus Sempronius, and Caius Seruilius wre Consuls, who in like manner past into Sicily with an Army, to goe from thence into Affricke: where being arriued, they dispersed their Men into diuers places, and commit∣ted great spoiles, yet they did not any thing worthy of Memo∣ry. Finally, they arriued at the Island of Lotophages, which they call Mirmyx, which is neere vnto a little Shelfe or Barre of Barbary, where not knowing the passages, they were in a great streight, and were stayed by reason of the ebbing of the Sea: They were for a time in suspence what to doe. Finally, the Flood comming sud∣dainly vpon them, they were almost driuen to dispaire: Yet they could not saue themselues vntill they had lightned their ships, and cast out their baggage to saue themselues. After that Day the Romans were so amazed with so many dangers, as they sailed continuallly as if they had fled. Soone after they returned into Sicily, and leauing Lilybeum, they tooke Port at Palermo. But soone after that they were gone from thence to saile into Italy, there
rose so great a storme as aboue a hundred and fifty of their ships were driuen vp and downe,One hundred and fifty of the Roman Vessels lost. and in the end perished. And although the Ro∣manes after so many losses, were of aduice to preferre the honor and Maiesty of the Empire before all other things, yet they were so broken with so great miseries, as they resolued to abandon the Sea. And therefore they only leuied an Army by Land, wherein they thought they should be more confident and of better hope, the which they sent into Sicily with the two Consuls, Lucius Cecilius, and Caius Curius: To whom they deliuered only three score Vessells for their Victualls. By this meanes the Carthaginians, became againe Maisters of the Sea with out contradiction, seeing the Romans had no more any Fleete at Sea. Moreouer they had great confidence in their Army at Land, and not without cause. For after that the report of the battell giuen in Affricke, came to Rome, and that they vnderstood that the defeate of their men hapned by the force and fury of the Elephants, for that they had bro∣ken the Rankes and opened the battalions, and that they had made a wonderfull slaughter of them. Their feare of the Elephants from that day, was so great, as for two yeares after they neuer durst charge the Carthaginians, although they made many incounters in Affricke, and in the Country of Selinun∣tia, nor Campe in the Plaines within fiue or sixe furlongs of them, kee∣ping alwayes the Mountaynes and hilly Countries, to saue themselues from the Elephants;Theruce and Lipara. so as they only forced Theruce and Lipara. Where∣fore the Romanes knowing the feare their Army had, resolued againe to put a Fleete to Sea. At that time the Romane people being assembled, they chose vnto the Consulship Caius Attilius, and Lucius Manlius: They also made fifty new ships,A new Army at Sea, prepared by the Romans. and Rigg'd out the olde, the which they furnished with Souldiers proportionably. When as Asdruball Generall of the Carthaginians, knowing well the feare of the Romans, had beene ad∣uertised by the Fugitiues, that one of the Consuls was returned vnto Rome with halfe the Army, and Cecilius remayned alone at Palermo with the other, he parts from Lylibeum (when as Haruest approached) with his Army to spoile, and falls vpon the Territory of Palermo, plan∣ting his Campe vpon the Mountaines. Cecilius hauing newes of their comming, and knowing that Asdruball desired nothing but a battell, kept his Army within the Towne. By this meanes Asdruball growing very confident, conceiuing that Cecilius kept himselfe close for feare, he causeth his Army to March to Palermo, hauing ruined and burnt all the Champion Countries. The Consull was alwaies of opinion not to go to field, vntill that his enemy was drawne to passe the Riuer, which runnes neere vnto the Towne Walls. But when he saw that the Campe and the Elephants approach∣ed,The policy of Cecilius to de∣feae the Ele∣phants. he caused a ally to be made by the nimblest and most actiue men of his Army, commaunding them to skirmish with the enemy, vntill their whole Campes should be forced to come to the combats. And afterwards considering that matters had succeeded as he desired, he or∣daines the lightest and most actiue, to plant themselues beyond the
Towne ditch, giuing them charge to cast Pertuisans, Darts, and Spits a farre off at the Elephants: And if they came running vpon them with fury and violence, they should slip into the Ditch, and from thence cast their Darts at them. He also commaunded the Archers of the Mar∣ker place, to go out of the Towne, and to fight at the foote of the wall. In the meane time, he issued foorth with all the Esignes, by another side of the Towne right against the enemies left Wing, and sent many to those which fought with Darts. Presently after the skirmish beganne, the Maister of the Elephants, who with a desire of glory would haue the honour of the Victory, in∣censed them against the enemies, not attending Asdrubals pleasure. The Romans obseruing the Consuls commaundment, turned head pre∣sently; and when as the Elephants pursued them with fury, they slipt into the Ditch, the Elephants being vppon the side of it, they were suddainly charged with Darts and Pertuisans, aswell by the Townes∣men which were vpon the Walls, as from the Souldiers which lay in the Ditch. And when as they could passe no further, they turned head, being necessarily forced to fall vpon their owne battallions with great slaughter. In the meane time Cecilius goes suddainly to field, hauing his whole Army entire and in good order, by another gate, and chargeth his ene∣mies furiously,A defeat of the Carthaginians, by the Romans. who being already broken by the Elephants, and char∣ged againe by the Consuls Troupes, were easily defeated. A part of them were slaine, the rest saued themselues by flight: There were ten Elephants taken with their Indian Maisters;  after the battell, their Gouernours being cast downe. This Victory purchased great honour to Cecilius, as the Man who by the report of all the whole World, had beene the cause that the Romanes after that time resuming courage camped in the Plaines. When the Romanes had newes of this Victory, it is not credible the ioy which they conceiued, not so much for the taking of the Elephants, whereby the Carthaginians power was much decreased, as for that their men seemed to be grown more hardy in the Warre,An Armie at Sea prepared by the Romans. for that they had conquered them. Wherefore they Prepared an Army at Sea, as they had formerly resolued, and sent the Consuls into Sicily with two hundred Vessells, desiring to make an end of that Warre: Whither they past hauing made prouision of Victualls, and other things necessary. This was the foureteeneth yeare since the beginning of the Warre. The Consuls being arriued, and receiuing the Bands of Souldiers that were there, they go and lay siege to Lylibeum, hoping after the taking thereof, they might easily transport the Warre into Affricke: But the Carthaginians mooued with the like considerations, resolued by all meanes to keepe it, knowing well that after the losse of Lylibe∣um, they had nothing else remaining in Sicily. The Romans in truth held in a manner the whole Iland, except Trepanum. But to the end that what wee speake of Sicily, may not seeme obscure to some one, by reason of the ignorance of places, we will deliuer the Scituation in few words.
All Sicily hath its Scituation in regard of Italy and the limits there∣of,The Scituati∣on of the Iland of Sicily. like vnto Morea in respect of Greece, and its bounds. It is true, here is some difference, for that there is a little Sea betwixt this and Italy. Whereas Morea is ioyned vnto Greece, by a little slip of Land, for they may goe on dry foote from Morea vnto Greece, and not from Sicily into Italy without shipping. Sicily is of a Triangular forme,Three princi∣pall promonto∣ties in Sicily. and so many Angles as it hath, so many Capes or Promontories there are vpon the Sea shore. Among the which, that whereon the Sicilian Sea doth beate is called Pachinus, and lookes towards the South: that which tends towards the North, where the Sea doth end, and is not a∣boue a mile and a halfe from Italy, is called Pelorus. The third which hath his Aspect towards Affricke, and towards the Winterly West; and which is right against Carthage, from the which vnto the Affricke shore, there is not aboue one hundred twenty and seuen miles, is called Lylibeum, diuiding the Sea of Sardinia and Sicily. There is a Towne on this Cape, which carries the same name, the which the Romans besieged at that time: The which is strong with Walls and Dit∣ches, and moreouer with Marshes and Pooles, by the which lyes the passage for ships into the Port; but the entry is difficult, and not ac∣cessible but by expert Marriners. The Romans then to besiege it throughly, made round about it Tren∣ches, Rampiers, and Bastions, one neere vnto another. Finally, they set vp their Engines of Warre; neyther did they omit any thing that was necessary to force a Towne.Many Towers ruined by their Engines. At their first beginning they battered a Tower, which was scrared vpon the Sea shore, looking towards Af∣fricke, adding daily new Engines and planting them in order. Finally, they ouerthrew at the same time sixe other Towers neere vnto it, by the shaking of great Beames, armed with iron at the end, like vnto a Rams-head. Wherefore as this siege was troublesome and dangerous, and that some Towers were much indammaged, and others ouerthrown by the Violence of the Engines, and the Towne continually battered, the besieged beganne to faint, and to grow fearefull and amazed. They were ten thousand Souldiers besides the inhabitants of the Town. Yet Imilcon, who had the guard thereof, maintayned this siege a∣gainst the Romans by his Councell and great courage:Imilcon. Wheresoeuer the Romans made any breach in the Walls, he repayred it within; and if the enemy did Mine, he preuented them by countermines. By this meanes he still defeated their interprises. Sometimes hee also made sallies, hindring them much in all their attempts, and trying if hee could to fire their Engines of battery. Many times hee gaue Allarums, both by day and night, so as there was a greater slaughter and losse of men by this kinde of incounters, then many times in their set Battells. At that time some Commaunders of mercenary Souldiers,A Conspiracy by merceary Souldiers sr∣uing vnder the Carthaginians. con∣spired to yeild the Towne vnto the Romans; who being confident of the consent of their Companions slipt downe the Wall in the night, and goes vnto the Campe, discouering their charge vnto the Consull: At what time there was likewise a Grecian in Lylibeum called Alexon,Alexon. who
had sometimes saued the Towne of Agragas from Treason, when as the Saragossins held it. This man after that he had vnderstood the enterprize of the Trea∣son, reuealed it vnto milcon: who caused all the Captaines to bee pre∣sently called, except such as had slipt downe the Wall, and declared vnto them what he had vnderstood of the Treason, intreating them they would not so ignominiously deliuer him and the Towne vnto their Enemies. Moreouer he made them great promises, if they would keepe their faith: And when they had all consented to that which hee pro∣pounded, he presently sent Haniball with them to pacifie a Troope of Gaules. This was the Sonne of that other Haniball, who (as we haue said) was hang'd vpon a Crosse in Sardinia, after he had made that losse of the Army at Sea. He hoped well that he would be pleasing vnto them, for that had beene at the Warre with them vnder his Fathers commaund. Hee likewise sent Alexon to other bands of strangers, for that they had great confidence in him. Presently after hee had assem∣bled the Companions, he preuailed so by prayers and promises, as all generally kept their Faith and Friendship with the Carthaginians. Wherefore assoone as the Chiefe of the Treason were returned, and ready to speake vnto them, and to relate what they had treated with the Romans, they not onely denied to consent vnto them, but they disdained to heare them, driuing them from the Walles with Darts and Stones. Thus the Carthaginians being in a great and manifest danger of Trea∣son, had like to haue fallen into their Enemies  But Alexon (who formerly for to keepe his Faith with them of Agragas, had not onely preserued the Towne, but the Countrey likewise, their Lawes, and li∣berty) was the cause at this time (in the opinion of all the world) that the Carthaginians were not defeated.The foresight of the Cartha∣ginians. And although they of Carthage could not be aduertised of the affaires of Lylibeum, yet doubting the necessiies which they might fall into during a long Siege, they armed fifty ships with ten thousand men: whereof Haniball the Sonne of Ail∣car,Haniball sonne of Amilcar, Captaine of 50 ships with 10000. me▪ who formerly was Captnine of the Triremes, and a great friend to Atarbe, had the leading▪ to whom they gaue charge in few words to doe what possible he might, to enter into Lylibeum, and to suceour the besieged. Haniball then with these ten thousand Souldiers, arriues first at the Islands of Eguse, which are mid-way betwixt Carthage and Lyli∣bum, and there attends the Winde: After which setting sayle, he bent his course directly to the Hauen of Lylibeum, hauing his men all in bat∣tell and ready to fight. The Consuls amazed at this suddaine approach of the Enemy, doub∣ted that if they attempted to fight with them, the violence of the winde would likewise driue them into the Port. Wherefore they resolued not to stop their entry. It is true that they prepared themselues vpon the shore, and sought to terrifie them at their entry. In the meane time all the troops within the Citty, seeing succours come, resumed courage, leping for hope and ioy, and giuing courage by signes and shours to their Succours. Haniball with incredible courage, sayles won∣derfull
swiftly and enters the Port, the which no man would haue im∣magined, and puts his Army safe into Lylibeum. It is incredible the ioy which they within the Towne conceiued, after their succours were entred, not so much for the refreshing of men, but for that the Ro∣manes durst not hinder the entry of the ships. But Imilcon Commaunder of the Carthaginians, seeing that the Souldiers demaunded nothing but to fight, aswell the old Garrison, in regard of their supplies, but the new succours, for that they had not felt the former miseries; he would not loose this opportunity, resol∣uing to set fire on the Romanes Engines by what meanes soeuer. Where∣fore when hee had drawne them altogether, hee made a speech vnto them, promising good rewards to such as should shew themselues braue Men: And assured them that the Carthaginians would acknowledge it. The Souldiers mooued with these speeches, told them that they were ready to do their duties. Moreouer they cryed out with a loud voyce, intreating him that without any further stay he would lead them to fight. Imilcon commending their courage, sent them to refresh themselues, and gaue them charge to be ready, and to performe that which their Captaines should commaund them: Whom presently after hee drawes a part, and acquaints them with his interprize; then hee appoints vnto euery one his Quarter and place, commaunding them that euery one should retire speedily in the beginning of the night, the which they performed. At the breake of day Imilcon made his sallies in many places, and fell vpon the Engines. The Romans who doubted the enemies designe, were not negligent, but were all in Armes keeping a good Guard. Wherefore as soone as the Carthaginians beganne their sally, they marcht against them, so as the Allarum was great neere vnto the walls. The Carthaginians were about twenty thousand men, and the Romanes many more. And for that the combate was without any order of bat∣tell, the danger was the greater: For in so great a multitude of Soul∣diers, they did fight Man to Man, as if it had beene a single combate. It is true, that the heate of the fight, and the greatest Allarum was neere vnto the Engines. Beleeue that they which were appointed, aswel by the Carthaginians to assaile, as by the Romanes for defence, cam to so great and cruell a combate, as they dyed with incredible Resolu∣tions, neuer abandoning the place which they had beene ordain'd them. But they which were mingled in fighting, cast themselues vpon the Ro∣manes with such great courage, assailing the Engines with fires, Darts, and such like Armes, as the Romans that day, seeing themselues not able to resist the enemies interprize, thought in a manner all to bee vt∣terly lost. When as the combate had continued long, Imilcon seeing the great losse of his men, and that he could not preuayle, he caused a Retreate to be sounded. And although the Romanes were that day in great dan∣ger to loose all their equipage for battery, yet in the end they defended their Engines, and all their furniture, resisting the enemies with incre∣dible valour.
After these actions, Hanniball parting in the Night from Lylibe∣um, vnknowne to the Enemy, with all the shippes which hee had brought with him, hee sayled to Tripanum to Adherball, who was Generall of the Carthaginians, for that they had alwayes a great care to keepe it, in regard of the opportunity of the place, and the beauty of the Port: It is but fifteene miles from Lylibeum. Ad although that in the meane time the Carthaginians were very destrous to heare newes of the affaires of Lylibcum, yet it was not possible, for that the Towne after Hanibals departure was kept so short,Hiball a Rh∣dieu. as no man could enter or come forth. At that time a Rhodien named Haniball, an able Man, seeing the great desire of the Carthaginians, promised them to enter into Ly∣libeum, mauger all the World, and to bring them certaine newes of their estate. But although the Carthaginians were glad to heare him, yet they held it impossible, for that the Romanes Army at Sea was in a manner within the Port. Yet the Rhodien ssures them, and parts with his ship: And being arriued at an Island neere vnto Lylibeum, three dayes after hauing the Winde in Poope,The great re∣solution of the Rhdin, hee sayled directly thither at noone day, and in the sight of the Enemy, (striuing by all meanes to hinder him) hee entred, performing that which hee had vndertaken. One of the Consuls wondring much at the great courage of this man, drew by night to the entry of the Port ten of their best Sayles to sur∣prize him in his returne: with the which hee himselfe kept watch vpon the departure of the Rhodien, and gaue  to the whole At, my to doe the like. The shippes which were at the entry of the Port of either side the Marishes, attended with their Oares ready the returne of the Rhodi∣en shippe, thinking that hee could not auoid it, but would bee inuested: But the Rhodien relying much vppon his courage, and the swiftnsse of his Vessell, past thorough the Enemies ships being thus prepared, not in the nght, nor by stealth, but in two open day: and not conten∣ting himselfe to bee thus escaped safe with his Men, seeing himselfe a little out of the presse, hee turned the Prow of his Vessell, calling them to fight, yet no man durst assaile him, in regard of the swiftnesse of his Vssell. Finally, hee returned to Carthage, hauing triumphed ouer the Ene∣mies with one Vessell, and related all the newes vnto the Senate. The which he hath performed since many times, doing great seruice by this meanes to the Carthaginians, in aduertising them of what was ne∣cessary, and bringing hope and comfort to the besieged, with an amaze∣ment to the Romans of so great boldnesse, wherein hee was animated, for that a little before the route that was made vnto him by dilligens experience: But suddainly when hee was discouered, hee turned his Prowe directly to the Tower which stands vpon the Sea towards Italy; so as they which looke to Lybia were in sight to all Men: which was the onely meanes whereby Saylers might with a good wind recouer the Port. Many mooued with the vndaunted  of
this Rhodien, and knowing the places presumed to doe the like. The Romans discontented with this great affont and scorne, vsed all dilligence to fill vp the entry of the Port, for the effecting where∣of they filled many Merchants ships with and, and sunke them: Then they cast great store of earth vpon them, yet they lost their labour and time, for the great depth swallowed all; and the ebbing and flowing of the Sea dispersed whatsoeuer they cast in. Finally, there was some part, which by chance had made a Barre or Banke, where suddainly a Carthaginian Quadrireme sent in the Night was stayed: After the taking whereof, being well armed and furnished in the Port, the Romans attended the comming of others, especially of the Rhodien Vessell. By chance hee arriued with the accustomed celerity: But at his returne, the Quadrreme pursuing him, began to presse him neere. The Rhodien at the first sight wondred at the lightnesse of the Vessell: But hauing well viewed it, hee knew that the Carthaginian Quadri∣reme had beene taken by the Romans. Wherefore hauing no more hope in flight, hee resolued to sight. But when they came to ioyne, the Romans had the aduantage, aswell by reason of the multitude of their shippes,Th Rhodi taken with his ship. as the bounty of their men. Wherefore the ship was easily taken with the Rhodien. After which prize the Romans ioyn'd it to the Quadrireme, and kept them continually armed and ready in the Port: By which meanes they tooke from them all easie entrance into Lylibeum. In the meane time they battered the Towne violently, and the Walles were ouer∣throwne in diuers places with their Engines. But Imilcon built a new Wall where as the old had been ouerthrowne, hauing no more hope in his Sallies, nor be able to set fire on the Engines. And as they had con∣tinued some time in this manner, there did suddainly rise so great a storme, as all the Engines and Instruments were shaken by the vee∣mency of the Winde: so as the vpper story of some Towers were ouer∣throwne to the ground. Some Grecian Souldiers among the besieged,A Sally of the Carthaginins vpon the Ro∣mans Engines of Battery. holding this very commodious for the burning of the Engines, discouer their Opinion to the Gouernour, who finds this conceit good, and after that hee had made prouision of things necessary, hee suddainly makes a Sally, and casts fire in three places vpon the Engines. The which when the Souldiers had done suddainly, the fire by reason of the violence of the Winde ooke easily, and consumed them speedily, for that they were dry, and had beene long burnt in the Sunne Neither was it possible to preuent it by the hand of Man, for the violence of the Winde. In trueth they were so amazed at this new accident, as they had not iudge∣ment to see and confider what they had to doe, so as striuing to suc∣cour their Engines, some fell, being ouerthrowne with great Fire∣brands falling from aboue, or blinded with smoake. And the more the Romanes found themselues crossed and troubled for the reasons aboue mentioned, the more beneficiall and fortunate it was for the Carthaginians: For they might easily discouer the Enemies and all the Engines, and if they they cast any thing against the Romans or
their Engines, the Winde draue it with great violence, and made the blow more forcible. Finally, the fire was so great, as the foundation whereon the Towers were set, were burnt, and the Heads of the Rammes consumed. The Consuls after this had no more care to repaire their Engines, re∣soluing to carry the Towne by a long siege, in causing a great Trench with a Rampir to be cast vp round about it, and there Campe, with a resolution not to raise the Siege before they had taken it. When as they of Lylibeum had rampired all places necessary, they indured the Siege with great courage. But after the Romans had receiued newes of this Disaster, the Senate caused ten thousand men to bee raised, which they sent into Sicily to refresh their Army, for that many had died at this siege, and their Army at Sea was bare of Men: These faild first vnto the Port, then they marcht by Land vnto the Campe before Lylibeum. Appius Claudius being now Consuil,An enterprize of the Romans vpon Tripanm and chiefe of the Army, and the other Consuls vpon their returne to Rome, seeing the Succours also arriued, assembled the Captaines, and let them know that in his Opi∣nion it was time to sayle to Tripanum with all their forces by Sea, to surprize Adherball, the Generall of the Carthaginians nothing doubting of the Succours which were newly arriued into Sicily, and would ne∣uer conceiue that the Romane Army would put to Sea after so great a losse of men, during the siege of Lylibeum. When as this aduice was approued by the Captaines, hee made choice of some out of the old and new Bands, and furnished all his ships with the ablest men in the whole Army, who imbarked most willingly, for that the Voyage was short, and the promises great. Being then ready, they parted at mid-night vnknowne to the Enemy, and sayled directly vnto Tripanum. But at the breake of day, being neere the Towne, and they discoue∣ring that they were Romane ships, Adherball recouered his spirits, and assured himselfe, although tha at the first hee was amazed at their ud∣daine arriuall, resoluing to try the fortune of the fight, and to vndergoe the hazard rather then to be besieged shamefully in the Port. Where∣fore he presently caused their Oares to imbarke, and caused the Trum∣pet to round, to draw the Souldiers together, shewing them in few words, according to the necessity of the time, that if they did their duties, there was hope of Victory: But if they refused to fight, he layed them before the miseries of men besieged. And when as the Soul∣diers made shew of resolution, crying ot that hee should make no stay to march against the Enemy, then Adherball commending their forwardnesse, causeth them all to imbarke, giuing them charge to haue an eye vnto his ship, and that they should follow with courage. Presently after hee parts first our of the Port, as he had said, on the con∣trary side to the Romans. But the Consull seeing the Enemies contrary to his hope, not to a∣bandon the place, nor ready to flye, but seeking the Combat with great heate, hee called backe his shippes, whereof some were
already in the Port, others at the entry, following them neere. And when as the first turned head, according to the Consulls commaund, and that the rest which followed farre off made hast to enter into the Port, they fell foule one vpon another at the entry, and at the com∣ming foorth, so as the Romans were in danger to haue lost all. Finally after the Vessells had recouered the open Sea, the Captaines Ranked themselues along the shore one after another, turning their Prowe to the enemy. But the Consull who from the beginning had alwayes followed the Army, made the left Wing, casting himselfe into the open Sea. In the meane time, Adherball hauing gotten aboue the left Wing of the Romans with fiue Vessells, and turning the Prowe to the enemy, he fortified himselfe by the Sea, commaunding other foure which follow∣ed him to do the like. When they were thus in Front against the ene∣my, he giues them a signe to charge the Romanes, whose ships (as we haue sayd) were Rank'd along the shore. It is true they had done it, to the end that the enemies Vessells which should part out of the Port,A Combate at Sea betwixt the Romans and the Carthagini∣ans. might be incountred with more ease. The battell was long and furi∣ous, so as the danger seemed equall; without doubt they were the choyce men of both the Armies at Land. Yet the Carthaginians had alwayes the better, for that their Vessells were lighter, their men more expert in Rowing, and moreouer they were in the open Sea, where they might turne vp and downe at their pleasure. If any one were neere prest by the Enemy, he knew how to sau himselfe suddainly, by the lightnesse of his ship▪ And if the Enemies pursued him, many others turning presently together, compassed and hemb'd them in by their lightnesse. By this meanes they spoiled them much, and sometimes sunke them. And if any one of their companions were in danger, they relieued him easily without perill, sailing in the open Sea. Contrariwise the shore neere vnto the Romanes did annoy them much; for being forced in a streight, they could not Retyre in necessity, nor defend themselues, nor succour them that were prest, nor passe beyond the Enemies to charge them againe. Which is a mst requisite thing in fighting at Sea. For that they were closed vp in a streight, and their Vessells were heauy, and their Marriners vnskilfll in Sea causes, nor well practised to Rowe. The Consull seeing that all went from ad to worse, some of his ships being broken vpon the shore,A Victory at Sea by Adheral against the Ro∣mans. others sunke, and finally being voide of all hope, he flyes away first. There were about thirty Vessells re∣mayning of the whole Army, which by chance were neere him, and followed him; all the rest to the number of fourescore and thirteene were taken by the Carthaginians. Moreouer all the ands of men were taken, except those which  by the Wracke. Adherball was in wonderfull great esteeme among the Carthagini∣ans for this Victory, hauing well mannaged the Affaires by his onely Wisdome and great Courage. Whereas on the other side, Appis Claudius was infamous, and indured a thousand iniuries by the Romane people, for that he had carried himselfe so indiscreetly, and had
drawne the Romane Common-wealth into so great danger. Finally, be∣ing Deposed from the Consulship,Appis Cludi∣us deposed from the Con∣sulship, and condemne to dye. he dyed by the hand of Iustice with great ignomy and shame. And although the Romans were very sensible of this great Defeate; yet like Men of great Courage and Resolution, they suddainly prepare a Fleete at Sea with a new Leuy of Men,Lucius Iunius. and send Lucius Iunius the Consull into Sicily; to whom they giue charge to Relieue the Campe before Lylibeum, and to carry them Victualls and other necessary Mu∣nitions. He sai'd directly to Messina with threescore Gallies, and there drawes together all the Vessells with Beake-heads in Sicily out of Lylibeum, and makes a Fleete of sixescore Men of Warre, besides the Merchants, and those which he had to carry the Victualls, to the number of eight hundred, of which he gaue in a manner the one halfe to the Questor, with some that had Beake-heads, to conduct the Victuals vnto the Campe. In the meane time he stayed at Sarragosse, expecting the rest of the ships which came after him from Messina, and the Corne which the Allies of the inland Country did furnish. At the same time Adherbal sent the Prisoners and ships which he had taken at the battell to Carthage. Then he dispatch'd Captaine Carthl with thirty Vessels, to go and find the enemy, whom he followed neere with threescore and ten others. Moreouer he gaue charge to Carthalo, to take what ships he could whole from the Enemy, and to burne the rest.The Romans surprized by Carthalo. When as Carthalo (vsing dilligence to saile all night) had surprized the Romane Fleete sud∣dainly, which was retired into the Port of Lylibeum, and had burnt some, and taken others, hee drew the Romans into great danger; for when as they which kept a Guard about the ships made great cryes, and gaue an Allarum, Imilcon hearing the noyse, and seeing theirs com∣ming at the breake of day, he presently made a sally vpon the Enemy. By this meanes the Romane Army being inuironed on all sides, was in great danger. After that Carthalo had taken and burnt some Romane ships, he went to Heracleum, to cut off the Victualls which came from thence to the Campe. And as he made the Voyage, some Discouerers bring him newes that they had seene a great multitude of ships. After which reives, Carthao without making any shew; (for that hee did not much esteeme the Romanes in regard of the former Victories) makes hast to meere them. The Romanes were likewise aduertised that the Carthagi∣nian Army approached But for that they did not hold themselues able to incounter them at Sea, they cast themselues by Fortune vpon the e∣restshore, where there were some retreates and turnings: Ouer the which did hang some Rocks, whether the Romans retiring, they repuls'd the Enemies ships with stones and slings: And although at the first the Carthaginians were resolued to keepe them besieged vntill they had ta∣ken them. Yet seeing that the place by Nature defended them, and that Romans, resistance was greater then they expected, they sailed in the end (after they had taken some Merchants vessels) to a Riuer which lay neere vnto them, to obserue the parting of the Romans. In the meane
time the Consull hauing dispatch'd the Affaires for the which he staied at Sarragosse, he past the Cape of Pachinus to come vnto Lylibeum, hauing no aduertisement of that which had hapned vnto his men some dayes before. The Carthaginian Captayne hauing newes by his Scouts of the Con∣sulls comming, vsed all dilligence to incounter him farre from the o∣ther ships. But when as Lucius Iunius saw the enemies Army a far off, he was amazed at the great number, so as he durst not fight; neyther could he well flye being so neere vnto them. Wherefore Retyring by dangerous and difficult places, hee stayed in the first Port, resoluing rather to indure all extremities, then to suffer the Roman Army to fall into the enemies hands. The which Carthalo Commaunder of the Carthaginians perceiuing, he made no more pursuite, but retyred in∣to a Port betwixt the two Roman Armies, hoping by this meanes to keepe both Armies from parting. Some few dayes after there rose a great storm; the which the Carthaginians perceiuing, as Men which had great experience in Sea matters, and knowledge of the places where they were,The Romanes Fleete broken at Sea by the Violence of a storme. informed Carthalo that in passing speedily beyond the Cape of Pachinum, he should auoyde the violence of the storme: whereby they preserued all his Fleet. But the Romans were so beaten with the storm, for that the places where they were had no Ports, that their ships were broken in such sort, that there remayned not any thing, whereof they could afterwards make vse. By the meanes of these mis-fortunes at Sea, the Carthaginians were afterwards the stronger. The Romanes hauing lately made so great a losse at Tripanum, and now agayne hauing lost all their Equipage abandoned the Sea, relying only vpon the Land. The Carthaginians on the other side were Mai∣sters without contradiction: neyther were they without hope at Land. And therefore the Lords of the Senate, and they which were at the siege at Lylibeum, were of aduice to continue the siege, although they had bin affllicted with the former mis-fortunes. By this meanes the Ro∣manes sent to the Campe at Lylibeum whatsoeuer they thought necessa∣ry, and they of the Campe vsed all possible meanes to continue the siege. Lucius Iunius after this great shipwrack arriued at Lylibeum much discontented, studding continually how he might performe some Act, whereby he might in some sort Rpayre his disgrace for the last losse.Mount Erix. Wherefore soone after he tooke by Treason without any great occasion Mount Erix, the Temple of Venus and the Towne. Erix is a Mountayne of Sicily, which hath his Aspect vpon the Sea towards Italy, betwixt Trypanum and Palerm, but neerest to Palerm. It is the greatest in all Sicily,Mount Aetna. but Aetna. It hath a playne vpon the top, where stands the Temple of Venus Ericina, the which (by the Report of all the World) is the richest and most beautifull of all Sicily. A lit∣tle vnder the top of the Hill, there is a Towne of the same name, which is very long, and hath the acesses very vneasy and difficult on all sides. The Consull set a Garrison vpon the top of the Mountayne, and at the foot vpon the approaches from Trypanum, thinking by this meanes
that he should be able to keep the Towne and all the Mountayne safely. After the taking of Erix, the Carthaginians made Amilcar, surnamed Barca Captaine Generall of their Army at Sea. This man falling vpon Italy with his Army spoyled all the coast (it was then the eighteenth yeare since the beginning of the War) and from thence (after that heAmilcar spoiles the Coasts of Italy. made great spoiles in the Countries of the Locrines, and Calabria) he returned into the Territory of Palermo with his whole Army, where he planted himselfe in a Place betwixt Rhegium and Palermo, the which lay high aboue the Sea, and was fortified by nature, and safe for his Campe. It is a Mountayne inuironed with caues and holes, vpon the which there is a playne not lesse then twelue miles in compasse, the which is commodious and fit for labour. It hath moreouer all the Sea Winds, and is not infected with any venomous Beast. Moreouer it is inuironed both by Sea and Land with inaccessible Rockes, in regard of the places which are betwixt both there is no great need of buildings. It hath on the top a little Hill which serues for a Watch and Fortresse; it hath like∣wise a very pleasant and commodious Port, for such as passe from Try∣panum or Lylibcum into Italy; and it hath store of Water. There are but three wayes to go vnto this Mount, which are difficult and vneasy, two vpon the firme Land, and the third towards the Sea. Amilcar Planted his Campe there, where there was no conuenient Towne,Amilcar. but was lodged among his enemies, whom he did not suffer to liue in rest: For many times he went to Sea, and spoyl'd the coast of Italy vnto Cumes, and then he led his Army by Land vnto Palermo. and besieged it within eight hundred Furlongs of the Romanes Campe: where he stai∣ed neere three yeares, performing many braue Acts which were diffi∣cult to relate in particular. For euen as when excellent Combattants re-doubling their blowes with dexterity and force, the prize of the Victory being propounded, it is neyther possible for them, nor for the standers by, to yeild a reason of euery charge and blow, taking in generall a sufficient knowledge of their Valour, aswell by the Prowesse of the Men, as by their mutuall indeauours, and by their Experience and Virtue; we must conceiue the like of the Commaunders of whom we now speake. For if any one will Write the causes, or manner how they lay Am∣bushes, and intertayne skirmishes and incounters, he should not be a∣ble to number them, and would cause a great trouble without any pro∣fit to the Reader; where we may better attayne to the knowledge of things past, by a generall narration and by the end of the War. They likewise cannot perceiue in this present War, any thing by the History of the great pollicies, nor by the time, nor by the feeling of the pre∣sent case by things done, which haue bin decided with an ouer-weaning and violent boldnesse. There are many causes, for the which they could not discerne betwixt the two Campes; for the Armies were equal and their Forts not easie to be approached vnto, for that the space be∣twixt both was very strong and little; so as there daily hapned particu∣lar combates. Finally they performed nothing which concerned the
end of the Warre: For many times in incounters some were slayne, and others turning away, and escaping the danger assured themselues, and fought againe, where Fortune remayning like a good Distributer, chan∣ging them from Front to Front, hath inclosed them in a narrower com∣passe, and a more dangerous fight in regard of the place and precedent Combat. Whilst the Romans (as we haue sayd) kept the top and foote of the Mountayne of Erix, Amilcar surprized the Towne, which was be∣twixt the top of the Hill,The Towne of Erix taken from the Ro∣mans by A∣milcar. and the foote of it, where the Roman gar∣rison lay. By this meanes the Romans which held the top, were besie∣ged by the Carthaginians, with great danger: The Carthaginians like∣wise were no lesse in the Towne, seeing they were besieged from the top of the Mountayne, and from the foote, and hauing but one way, they could hardly draw vnto them that which was necessary. Thus ei∣ther Party persisted one against another with extreame obstinacy: Suf∣fring great extremities and running into great dangers. Finally, they purchased a sacred Crowne, not as Fabius sayth, as Men weakned and tyred, but constant and not vanquished: For before that one party o∣uercame the other, although the War continued two yeares, yet be∣ganne to haue an end by another meanes. Finally the Affaires of Erix, and the forces were in this estate. You may imagine that these two Common-Weales,A good Com∣parison. did like vnto Rauening Birds fighting among themselues vnto the last gaspe: For al∣though that sometimes their flight fayled them for want of breath, yet they repulse the assaults with great courage, vntill that hiding them∣selues willingly, they fled away easily; this done some take their flight before the rest. In like manner the Romanes and the Carthaginians ty∣red with toyle, grew cold in their continuall combats, abating their forces for the ordinary charges. And although the Romanes had aban∣doned the combats at Sea, almost for fifteene yeares, aswell for their mis-fortunes, as for that they did hope to make an end of this Warre by the Army at Land; yet seeing their designe not successefull, consi∣dering likewise the courage of Amilcar, they conceiued a third hope in their Forces at Sea. They aduised well, that if their designe were successefull, it would be a meanes to make an end of their Affaires, the which in the end they effected. First, they left the Sea yeilding vnto their mis-fortunes: And for the second time, for that they had bin vanquished neere vnto Trypa∣num, and finally at the third time, they were of another humour, by the which being Victors, they cut off the Victuals from Erix, and made an end of the Warre. This attempt for the most part was like a Combate of great courage; for the publicke Treasure vnable to furnish this charge: But the Citizens contributing euery Man vnto his power, many together built a Quinquereme, supplying the necessary expen∣ces; so much the peoples hearts were iflamed to Armes, and to aug∣ment the Romane Empire. By this meanes they made a preparation of two hundred Quinqueremes, after the patterne of the Rhodien, the which as we haue sayd had beene taken before Lylibeum: Wherefore
they afterwards gaue the commaund vnto Lucius Luctatius Consull, and sent him in the Spring against the Carthaginians,The port of Trepanum ta∣ken by Luati∣us, Commaun∣der o the Ro∣mane Army. who being sud∣dainly arriued in Sicily with his Army, tooke the Port of Trepanum at his entry, and all the rest which were about Lylibeum. In the meane time all the Carthaginians ships retired to their Cap∣taine. Afterwards hee indeauoured to take Trepanum with his Engins, and other things necessary to force a Towne: But for that the Carthagi∣nians Army at Sea was not farre off, they had a remembrance of things past, and of what importance the knowledge of the Sea was, he was not idle nor negligent, causing his Rowers and Marriners to bee continually kept in practice, not suffring any one to be idle. By this meanes the Soul∣diers in a short time were inured to the Sea. The Carthaginians contrary to their hope, hauing newes of the Roman Army at Sea, presently prepa∣red their ships,An Army at Sea prepared by the Cartha∣ginians. and rraighted them with Corne & other Munition, to the end the besieged within the Towne of Erix should not haue any want of things necessary. Hanno had the charge of this Army, who past first to the Island of Hieronesus,Hanno. and from thence he made haste to sayle aboue the Enemy to Amilcars Campe, to discharge his ships, and to victuall it. But Luctatius being aduertised of their comming, and doubting of their enterprize, (for it was not hard to coniecture) made choice of the ablest men of the Army at Land, and failed directly to the Island of Eguse, which is not farre from Lylibeum. Then hauing giuen courage to the Souldiers, he makes a Proclamation that euery man should be ready the next day to fight. Three daies after the Consull seeing at the breake of day that the wind was good and prosperous for the Enemy, and contrary to his Army; and that the Sea was much troubled with a storme, he was long in suspence what he should doe: but suddainly he resolued, that if his men came to fight during the storme, he should haue nothing to doe but with Hanno and his Army at Sea, and with ships that were laden and incumbred: But if he should delay the fight vntill the Sea were calme, he should haue to deale with ships that were light and very swift, and with the choice of the Land souldiers: and moreouer with the courage of Amil∣car, who was then held to be very terrible. Finally, he resolued to fight with the Enemy notwithstanding the storme and the contrary Winde. The Carthaginians comming with full sayle,A fight at Sea betwixt the Ro∣mans and Car∣thaginians. he put himselfe before them with his Army ready and in battell. When the Carthaginians saw their course to bee hindered by the Enemy, and their ships in bat∣tell, they strooke saile, and prepared to fight, where they charged of either side with great courage: But for that things were manna∣ged in another manner, than when they were defeated at the battell of Trepanum, it was no wonder if that their Affaires had ano∣ther successe. In regard of the Romans, their ships were very light, and free from all incombrance, but of that which was necessary for the Warre. Their Rowers had beene long practised, and were therefore eager and ready to fight. They had also made choice of the best men in their Army at Land: the which fell out contrary with the Carthagini∣ans.
Their ships were laden, and therefore vnfit to fight: Their Rowers and Marriners were men gathered together by chance, and not accusto∣med to the War: their Souldiers were also new, and had not seene any thing: for they had no more care for the affaires at Sea, imagining that the Romans would not attempt any thing more at Sea. And therefore as soone as the Battell began, the Romans had the Victory;A Victory of the Romanes a∣gainst the Car∣thaginians. whereas fifty of the Carthaginians ships were broken or sunke, and three score and ten others that were laden, taken. The rest set sayle and got the Winde, and recouered Hieronese with incredible swiftnesse, by a sud∣daine change of the Winde. After the Battell the Consull retired to Lylibeum with his whole Army, whereas the booty and Prisoners were deuided amongst the Souldiers: For besides the dead, there were aboue ten thousand men taken. The Carthaginians amazed at this heauy and great defeate, found themselues troubled for many reasons, although their minds were al∣wayes inclin'd to Warres. First they had no meanes to victuall those that were in Sicily, after the defeate of their Army at Sea: Considering that their Enemies were Maisters of all the Sea. Moreouer they imagi∣ned that it would be a Traiterous act to suffer their Generall and the Souldiers which had serued their Common-wealth to be lost. In re∣gard of continuing the War, they had neither Men nor Captaines to mannage it: wherefore they sent a Man to Amilcar, and gaue him full power and Authority to doe what he should thinke fitting for the good of the Common-weale. Amilcar performed the duty of a good and wise Captaine: For whilest there was any hope in the Carthaginians af∣faires, he neuer complained of his paines, nor auoided perill, but being a man of great industry and courage, he thrust himselfe continually into all dangers, to vanquish aswell as any of the other Captaines. But when as he saw there was no more hope in the Carthaginians affaires, hee sent Embassadours to the Consull, to treate vpon an accord, yeelding wise∣ly and discreetly vnto the time: For wee must know that the duty of a good Captaine consists aswell in considering of the time, not onely to vanquish, but also to strike sayle. Whereunto Luctatius did willing∣ly giue care, knowing well the necessities which the people of Rome en∣dured by this tedious War, Finally, a peace was thus concluded: that the Romans and Carthaginians should line in amity and friend∣ship, if the people of Rome would consent vnto it: And that the Car∣thaginians should leaue all Sicily: Neither should they hereafter make War against Hieron, nor against the Saragossins, or their Allies, and that they should restore all the Prisoners without ransome: And more∣ouer they should pay thirteene hundred and twenty thousand Crownes within twenty yeares. These Articles were sent to Rome, which the people notwithstanding would not yeeld vnto: but committed ten men with power from them who were sent into Sicily: Being arriued, they altered nothing of the treaty of peace, but the time of payment, which they shortned, aug∣menting the summe with 600000. Crownes more. Moreouer they did articulate, that they should not onely dislodge out of Sicily, but
also out of all the Islands which are betwixt it and Italy. Behold the end of the first Warre betwixt the Romans and Carthagi∣nians for Sicily. It continued foure and twenty whole yeares, and hath beene the longest and the greatest that was euer heard spoken of. During the which (I omit other things worthy of memory) they haue fought at one instant with aboue fiue hundred Quinqueremes on both sides: Afterwards with not much lesse then seauen hundred. The Ro∣mans haue lost seauen hundred Quinqueremes, besides those which at sundry times the torments haue sunke, and the Carthaginians about fiue hundred. Wherefore they which formerly haue admired Armies aswell by Land as Sea, and the Combats at Sea of Antigonus, Ptolomey, and Demetrius, haue reason to cease, considering the great deeds of the Romans and Carthaginians. But if they will consider how great a difference there is betwixt the Quinqueremes and Triremes, whereof the Persians made vse against the Grecians, and which the Athenians and Lacedemonians vsed in their Warre, they shall vndoubtedly see, that there was neuer seene such great forces fight at Sea, wherefore that ap∣peares plainely which we haue propounded in the beginning, that the Romans haue not onely indeauoured to conquer the vniuersall Empire by vallour, but they haue also accomplished their desire, not by good For∣tune as some Grecians suppose, nor by chance, but by a wonderfull ex∣perience and practice in such great affaires. Although that some may demaund how it happeneth that the Ro∣mans, who are at this day farre greater Lords both at Land and Sea, considering that they held in a manner the Empire of the whole world, cannot draw together so many Vessels, nor rayse so great an Army at Sea at one instant. The reason will be easie, when they shall let them vnderstand what the Romane Common-wealth was, what their Lawes and their manner of liuing, although it will not be profitable neither for vs nor for the Readers of our Workes, to make mention of things which concerne not our purpose. Without doubt the Reasons are great: the which notwithstanding in my Opinion no man hath knowne vnto this day by the errour of Historiographers: Whereof some knew not what they wrote, and if others vnderstood them, they haue made them obscure and vnprofitable. If they would duely consider this War, they shall finde that the courage and power of these two great Citties were equall. First their desire was alike, they had the same cou∣rage, and the like desire of glory. It is true, the Romans had the bet∣ter Souldiers: But Amilcar Generall of the Carthaginians, surnamed Barca, Father to Haniball, who afterwards made Warre against the Ro∣mans,Amilcar Father to Hanniball. had not his equall in prudence and vallour. When as the peace had beene concluded, either of them fell in a manner into the like incon∣ueniences: for Ciuill war followed after. The Romans had presently War against the Inhabitants of Mount-Flacon: the which was soone de∣cided and their Towne taken. But the Carthaginians being assailed at the same time by Strangers, Numidans, and other people of Affricke, who reuolted with hem, were in a manner quite ruined. Finally, they were forced to fight not onely
for the Prouince, but for themselues, for their liberty, for their Children, and for their owne Country. This is a warre which we will relate summarily and briefly, for it is worthy, as we haue promised in the beginning. So they shall easily see by the deeds of these times what this warre was, and of what fury, which they call i reonciliable: And they may likewise obserue to what thngs the Commander of an Army ought to haue care, and to be wary how he imploies Mercinary men: And moreouer what difference there is betwix the confused manner of liuing of Barbarians, and those that are bed vp vnder Discipline, Lawes, and Policy: And wihall they may easily see by the knowledge of this warre, the causes for the which Ha∣niball made warre against the Romans, which is a principall poynt, whereof in opening the truth, wee haue not done little for those which desire to see our worke. For that they haue not onely beene doubtfull and obscure to those which haue written, but also to such as haue beene present. After that Amilcar had treated the peace with the Romans, he ed his Army from the Towne of Erix to Lylibeum, and resigned his charge, giuing the conduct thereof into Affricke to Captaine Gescon, who was at Lylibeum:Gescon. who fearing that if so great a multitude of men, should passe together into Affricke, there would grow some mutiniy and contenttion for that there was much due vnto them for their pay, the which they could not satisfie for want of treasure: Where∣fore he prouided long before, that the troupes should not passe altoge∣ther, but at diuers times, leauing some respite of purpose: to the end that they might with more ease prouide, in sending them backe by troupes, and that the first might be retied to their houses, before the se∣cond ariued. The Carthaginians had consumed their treasure, in their former charges, and did not send them backe to their houses but com∣manded them to attend within the City vntill the returne of their Com∣panions, to the end they might make some accord with them altogether concerning their Paye.Insolency of the Souldiers within Car∣th. But when as the Souldiers committed many Royots day and night within the City, and that the insolencies of such a troupe were insupportable, the Carthaginians called the Captaines, and iurreated them to leade all this multiude assembled in their City to the Towne of Sicca, vntill they had giuen order for their Prouin∣ces. Moreouer they caused some money to be deliuered to euery one of them, to the end they might tolerate their expectance the more easily. The Captaines obeying the will of the Carthaginians, drew forth their Men. But for that euery man desired to leaue his baggage within the City, as they had done, hoping to make a short returne for their paye: the Carthaginians doubted that if they should allow that, some would not budge for the loue of their children, others for their wiues, and by this meanes they should bee nothing bettered within the City. Wherefore in the end they forced them to depart with their baggage. Being within the Towne of Sicca, they liued at pleasure in idlenes and basely, which is a pernicious thing for an Army, and in a manner the onely fountaine and beginning of Mutinie. Some began to demaund their pay more auda∣tiously
then they had beene accustomed, and much more, reducing to memory the promise of Presents, which the Captaines had made vnto them at need, when as they intreated them to fight valiantly. More o∣uer they expected much more then their Pay amounted vnto: But they were frustrated of their hope: For assoone as they were all assem∣bled in Sicca, Hanno, Pretor of the Carthaginians was sent vnto them: Who bringing no presents vnto them, intreated them moreouer for some abatement of their Pay, shewing them the pouerty of the Trea∣sure. They generally mutining at this speech, began to rise suddain∣ly,Mutiny of the Souldiers. so as there was a great tumult and sedition in the Army, conside∣ring the great diuersity of their manner of liuing, and languages. It is true the Carthaginians had some reason to raise their Army out of diuers Nations: For by this meanes so diuers an assembly could not easily make a Conspiracy. Moreouer the Captaines better obeyed. And likewise if there did rise any mutiny or sedition in the Army, they should not finde meanes to pacifie them, for ignorant men are mooued with fury. Beleeue me when they are once in choller, they increase it more and more, like bruite Beasts with an vnrestraine cruelty. The which happened at that time in the Carthaginians Campe: For some were Spaniards, others Ganles, some Geneuois, and others of the Islands of Maiorqua, and Minorqua. There was also a good Troope of Grecians, most of which were fu∣gitiues and slaues, and the greatest number were Affricans. Where∣fore it was not possible to draw them altogether at that time, although they could not haue taken a better course. Moreouer Hanno could not vnderstand all their languages: and it seemed in a manner more impos∣sible to imploy many Interpreters at one time to draw the Army toge∣ther, and withall to vse the same speech vnto them foure or fiue times. The last remedy was to mannage this by the Captaines; the which Hanno attempting preuailed nothing: For some vnderstood not what their Captaine sayd vnto them, others related it otherwise then they had spoken, although they had consented vnto the cliefe, some did it of ignorance, but the greatest part through malice. Wherefore all was full of perplexity, inhumanity and distrust. Among other things they complained,The complaint of the Souldi∣ers. that the Carthaginians of purpose did not send one of the Captaines vnder whose charge they had made War in Sicily, and who had made them so many promises; but one who had beene in those actions. Finally, they runne to Armes be∣ing all in a mutiny, making no accompt of Hanno, nor of the other Cap∣taines, and marcht directly to Carthage, planting their Campe neere vn∣to the Towne of Tunes, which is fifteene miles from Carthage, being aboue twenty thousand Men. Then the Carthaginians began to looke one vpon another, and to acknowledge their great errour, when there was no redresse in their affaires. In trueth it was a great fault in them to haue drawne together so great a multitude into one place after the War was ended. They committed another which was no lesse, when as they did not retaine their Wiues Children and baggage, whereof they might haue made vse in necessity as of Hostages. Being in no small feare
of so great a multitude of Men, they omitted nothing which they thought be hoouefull to pacifie their Rage, causing Corne to be carri∣ed vnto them, and all other things necessary, and to be deliuered vn∣to them at their owne prize. Moreouer the Senate sent Embassies often vnto them, promising to do according to their commaund, so as it were in their power: But the Souldiers who are now growne more insolent, did orge daily new Quarrels, perceiuing the feare of the Carthaginians, especially for that they had bin trayn'd vp in the War of Sicily, and that the Carthagi∣nians nor any other durst looke vpon them in order of battel Wherfore whereas formerly they had made their quarrell, but for the pay that was due, they now demaunded Recompence for their Horses that were slayne, and not content with that, they pretended there was Corne due vnto them for many yeares, for the which they demanded payment at a prise, whereof vntill that day they had neuer heard them speake. Finally they daily pretended new quarrels to enter into War, for the most Wicked and Mutinous had the greatest credite in the Army. And when as the Carthaginians had made promise vnto them, to do all things possible, in the end they agreed, that for any thing that should be doubtfull, they should Refer themselues to that which the Generall should decree, vnder whom they had made War in Sicily. They did not much affect Amilcar Barca, vnder whose charge they had bin, for that he came not to see them during this dissention, and that he had formerly Relinquisht his commaund ouer them of his owne motion: Contrariwise they all in generall loued Gescon, who had bin their Captaine in Sicily,Or Geson. and who had intreated them curteously aswell in all other things, as in their passage to Affricke; wherefore he had the charge by a common consent. Presently being imbarked with Mony, and aiuing at Tunes, he called the Captaines: then he caused euery nation to Assemble, and blamed them for their faults past,Gescon makes remonstrances to the Souldiers and admonishing them for the present, and giuing them aduice by a long speech for the time to come, to continue good friends to the Carthagi∣nians, who had intertayned them so long. Finally he perswades them to Rest satisfied with their pay, the which he desired to diuide among the Nations. There was by chance a Campanois in the Army called Spendius, who being lately a slaue vnto the Romanes, had fled into Sicily: This was a bold and hardy Man, and a good Souldier:Spendius. Who (fearing that if they agreed with the Carthaginians, he should be Restored to his Maister, and then put to Death according to the Roman Lawes) vsed Audacious speeches, and laboured by all meanes to mutine them all, desiring troubles rather then any accord, and Wars then Peace. Moreouer an Affricaine called Matho,Malbo. a free Man who had beene in the Wars of Sicily, for the Carthaginians, feared to be punished, for that he had much incensed the Munity, during the Dissention. This Matho ioy∣ning with Spendius, drawes together all the Affricaines, and Aduises them to consider well what they had to doe in this Action, and that
they should rest assured, that presently after the Retreate of the other Souldiers, hauing receiued their pay, the Carthaginians would be re∣uenged wholly vpon them, (labouring by this meanes to terrifie all the Affricanes with punishment) and for this reason they should looke well to themselues. The whole Troupe being much mooued with this speech, and like∣wise for that Gescon had onely spoken of their bare pay, without any mention of Recompence for Horses dead, nor of Corne for so many yeeres, they drew presently all together to consult of their Affaires. And when as Spendius and Matho vsed very bad speeches against Gescon and the Carthagintans, they easily gaue eare vnto them. And if any one sought to shew the contrary, they had not the Patience to heare them, if it were contrary to the opinion of Spendius, but beat them downe presently with stones. By this meanes the Murther was great, not onely of Captaynes but of simple Souldiers, so as there was nothing heard in the Army during this Mutiny, but all cryed out together, Charge, charge. And although they did this continually, yet their fury was greater, when they parted drunke from the Table. By this meanes as soone as any one cryed Charge, the stones flew about, so as there was no meanes of Retreate. Wherefore when no Man durst speake any thing in the Assembly, they made choise by a generall con∣sent of Matho and Spendius for their Captaines. And although that Gescon saw this great trouble and mutiny in the Campe, yet he desired to prefer the Publicke Vtility before all other things. Wherefore see∣ing that by the mutiny of the Souldiers increasing daily more and more, the Carthaginians were in great danger, he resolued to pacifie it, and to trye all meanes with the hazard of his life. One day he called the Heads of the Conspiracy, another day some Nation apart, labouring to pacifie their fury by prayers and promises. But for asmuch as they had not yet receiued the Corne, which they sayd was due vnto them, and that they quarrelled continually, Gescon desorous to restraine their contempt, commaunded them to set downe their demaunds to their Captaine Matho. At which words the Com∣mons incensed grew so insolent, as they presently seized vppon all the Siluer which was brought thither for their pay, laying hold vpon Gescon and the Carthaginians that were with him. But Matho and Spendius Captaynes of the whole Troupe, thought presently to commit some Act of great Villany, to the end that the War might be the more in∣flamed. And therefore in commending the insolency of the Souldiers, they tooke with the Money all the baggage of the Carthaginians, and gaue order to shut vp Gescon with all his company, after they had done them many outrages. After this, they made open War against the Carthaginians, with the most cruell Conspiracy, that euer had beene heard speake of vnto that day. Behold the causes of the beginning of this War, made a∣gainst the Souldiers,Embassies sent throughout all Affricke by Matho and Spendus. which they call Affricane. After that Matho and Spendius had done as wee haue sayd, they sent Embassies to all the people of Affricke moouing them to liberty▪
and intreating them to giue them succours against the cruell and tyran∣nous Empire of the Carthaginians, who in a manner all found the en∣terprize good, and sent Men and Victualls in aboundance. And after that the Captaines had diuided their Army in two, one part went to besiege Bisarthe, and the other Hippona, for that they would not consent vnto the Conspiracy. The Carthaginians who had beene accu∣stomed to feed their families only by Tillage, and to draw their publicke Treasure from the Tributes of Affricke, and moreouer to mannage their War by Mercenaries; being then not onely frustrated of all these things, but moreouer seeing they were all turned to their Ruine, found themselues suddainly in great difficulties, not knowing which way to turne them. And they found them the more desperate, for that they had hapned contrary to all opinion. It is true, they were in hope, after they had beene tyred with the long Wars of Sicily, and had in the end made a peace with the Ro∣mans, that they might rest for a time, and take breath; but it succeeded otherwise. Beleeue me, this War suddainly kindled, was more dan∣gerous than the other: For that in the first, they did not fight with the Romans but for the Conquest of Sicily; but in this they were forced, to vndergoe the danger for themselues, for their families and their Country. Moreouer they were vnfurnished of Armes, of a Fleete at Sea, and of Equipage for shipping, for that they had lost many in their battels at Sea. They had no more hope of Tributes, nor in the succours of their friends and Allies. Finally they saw then what difference there was betwixt a Forraine and Transmarine War, and the mutiy of a ciuill sedition,The cruell and couetous Em∣pire of the Carthaginians. of which mischiefe vndoubtedly they them∣selues were the cause: For in their first War, they did Lord it ouer the people of Affricke, with too great Tyranny and coetousnesse, for that they were of opinion they had good cause, so as they leuied a full moiety of all their fruites. They also doubled the Tributes, and did not pardon those which had offended through ignorance. They gaue Offices not to such as were milde and gracious, but to those which aug∣mented the publicke Treasure, although they had tyrannized the peo∣ple, like vnto Hanno of whom we haue spoken. By this meanes it hapned that the people of Affricke seemed glad to Reuolte, not onely at the perswasion of many, but at a simple Mes∣senger. There is nothing more true, that euen the Women of euery Towne conspired,The Conspira∣cy of the W¦men Affricke. for that in former times they had seene their Hus∣bands and Children led into seruitude, for that they had not payed the Tribute: so as they made no reseruation of their goods which they had remayning, but moreouer they did contribute their Iewels, (a hard thing to belieue) to supply the payment of the Souldiers. By this meanes Matho and Spendius gathered together so great a quantity of siluer, as it was not onely sufficient to satisfie the promises which they had made to the Souldiers, from the beginning of the Conspiracy, but they had more than was needfull to mannage the War. Wherefore a wise man must not looke vnto the present time, but also vnto the future.
And although the Carthaginians were enuironed on all sides with so many miseries, yet they fainted not: but gaue the conduct to Hanno (for that formerly they held he had ended the Warre neere vnto Heca∣tontophylon) of those Souldiers they could leuie in this necessity of time. They also armed the young men of the Towne, and caused their Hor∣ses to be practised: They repaired the remainder of their ships, and old Triemes, and caused new to be made. In the meane time Matho and Spendius, (to whom three score and ten thousand armed men of Affrica had ioyned,) after they had deuided their Army in two as wee haue said, held Bisarthe and Hippona bsie∣ged, yet not abandoned their Campe neere vnto Tunes. By this meanes all Affricke was shut vp to the Carthaginians. You must vnderstand that Carthage is seated vpon a Promontory,The seituation of Cathage. which aduanceth into the Sea, and is in forme of an Island, but that it ioynes vnto Affricke by a little space of land. In regard of the Citty, it is enuirond of the one side by the Sea, and on the other by Marishes. The breadth of the Coun∣trey whereby it is ioyned to Affricke, containes not aboue three miles; whereof the Towne of Bisarthe is not far off from that sie which looks towards the Sea: And that Tunes ioynes vpon the Marishes. The Ene∣mies hauing planted their Campes at Tunes and Bisarthe, tooke from the Carthaginians the rest of Affricke: and making courses sometimes by Day, and sometimes by Night vnto the walles of the Citty, they gaue them great Allarums, and put them in feare. In the meane time Hanno made preparation of all things necessa∣ry for the Warre.. Hee was a diligent man, and well practised in such things; although that soone after hee had gone to field to finde the Enemy, he committed an act of little iudgement in not discerning the times. You must vnderstand that assoone as he was sent to succour the besieged in Bisarthe, he forced the Enemies at the first charge, being terrified with the multitude of Elephants: but afterwards his conduct was so bad, as hee drew the besieged (for whose succours hee was come into great danger, and extreame misery. For when he had brought grea prouision of all sorts of Engins for battery, and had lodged his Campe neere vnto the Towne-walles: hee fought with the Enemy, who could not endure the violence of the Elephants: Wherefore they abandoned the Campe, with great losse of their men, and retired to a little Mountaine strong of it selfe, and full of Groues. But Hanno who had not beene accustomed to make Warre but against the Numidi∣ans,The Nature of the Numidians. who after they haue once taken a flight, doe seldome stay vntill the third day, had no care to pursue them, supposing he had gotten an absolute victory; but entred into Bisarthe, not thinking of any thing but to make good cheere. But the Enemies hauing made Warre in Sicily vnder Amilcar, and beene accustomed many times to flye before the Enemy, and suddain∣ly to charge againe the same day, hauing newes of Hanno's retreate into Bisarthe,Surprize of the Carthagiians Campe. and that the Campe as Victors was secure; they as∣sayled it by surprize, and slew part of them: the rst were forced to re∣couer the Towne, to their great shame and ignominy. All the equipage
of Engins was taken without resistance. It is true, that this was not the onely misfortune which at that time did preiudice the Carthaginians by the folly of Hanno. For some few dayes after, when as the Enemies camped neere vnto Sorze, and that an opportunity was offered to de∣feate him easily, hauing beene twice in quarrell, and twice in battell one against another, as they are accustomed, hee lost these two occa∣sions by his folly and basenesse. Wherefore the Carthaginians considering that Hanno did not man∣nage this War well, they by a generall consent made Amilcar Captaine againe:Amicar. to whom they gaue three score and ten Elephants, and all the Souldiers and Fugiiues, with some Horse-men, and the young men of the Towne, so as hee had about ten thousand Souldiers. But assoone as he had marcht forth with his Army, he presently by his admirable vertue brake the hearts of his Enemies, and raised the siege of Bisarthe: and then he shewed himselfe worthy of the glory which they had giuen him for his prowesse in times past; and that hee was worthy of the hope which all men conceiued of him. Behold wherein they first disco∣uered his diferetion and iudgement. The Cape whereon Carthage stands, is ioyned to Affricke like vnto a crooked backe, and is very stony; with Mountaines full of wood, whereas the wayes are very vneasie and inaccessible, they being most of them made by the hand of man. And therefore Matho had seized vpon all the little Hills that were vpon the way, and had planted good Garrisons.The Riuer of achera. Moreouer he passed the Riuer which they call Machera, the which hath high banks, and a very swift course, and cannot be past but by a Bridge,Sepyra. vpon the which stands the Towne of Se∣phyra, the which Matho did likewise hold. By this meanes the paages of Affricke were not onely shut vp from the Carthaginian Army, but also from a priuate person. The which Amilcar consi∣dering, and trying all meanes to passe into Affricke, in the end hee vsed this inuention. Hee had obserued that sometimes the course of this Riuer was so stopt by the Winde, as the mouth of it ouerflowed, and made in a manner a great poole, and at that time it had no great fall into the Sea. Wherefore hee was of opinion, that at this season they might passe it neere vnto the Sea. Hee kept this secret, and onely made necessary preparation for the Army to march. Hee care∣fully attended the opportunity of the time, and then appointed his Army to part secretly in the Night, and to passe the Riuer. But at the breake of day the Enemy and they that were in the Towne, were wonderfully amazed at this passage. In the meane time Amilcar march'd with his Army directly to those which held Se∣phyra. When as Spendius had the news that Amilcars Campe had past, he presently makes haste with his forces to succour his men. Behold how the two Campes succoured one another. There were 10000. men in Sephyra, neere vnto the Bridge: and about 15000 in Bisarthe. These thinking they might easily compasse in the Carthaginians, if they all marcht against them at one instant, some in front, and the other at their backes, suddainly they tooke courage, and marcht against Amilcar
with all their Troopes; who the fore-ward, then the Horse and the Souldiers that were lightly ar∣med, and vpon the Reare . But when hee saw the Ene∣mies charge his men couragiously, he presently changed the order of his Army,The Pollicy of Amilcar. and turned it quite contrary: So as they which were in the fore-ward, returned backe, making shew of some flght, and they which were in the Reare, taking another way, marcht directly to the fore-ward. The which the  seeing who assailed the Carthaginians on eith side, and thinking that the Enemies amazed at this , had fled, they began to purue them without order, and came suddainly to fight. But when as they saw the Horse-men approach, and the o∣ther Battalions to fall vpon them with great fury;The Victory of Amilar. amzed at this new manner of War, they were soone broken; and in the end flying away, ome were defeated by the Legionaries, who charged them vpon the with great slaughter, others by the Elephants and Horse-men who entred after the Legionaries. There were sixe thousand men slaine, and about two thousand ta∣ken; the rest saued themselues by flight, some in the Towne of Sephy∣ra, the rest retired to the Campe before Bifarthe. After this good fotune, Amilcar pursued those which had gotten into Sephyra, the which he tooke at his comming, for the Souldiers that were within it, fled presently to Tunes: and from thence running ouer the Pro∣uince, he tooke diuers Townes, whereof some were won by breach and assault. By this meanes th Crthaginians, who before were deiected and without hope, tooke heart, and recouered their ancient courage. At that time Matho held Hippona besieged, and had peswaded Spendius, and Autarice, Captaine of the Gaules, to pursue the Enemy, and that flying the Plaines, by reason of the multitude of Elephants and Horse-men, they should keepe the foote of the Mountaines, and not to goe farre from them vpon any occasion that should be offered. More∣ouer he sends often to the Numidians and Lybians, solieiing and intrea∣ting them to giue him succours, and not to lose so great an opportunity to restore Affrick to liberty; Spendius then hauing made choice of sixe thou∣sand old Souldiers out of the Campe which was at Tunes, lodged con∣tinually neere vnto the Enemy▪ keeping the foote of the Mountaines. Moreouer he had the Gaules with him, which were vnder the charge of Autarice, to the number of about two thousand men: for the rest of their Troope which was in Sicily, had retired to the Romans during the siege of Erix. Whilest that Amilcar stayed with his Army in a Plain wholly in∣uironed with Mountaines,Supplies of Numidians come to Spen∣dius. there came great supplies of Numidians and Affricans to Spendius. By this meanes the Carthaginian Army was besieged with three Camps. The Affricans were in front, the Numidi∣ans vpon their taile, and Spendius on the side. Hannibal was long in suspence what counsell hee should take, being thus beset. There was at that time among the Numidians a certaine man called Naraue, of a noble and auncint extraction,Narau. and of a Royall courage. Hee had alwayes beene fauourable vnto the Carthaginians, keeping his Fathers
affection, and who then had succoured them, for that Amilcar was cho∣sen their Captaine. Thinking new to haue found a good opportunity to purchase their friendship, he marched directly to the Campe, accom∣panied with about an hundred Numidians: being neere vnto it he makes a stand, giuing them a signe with his hand that he would parley. A∣milcar wondring at his great boldnesse, sends an Horse man vnto him, to whom he sayd, that he was come to speake with the Commaunder of the Army. And as Amilcar stood still in doubt, and could not be∣leeue him; the Numidian leanes his Horse, his Lance, and his Com∣pany, and goes directly vnto him without any feare for amazement. The whole Army wondred, and were amaed at this Numidians great confidence. Finally, being called to parley, he told him that he had alwayes borne a great affection to the Carthaginians, and that he had long desired the Friendship of Amilc. Moreouer that he was come to doe him seruice, and to put himselfe and his estate faithfully into his hands vpon all occasions. Amilcar hearing this Speech, was so ioyfull, as well for the boldnesse of this young Man, who had presented himselfe so confidently vnto him, as for the plainenesse of his Speech, that he not onely made him Companion of his fortunes, but protested and vowed vnto him to giue him his Daughter, in keeping his faith to the Carthaginians. After this discourse Naraue retired to his men, and within three dayes after returned to Amilcar with two thousand men which he had vnder his charge. The Carthaginians being fortified with this troope, Amilcar durst fight with the Enemy. Spendius likewise supplied with Numidians and Affricans, drawes his Army into the Plaine, and without any long stay comes to the Combate, which was cruell. Finally, the Cartha∣ginians relying in the multitude of their Elephants, and likewise Na∣raue performing his duty well,The Victory of the Cartha∣ginians against Spedius. they had the Victory: Autarice and Spendius hauing no more hope, fled. There were ten thousand men slaine, and about foure thousand taken. After this battell Amilcar freed those that would follow the Warre vnder him, and armed them with the Enemies spoyles, telling them that refused, that they should no more carry Armes against the Cartha∣ginians, and for all that which they had formerly done they were par∣doned. Moreouer, that it was lawfull for them to retire into their Countrey, if they thought it good: but if they were found heareafter attempting any enterprize,A mutiny of mercenary Souldiers in Sardinia. Bostare slaine. their punishment was certaine. At the same time the mercenary strangers which kept Sardinia, assailed all the Carthaginians that were there, after the example of Spendius and Ma∣tho, and hauing shut vp Captaine Bosare with his Company into a Fort, they put him to death. Hanno was afterwards sent with a new Army, against whom the Strangers conspired with the old Souldiers, and after they had committed great cruelties, they hang'd him. Then fearing to be punished for so great a villany,Hinno hang'd on a Crosse. they slew and strang∣led all the Garthaginians which inhabited Sardinia, and tooke all the Townes and Forts, nioying the Ind vntill that a sedition rising betwixt them and the Sardinians, they chased them away, and forced
them to flye into Italy. By this meanes the Carthaginians lost Sardi∣nia, a very great Island, well peopled,The Carthgi∣nans lose Sar∣dinia. and abounding with all com∣modities: It will not be needfull to relate those things which are appa∣rent by that which others haue written. Matho, Spendius, and Autarice Chiefe of the Gaules, fearing that this clemency of Amilcar, in feeing the Prisoners with pardon, would gaine the Lybians, and other Souldiers, they laboured to commit some villanous act, to estrange the hearts of their men wholly from the Car∣thaginians. And therefore they assembled them together, where soone after a Post comes with Letters, as if hee had beene suddainly arriued from Sardinia; the tenor whereof was, that they should keepe Goscon and the other Prisoners carefully: and that there were some in the Campe, who to purchase grace and fauor with the Carthaginians, would set them at liberty. Spendius hauing found this occasion, first aduised his Companions that they should not regard the deliuery of the Priso∣ners, vnder the colour of Amilcars counterfeite clemency: For hee had not freed them for any desire hee had to saue them, but to the end that by this meanes hee might haue them all, and afterwards punish them ingnertall. Moreouer he gaue them chage to keepe Gescon with his Company carefully, that they might not escape through negligence: but if they did otherwise, the Enemies would make no great accompt of them, and withall they should haue great inconueniences in their Warre. But who will doubt that so excellent a Captaine, and of so great experience in the Warre, will not suddainly become their mortall Ene∣my, when he shall bee escaped by their negligence? Whilest hee was thus speaking,Letters from Tunes, to the Mutines Camp. behold another Mssenger comes from Tunes, bringing Letters of the same Tenour, the which being Red vnto the As∣sembly, Atarice Commaunder of the Gaules stood vp, saying, that he saw no meanes for their safety, but by taking away all the hope they haue in the Carthaginians. For as long as any one hath respect vnto their clemency, he can neuer be a loyall Companion in the War. And therefore we must beleeue, heare, and consent vnto the opinion of those, which shall giue aduice to do the  we can vnto the Carthaginians, and to hold such as shall say the contrary for enemies and Traytors. When he had made an end of this Speech, hee aduised them to put Gescon and his company to some cruell death, with all the Carthagini∣ans which had bin since taken: This Autarice had great credite in their Assemblies, for that they all vnderstood him, speaking the Punique Language, which at that time was common among the whole Army, by reason of the long War, wherein he had serued vnder the Carthaginians; and therefore his Aduice was easily allowed by the Army, in regard of the fauour he had among the Souldiers. And although many of euery Nation, walking and conferring together, did not thinke it fit to vse such cruel∣ty, especially agaynst Gescon, who had done them so much good, yet they heard nothing of that which they spake, for that they talked a∣mong themselues in their Languages. But when as they saw that they did not like of putting the Carthaginians to Death, a seditious Mn
who was by chance among them, cryed out with a loud voice, Charge: At which word they were presently beaten downe with stones by the Multitude,A great inhu∣nity. so as their Kinsmen carried them away soone after, as if brute Bests had torne them in peeces. This done, they take Gescon, and the other Prisoners which were to the number of seuen hundred,Gescon with his Copany put to death. and led them without the Rampiers, and there beginning wih the head, whom a little before they had cho∣sen among all the Carthaginians, as the Man which had intreated them best, they cut off all their hands, and Dismembred them, and in breaking their Legs, they east them thus liuing into a Ditch. The Carthaginians aduertised of so great a cruelty done vnto their Citizens, knew not what to do, but that which was in them, to be wonderful∣ly incensed, and to lament for the great ignominy of their Citty, and the misey of their Citizens. Finally, they sent to Amilcar and Hanno, which were the other Commaunders of the Army, intreating them that so great a cruelty done vnto their Citizens, should not remayne vnpunished. Moreouer they sent an Embassie to these enemies to require the bodies to be interr'd. Who not only refused them, but also forbid thm not to send hereafter any Treaters of Peace vnto them, nor Embssies,A cruell reso∣lution. and if they did it they must expect to indue the like paynes that Gescon had suffed: and moreouer they had concluded, that as many Carthagini∣ans as fell into their hands, should be cruelly slayne: And as for their Allies they should lose their hands; the which afterward they did carefully obserue. Wherefore he that will duly consider these things, may boldly say, that the Bodies of Men, and some of their Vices, do not onely increase sometimes, but also their hearts much more. Be∣leeue that euen as Vcers are inflamed by Medicines, and are impaired if they be applyed; and if they make no reckoning of them, they di∣late and extend themselues of their nature, and neuer cease vntill the Body be wholy corrupted and rotten, so it many times fals out of the Vices and corruptions of mans minde, so as there is no Beast so cruell or sauage as Man: To whom if thou doest any grce or remission of pu∣nishment, or some other good, he growes worse, esteeming all this but Deceite, and wilbe more distrustfull of his Benefactors: And if on the other side thou seekest to resist him, there is nothing so vnreasona∣ble, so cruell, nor so wicked, but he will easily vndertake it, glorifying himselfe in his presumption, vntill his proud Spirit hath past the bounds of Reason. Of which things the beginning and the greatest part, pro∣ceedes from the lewd life, and bad breeding of Youth. There are other things which adde much vnto it, and namely the Couetousnes and cruelty of the Captaynes. All which Vices were found at that time in this Army, and especially in the Commaunders. In the meane time Amilcar bearing the enemies outrages impati∣ently, caused Hanno, another Captayne Generall for the Carthagini∣ans to come vnto him, imagining that when the whole Army were to∣gether, the Warre would be the more easily ended. Finally, he cau∣sed the enemies which were then taken, or afterwards, to bee cruelly
slaine, or deuoured by Beasts, hoping that the Warre would then haue an end, if he might put them all to Death. As the Carthagini∣ans seemed at that time to be in better hope, Fortune suddainly chan∣ged, so as their Affaires beganne to impaire and grow worse: For as soone as these two Captaines were ioyned together,Diffention be∣twixt Amilca and Hanno. they fell into such dissention, as they not onely lt pursuing the enemy, but gaue them great occasions of their owne defeate. For which causes the Carthaginians being mooued; they sent word that one of them should returne to the Citty, and that hee which the Souldiers loued best, should remayne in the Campe. They had also a∣nother inconuenience: For their great shippes wherewith they brought Corne and other necessaries to the Campe, were in a manner all broken in a storme. Moreouer Sardinia, from whence they were wont to draw great succours for the affaires of Warre, was lost for them, as we haue sayd. And to the end their miseries should be full,The Townes of Hippon and Bisarthe reuolt from the Car∣thaginians. the Townes of Hippona and Bisarthe, which alone among all the people of Affrick had kept their Faith inuiolable to the Carthaginians, not only in this War, but in that of Agathocles, and in the time of the Romanes; reuolted then not onely ignominiously from the Affricanes, but also shewed them suddainly a wonderfull Affection and Loue: And to the Carthagi∣nians an implacable hatred, casting into the Ditches all the Carthagi∣nians with their Captaines, which were there for their Guard, to the number of fiue hundred, after they had cruelly slayne them: And they deliuered the Towne, and would not render the Bodies to the Citizens of Carthage to interre them. By this meanes Spendius and Matho grew more insolent, and layed siege before Carthage. Amilcar at that time had Hannibal or a compa∣nion in his charge, whom the Carthaginians sent him, when as the Souldiers left Hanno, to whom during the dissention of the Captaines, the people of Carthage left a power to retayne whom they pleased. A∣milcar accompanied by Hannibal and Naraue, ouer-ran the whole Pro∣uince, cutting off the Victuals from the enemy; wherein the Numidi∣an Naraue did him great seruice. This was the estate of their Campes. The Carthaginians being thus opprest by their enemies, were forced to craue succours from their Allies,The Prudnc of Hieron. to whom at that time Hieron of Sara∣gosse sent them great assistance, supplying them with whatsoeuer they demaunded: For he was of opinion that the preseruation of the Car∣thaginians was necessary for him, as well for the safety of his estate, as to entertayne the friendship of the Romanes; to the end that after the ruine of Carthage, they might easily do whatsoeuer they pleased with∣out contradiction. This was wisely considered of him: For in truth no Man must seeme carelesse of such things, neyther must they suffer any one to grow to so great a power, as he shall haue cause euer after to feare a manifest iniustice. The Romans also bound by the Articles of the peace, did what they could possibly to relieue them. It is true, that in the begin∣ning, there was some dissention for th causes which follow. When the Carthaginians were first besieged, they tooke about fiue hundred
Men, who ayling from Italy for gayne, were taken and put in prison. The people of Rome tooke this in ill part. But when as soone after they had sent an Embassie for this cause, the Carthaginians freed them, and intreated them curteously. This was so pleasing vnto the Romanes, as presently they deliuered all the Prisoners,The courtesie of the Romanes to the Car∣thaginians. which they had yet remay∣ning since the Warres of Sicily, without Ransome, succouring them still whensoeuer they required it, and suffered their Merchants to carry them Corne, forbidding them to furnish the enemies Campe with any Victuals. Moreouer at such times as the old Souldiers of Sardinia re∣uolted agaynst the Carthaginians, they would not giue Audience to their Embassadours, who were sent to deliuer them the Island. A while after they would not receiue the Bisarthins, who would in like manner haue giuen themselues vnto them: For that they would not in any sort infringe the Articles of the Peace: The Carthaginians thus relieued by the succours of their Allies, indured the siege more easily. Matho and Spendius were no lesse besieged than they did besiege: For Amilcar had reduced them to such great want of all things, as they were in the end forced to raise the siege. Soone after they made choyse of the ablest Men of all their bands, to the number of fifty Thousand, and went presently to seeke out Amilcar. Moreouer they kept not the plaines, fearing the Elephants and the Horse men, whereof Naraue had the Charge, but striuing still to gaine the high and inaccessible places: du∣ring the which, although they were as strong and hardy as the Car∣thaginians, yet they were often beaten, for that they vnderstood not the practise of Warre. Then they might easily iudge what difference there is betwixt the good conduct of a Captaine, and the ouer-weaning of a Multitude. He separated some and inclosed others by his industry, being forced by their priuate necessity. He also defeated many by Am∣bushes in full fight. Somtimes he terrified the enemies, falling vppon them by surprize. All such as were taken aliue, were cast vnto the Beasts. Finally, he lodged about his enemies to their great disaduantage, and to the benefit of the Carthaginians, drawing them into such necessity, as they neither durst come to fight for feare of the Elephants and Horse∣men, neyther could they safely flye,The extreame necessity which prst the stran∣gers Campe. for that they were enuironed with Ditches and Pallisadoes. Finally, hunger did so presse them as they did eate one another. Behold the reuenge which the gods tooke of them for the cruelties they had committed against their Friends. They came not to fight, both for that the Carthaginians were assured of the Victory, and their punishment was certayne. They made no mention of any treaty of peace, for that they knew well there was no hope of Mercy, hauing committed such great cruelties. Finally they indured all miseries, expecting daily succours from Tunes. But when they had cruelly eaten vp their Prisoners,Famine makes them to eate men. and their Seruants, (a kind of liuing which they had long vsed) and that no succours came from Tunes, they knew not what to resolue, for the extremity of the Famine, and the feare of punishment. Finally, Autarice, Zarxe, and Spendius resolued to parley with Amilcar. By this meanes they demaunded lee to
send Embassadours: The which being granted, the Embassie comes, with whom Amilcar agrees, that it should be lawfull for the Cartha∣ginians, to chuse ten such as they pleased out of their whole Army, and that the rest might retire in their shirts without any harme. The which when they had concluded, Amilcar told them, that according to the agreement he made choise of those that were in his presence. By this meanes Spendius, Autarice, and the other heads of the Army were deliuered vnto him. When the Lybians had newes of the taking of their Captaines, thin∣king that the Carthaginians had broken their Faith, for that they knew not the Articles of the peace, they tooke Armes, fortifying themselues in a Quarter of the Campe: To whom Amilcar gaue battell with the Elephants and his whole Army, and slew them all, whereof the num∣ber was aboue forty thousand men.Forty thou∣sand men slaine by Amilcar. This was neere vnto a place which they call Serra, for that it doth resemble an instrument, which at this day is called Sie. This done, the Carthaginians who before seemed to haue lost all hope, began to assure themselues, and to recouer their courage and Spirits. In the meane time Amilcar with Hannibal and Naraue ouer-ran the Country, and the Townes of the Prouince, where hauing reduced the greatest part of Affricke with the Townes, they go and lay siege to Tunes, and besiege Matho with all his Company. Hannibal lay on that side which look to Carthage, and Amilcar was opposite vnto him: Thither they brought Spendius and his Compani∣ons, who were hang'd on a Crosse. Matho seeing that Hannibal made his retreat but badly, and without order, did not thinke it fit to lose this occasion. Wherefore he pre∣sently gaue a charge, and slew part,A defeat of the Carthaginians y Matho. the rest flying away. Finally hee spoyl'd the Campe and all the Baggage. Hannibal himselfe was taken, whom presently they crucified in the place of Spendius,Hannibal cruci∣fied. after they had done him a thousand indignities. Moreouer they slew thirty Gentle¦men of Carthage, about the body of Spendius most cruelly, by a power giuen them by Fortune for a mutuall reuenge. Amilcar was not soone enough aduertised of the enemies sally, by reason of the distance of the two Campes, neyther was it in his owne power to relieue them, in regard of the difficulty of the places. Wherefore leauing Tunes, and leading his Army to the Riuer of Machera, he lodged vpon the bankes at the mouth of it. The Carthaginians hauing newes of this defeate, began againe to haue a bad conceite of their Warre: But they presently resumed cou∣rage, vsing all possible diligence for the preseruation of the Citty. They sent an Embassie to Amilcar of thirty Senators, with a leuy of young men vnder the Commaund of that Hanno, who formerly had beene the Generall. They giue these Senators charge, to deale so with the two Captaines, as their priuate hatred might be smothered and supprest, and that they should force them to manage this Warre by their common Counsell, in laying before them the miseries of the time and the present necessity. After that the Senators had drawne these two Captaines together, and vsed diuers speeches vnto them, in the
end they perswade them to pardon one another,Reconciliation of Amilcar and Hanno. and to obey the Car∣thaginians. By this meanes all the Affaires were gouerned by a com∣mon Councell, so as when as Matho was reduced to a streight, after many incounters, Ambushes, and pursuits which they had layd for him neere to the Towne of Leptis, and in other places, in the end they ap∣pointed a set day of battell with the enemy:Assignation of a Battell. to the which both Armies prepared with Resolution. So they called their Allies, and drew men from all parts, euen vnfurnishing their Townes of Garrisons, as if by this battell they should decide all their affaires. When as all things necessary for the fight were ready on eyther side, they ioyned vpon the day appointed. The battell was cruell, but in the end the Carthagi∣nians had the Victory. The greatest part of the enemies were slaine in fighting:A Battell won by the Carthagi∣ginians, The rest which retired to the next Towne, yeilded soone after to the Carthaginians. In regard of Matho he was taken aliue. They on∣ly of Bisarthe and Hippona finding themselues guilty, and hauing no hope of pardon and Mercy, continued obstinate in their Rebellion. See how a reasonable contentment hath power in all things, and how much better it is, not to affect and seeke a thing, which afterwards is intol∣lerable to another. Finally after that Amilcar and Hanno began to approach neere vnto them, they had no more hope, but were forced to yeild vpon such con∣ditions as pleased the Carthaginians. Thus ended the Warre of Affrick, but so happily for the Carthaginians, as they not only recouered Af∣fricke, but punished all the Heads of the Rebellion according to their merites. Thus Matho and all the other Prisoners, were led in Try∣umph through the Citty by the Youth of Carthage,Matho punish∣ed. and in the end pu∣nished for their Villanies. This Warre continued neere three yeares and foure moneths, the most cruell and inhumane that euer was heard spoken of. The Romanes at that time solicited by the Souldiers which were re∣tired out of Sardinia vnto them,Note the iniu∣stice of the Ro∣mans. prepared to vndertake the Voyage. And when as the Carthaginians were discontented, saying that the Island belonged vnto them, and prepared an Army to send thither, the Romanes laying hold of this occasion, signified Warre vnto them, complayning that this preparation of an Army was not so much for Sardinia as against them. But the Canthaginians yeilding to the time, vnderstanding well their owne weaknesse, to renew a Warre against the Romanes, indeauoured to auoide all occasions, so as they left the Island vnto them. And moreouer they paied vnto the Romanes seauen hundred thousand Crownes to redeeme the Warre. Thus matters past at that time.
THE SECOND BOOKE of the History of POLYBIVS. WE haue related in the First Booke, at what time the Romanes began to inuade Forraine Nations, after they had pacified Italy: And ow they past into Sicily, and the causes why they made Warre against the Carthaginians: A what time also they began first to put an Army to Sea; and Summarily all the Affaires which hapned to the end of this Warre, to the one or the other. In the which finally the Carthaginians Sicily, whereof the Romanes were absolute Lords, except those pla∣ces which Hieron King of Saragosse held. Wee haue subsequently set downe, how after the Mutiny raised betwixt the Carthaginians and their Souldiers, the Warre was kindled, which they call Affricaine: And what extremity and incredible cruelty was vsed, and what the end was. Now we will indeauour to write in few Words the accidns which hapned since, touching euery thing as we haue propounded in the beginning. After that the Carthaginians had reduced Affricke to their obedi∣ence, they sent Amilcar presently into Spaine with a Army, who (parting with all his Troupes, and hauing his Sonne Hannibal with him, about nine yeares of age) past beyond the pillars of Hercules, and re∣couered a great part of Spaine. Where staying about nine yeares, con∣quering many Townes by force, and othrs by composition, to haue their liues and goods safe,The death of Amilar. hee dyed a Death worthy of his
actions. For when he had made Warre against couragious and power∣full people, he dyed after hee had exposed himselfe to all dangers, with great assurance, and the admiration of all the World. After this the Carthaginians made Asdrubal kinsman to Amilcar,Asdrubal made Generall. (who had com∣maunded the Triremes) Generall of their Army: At which time the Romanes passed to Sclauonia, and to that part of Europe with an Army. They which desire to vnderstand truely our Discourse, with the begin∣ning and increase of the Romane power, must diligently obserue it. This Voyage by Sea, was vndertaken for the causes which here follow. Agron King of Sclauonia,Agron King of Sclauonia. was the Sonne of Plurate. This King drew to field more foote and Horse, than any that had reigned before him in Sclauonia. It is true, that he was corrupted with money at the perswasion of Demetrius Father to Philip,Demetrius Fa∣ther to Philip. so as he succour'd the Midioniens, whom the Etoliens held besieged. You must vnder∣stand, that when the Etoliens saw that they could not draw the Midi∣oniens to liue according to their Lawes, they began to make Warre a∣gainst them, laying siege to diuers places, and doing what they possi∣bly could to take the Citty. And as in the meane time the day of the assembly was come, wherein they were to chuse another Captaine of the Army, and that the besieged were growne so weake, as they see∣med to haue no other thoughts but of yeilding; he which at that time was Generall, came vnto the Etoliens, and let them vnderstand that it was reasonable, that he who had indured so great paines, and ex∣posed himselfe to so many dangers during the Warre, should haue the booty and spoile of the enemies if they were vanquished. There were many, euen of those which had any colour to attaine vnto that charge, who discontented with this kind of demaund, intreated the multitude not to determine any thing, but to leaue the booty to him to whom Fortune should giue it. Finally the Etoliens decreed that whosoeuer should winne the Towne, he should share a moiety of all the Booty, Riches, and Armes, with him who formerly had beene the Com∣maunder. While matters stood on these termes, and that within three dayes after the Assembly was to meete (where according to the Custome of the Etoliens, the last Commaunder was to be Deposed, and a new choses) there arriued in the night about a hundred ships neere to Mi∣dionia,Succours from Sclauonia to the Midioians. with ten thousand men of Sclauonia: Who after they had recouered the Port, and the day began to breake, they landed in haste and by stealth, and then they marched in battell after their manner a∣gainst the Etoliens Army. And although the Etoliens being aduertised of their comming, were at the first amazed at this newes, and the boldnesse of the Sclauonians: Yet hauing great spirits and courage, re∣lying also in their Forces, they drew out before their Campe, the greatest part of their Horse and Armed men, and placed vpon some passages, which were not farre from the Camp, some Horses and such as were lightly Armed. The which were charged and broken by the Sclauonians, as well by reason of the multitude of their
Souldiers, as for that the middest of their battell was strongly fortifi∣ed. In regard of the Horse-men, they were forced to flye shamefully vnto their Campe: From thence thorough the aduantage of the place, they marcht speedily against those which kept the Plaine,A defeate of the Etoliens by the Sclauonians whom they charged and put presently to flight. The Midionians sally forth, and pursue them; so as there was a great slaughter of the Etoliens, and ma∣ny Prisoners, with the spoile of all their baggage, hauing found no resistance. When as the Sclauonians had performed their Kings Commaund, and shipt all their baggage and booty, they set sayle and retire to their houses. The Midionians also being thus preserued contrary to their hope, they assembled, and held a Councell among themselues, as well for o∣ther affaires, as for the diuision of the booty taken from the Enemy, and of their Armes, to deuide them in common, by an example taken of him who had beene Chiose of the Etoliens, and of those which accor∣ding to the decree of the Etoliens, should succeed him: as if Fortune had done it willingly, to make the world know her force by the misfortune of the others. In truth, these in a short time made their Enemies to feele the miseries which they themselues expected suddainly. The Etoliens after this misery serued for an example to the world, not to hold future things as already done, nor to put their hope in things which may succeed otherwise: And that wee must alwayes reserue some part in things which may happen contrary to our hope, as well as in all other actions, (seeing we are men) as in the affaires of Warre. When as the victorious ships were arriued, King Agron transported with incredible ioy for the exploits of his men, hauing vanquished the Etoliens, relying much vpon their forces; he gaue himselfe so to ban∣queting in the night, and to a foolish delight of drinking and watch∣ing, as hee fell into a Pleurisie,The death of King Agon. the which grew so violent, as hee died within few dayes after. After whose death his Wife Teuca reigned,Queene Tea▪ gouerning the Realme by the counsell and aduice of her Friends. But afterwards shee followed her womanish affections, ha∣uing no care but of this prosperity, nor any regard to forreigne affaires: suffering all those that would goe to Sea, to spoile all passengers. Shee also raised a great Army at Sea, letting the Captaines vnderstand, that the Countrey which was right against hers, was Enemy vnto her: Who at the first assailed the Elienses and Messenens, whom the Sclauonians spoiled often. But for that there is a large Sea, and that the Townes of those Regions were all vpon the firme Land; they could not easily preuent the Sclauonians courses: and therefore they did spoile and ruine the Countrey without any obstacle, And as at the same time they sayled to Epirus to fetch victuals,Pheice taken by the Sclauo∣nians.. they came to Phenice, where there were about eight hundred Gaules, entertained by the Epirotes to guard the Towne. Heere they landed and parled with them to deliuer it, whereunto they yeelded: so as they tooke it, and all that was within it by the helpe of the Gaules. When the Epirotes had the newes, they came presently to succour them with all their people, and lodged vpon the banks of a neere Riuer.
Then they tooke away the planks of the Bridge, to be free from the dan∣ger of those which kept the Towne. In the meane time they were ad∣uertised,Scerdilaide. that Scerdilaide came by Land with fiue thousand men, by the Streights of Antigonia. Wherefore they deuided their Army in two, whereof the one went to guard the passages of Antigonia, and the o∣ther remained in the Campeidlely and negligently, consuming what was in that Countrey without feare, and disdayning to keepe any watch or guard. The Sclauonians within the Town aduertised of the separa∣tion of the Army, and of the negligence of the Enemy, goe forth at mid-night, and lay planks vpon the Bridge: So crossing the Riuer, they gaine a place strong by Nature, where they passe the remainder of the Night without any noise. At the break of day either side were in bat∣tell,The Victory of the Sclauoni∣ans against the Epirotes. and the fight began. The Sclauonians got the Victory: so as few Epirotes escaped, the rest being taken or slaine. The Epirotes seeing themselues inuolued with so many miseries, and out of all hope, they sent an Embassie to the Etoliens and Acheins, crauing Succours from them; who hauing compassion of their afflictions, & desiring to relieue them, marcht to Helirane: whither the Sclauoni∣ans (who as we haue sayd had taken the Towne of Phenice, being ioy∣ned to Scerdilaide) came and lodged neere vnto them, desiring battell. But the difficulty of the places kept them asunder: together with their Queenes letters, who communded them to make no longer stay, but to returne, for that some Townes of Sclauonia had reuolted to the Dar∣daniens. Wherefore after they had spoiled the whole Prouince, they made a truce with the Epirofes by the which they yeelded the Citi∣zens and the City, but carried away all the slaues and pillage in their ships. Thus one part retired by Sea, and the other by Land by the streights of Antigonia, leauing a wonderfull feare in the Sea-townes of Greece. Without doubt when they considered, that so strong and powerfull a Towne of the Epirotes had beene spoil'd, contrary to all ex∣pectance, they were not onely in feare (as formerly) for the Coun∣trey, but also for themselues and their Townes. After that the Epirotes had ended their Affaires farre better than they expected, they were so farre from taking reuenge of the wrongs which they had receiued, or to thanke those which had assisted them, as they presently sent an Embassie to Queene Teuca, and made a league with the Arcanians and Sclauonians.A reprehensi∣on of the Epi∣rotes. Wherefore fol∣lowing after that time the party of the Illiriens, they became Enemies to the Acheins and Etoliens. Wherein they were not only ingrate and vnthankefull to their Benefactors, but also they had beene very ill counselled from the beginning of their affaires. And where as many (like men) fal somtimes by the hazard of Fortune into great aduersities and miseres, it happens not so much by their owne fault, as by that of Fortune, or by such as are the procurers: But when as men seeke their misfortune by their owne indiscreion, their fault i euident. And there∣fore when we see some great disaster and aduersity beall some men by Fortune, we doe not onely pitty them, but relieue them to our pow∣er: whereas we blame, condemne, and hate those whom we know to
haue beene the cause of their owne misfortunes by indiscretion and ma∣lice. The which the Grecians might at that time do with reason vnto the Epirotes. But what man is so confident, which hauing no feare of the common fame of the Gaules inconstancy, would haue dared to commit so noble a Citty vnto their charge,Some Gaules banisht their Countrey for their disloyal∣ty. who had so many reasons to doubt of their faith, being banisht out of their Countrey, for that they had falsified their faith with their owne Nation: and who aferwards being re∣tired by the Carthaginians, at such time as they had Warre with the Romans, and hearing a bruite of the reuolte of mercenary Souldiers for pay which they had pretended was due vnto them, begn first to spoile Agragas, whereof they had the Guard, being about a thousand men. Afterwards they were put in Garrison into Eix by the Car∣thaginians: the which they would haue betrayed whilest the Romans besieged it. The which not able to effct, they retired to the Romans, who receiued them: After which they spoyled the Temple of Venus Ericina. When as the Romans saw the treachery and falsehood of these Barbarians, hauing concluded a peace with the Carthaginians, they disrmed them, and shipped them away, chasing them out of all Italy. These are the men whom the Epirotes made the Guardians of their Lawes and Commonwealth, to whom they intrusted o faire and rich a City: Who will not then blame them? Who will not say but they haue beene the cause of their owne miseries? Without doubt it is a great folly and indiscretion to entertaine forces, especially of bar∣barous men; and to put them into a Towne where they may bee the stronger, or more in number than the Cittizens. But wee haue spoken sufficiently of the Epirotes folly. The Sclauonians before, and many times spoiled such as saild from Italy and Phenicia, seeing that of late dayes they inhabited there, who separating thmselues sometimes from the Army at Sea, spoiled many Italian Merchants, or slew them. They had also carried a∣way a good number of Prisoners. When this had beene often com∣plained of to the Senate, they made no accompt thereof: Yet in the end they sent into Scauonia, Caus and Lucius Coroncanus in Em∣bassie, when as the complaints of many came vnto them concerning the outrages of the Illiians. VVhen the ships were returned from Phenicia in safety,The Illirians are Sclauoni∣ans. Teuca (wondring at the beauty and greatnesse of the spoile) had a great and longing desire to make Warre against the Grecians; for in truth, it was the richest Towne of all Epirus: But for that her Countrey was then in Combustion, shee could not attempt it. Moreouer, after shee had pacified Sclauonia, and at such time as shee held The Romans Embassie to Teuca Queene of Sclauonia. besieged, which had alwayes continued firme, the Romans Embas∣sie arriued; who hauing a day of audience appointed them by the Queene, they made knowne vnto her the outrages her men had done them. The Queene gaue are vnto them with great  and arro∣gacy.
After they had deliuered their chargehe made answere, that she would take order, that her Subiects should not make open War against them: but it was not the custome of Kings to prohibite their priuate subiects to make what profit they could at Sea. At which words the yongest of the Embassadours made a bold and couragious answere, but in bad season. And therefore sayd he,A bold answer of an Embassa∣dour. Madame, it is the custome of the Romans to take a publicke reuenge for priuate wrongs, and to relieue the aflicted: So as if it please God, wee will take such order, that her eafter you shall not be much troubled to reforme this kinde of royall customes. The Queene an ouer-weening woman, grew into such a rage, as neglecting the right of Nations, shee sent men at the returne of the Embassadours, to kill the youngest who had vsed this Speech. The Romans being aduertised of this great affront, prepared present∣ly to Warre, leuied men, and made a good number of Vessels: Final∣ly, they prepared all things necessary to take reuenge of so great a crime. In the meane time the Queene sent in the Spring a greater num∣ber of ships into Grece than formerly: whereof one part saild to Cor∣fue, and the other bent their course to the Port of Durazo. Where making a shew to refresh themselues with water and victuals, they re∣solued to take the Towne. They of Durazo being confident, and fea∣ring nothing,Durazo surpri∣zed by the Scla∣onis. suffered them to enter without Armes, vnder colour of water and victuals; although their true intent was to take the Towne by Treason. But when they aw themselues within the Towne, they tooke their Armes which they had hidden in their vessels for water, and killing the Guards at the Gate, made themselues Maisters thereof. Those in the ships eing ready, entred in like manner, and seized vpon a great part of the Walles: And although that they of the Towne were much amazed at this great and suddaine accident, yet they made a long resistance, defending themselues valiantly; so as the Sclauonians were forced to retire. By this meanes it happened, that the Durazins who were in danger to lose themselues and their Citty by their negligence, after they had escaped the perill by their vertue, did afterwards settle a better order in their affaires. The Sclauonian Captaines weighed Anchor presently, and put to Sea, ioyning with those,Corsue besie∣ged by the Sclauonians. who as wee haue sayd, went to Crfue, and made haste ioyntly to besiege the Towne. They of Corfue being thus sud∣dainly surprized, and not finding themselues strong enough, sent to craue aide from the Acheins and Etoliens; the like they did to them of Appolonia and Durazo: intreating them not to suffer them to bee thus shamefully chased away from their naturall Countrey by the Barbari∣ans; who hauing pitty of their fortune, armed ten ships of Warre of the Acheins, and within few dayes after sayled to Corfue, hoping to raise the Barbarians siege at their comming: But the Illirians ha∣uing recouered seuen Vessels armed from the carnanians, with whom they had made a league, marched against the Achens, whom they encountred neere vnto the Islands which they call Paxes, and there they fought. The Acarnanians and the Acheins ships fought equally; and continued long firme, onely their men were wnded.
But the Illirians interlaced themselues with their Enemies, who were tied foure together, and enuironing them, they hindred them much: Then the Enemies Vessels were much troubled, being peirced and grap∣led withall, their Spurs being fastned to the Sclauonians Vessels: who entred them with fury, and vanquished them easily by reason of their multitude. By this meanes foure Quadriremes of the Acheins were ta∣ken by the Illirians, and one Quinquereme sunke,A Victory of the Sclauonians against the Acheins. and all that was in it: In the which was Marcus Caryneus, a man of great esteeme a∣mong the Acheins, who had alwayes performed his duty well for the Countrey. But when as they which fought against the Acarnanians, saw that the Illirians had the Victory, they fled, relying much in the lightnesse of their Vessels: And saued themselues from the Battell, re∣tiring to their houses. The Sclauonians growing proud of this Victory, besieged the Towne more boldly than they had done. They of Corfue hauing no more hope,Corfu yeelded. after they had maintained the siege for a season, in the end yeelded it to the Illirians, receiuing their Garrison, and Demetrius of Pharos their Captaine. After which the Illirian Captaines returned to Duraz, and besieged it. In the meane time the Roman Consuls, Caius Fuluius with an Ar∣my at Sea of two hundred ships, and Anchus Posthumus with the Army at Land, parted from Rome: So as Fuluius came to Corfue, thinking that the siege had continued still. But when hee saw that hee came too late, for that the Illirians were within it, hee resolued to passe on, as well to vnderstand what had beene done, as to try what Opinion they had of Demetrius: And for that he had vnderstood that his Enemies had brought him in disgrace with the Queene, and that hee feared her fury,Corfu yeelded to the Romans. he had sent men to Rome, to promise the the Towne, and whatsoeuer he held. They at Corfu being ioyfull at the Romans arriuall, deliuered vnto them (by the consent of Demetrius) the Towne and the Illirian Garrison. Finally, they put themselues vnder their protection, hoping that by this meanes they should bee no more subiect to the outrages of the Illirians. When the Romans had receiued them into league, they sayled to Apolonia, whither Demetrius guided them. At the same time Ancus Posthumus caused his Land-army to imbarke at Brunduzium, being about twenty thousand Foote, and two thousand Horse,Apolonia yeel∣ded to the Ro∣mans. all which met at Apolonia; the which being yeelded, they sayled to Durazo, for that they had newes the Il∣lirians had besieged it: who being aduertised of the Romans comming, they raised the siege for feare, and fled here and there. When the Romans had receiued them of Durazo into friend∣ship, they sayled on into Sclauonia, taking many Townes in their way,Parthenia yeel∣ded to the Ro∣mans, and shut vp the Sardiens. In the meane time there came an Em∣bassie from Parthenia to the Romans, giuing themselues and their Cit∣ty vnto them. Who being receiued with the Antitanes, they tooke their way to Isse, hauing vnderstood that the Illirians held it besieged: where they entred after they had raised the siege: After which they tooke many Townes in Sclauonia by force, wherein they lost not onely many Souldiers, but also some of their Tribunes, with the Questor neere
vnto Nutria. They tooke twenty of the Illirian shippes, which ser∣ued them to victuall their Campe. In regard of those which were within Isse, they were all defeated, and fled to Narente, except those which were of Pharos, which were giuen to Demetrius. Queene Tuca with a small company retired to Rhyzon, a strong Towne, and farre distant from the Sea, seated vpon the Bankes of the Riuer of Rhyzon. When the Consuls had put many Townes and great Seiguries into the hands of Demetrius, they returned to Durazo, with their Ar∣mies both at Sea and Land. From thence Caius Fuluius returned to Rome with the greatest part of both Armies. But Posthumus stayed at Durazo, whereas he riggd forty Vessels, and after hee had leuied men in the neighbour Countries, he setled his Garrisons, hauing in his company the Ardienses,An accord made with Tuca. and all the rest that were allied to the Ro∣mans. When the Spring came, Teuca sent an Embassie to the Romans to treate a peace, the which in the end shee obtained vpon these con∣ditions. That shee should pay them a yeerely tribute, and that shee shuld leaue all Sclauonia, except some petty places: And as for that which concernes the Grecians, shee might not sayle beyond Isse, but onely with two ships without any furniture of Warre. During these actions Posthumus sent an Embassie to the Cheins and Etoliens, to ad∣uertise them of the cause of the Warre, and of the Romans voyage by Sea: And to let them vnderstand what they had done, and to reade the conditios of the peace. Who after they had obeyed the Consuls commaund, and had beene well receiued by these two people, they re∣turned againe to Corfue; the Cittis of Greece being then freed from feare by this accord made with the Illirians. For in those times the Illirians did not assault any one in particular, but all the world in generall. These are the causes for the which the Romans past first with an Army into Sclauonia, and into that Countrey of Europe. Since they sent an Embas∣sie to Corinth, and to the Atheniens, at such time as the Corinthians de∣sired to make the Romans partakers of the Warre, which they made a∣gainst them of the Iftmus. At that time Asdrual (for here wee formerly left our discourse of the affaires of Spaine) had by his great vertues much increased the Carthaginians Empire in Spaine, and built a Towne which some cal∣led Carthagena,Carthagena built in Spaine by the Cartha∣ginians. others Villanoua, most commodious by reason of its scituation, as well for the affaires of Spaine as of Affricke▪ Of whose scituation, and of the benefit it may bring to the two Prouinces, we will speake in another place when it shalbe fitting. The Romans seeing the Carthaginians forces growne thus powerfull in Spaine, did not hold it fit to let things passe in this manner: But acknowledging their negli∣gence for that formerly like men asleepe, they had by their owne weak∣nesse suffered the Carthaginians name to grow great there, they resol∣ued to repaire this errour: Yet they durst not begin a Warre, fearing a descent of the Gaules, whose fury they apprehended much. And therefore they resolued to treate first with Asdrubal touching Spaine, and then to assaile the Gaules: And whatsoeuer should happen to
vndergoe the danger, in holding it for certaine, that it was not pos∣sible for them, to be Lords of Italy, nor to keepe their owne Countrey and houses, vnlesse they had subdued the Gaules.A treaty made betwixt the Romans and Carthaginian Thus they sent an Embassie into Spaine to Asdrubal, who concluded a treaty of peace: By the which among other things it was agreed, that the Carthaginians should not passe the Riur of Ebro with an Army, and that they might ouer runne the rest of Spaine. Presently after the conclusion of this treaty, they prepared for Warre in Italy against the Gaules: the which wee haue thought good to relate summarily, to the end that as wee haue proposed the preparatio for the other, Histories may be more manifest. Wee will looke backe vnto the time when as the Gaules seazed first vpon Italy. For in my Opinion the History will not onely be pleasant, and worthy of memory, but most necessary to vnderstand with what people afterwards, and in what Couatries Hannibal trusting himselfe, durst assaile the Roman Em∣pire. And first wee will speake of their Prouince, what scituation, and what proportion it hath to the rest of Italy. For by this meanes they may the better vnderstand the things which concerne the know∣ledge of the History, in declaring first the property of places and Countries. All Italy is of a triangular forme.A description of Italy. That side which lookes towards the Est, is confined by the Ionian Sea, and the Adriatique Gulfe: and that which tends towards the South and West, is inclosed by the Seas of Italy and Sicily. These two sides ioyned together make the point of the Triangle: Where in front lies the Promontory, which the people of the Countrey call Cocynthe, and hath its aspect to the South, deuiding the Ionian Sea from the Sicilian. The third side, which tends to the Pole Artique, and to the firme land, is limited by the continuation of the Alps, the which beginning at Marseilles, and in those Countries which are about the Sardinian Sea, continue vnto the shore of the Adriatique Sea, leauing some little space betwix both. Within on this side which wee meane to bee bounded by the Alps, and is as it were the Basis or foundation of the Triangle, there are from the Southerne Countrey, tending towards the North, Plaines which make the end of Italy, and are the greatest and the most fertill in all Europe: whose figure is likewise Triangular. The Appenin Hill, and the Alps ioyning together make a point of the Triangle, neere vnto the Sardinian Sea, and aboue Marseilles. That side which lookes to the North is made by the Alpes, whereof the extent is two thousand, two hundred Furlongs. That side which hath its aspect to the South, is bounded by the Appenin Hill, the which hath three thousand and three score Furlongs in length. The shore of the Adriatique Sea holds the fashion of the foundation of the whole figure, whereof the greatnesse (which begins at the Towne of Senegaille, vnto the Gulfe of the same Sea) hath two thousand fiue hundred Furlongs in compasse. By this meanes the Circuite of the whole Plaine containeth tenne thousand Furlongs in compasse. It is not in my power to
describe the great fertillity of the Country,The fertillity of Ital. so much it abounds in all sorts of Fruites, that many times a Bushell of Wheate, after the mea∣sure of Sicily▪ hath beene sold in our times for two Soulz,About three pence. and foure Dencers: That of Batley for foureteene Deneers, and a Vessell of wine for asmuch. Moreouer it is not credible the aboundance of Mill and Panique, which they call Indian Oatmeale. There is also a great a∣boundance of Akornes, which come from the Forrests which are in diuers parts of that Region: Considering that the Italians breed an in∣finite number of Swine, to Sacrifice, and for their vse and necessary prouision of an Army; the which the Fertillity of this Country doth supply aboundantly. It is easie to conceiue that the aboundance of other particular things necessary for the vse of Man, is great: Considering that when as Guests come vnto their Innes, they neuer make a particular price for the things they take, as they do in oher Countries, but onely what euery Man is to pay for his share. When as the Guests had beene honestly intrea∣ted, and haue had whatsoeuer was necessary for their reection,A pice hard to be credited. they neuer payd aboue halfe an Assaie, which is worth three-halfe-pence, they seldome exceed this price. Moreouer it is very well peopled; the Men are actiue, goodly, and strong for the Wae, the which is more easie to be knowne by their Actions, than by that which can be spoken. The Gaules whom they call Transalpins inhabite the Mountainous pla∣ces on either side the Alpes towards the Rhoe and the North. And on the side of the plaines dwell the Turinois,The Turinois and Agoniens. and the Agoniens, and ma∣ny other Barbarous Nations, which are of the same Race with the Transalpins, and differ only in their Habitation: The other are called Transalpins because they dwell beyond the Mountaines. As for the top of the Mountaines, it is so farre from being inhabited, as they do not find so much as the tract of a man, both by reason of the diffi∣culty and vneasinesse, as for that it is alwayes couered with Snow, and full of Ice. But the Genouois dwell aboue Marseilles,The Genouois. where as the Appenin Hill begins to ioyne with the Alpes Moreouer they hold all that Coast which lookes to the Champion Country, and to the Sea of Italy: So as along the Sea they hold all vnto the Towne of Pisa, which is the first Citty of Italy, towards the West, and towards the firme Land to Aretzo. Next to the Genouois come the Italians, and of eyther side of the Appenine Hill lye the Vmbrians. Then the Appenin Hill being distant about three score and three miles from the Adriatique Sea, lea∣uing the Plaine, bends to the right hand, and in crossing Italy, extends it selfe to the Sea of Sicily. The Country which is betwixt it and the Adriatique Sea, extends vnto Senegaille. The Riuer of Poe,The Poe. which the Poets call Eridanus, and which beginnes at the Foote of the Mountaines, where as they make in a manner a point of the Triangle (as we haue sayd) takes his course to the plaine towards the South, ad from thence bending towards the East, it enters by two mouthes into the Adriatique Sea. It is the greatest of all the riuers of Italy. For all the waters which descend from the Alpes
and the Appenins, fall into the Poe. It is farre greater in Summer than in Winter, by reason of the abundance of Snow which melts.Volane. It is nauigable from a place which the people of the Countrey call Volane, two hundred and fifty miles towards the Alpes. Its spring is but a small Riuolet; but after it deuides it selfe in two and enters into the Adriatique Sea by two Armes,Padoua. which they of the Countrey call Pa∣doua and Volane. The last is the safest Port of all those of the Adria∣tique Sea. They which dwell vpon the Poe,Bodencus. haue sometimes called it Bodencus. Finally, the Grecians spake many things of this Poe, as that Phaeton go∣uerning the Horses of his Fathers Chariott, fell into it  and how that the Heliades powre forth teares continually, the which are pre∣serued by a Tree: and that the people of the Countrey since that day began to weare blacke Robes in signe of mourning, and haue alwayes vsed it since; with many other things, whereof I will now to leaue to speake, for that in my Opinion they doe not conduce to the preparati∣on of our Worke. Hereafter notwithstanding we will treate of them, when any necessary occasion shall be offred: being most certaine that Timeus did not vnderstand those things which did concerne this Region. The Tyrreins haue formerly held all the Champion Countrey, which is confined by the Appenine hill, and the Adriatique Sea, at what time also they enioyed the Countrey called Phlegrein, which is about Capoua and Nola at what time also they purchased a greate esteeme of vertue. Wherefore Historiographers must not attribute the power of the Tyr∣reins to the Region which they now inhabite. The Gaules frequented much with them, by reason of their neighbour-hood: who moued with the beauty and fertility of the Countrey, vpon a small occasion made Warre against them, and hauing chased them away, setled themselues there. The Countrey betwixt the Poe and the Alpes, is inhabited by the Layes, then by the Vercellains. Neere vnto whom are the Milanois in great numbers, and vpon the banks of Poe lye the Cenomans. In regard of those places which are neere vnto the Adri∣atique Sea, they are inhabited by people, which are aunciently de∣scended from Paphlagonia, whom they call Venetiens,The Venetiens come from Paphlagoni. who differ no∣thing from the Gaules in their manner of liuing and habite, but onely in their tongues: Of whom the tragicall Poets write many strange foo∣leries. Moreouer, that which lies betwixt the Appenin Hill and the Poe, is at its entry inhabited by the Ananes, by the Boloniens, by the Eganes, and then by thee Senogallois: These are they who (borderers to all the rest) haue inhabited neere vnto the Adriatique Sea. Behold the principall Nations of all the Gaules which dwelt in Ita∣ly,The Gaules manner of liuing. liuing in Villages without any inclosure, hauing no furniture for their houses, but lay vpon the bare. They liued of flesh, and made no profession but of Warre and Tillage, leading a simple life without Arts or Sciences. Their wealth was in Gold and Cattell, for that they were things easie to transport where they pleased, when necessity pressed them. They did all striue to purchase Friends, for they much
esteemed a man that was honoured by many. In the beginning they not onely held this Countrey, but they also drew vnto them a great part of their Neighbours, being terrified with their fury. Soone after making Warre against the Romanes, they defeated them with their Allies,Rome taken by the Gaules. and put them shamefully to flight. Within three dayes after they tooke Rome except the Capitoll, and afterwards re∣turned to their houses, hauing concluded a Peace with them, and resto∣red their Citty: For that they were forced to returne, by reason of the inuasions which the Venetiens made into their Country. From thence∣foorth they began to make Warre amongst themselues: For they which dwelt at the Foote of the Mountaines, seeing the others to increase daily in power, made Warre often against them. In the meane time, the Romanes recouering their Forces, preuailed ouer the Latins. Thirty yeares after the taking of Rome, the Gaules returned with a great Army to Alba:The Gaults re∣turne against the Romans. But for that the Romanes were surprized, and had no leisure to Leuy an Army, nor to require succours from their Allies, they made no resistance against them. And when as they re∣turned twelue yeares after, the Romanes being presently aduertised of their comming, and drawing together the succours of their Allies, marcht with great courage to incounter them with an Army, desiring nothing more than Battell, by the meanes whereof they should soone decide who should haue the Empire. The Gaules amazed at their Re∣solution, and withall there falling a mutiny amongst them, they made their Retreate little lesse than a flight, and so continued thirteene yeares without making Warre. But when they saw the Romans power increase daily, they beganne to treate of Peace, the which they obtayned, and continued thirty yeares without Warre. The Transalpins renewed the Warre against them. Wherefore fearing to be assailed on two sides, they intreated them, that for asmuch as they were of one Nation they would not be their enemies. Moreouer they sent them rich presents, intreating them to turne the Warre against the Romans, and that they would assist them with all their meanes. Whereunto being easily perswaded, they marcht all with one consent against the Romans by Tuscany (for a great number of the Tuscans held for them) and hauing made a great spoile,Pillage made by the Gaules vpon the Ro∣mans. they retired out of the Romane Prouinces to their owne Houses without losse. Where as there fell out a great debate vpon the deuision of this great booty, so as they not onely lost a great part of their booty, but also the best part of their Empire: the which doth vsually happen to the Gaules, by reason of their gormondize and drunkennesse. Foure yeares after ioyning with the Samnites they assailed the Romanes,Diuers victories of the Gäules against the Romans. of whom they made a great slaughter, in the Region of the Camertins. Some few dayes after they assailed them againe, and had a Battell neere vnto the Country of the Sentinates, where they gaue them a great de∣feate, and forced the rest to recouer their Houses. Ten yeares after they made a great assembly of men of Warre, and descending into Tuscany they besieged Arezo. The Romanes comming to succour the Arezins, fought neere vnto the Towne, and lost the
Battell with the Consull Lucius: In whose place they did choose Mar∣cus Curio, who presently sent an Embassie into Gaule, to retire the pri∣soners; who at his comming was slaine by them, contrary to the Law of Nations. The Romanes incensed at so wicked an Act, made a new Leuy of men, and resolued to enter the Gaules Countrey.A defeate and ruine of the Senogallois by the Romans. But they had not done any great matter, when as the Senogallois went to incounter them; whom the Romanes charged, and slew the greatest part, and those few which remained were chased out of the Country. They re∣couered the whole Country, and re-peopled the Towne againe, calling it Senogallia, as it had beene formerly, when it was first inhabited by the Gaules.The scituation of Senogallia. This Towne (as we haue ayd) is scituated vpon the A∣driaticke shore, where as the points of Italy do end. When the Bolo∣nians saw the Senogallois chased by the Romanes from their Countrey, they raysed an Army to make Warre against them, calling all the Tus∣cans to their ayde, fearing least the Romanes should doe the like vnto them. Presently after they fought, where most of the Tuscans were laine,The Bolonians defeated by the Romans. and a few of the Bolonians saued themselues by flight. Yet they fain∣ted not for this defeate, but the yeare following drew together all the Forces they could make, and all the Youth that could beare Armes, and marcht against the Romanes, where they were defeated and slaine, so as they were in a manner vtterly ruined. Wherefore their pride abated, they made an agreement with them by Embassadours. These things hapned, three yeares after the descent of Pyrrhus into Italy,A defeat of the Gaules in Del∣phos. and fiue yeares after the Gaules had beene defeated in Delphos. Behold how in that time Fortune (as a mortall plague among the Gaules) persecuted them in all places. But the Romanes made a double profit by the battels which we haue formerly related: For being accustomed to fight with the Gaules, who had beene held very fierce and fearefull, they became good Souldiers against Pyrrhus. Thus by little and little they abated the pride of the Gaules, so as afterwards they were much more assured, first to fight with Pyrrhus for Italy, and afterwards against the Cartha∣ginians for the Soueraignty of Sicily. The Gaules weakned by the meanes of the former Battels, liued in peace forty fiue yeares, without any breach of the accord made with the Romanes. But after that the old men, (who had vndergone the dangers, and felt so many losses) were dead, the Youth who were of a harsh and bad disposition, and had not felt the miseries of former times, grew insolent. These (as it is willingly the nature of men) began presently to vndertake the Warre, and to bee enemies to the Romanes, whatsoeuer should succeed, and moreouer to send to craue succours from the Transalpins. It is true, that in the beginning the Princes did mannage the affaires without the consent of the people: So as it hapned, that when as the Transalpins were come to Rimeni,King Etas and Gastus slaine the common peo∣ple of Bolonia, being ignorant of this enterprize, and fearing this desscent, mutined against their Commaunders, and put to death Etas and Gallus their Kings; then they fought with the Transalpins. The
Romanes likewise amazed at this descent of the Transalpins, drew their Men to field: but when they were aduertised of the other defeate of the Gaules, they retyred to their Houses. Fiue yeares after, Marcus Lepidus being Consull, Caeius Flaminius made a Law for the people, by the which that Region of Gaule, which they call the Marquisate of Ancona, vnto Rimeni, from whence the Senogallois had beene chased,The occasion to renew the Warre betwixt the Romans and Gaules. should be deuided amongst the omane Souldiers. For which cause there suddainly grew a new Warre: For most part of the Gaules, especially the Bolonians, who were neigh∣bours vnto the Romanes, were much incensed therewith, thinking that the Romanes did not fight for principallity or Glory, but for pillage and their ruine. Wherefore the Millannois and Bolonians consenting toge∣ther, sent suddainly to the other Gaules, which dwell beyond the Moun∣taines along the Riuer of Rhone, whom they call Gessates, for that they fight for pay, (for so the word imports) offering to their Kings Congoli∣tan and Aneroeste a great summe of present money. They acquaint them with the great felicity of the Romanes; and what a benefit it would be if they could vanquish them. By this meanes they mooue them to make War against the Romans; the which was easie to perswade, considering the former Reason. They promise them also to make them Companions in this Warre, reducing to their memory the prowesse of their Predecessors,The Gaules were seauen moneths with∣in Rome. who had not only defeated the Romanes in battell, but after the Victory had taken the Citty of Rome with wonderfull celerity: Where they had taken great spoiles, and after they had beene masters thereof seauen moneths, they restored them the Empire willingly, and returned into their Countrey safe with all their booty. In propounding these things brauely vnto them, they incouraged these Kings and the Gaules, so as there was neuer descent made out of that Country, of a greater Army, nor more valliant men, nor better furnished. When the newes thereof came to Rome,Amazement of the Romans for the descent of the Gaules. the Citty was so amazed, as they presently made a new Leuy of men, and began to make proui∣sion of Victualls, leading their Army sometimes vnto their Frontiers, as if the Gaules had beene there present; who notwithstanding were not yet come out of their Country. These things were very beneficiall to the Carthaginians, to augment their Empie in Spaine. But the Be∣anes considering that these affaires were more pressing, for that these people were too neere enemies, they were forced to lay aside the af∣faires of Spaine, vntill they had pacified Italy. And therefore in re∣newing the accord with Asdrubal, Lieutenant Generall for the Cartha∣ginians, they wholly attended the Warre against the Gaules, studying only how they might resist their fury. When as the Gessates had drawne a great number of men together neere vnto the Rhone, they passed the Mountaines,A descent of the Transalpins into Italy. and entred the plaine neere vnto the Poe: Where as the other Gaules eight yeares after the yeilding of that Region, and in like manner the Millannois and Bolonians, ioyned presently with a great multitude. But the Venetians and Cenomans pacified by an Embassie from the Romanes, preferred
their friendship before the Alliance of the Gaules. Wherefore the Kings for feare of them, left a part of their Army in Millannois to guard the Countrey, and marcht with the rest into Tuscany,The number of the Gaules Army. being a∣bout fifty thousand Foote, and twenty thousand Cars and Horse-men. When as the Romans had newes that the Gaules had past the Alpes, they sent Lucius Emilius the Consull with an Army to Rimeni, that being there before the Enemy, hee should stay their passage. They al∣so caused one of the Pretors to march into Tuscany, for the other Consull Caius Attilius, had in the beginning of his Consulship past in∣to Sardinia with an Army at Sea. The City of Rome was heauy, and much troubled, and did not attend this great attempt of the Gaules without great feare. They then remembred their former defeates, and feared this Nation, as the ruine of the City of Rome. And therefore they had long before prepared a great Army: they dayly made new leuies of men,The diligence of the Romans. and they aduertised their Allies to bee ready and in Armes. Moreouer, they enioyned them to send vnto the Senate the Rolles of the Bands of their Youth, desiring to know the number of Souldiers of all the Italian Army. They likewise made provision of Corne and Armes, and of all other things necessary, in greater abundance than they had done in former times. The other people of Italy were no lesse diligent, they were so much amazed at the descent of the Gaules: so as they did not thinke to fight for the Romans, nor for their Empire, but euery man for his owne safety, for his City, and for his Countrey: Wherefore all the Italians did willingly obey the Romans in this Warre.The preparati∣on which the Romans made for Warre. I will here set downe the preparations the Romans made for Warre, and what number of men they had in those times, to the end you may plainely see how great they were, and what forces they had when as Hanni∣bal presumed to assaile them, and with what Troopes making Warre against the Romane power, hee brought the Citty into so great dan∣ger. First, the Consuls went to field with foure Romare Legions, whereof eyther consisted of fiue thousand two hundred Foote, and two thousand Horse. They had moreouer by reason of this arming of the Gaules, raised other Troopes.The number of Souldiers which were raised in Italy. The Tuscans and Sabins had drawne together three score and ten thousand Foote, and about foure thousand Horse. As soone as the newes came that the Gaules past the Alpes of Bo∣lonia, these were sent into Tuscany, vnder the command of the Prouost of the Citty. After these the Vmbrians and Sarsenates inhabiting Mount Appenin, were assembled to the number of twenty thousand men. The Venetians also, and Cenomans were about twenty thousand, all which were appointed to keepe the Appenin Hils, and to fall vpon the Bolonois when occasion should bee offered. Behold the Troopes which at the first they sent against the Gaules. There was moreouer another Army within Rome to guard the Citty, and to attend the pleasure of the Senate vpon all occasions: whereof there were twenty thousand foot▪ Romans, and fifteene hundred Horse, and of their Allies thirty thousand
Foote, and two thousand Horse. Moreouer they had the Roll of the Army of the Latins, which consisted of foure score thousand Foote, and fiue thousand Horse: and of the Samnites of three score and ten thou∣sand men, and seuen thousand Horse. Of the Lapiges and Mesapiens fifty thousand Foote, and sixeteene thousand Horse, of Marses, Marruci∣ens, Ferrentins and Vestins, twenty thousand Foote, and foure thousand Horse. Of the Lucains thirty thousand Foote, and three thousand Horse. There were moreouer at that time two Legions in Sicily, and about Ta∣rentum for the guard of the Countrey: whereof either was of foure thousand two hundred Foote, and two hundred Horse. Moreouer, the multitude of the Romans and Campanois, was about two hundred and fifty thousand Foote, and three and twenty thousand Horse. By this meanes the number of the Troopes which were subiect to the Senate and people of Rome, exceeded an hundred and fifty thousand Foote, and about sixe thousand Horse. But the whole force of Italy was gene∣rally of seauen hundred thousand Foote, and three score and tenne thousand Horse. Against the which Hannibal hauing but twenty thousand men, durst enter into Italy. But this shall bee for ano∣ther time. The Gaules finally passing the Appenin Hils,Tuscany ruined by the Gaules. entred into Tuscany without any resistance, putting all to fire and sword: Finally, they marcht speedily to Rome. Being come neere vnto a Towne which they call Cluse, within three dayes iourney of Rome, they had newes that the Roman Army (which as wee haue sayd, had beene sent to guard Tuscany) was drawne together and followed them. Wherefore they presently turned head furiously vpon them. And when they were come neere vnto the other at the Sun-setting, then they camt, leauing some little space betwixt them. Night being come, the Gaules made fies in their Campes after their vsuall manner, and left their Horse-men there,The pollicy of the Gaules. giuing them charge to part at the breake of day, and when they should be discouered by the Enemies to goe on their course. In the meane time making shew of a fght, they part with all their Foote, and march directly to Fesula, of purpose to drawe on their Horse-men, and to breake the Enemy which followed them. The Romans seeing the Gaules Horse-men part at the breake of day with great noise, thinking it was for feare, hasted after them indiscreet∣ly, and drew neere vnto them. Wo being ioyned, the combate in the beginning was furious,A Victory of the Gaules a∣gainst the Ro∣mans. for that the Gaules did charge them on all sides according to their resolution. Finally, the Romans lost sixe thousand men, for that the Gaules were more in number and of greater courage. All the est of the Army fled, whereof a great part retired to a little Hill, strong by scituation and nature. The Gaules began to besiege them: But for that they were tired with watching the Night before, and with the toyle of the day, they returned to take their re∣fection, leauing a strength of Horse-men to keepe the Hill, with a resolution to giue an assault with all their forces, if they did not yeeld within three dayes. At that time Lucius Emilius the Consull, who (as wee haue sayd) was at Rimini with an Army, hauing
aduertisment that the Gaules had past Tuscany, and marcht to Rome with all their forces, he vsed all diligence to come and succour his companions. When he had past the Appenin Hill, and was lodged neere vnto the Enemy, they which had retired to the Hill, knowing the Consuls comming, which they easily discouered by the fires in the Night, they presently tooke courage, and sent some of their men vnarmed vnto him by the Forrest, to let him vnderstand how things had past. The Consull seeing that all delayes in so great a danger of his com∣panions were preiudiciall, he gaue order to the Tribunes of the Souldi∣ers, to march at the breake of day with all the foote: And in the meane time he takes his way towards the Hill with all the Horse-men. The Commaunders of the Gaules doubting of the Consuls comming by the fires in the Night, assembled to aduise what they had to doe.The aduice of Aneoeste. Then King Aneroeste was of opinion, that it was a folly to lose time with the Enemy, and to bring their conquest in danger, before they had put so great a spoile in safety (they had in truth an infinite number of Priso∣ners, and abundance of all other things) and therefore they must first returne into their Countrey, and there leaue all the baggage, and then returne into Italy if they thinke it fit:The retreate of  Gaules. to the end the Souldiers might fight with their Enemies without any incumbrance. The Gaules liked of this counsell, and the next day drew forth their Ensignes before the breake of day, returning into Gaule along the Sea-shore, laden with all sorts of pillage. When as Lucius Emilius had retired those which had fled to the Hill,The pursuite of Emilius. he pursued the Gaules with his Army. Yet he did not hold it fit to present battell to so great a multitude, but rather resolued to attend some opportunity, either of time or place, where hee might amaze the Enemy, or make them abandon the booty in some sort. At the same time Caius Attilius tbe other Consull, who was lately arriued at sa from Sardinia, landed with his whole Army, and marched di∣rectly to Rome by the Sea-shore before the Gaules. They were not farre from Telamona a Towne of Tuscany, when as some of their scouts fell by surprize into the Romans hands, who discouered vnto the Con∣sull that the Gaules were not farre off,Caius Attilius. and that Lucius Emilius pursu∣ed them. These things being vnderstood, Caius Attilius won∣dering at this fortune, and hoping partly of the Victory, for that For∣tune seemed to haue deliuered the Enemy betwixt their two Campes, he gaue the Legions to the Tribunes of the Souldiers, and gaue them charge to march against the Enemy, as much as the opportunity of place would giue them leaue. In the meane ttme seeing a little Hill vpon the way, very commo∣dious for their Warre, to the which the Gaules seemed to tend, hee tooke the Horse-men, and resolued to get it before them, and to vn∣dergoe the danger, hoping that if the Romans had the Victory by this meanes, they would attribute the honour vnto him. The Gaules ignorant in the beginning of the Consuls comming, and doubting by the things which they saw, that Lucius milius had past before night with his hors∣men,
to gaine the Countrey which was aduantagious for the Warre, they presently sent all their Horse, and some of their most actiue men to recouer this Hill. But when they were aduertised by the Prisoners that Attilius held it, they presently caused their Foot-men to march, and order their battell in the Reare, as in the Front, for that they saw E∣milius followed them in the taile, and that the other attended them in front, as they had learned by the Prisoners, and by the things which had happened. They which were with Emilius, were not yet confi∣dent, although it were a common buite that the Army of Sardinta was arriued at Pisa. But they were assured when as they saw the com∣bat at the Hill: for the Enemies were very neere, and therefore the Emilian Horse reioyced much, and tooke a way by the side of the neerest Hill to goe and succour those which defended it. Emilius in the meane time marcht after the Gaules in the same order hee had beene accustomed. When the Gaules saw themselues thus inuolued by the Enemies,The order of the Gaules battell▪ they put vpon the Reare the Gssates and Milannois against Emilius who followed them, and vpon the Front the Pemontois, and those which inhabite along the Poe, appointing the Bolonians and the Cas with all the baggage apart without the two Battalions, and all the pillage vpon a  Hill, with some Horse-men to guard it. When they had thus ordained their Battell with two fronts, it seemed not onely terrible to bhold, but also of a wonder∣full efficacy for the combat. The Bolonians and Millannois, made choice of such as had Breeches, and were most at ease in their appar∣rell. But the Gessates for the great courage and wonderfull desire of glory which they had, stript themselues, and put themselues before the Battalion naked, only with their Armes, hauing a conceit that by this meanes they should be more actiue and disposed to fight: For the Bushes (which were thicke there) would stay them by their Clothes and hinder their fighting. First, the Combate which was at the Hill, was in the sight of both Amies, whereas the Horse men charged one another, and fought va∣liantly. There Cais Attilius was slaine,Caius Attilius slaine. fighting too rashly, whose Head was presently carried to the Kings of the Gaules. Yet the Ro∣mane cauallery fainted not, but were the more incensed to fight; so as in the end they not onely defended the Hill, but defeated all the Gaules Horse-men.The battell of the Foot-men. In the meane time the Foot men approach, and the com∣bate began, the which was not onely horrible and wonderfull to be∣hold for those that were present, but likewise for those which shall heare it spoken of. First cosidering that the battell was of three Ar∣mies, euery man may imagine, that the sight was not onely new and fearefull to the assistants, but also their manner of fighting. Moreouer, who will doubt but the Gaules had the worst, being chargd as well in the Reare as in the Front? Or it may be the better, for that they fought altogether against the two Armies, and that the two sides repulsed their Enemies, so as at the same instant they defended one another: And that moreouer they could not passe on, not hope for flight backe. ward? There is no doubt but a Battell with two Fronts hath the be∣nefit,
that the Souldiers haue no meanes to flye. In regard of the Ro∣manes, they had hope of Victory, for that they saw their Enemies in∣closed, as it were deliuered into their hands: On the other side they feared the fury and order of their Army, the sound of Trumpets and Clairons was terrible, with the which all the Troope made a great cry and shoute, so as there was an incredible noise. They could not heare the Trumpets and Souldiers, and moreouer, the neighbour places see∣med to ecchoe forth their cries. It was a terrible thing to see the forlorne hope march naked. Beleeue me, these great naked bodies, with their motions vnder their Bucklers were maruelous and fearefull. The beauty and riches of their Appar∣rell gaue also a great luster. For the whole Army shined with chaines of Gold, and Silkes wouen with purple. The which the Romanes ob∣seruing, they were partly amazed, and partly encouraged with the hope of spoile. Finally, the taile of the Army which was armed, was not gauld by the Roman Archers, who doe vsually march before the Batta∣lion. But the forlorne hope which fought naked before their Troopes, were contrary to all hope much annoyed:The defeate of the forlorne hope of the Gaules. For they could not couer their great naked bodies with their French Bucklers▪ And therefore the Arrowes fell easily vpon them. Finally, when they saw themselues thus beaten, and could not bee reuenged of the Archers by reason of the distance, and for the multitude of Arrowes which flew from all parts, they cast themselues like desperate mad-men, some vpon their Enemies, where they were slaine: others retired vpon their owne Troopes, who being all bloody, daunted the courage of the rest, and put them in disorder. By this meanes the fiercenesse of the Gessates, which made the for∣lorne hope was abated. Then the Milannois, the Bolonians, and the Turinois maintained the burthen of the battell: where they did not fight a fatre off with their Arrowes and Darts as formerly, but hand to hand with their Speeres and Swords: and the Combate was as furious as euer any was, for euery man performed his duty.The Armes which the Gaules did vse. It is true, that their Tar∣gets and Swords were not equall. For the Gaules Swords were heauy and blunt, and their Targets weake: The Romanes couered them∣selues with stronger Targets, and carried short Swords and sharpe. And therefore the Gaules were still defeated in what manner so euer they fought, whether in troope, or man to man:A defeate of the Gaules Ar∣my. Yet they stood firme in battell, vntill that the Romane Cauellery came downe from the Hill in great fury: Then they were broken and slaine here and there. The Foot-men died in the place where they had their Stations appointed: But the Horse-men fled. The Gaules lost in this battell forty thousand men;The taking of King Conglli∣tane. The death of King Aneroeste. there were onely taken ten thousand with King Congollitane. A∣neroeste, which was the other King of the Gaules, fled with some few which followed him to a neighbour-place, who some dayes after slew themselues. After this defeate, Lucius Emilius the Consull, sent the Enemies spoyles to Rome, and restored the booty to those to whom it did belong. From thence he went thorough the Genouois Countrey into that of B∣lonia,
making great spoyles:The Bolonians Country spoyled. And hauing in a short time inrich't his Ar∣my with all sorts of booty, he brought it backe to Rome, with the Armes, chaines and bracelets of gold, wherewith hee did adorne the Capitoll: being a kind of ornament of gold, which the Gaules are accustomed to carry about their wrists and neckes: the rest of the spoyles and all the prisoners, went before him in triumph. Behold those great attempts of the Gaules, which the Romans not onely feared, but all Italy in like man∣ner, came to nothing. The Romans hoping now to chase the Gaules out of Italy, sent Quin∣tus Fuluius and Titus Manlius late made Consuls, with a great Army into Gaule.The Bolonians yeild to the Ro∣mans. Who at their entry forced the Bolonians to submit them∣selues to their obedience. But they could not proceede in the warre, but were forced to retire by reason of the continuall Raine and the Plague. Afterwards Publius Furio, and Caius Flaminius being created Con∣suls, came againe into Gaule with an Army: and after they had receiued the Ananes into friendship, which are not farre from Marselles, they marched directly into the Country of Milan with their Legions, where as the Riuer Ada ioynes vnto the Poe. The Milannois had made a great leuie to repulse their enemyes. By whom when the Romans had recei∣ued great losse, not onely at the passage of the Riuer, but also in fortify∣ing their Campe, they parted thence, and tooke their way to the Coun∣try of the Cenomans▪ where after they had ioyned their Army to theirs, for they were their Allies, they made a new descent into the Milannois by the higher Country, which lookes toward the Alpes, ruining all where they past. The Princes of Milan hearing the resolution of the Romans to bee immutable, resolued to vndergoe the hazard and to fight with them. Wherefore after they had drawne an Army together, and taken the En∣signes of gold which they call vnmoueable out of Minerva's Temple, & made prouision of all other things necessary,The Army of the Milannois. they marcht against them with great assurance, planting their Campe ight against them, to the number of fifty thousand Men. It is true, the Romans finding themselues not strong enough, were of aduice to call the Gaules to their aide, with whom they were in league. But for that they feared their reuolt, & they were to fight with men of the same Nation, they held it dangerous to trust in such men in so great a danger, and especially to put their safeties in their handsat such a time, and in such an action: Finally, being neere the Riuer, they call the Cenomans, and cause them to passe. When all were past they brake the Bridge, depriuing them at one instant of the meanes to ioyne with their Enemies, and leauing their Men no hope of safety but in the victory. When this was done they put their men in order, and off battell to the Milannois. It seemes the Romanes had ordered this battell discreetly by the aduertisement of the Tribunes, for the meanes to fight in troope, or man to man: For when as their men were in battell they tooke the Pikes from the Triarij, and gaue them to such as were in the Front, giuing them charge to entertaine the fury of the Gaules, vntill their first heate
of fighting were spent: Which being done, leauing their Pikes, they should flye to their Swords; ordayning it in this manner, for that they had seene by the former Warres, that the Gaules had a furious poynt, and afterwards their hearts were faint and effeminate, and that more∣ouer their Swords as we haue sayd, were only fit to giue one blow;The vneasinesse of the Gaules Swords. but afterwards their length grew crooked, and the edge turned by reason of the breadth: So as if they did not suffer them to set the poynt to the ground, and to make them straight againe with their Feete, the second blow wrought no effect. The Romanes following the Commaund of the Tribunes, charge their enemies with great blowes vpon the brest with their Pikes. The Gaules on the other side imploy all their fury to cut them. Then the Romanes abandoning their Pikes, fought hand to hand, breaking by this meanes the fury of the Gaules: And taking from them all meanes to steppe backe, which these people are accustomed to vse in their Charge, for that their Swords are blunt and vnprofitable, by reason of their length, but only to giue one blow a farre off. But the Romans by meanes of their short Swords, wherewith they did not strike like vnto them, but thrust often through the bodies and throates of the Gaules, so as they slew a great number. Behold how the prouidence of the Tribunes preuailed much; with∣out doubt the Consull had not made choise of a place fit to fight: Con∣sidering that in ordering the battell vpon the Riuer side, hee had taken from the Romanes the meanes to march,A Victory of the Romanes against the Millannois. which is vsuall vnto them. Wherefore if during the Combate they had beene forced to retyre, they had all fallen into the Riuer by the errour of the Consull. Yet they had a goodly Victory by their owne forces, and retyred to Rome with a great multitude of Prisoners and spoyle. The yeare following the Gaules weakned with so many battels lost, sent an Embassie to the Romanes for a Peace, making them goodly pro∣mises. But Marcus Claudius, and Caius Cornelius chosen Consuls, vsed all diligence to draw their Army into their Country, to the end the Senate should not yeild vnto it.The Gessates dwell on this side the Rhne. Wherefore the Gaules hauing no more hope of peace, being as it were in despaire, raysed a new Army, and intertayned thirty thousand Gessates, who, as we haue sayd, dwell on this side the Rhine, hauing them all ready and in Armes attending the descent of the Romanes. When as the Consuls were entred the Millannois Country in the Spring,Acerras besie∣ged. they besieged the Towne of A∣corras, which lyes betwixt the Poe and the Alpes. And although it were not in the power of the Millannois to succour the besieged, for that the Romanes held the passages: Yet their full intent being to raise the siege, they cause a part of their Army to passe the Poe,Clstidium be∣sieged. to whom they giue charge to besiege Clastidium, a Towne belonging to the Allies of the Romanes, hoping by this meanes the Consuls should be forced to rayse their siege. But presently when they had the newes, Marcus Claudius makes hast with the Horse-men, and the most actiue of the foote, to succour the besieged. When the Gaules were aduer∣tised of the Consuls comming, they presently raysed the siege, and
went resolutely to encounter the Romanes offering them battell. At the first the Gaules had the better, for that the Romane Horsemen were surprized by theirs.A defeate of the Gaules by the Romans. But being afterwards environed by the Romane Cauallery, they were broken and defeated. Many were drowned ha∣uing cast themselues into the Riuer, flying the Enemy: The greatest part were slaine, and the rest taken Prisoners. But when they which were besieged in Acerras, had notice of the defeate of their men neere vnto Clastidium, they retired to Millan, the Capitall Citty of the Countrey.Acerras taken by Cornelius. Then Cornelius hauing goten the Towne of Acerras well furnished with Corne and all other Muniti∣on, hee pursued the Gaules, and planted his Campe neere vnto Mil∣lan. And for that the Milannois came not out to fight, he drew backe his Army, spoyling the Countrey. Then the Milannois pursu∣ing them, began to charge them in the Reare, and make a great slugh∣ter: whereof some fled, vntill that Cornelius turning head against the Enemy with the Legions, encouraged the whole Army to sight. Who willingly obeying the Consuls commaundment, fell with great fury vpon the Gaules, who hauing lately beene so often beaten, made no long resistance, but presently turned head, and recouered the Alpes. Cornelius pursued them, spoyling the whole Countrey, and from thence hee marcht to Millan, which he tooke by force, and brought it vnder the Romans obedience. After all these defeats, the Princes of the Gaules seeing there was no more hope in their affaires, submitted themselues to the will of the Ro∣mans. Thus ended the Warre of the Gaules, hauing neuer vnto this day heard speake nor read of a greater, be it for the obstinacy of cou∣rage, or the resolution of Souldiers, or the cruelty of battels, or the great slaughter of men, or the greatnesse of Armies: Although the counsell, the enterprize, and the daily aduice were vnprofitables For that the Gaules mannage their affaires by rage and fury, not by rea∣son. Of whom we might haue considered in how short a time they haue beene chased out of their naturall Countrey by the Romans, in leauing them a small portion within the Alpes, wee haue thought it good to relate summarily their first attempts, the successe of affaires, and finally their last ruines: For that I hold it fitting for a History, to make such accidents knowne to those of future times: to the end that our men for want of knowing them, may not easily feare the rash descents which Barbarians doe often make: and that they rather try their for∣tune, than to omit any thing that is necessary, nor to subiect them∣selues vnto them: Certainly such people are easily and without diffi∣culty broken and defeated, if they resist their first fury. I imagine that they which haue written the Gests of the Persians against the Grecians, and of the Gaules against the Delphiens, haue done a great fauour to the Grecians to fight for the liberty of the Countrey. There is no doubt but a man will not be amazed for riches, forces, or the multitude of men, if he fights for the defence of his Countrey, if hee hath before his eyes the actions of those times, and consider how many thousands of men, what forces and what Armies, the virtue of Souldiers with va∣lour
and reason hath vanquished, broken and defeated.The Grecians terrified by the Gaults. The Greci∣ans haue not onely beene errified by the Gaules in former times, but also many times in our age: which is the thing which hath mooued mee most to relate their actions summarily, beginning with the Originall. But to returne where we left, after that Asdruball Generall of the Carthaginians had continued eight yeeres in Spaine, hee was in the end traiterously slaine in the Night in his lodging by a Gaule,Asdrubal slaine by rea∣son of some priuate hatred: Hee was not onely excellent and expert in the Art of Warre, but was so eloquent to moue the hearts of men, as hee much augmented the Carthaginians Empire. Then they gaue the charge of the Army which was in Spaine to Hannibal, being then a young Man, for that hee had a good beginning, and a wonderfull great courage for his age. Who at his comming made declaration that hee would bee an Enemy to the Romans, the which fell out soone after. From that time the Romans and the Carthaginians iealous of one another. To speake the truth, the Carthaginians grew laboured secretly to surprize them for that they had chased them out of Sicily. On the other side the Romans know∣ing their intent, gaue no greate credit vnto them: so as it might easily bee conceiued the Warre would soone breake out. At the same time the Achaiens with Phillip King of Macedon, and their Allies, made Warre against the Etoliens, which they called the Warre of the Allies. As wee haue related the Warre which the Romans made against the Carthaginians in Sicily and in Affricke, and the things which followed, and being now come according to the order of our pre∣paration, to the beginning of the Warre betwixt the Allies, and to the second of the Carthaginians, which they call the Warre of Hannibal, seeing wee haue resolued to begin our course with those times, it is reasonable wee should come to the Gests and Exploits of the Grecians: to the end that making by this meanes a prepara∣tion of all parts, wee may begin the History which wee haue resolued on, when as wee shall come to the same end of all things. As therefore wee haue not vndertaken to write the actions onely of one Nation or another, as other Historiographers haue done, as of the Grecians or Persians, but of all the parts of the world together, which are come to our knowledge, (for that this present time hath beene of great vse, whereof we will speake more amply in another place) it shall be fitting to make a summary mention of the most knowne Na∣tions and Countries of the whole World, before the beginning of our worke. In regard of the actions of the Asians and Egyptians, it shall bee sufficient to deliuer those of our time: considering that many haue written the deeds of times past, whereof no man is ignorant: Neither is there any thing innouated, which is not according to the Commentaries of Historiographers. In regard of the people of Achaia, and the house of Macedon, it is fitting to search out the times past
summarily: As for that which concernes the Macedonians, the proofe will bee easie: And as for the Achaiens, there hath beene made (as wee haue formerly sayd) an augmentation and wonderfull accord in our time.All Mora re∣duced into  league. For when as many laboured formerly to reduce Morea to one accord, and could not effect it, considering that all men aime more at their priuate profit, than the liberty of the Countrey, there hath beene at this day made so great a change, as they haue not onely con∣tracted friendship, and a strict league, but moreouer they vse the same Lawes, the same weight, the same measure, the same money, and more, the same Princes, the same Councell, and the same Iudges: So as there is no defect in Morea for the making of a Burgesse, but that they dwelt not all in one Towne: All the rest was alike and the same thing. It shall not bee therefore vnfitting to shew how the Name of the Achaiens hath first reigned in Morea.The Name of the Acheis well entertay∣ned in Morea. You must vnderstand that they which were first so called, had no better Countrey, nor more Townes, nor more Wealth, nor more virtue. Without doubt the Arca∣dians and Lacedemonians doe farre exceed the other people of Mo∣rea, both in number of men and Townes: Neither is there any Na∣tion in Greece which passeth them in prowesse and virtue. What is the cause then that these men whom wee haue named, and the other people of Morea, haue willingly suffred not onely the Comminalty of the Achaiens, but also to take the Name? It were a folly to say that it was by chance. Wherefore it were better to seeke the cause without the which wee cannot finish those things which are done with reason, nor those which seemne to bee done without it. For my part I conceiue it was the equality, and the common liberty which was kept amongst them all, as a certaine president of a true Common-wealth: For there is no Citty in all Greece, where there are found better Lawes. Behold the cause which hath caused the greatest part of Morea willingly to follow this Common-wealth Some thorough reason and parswasion, others forced by little and little with the time, and yet they haue presently pacified their discon∣tents. And for that they did no from the beginning leaue more to one then to another, but would haue all things equall to all men, it pre∣sently brought the Acheis to this great Authority, vsing two meanes of great efficacy, that is, Equality and Clemency: Behold the cause which wee must imagine, for the which all Morea being of one will and accord, attained to this prosperity and peace wherein wee see it at this day. It is true, that this manner of liuing, and meanes of gouernment of a Common-wealth was long obserued by the Acheins: the which is probable by the testimony of many witnesses. Yet wee will pro∣duce but one or two at this time. You must vnderstand that at what time a Company of the Pythagorians were burnt for a secret conspira∣cy in the Region of Italy,The Pythàgori∣ans burnt in Italy. which they then called great Greece: It happened that the Countrey and the Townes were much afflicted with murthers and sedition, by a strange alteration of Common-weales whose
Princes were wickedly slaine. And therefore Embassadours came from all parts to pacifie their debates. Who leauing all the rest, they referr'd themselues in all their quarrels to that which the Acheins should decree. Soone after they resolued to vse their Lawes, and to frame their Common-wealth like vnto theirs. Without doubt the Crotoni∣ates, Sybarites, and Caulonites, after they had ended their quarrels in a friendly manner, edified a Temple in publique, to Iupiter Omarie, where they might assemble the people, and giue them iustructions. Moreouer hauing accepted the Institutions and Lawes of the Acheins, they would onely liue in them, and erect their Common-wealth. But the tyranny of Denis of Syracusa and the Gaules, who at that time spoi∣led the Countrey,The Lacedemo∣nians and The∣bains. hindered them from bringing their enterprize to an end. Moreouer, after the defeate of the Lacedemonians beyond all hope, before Luctres, and that they of Thebes had already troubled the Em∣pire of Grece, there was a great mutiny and a strange combustion throughout all Greece, namely, betwixt the Lacedemonians and the Thebains: For that the Lacedemonians conceiued they had beene van∣quished, and the others did not thinke they had gotten the Victory. Notwithstanding either of them by a common consent made choice of the Acheins among all the Grecians, to whose iudgement they sub∣mitted themselues touching their quarrels, not hauing so much regard to their forces or power (for in truth it was the least of all the Prouin∣ces of Greece) as to the faith and iustice of the people, which at that time was held great in the opinion of the World. It is true, they had then but bare virtue, hauing done nothing worthy of fame or estima∣tion. Wherefore their comminalty did not increase much for that they had not any Lord which was worthy to gouerne them, for that they had beene alwaies kept vnder by the Empire of the Lacedemonians or Macedonians. But after by succession of time they had found Gouernours worthy of their estate, they presently purchased honour and glory. They re∣conciled all Morea, which was an excellent worke:Arate. whereof no man doubts but Arate the Sicyonien had beene the Authour and contriuer: the which Philopomene the Megalopolitein finished, and afterwards con∣firmed: and that Licerta was the third which amplified and augmen∣ted it, and subsequently all his Companions. Hereafter wee will en∣deauour as much as the Subiect shall require, to relate their deeds, the manner and the time: Yet wee will make a summary mention of the actions of Arate at this time, and hereafter, for that hee hath compre∣hended all things in his Commentaries according vnto truth plainely and amply. But as for others our discourse shall be something more di∣ligent and more copious. It is true, that in my opinion, the declaration would bee more easie, and the History more plaine to those that desire to know it, if wee take it from the time, when as the Acheins, who had beene disper∣sed into diuers Citties by the Princes of Macedon, drew them∣selues againe together as it were in one body, and afterwards they augmented in such sort, as they came to this great amplitude whereof
wee haue hitherto spoken in particular, and which continues vnto this day. They of Patras and the Dymensorins made a league together,A league be∣twixt the Dy∣mensorins and them of Patra. in the hundred and foure and twentieth Olympiade, at such time as Ptolo∣my the Sonne of Lagus, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolomy Cerau∣nien dyed, without doubt they all dyed during this Olimpiade. Behold in what estate the Acheins were in former times:Tisamenes. They began to be go∣uerned by Kings, at such time as Tysamenes the Sonne of Hrestes cha∣sed from Lacedemonia, after the descent of Heraclites, held the Coun∣trey which is about Acheia. After whom Kings gouerned continu∣ally by succession vntill the time of Sygus.Sygus. After whom the Regall power began to be tedious, for that the Children of Sygus did not go∣uerne the Prouince legally, but by Tyranny. Wherefore they chased away their Kings, and gouerned in common: wherein they liued di∣uersly according to the diuersity of the times, vntill the dayes of Alex∣ander and Phillip, yet striuing with all their meanes to gouerne their Common-weales in a Comminalty, which contayned twelue Townes, who are yet in being, except Olena and Elix which an Earthquake swal∣lowed vp before the Battell of Leuctres.The alliance of twelue Cit∣ties. Behold the Citties, Patras, Dymes, Phare, Tritee, Leanty, Egire, Pelleue, Bure, Cerannie, Cary∣nie, Olene and Elix. But in the time of Alexander, and before the Olimpiade which we haue mentioned, they grew into so great dissention, namely for the Kings of Macedon, that the Townes thus deuided, held it would bee a great good vnto them to make Warre one against another. So as some drew vnto them the forces of Demetrius and Cassander, and soone af∣ter those of Antigonus: The others were imployed by the Kings, whereof there were many at that time in Greece. But in the hundred and foure and twentieth Olimpiade, as wee haue sayd, they began againe to be reconciled,The beginning of the league. at such time as Pyrrhus King of Epirus past into Italy. First, they of Patras, Dymes, Tritee, and Phare, were reconciled, when as there was no title of common alliance betwixt them. Fiue yeeres after they of Egire chased away their Garrison, and ioyned to the rest: whom the Buriens followed killing their King: and soone af∣ter the Cerauniens. When as Iseas (who at that time was King of the Crauni∣ens) saw that they of Egire had chased away their Garrison,Iseas King. and they of Bure had slaine their King; seeing himselfe in a manner inuolued with Warre, hee relinquisht the principallity, leauing the administration of the Common-weale to the Acheins, after the Couenants concluded with them to saue his life. But why haue wee brought these things from so farre? To the end first that the World may know by what meanes, and at what time, and who were the first among the Acheins, which rectified this comminalty againe, the which at this day wee see flourish: And that knowing their order, euery man may easily beleeue not onely our History, but also our actions. Beleeue mee, they haue alwayes obserued one course concerning the gouernment of their Com∣mon-wealth, and one reason by the which keeping continually an
equallity among them, and defeating those who of themselues, or by their Kings laboured to take their Country, they haue in the end preuailed in all their interprises, as well by their owne forces as by the helpe of their Allies. Finally those things which haue beene since done in this Prouince, ought to be attributed to the Acheins, who being companions to the omanes in many great affaires, haue not attributed any thing vnto themselues of that which was done, hauing no other thought but of liberty, and the common accord of Morea. But we shall see it more plainly by their actions. All these Citties which we haue named, did administer the Com∣mon-wealth from the beginning fiue and twenty yeares with the A∣cheins, making choyse of one Questor and two Captaines. After∣wards they resolued to haue but one, who should haue the charge of their principall affaires.Geryne. But Gerynee was the first which had this ho∣nour. When his foure yeares were expired,Arate. Arate the Sicyonien was chosen at the age of twenty yeares. Who presently by his singular Virtue, and great courage, freed the Country from Tyrants, and resto∣red the Common-wealth of the Acheins, to the which from the be∣ginning he bare a great affection. Some time after hauing gouerned eight yeares, he was chosen againe:The Fort of Corinthe taken by Arate. And then he beganne to thinke of the meanes by the which he might take the Fort of Corinthe, which Antigonus then held. The which after he had effected, he freed all Morea from great feare: And when as the Corinthians were freed from Tyranny, he ioyned them to the Acheins. Some few dayes after he did the like to the Megareins. These things hapned the yeare before the battell of the Carthagini∣ans, by the which they were forced to abandon Scily, and to pay tribute vnto the Romanes. When as Arate had in a short time finished all his interprises, he spent the remainder of his life in the gouernment of the Common weale, studying by all meanes how to chase the Ma∣cedonians out of Morea, to ruine the Kings, and to preserue the com∣mon liberty of the Country. And therefore he resisted the attempts and practises of Antigonus Gonate, whilest he liued, and the coue∣tousnesse of the Etoliens, who with Antigonus grew so audacious and ouer-wening, as they were not ashamed to diuide betwixt them by a common consent the Townes of Acheia. But after the death of Anti∣gonus, and that the Acheins and Etoliens had made a league, when as Demetrius made Warre against them, the dissentions and discords were somewhat pacified, and they contracted a common and mutuall friend∣ship betwixt them. But after the Death of Demetrius, who Reigned onely ten yeare, and at such time when as the Romans pssed first into Sclauona, the A∣cheins made themselues wonderful great: For all the Kings which Reig∣ned in Morea fell into depaire, aswell for the death of Demetrius who was their Commaunder and Emperour, as for that they saw Arate striue with all his power, to depriue them of their Cownes, propoun∣ding to such as shall doe it willingly great honours and dignities, terrify∣ing
and vsing threates to such as should be obstinate and wilfull. Fi∣nally he did admonish them all to leaue their Crownes, and restoring the Country to liberty, they should imbrace the League of the A∣cheins. Wherefore LysidasLysidas. the Megalopolitaine, who during the life of Demetrius, had wisely fore-seene future things, presently layes downe his Crowne. AristomacusAristomacus. King of the Argiues, XenonXenon. of the Hermionians, and CleominesCleomines. of the Phliasiens, renounced their Royall Principallities, and ioyned themselues to the League of the Acheins. But for that their Forces were by this meanes growne wonderfull great, the Etoliens as men ambitious by nature,The enuy of the Etolien a∣gainst the A∣cheins. enuied them, and hoping to be able to breake the League of the Townes which were allied, as they had done in the beginning, they promised to Alexander to share with him those of the Acarnaniens, and to Antigonus those of the Acheins. By this meanes they gayned vnder colour of the same hope Antigonus then Gouernour in Macedony, and left by Philip Tutor to his Sonne;Antigonus Tu∣tour to Phiips Sonne. they also made Cleomines King of the Lacedemonians. When as they saw that Antigonus had the gouernment of Macedony, who was a Souldier and an enemy to the Acheins, for the losse of the Fort of Corinthe, they were of opinion, that if the Lacedemontans were com∣panions in this Warre, in assailing the Acheins on all side they should easily defeate them. The which vndoubtedly had hapned, if Arate a man of great Virtue and Courage, (which they did not consider) had not taken vpon him the defence of the others. They began a most wicked War with all their Forces; wherein they were not only frustrated in their expectance, but they made Arate more stout and Resolute, being then Commaunder of the Acheins and the whole Nation, by his pollicy and diligent prouidence in all things, as we shall see by that which followes. For when like a man well aduised, he had considered that the Etoliens were ashamed to declare Warre a∣gainst the Acheins, for the benefits they had lately receiued from them during the Warre of Demetrius, and that for this cause they had soli∣cited the Lacedemonians to attempt it: And that they were transported with enuy against the good Fortune of the Acheins, so as they were nothing incensed against Cleomines, who had taken from them by stealth Tegea, Mantinea, and Orthomene, very strong Townes of Etolia, but contrarywise they confirmed them willingly vnto him; and that moreouer they sought all occasions of Warre, onely for a desire they had to Reigne, the Acheins hauing neuer offended them, suffring the King to violate his Faith vnto them, and that by fraud he had ta∣ken from them such rich Townes, to the end that the forces of Cleo∣menes (increased by this meanes) might with more ease defeate the Comminalty of the Acheins. Arate then (as I haue sayd) and the other Captaines considering these things, resolued not to declare any Warre, but onely to resist the at∣tempts of the Lacedemonians with all their power. Behold the first Resolution of the Captaines. But soone after when as they saw that Cleomenes built a Citty without feare, which afterwards was called Athenes,Athenes. in the Country of the Megalopolitains, and that he declared
himselfe an open enemy to the Acheins, they make an assembly, where it was resolued to make open War against the Lacedemonians, and not by Dissimulation. This Warre called Cleominique beganne thus at that time.The Cleome∣nique Warre. In the which the Acheins beganne first to resist the Lacedemonians with their owne Forces, without the helpe of any other, both for that they held it a greater honour to defend their Countrey and Townes themselues then with assistance of others: And they likewise indeauoured to enter∣tayne their friendship by all meanes with Ptolomy, fearing least hee should be discontented, if they should require succours from any others then from him. But when the Warre was begunne, and that Cleome∣nes in ruining the Common-weale, had turned a iust Empire into a Tyranny,A good confi∣deration of Arate. gouerning the Warre with Policy and Courage: Arate fore-eeing future things a farre off, as a man who vnderstood the Counsell and presumption of the Etoliens, was of opinion that they must breake their attempts. And considering that Antigonus was a man of great experience in the Arte of Warre, and more sound of his Faith then any other:The nature of Kings Knowing that Kings by nature haue neither friend nor Foe, measuring Friendship and Hatred according to their profit, he resolued to addresse himselfe vnto him, and to let him visibly see the euent of the Warre, and finally to make a League with him. He had many reasons why he should not do it openly: For if Cleomenes and the Etoliens had beene aduertised, they would haue made greater prepara∣tions for the Warre, and most of the Acheins would haue left him, be∣ing amazed at such an alteration, for that they would haue thought, their Commaunder would haue fled to the enemy for refuge like a man in despaire. Wherefore to auoyde these inconueniences, he not onely kept these things secret, but he spake and did many things contrary to his thought, by the which he shewed the contrary of that which he practised. Seeing then the Megalopolitains to bee more prest with Warre then any other, beeing neighbours to the Lacedemonians, and hauing no hope to obtayne succours from the Acheins, being subiect to the same Warre, and being moreouer in League and friendship with the Mac∣donians, for that they had done great pleasures to Philip the Sonne of Amyntas, there was no doubt but as soone as Cleomenes should begin the Warre against them, they would require succours from Antigonus and the Macedonians. Finally he declared his secret to Nicophanes and Cercides Megalopolitains. They had beene friends to his Father,Nicophanes. and seemed fit men to mannage this businesse. By their meanes hee incites the Megalopolitaines. to send an Embassie to the Acheins, to intreae them to demaund succours from Antigonus. The Megalopolitains send Nicophanes and CercidesCercides. to the Acheins,A good inuen∣tion of Arate. with Commission after their consent to go to Antigonus, the which the Acheins did easily allow. This Embassie went to King Antigonus, and let him vnderstand their Charge: and in regard of the Affaires which concerne their Countrey, they deliuered only those things which were most necessary in few words: But they made a long Discourse of the whole in generall, as Aate
had instructed them. They layd before him the attempts which the Etoliens and Cleomenes might make, confessing that this Warre for the present was of great consequence for the Acheins. But if the others preuailed in their interprize, it would be much more dangerous for him. They make no doubt, but the Acheins being assailed at one in∣stant by these two forces, they would bee easily ruined: So there is lesse doubt, that if Cleomenes and the Etoliens haue the Victory, that they will not bee satisfied therewith: For you must vnderstand that Morea, no nor all Greece cannot glut the couetousnesse of the Etoliens. In regard of the ambition of Cleomenes, although hee seemes for the present not to affect any thing but the principallity of Morea, yet if he preuaile, he will neuer cease vntill he hath Conquered all Greece: Whereunto he can neuer attaine before he hath ruined the principallity of Macedon. By these reasons and such like, they mooue the King to thinke care∣fully of things to come, and to consider what may seeme fittest for his affaires, whether to Allie himselfe to the Acheins and Beociens, and to make Warre against Cleomenes touching the Empire of Greece, or lea∣uing the party of so many people, to haue it soone after against the Eto∣lins, Beociens, Acheins, and Lacedemonians in Thessaly, for the prin∣cipallity of Macedony. But if the Etolies be ashamed, to seeme to breake the accord made with the Acheins, during the Warre of De∣metrius, and should still make shew to persist in friendship, as they did yet, the Acheins would be too strong to defend themselues against Cleomenes. And therefore if Fortune fauours them, they shall not neede any mans succour. But if contrarywise it should bee rather for the Etoliens, they intreated the King that he would be pleased to giue them succours, and that (not losing the opportunity of the time,) hee would preserue Morea, before it should be vtterly ruined. They sayd moreouer that he had no reason to care at that time for Faith and Recompence, and that Arate would finde the meanes in the greatest heate of affaires, to giue him satisfaction, and that hee would aduertise him of the time when he should neede succours. When as Antigonus had heard the Embassie, hee did wonderfully commend the prudence of Arate, and made answere that hee was ready to vnder∣goe the danger. Moreouer he wrote letters to the Megalopolitains, by the which he sent them word that hee was ready to giue them succours, so as it were with the consent of the Acheins. This done Nicophanes and Cercides returned to their Countrey: Where after they had deliuered their Letters, they made report of the Kings good affection. The Megalopolitains ioyfull of this newes, sent an Embassie againe to the Acheins, intreating them to contract with Antigonus, and that they might relye in him for all his businesse. Arate hearing all this by Nicophanes, and the good affection the King bare vnto the Acheins, and to himselfe, was wonderfully ioyfull, both for that he was not frustrated of his hope, but for asmuch as An∣igons, (contrary to the hope of the Etoliens,) did not seeme to flye his friendshippe. Hee did not finde that reasonable which the
Megalopolitains aimed at, that the Acheins should submit themselues vnder Antigonus in all this Warre:The fore-sight of Arate. For he was not of aduice to require succours of any man but in extreame necessity; and if that hapned, he would not haue it done at his request alone, but by all the Acheins. In trueth he feared that if Antigonus, hauing the victory by the defeate of Cleomenes and the Lacedemonians, should in the end make any en∣terprize against the Comminalty of the Acheins, they should not lay the blame vpon him, as if he had indiscreetly giuen the aduice for the drawing of the King into their Countrey, who was offended for the taking of the Fort of Corinthe. When the Embassadours of the Megalopolitains came into the Coun∣cell, and had made relation of Antigonus his Letters, and of the Kings loue and affection, and had made a remonstrance vnto the Acheins for a peace with Antigonus, and that it seemed the whole assembly found it good, Arate commended the Kings affection, and the good desire of the whole assembly. Yet he let them vnderstand by many reasons that they should indeauour to keepe their Townes and Countrey with their owne forces, but if they could not effect it, then they could not doe any thing more commendable and more profitable. But if Fortune were contrary vnto them, that they must first doe all that could be possible: And if there were no more hope, then they should require succours from their friends. The whole assembly allowed easily of his Councell; and it was resolued, that for the present they should or∣daine no new thing, and that the Acheins should mannage this war alone. But when as (during these negotiations) Ptolomy had furnished Cleo∣menes with men, and other things necessary for the Warre, desiring by this meanes to make him an enemy to Antigonus, for that hee had greater hope to bee able to Conquer the Realme of Macedon by the meanes of the Lacedemonians, then of the Acheins, and that the Acheins were first Defeated by Cleomenes by a surprize neere vnto Lyeea, and that afterwards they made a great losse neere vnto the Town of Megalopolis, and that finally the third time, they were so beaten, Defeated, and slaine, neere vnto the Towne of Dyie in a place which they call Hecatombee, as they were in a manner quite ruined:Diuers defeat of the Ach. Then Arate seeing himselfe inuironed with so many miseries, knew it was no time to Dreame, and that hee was forced (as hee had formerly resolued) to demaund succour from King Antigonus. For the effe∣cting whereof hee sent his Sonne in Embassie to confirme the Arti∣cles of the agreement. Yet hee was in doubt and much troubled, for that hee did not hope Antigonus would succour him, if they did not deliuer him for his security the Fort of Corinthe, which they called Acrocorinthe with the Towne: Neyther did hee see any meanes to deliuer it to the Macedonians without the consent of the Corinthians. And therefore hee deferred the Councell to aduise of the meanes of safety. In the meane time Cleomenes glorious of his good For∣tune, ouer-ran the whole Prouince, taking Townes aswell by per∣swasion as by terrour. When by this meanes he had taken Caphie, Pellene, Phene, Argos, Phlie, Cleone, Epiaure, Hermion, and Trizene, and in
the end Corinthe, hee seated his Campe neere vnto the  of the Sicyoniens, and by this meanes freed the Acheins of that  whereof wee haue spoken. For when as Arate had the newes, that the Corin∣thians had chased away the Garrison of the Acheins,Acrocrinthe yeelded to An∣tigonus. and ent an Embassie to Cleomenes to deliuer him the Citty, hauing found a good occasion, hee yeelds vnto Antigonus the Fort which the Acheins held. By this meanes hee repaired the wrong which hee had done vnto the King, and it serued him for a pledge, and as it were a Fort and retreate for the future Warre. But when as Cleomenes vnderstood the league which the Acheins had made with Antigonus, and that the Fort had beene freely deliue∣red vnto him, hee presently raised his Siege, and seated his Campe neere vnto Isthmus, and rampred diligently with Pallisadoes and Dit∣ches, the place which lies betwixt the Fortresse and the Mountaines, which they of the Countrey call Onies, as if hee had a hope to make himselfe Lord of all Morea. Antigonus who had his Army ready, expected onely the opportunity of the time. But when hee saw by those things which had happened, according to the aduertisement of Arate, that the time approached of Cleomenes voyage into Thessaly, hee causeth his Army to march towards Isthmus by Beocia, hauing aduertised the Acheins of his affaires: For the Etoliens being discon∣ted at his descent, sent him word, that hee should not passe within the streights of Thermophiles, and if hee vndertooke it, they would take Armes to hinder his passage. Thus Antigonus and Cleomenes lodged their Armies before one another. The one to enter into Morea and the other to keepe his Frontier. And although the Acheins had receiued great losses,Reuolte of A∣ripote of Argos. yet they fainted not. But being suddainly ad∣uertised of the reuolte of Aristote of Argos against Cleomenes, they relieued him vnder the conduct of Timoxene,Argos taken by the Acheins. and tooke the Towne of Argos, which was of great consequence vnto them: For by this meanes the fury of Cleomenes was much abated, and the Souldiers hearts broken, as appeared plainely: For although that Cleomenes Army was much stronger by reason of the opportunity of places, and abundance of victuals, hauing also good and resolute Souldiers, yet there was so great and suddaine an alteration after the taking of Argos, that Cleomenes leauing all, made a retreate, sauouring of a flight: So much hee feared that hee should bee inclosed by his cruell Enemies. From thence hee marcht directly to Argos, where hee made great attempts to carry it by assault. But for that the Acheins resisted like braue men on the one side,Acrocorinthe taken by Anti∣gonus. and the Argiues on the other, for feare of the fault committed, hee was deceiued in his hope: And in passing by Mantinia, he led his Army to Sparta. When as Antigonus was entred into Morea, hee tooke Acrocorinthe. Then hee made haste to goe to Argos, where he much commended the Argiues, and settled an order for the affaires of the City. From thence he returned againe into Arcadia with his Army, and chased away the Garrisons out of those Forts which Cleomenes had built, the which he restored to the Megalopolitains pas∣sing
by the Region Egitane. Then he went to Egia, where he called an assembly of the Acheins: and made a great discourse of the present af∣faires, and shewed them in few words the times to come. Finally, be∣ing created chiefe of the whole league, he past the Winter in the Coun∣tries of the Corinthians and Sicyoniens with his Army. Then in the Spring he went to the field, to whom the Acheins ioyned, and being come within three dayes to the Towne of Tegee, hee besieged it. The Tegetains seeing the Macedonians very busie in making of Trenches, Mines,Tegee yeelded vnto Antigonus. and all other preparations to take the Towne, they yeelded, be∣ing void of all hope: Whereas after he had setled a good order, Anti∣gonus marcht suddainly to Laconice. By this meanes approaching neere vnto Cleomenes, who kept vpon the Frontiers, hee had some small en∣counters with the Enemy. In the meane time they were aduertised by their Spies, that there were succours come from Orchomene to Cleo∣menes. Wherefore Antigonus turned head to Orchomene,Orchomene ta∣ken with other Townes. and takes it without resistance. From thence he besieged Mantina, which was also presently yeelded. Then hee led the Legions to Herca and Telphusa, the which in like manner were yeelded in a short time. After this in the beginning of Winter, hee sent the Macedonians to their houses, and retired with the mercenaries to Egia, there to consult of the present affaires. At that times Cleomenes aduertised that Antigonus had dismist his Amy, and that he stayed at Egi, which is aboue three dayes iourney from Megalopolis, a vast Towne, and ill peopled: especially for that the greatest part had beene slaine in former battels as we haue said, neere vnto Licea, and Ladicea: and that moreouer at that time it was not carefully kept, by reason of the presence of Antigonus, he had a hope to surprize it. Wherefore hee marcht suddainly, being guided by some Messeniens, who being chased and banisht from their Countrey, had retired to Megalopolis: and brought them by Night into the City. But day being come, he was in danger to be defeated with his whole Army, considering the great resistance the Megalopolitains made: the which happened vnto him three Moneths before, when he assiled a Citty sea∣ted in Colea. It is true, that in the end he had the Victory, as well by rea∣son of the multitude of his men, as for that he had formerly gotten the places of aduantage. After he had taken and spoiled the Citty, and chased away the Me∣galopolitains, hee razedMegalopolin razed. it vtterly, to the end they should haue no more hope to re-edifie it. In my opinion hee did it tending to that which the Lionenses, the Megalopolitains, and the Stimphalns with other bordering people, conceiue, that Traytours, or those which loue reuoltes, are neuer in safety. Without doubt the wickednesse of one man blemisht all the virtue of the Clitoriens: This was The∣arceThearce. whom with reason the Clitoriens denyed to bee borne in their Countrey, saying, hee was of Orchomene, and the Sonne of some stranger. Moreouer, for that there are some which preferre Philarchus before al others that haue written this History, although that many times he speakes and iudges of things contrary to Arate, I haue thought it
good, nay rather necessary, not to conceale this: To the end they may discerne truth from falshood, and the rather for that we haue fol∣lowed Arate. Hee hath spoken many things throughout the whole History as Affection hath transported him, which are not needfull to debate at this present, holding those things to be deliuered by vs, which hapned at such time as we Write, that is to say, during the Cleomenique Warre: For that they would be more then sufficient to discouer the errours and faults of this Author. First when he labours to set foorth the cruelty of Antigonus, and of the Macedonians, and moreouer that of Arate and the Acheins, he sayd that as soone as he had Conquered the Mantiniens, they caused them to suffer great outrages and cruelties, and that the Citty which was one of the noblest and most auncient of Arcadia, fell into so great mi∣sery and ruine, as it mooued all Greece to weepe and lament. And when as afterwards he seekes to make the cruelty seeme greater, and to mooue the Readers hearts, he relates a burning of Women, their haire scattered vp and downe, their Paps naked, the teares and lamentati∣ons made by men and women, who dragg'd after them their little Children and their Parents broken with age. This hee doth often throughout his whole History, to let euery man see the agrauating of their miseries. Leauing then this basenesse and effeminacy of his heart, let vs seeke the things which are most proper and profitable for the History. A Historiographer ought not to mooue the affections of men,The duty of a Historiogra∣pher. nor seeke occasions fit for it, neyther let him pursue the miseries of men (the which belongs to the makers of Tragedies) but let him deliuer truly the sayings and doings of men, although they be not great. Without doubt a History and a Tragedy, tend not to one and the same end, but rather are quite contrary.What is requi∣red in a Tra∣gedy. For they must labour in a Tragedy to draw by coniecture the hearts of the Auditors to Hope, Feare, Care, Plea∣sure, and such like affections. But in a History hee must imploy his whole indeauour to relate truly the sayings and doings of men. Where∣fore things that are likely and coniecturall, are necessary in the one, to abuse the Assistants, and those which are true in this being Written for the profit of the Readers. You must vnderstand likewise that this Historiographer many times doth not yeild the cause in his History, nor the reason of things, without the which they cannot easily mooue any to pitty, or indigna∣tion in humane affaires. But what is he that will not finde it strange to see a Cittizen whipt: yet if any one be so by reason of his offence, wee finde it reasonable. And if any one strikes a free man to punish and a∣mend him, shall wee not hold him an honest man and praise worthy? Murther in a Cittizen is likewise forbidden, and seuerely punisht: But if any one kils a Thiefe or an Adulterer, is hee not held for innocent? And if any one kils a Traytor to his Country, or a Tyrant, shall he not be commended by all the World, held deare and honoured? VVee must therefore looke to the end in all things, and to the intention of the man, not to that which is acted, but to the causes and Discourses,
with consideration of the differences. The Mantiuiens leauing first the Common-weale of the Acheins, gaue themselues and their Coun∣trey willingly to the Etoliens,The reuolte of the Mantiniens. and soone after to Cleomenes. In the meane time, whilest they liued vnder the Lacedemonians, the Acheins tooke them againe vnder the Conduct of Arate, foure yeeres before the Descent of Antigonus: where they were so far from being punished for the offence committed, as this easie and suddaine revnion of two people into one Common-wealth, seemed incredible to the whole VVorld. For as soone as Arate was entred, he forbad his men to touch their good: Calling the Burgesses afterwards together, wishing them not to care, and that they should inioy their goods, and be assured to liue in peace, as long as they were vnder the Acheins Common-weale. The Mantiniens who seemed to be without hope,The courteous vsage of Arate to the Manti∣nien. were wonderfully reioyced at the words of Arate: VVherefore they presently changed their opinion, receiuing those into their Houses, to whom formerly they had beene deadly enemies, with whom they did communicate their Goods and VVealth. Finally, they omitted nothing of that which seemed necessary for the setling of a firme friendshippe; and in truth it was not without cause. I doe not know if euer any fell into the hands of more gracious enemies, or being falne into so great inconue∣niences, haue relieued and raised themselues with so little losse: the which proceeded from the humanity of Arate and the Acheins. After∣wards seeing a farre off the seditions which were renewed amongst them, and the practize of the Etoliens and Lacedemonians, they send an Embassie to the Acheins, to deliuer their Town into their protection and to receiue a Garrison. VVho presently leuied three hundred men, and sent them to Mantinea, these three hundred men of the Acheins nation, leauing their Countrey and all their estates, they remained at Mantinea to preserue their liberty. They had moreouer two hundred Souldiers that were strangers. Soone after there grew a sedition among the Mantiniens; wherfore they called the Lacedemonians, deliuering them the Towne;The great vil∣lany commit∣ted by the Man¦tinien. and to the end their wickednesse might be full and compleat, they murthered all the Acheins; a crime which was most execrable. For seeing they would leaue the party and friendship of the Acheins, they should at the least haue sent backe the Garrison safe into their Country. It is a Custome which enemies obserue daily by a Common Law. But to the end they might with more ease shewe their affection to Cleomenes and the Lacedemoians, there proceeded to this great cruelty and basenesse, who in breaking the Law of Nations would not spare their Friends. Seeing then they haue practised such great cruelty towards those, who hauing lately taken their Towne, intreated them like men without of∣fence, and now defended and kept their Towne, of what paines shall wee iudge them worthy? VVhat punishment may wee ordayne for so foule an outrage? Shall they be sold with their wiues and Children? But by the Law of Armes they may doe it to those, which haue not committed such crimes nor such cruelties. They were therefore wor∣thy
of a greater punishment, and a more grieuous example. Where∣fore if they haue suffered no more but that which Philarchus mentio∣ned, we must beleeue that the Grecians were not mooued to pitty, but rather commended the iudgement of the Acheins; who had resolued that so great a cruelty (the like whereof had neuer beene spoken of) should be grieuously punished. Seeing then the Mantiniens at that time had no other harme,The Mantini∣ens sold. but the losse of their goods, and were sold by their enemies, who will not hold this Historiographer to be a lyer, and moreouer to haue Written incredible things: And to the end he might shew his ignorance, he hath not obserued that the Acheins at the same time did not the like vnto the Tegeates, whom they tooke in battell: For if the cruelty of the Acheins had beene the cause thereof, there is no doubt but the Tegeates had suffered in like manner. But seeing that this Rigour fell onely vppon the Mantiniens, it is apparent that the cause of their chol∣ler was diuers. Moreouer, this same Historiographer tells vs,Aristmacus. that Aristomacus the Argine, of a noble Family, and of an auncient Ty∣rannicall Race, was Tyrant of Argos, who being taken by Antigonus and the Acheins, and brought to Cenchrea, hee suffered the most vn∣iust Death that euer man indured. He makes him moreouer (as it is his custome) to cast out lamentable cries, the night that he was strangled: And that the neighbours terri∣fied partly with the cruelty, and partly desirous to know what it was, some of them wonderfully incensed ranne thither. He also sets downe other effeminate things, which we will leaue for the present, beeing content with that which we haue here related. For my part I conceiue that if Aristomacus had done no other thing against the Acheins, but to turne the Common-weale into ruine, and the liberty of the Country into Tyranny, that he hath worthily deserued very great punishment. Although that this gentle Historiographer desirous to attribute great glory vnto him, and to begge pitty from the Auditors, by a comme∣moration of the paines which he indured, he doth not once say, that he was a Tyrant, but that hee was descended of a Tyrannicall Race. What could he say worse, or more pernitious? For the very name is the field where all cruelty is sowne, and which imbraceth all the out∣rages and villanies of men. And admit that Aristomacus had indured great torments, as Philarchus sayth, yet he was not sufficiently puni∣shed for that which he committed in one day: for when as Arate entred into Argos with a Troupe of Acheins, without Discouery, labouring to restore the Argiues to their liberty, hee was in the end forced to leaue the Towne, for that hee found not any man would take Armes, for the feare they had of this Tyrant. Wherefore Aristomacus taking his occasion (for that they had con∣sented to the comming of the Acheins) put to Death fourescore Citti∣zensThe cruelty of Aristomacus. in the presence of his familiars. Beleeue me it will bee tedious to relate the cruelty which he committed in his life time: He held it of his Predecessors by right of inheritance. And therefore wee must not thinke they haue done him wrong, if they haue made him serue for an
example with torments: For it would haue beene much more vnwor∣thy, that so wicked a man after the murther of so many, and after many thefts and spoyles, should haue died vnpunished like an Inno∣cent. Neither can they charge Antigonus nor Arate of cruelty, to haue put a Tyrant to death in Prison, whom they had taken in open Warre, and whom they might with reason and honour haue taken du∣ring a peace, and haue put him to a cruell death. But of what punish∣ment will not you hold him worthy, who besides all these things brake his accord with the Acheins. A little before hee had relinquisht the tyranny, being destitute of all hope and succours after the death of De∣metrius. At what time the Acheins did not onely saue him, but en∣tertaine him so courteously and graciously, as they remitted all the wrongs which hee had done during his Reigne, and gaue him great ad∣uancements in their Common-wealth. Finally, they made him Chiefe of the Acheins. But this wicked man amongst all others, forgetting that great humanity and clemency, began presently to plot how hee might make a league with Cleomenes, retiring himselfe in that greatest neede soone after to the Enemy: whereby the Acheins were in great danger. Who some few dayes after was taken in Warre, was he not worthy to dye in the Night in the Prison at Cenchrea, as Philarchus saith,Aristoacus strangled▪ but hee should rather haue beene carried throughout all Mrea, and after that he had suffered infinite torments, to haue dyed cruelly. Yet hee was onely strangled in Prison, although hee had committed all sorts of Villany. Moreouer, the same Historiographer holds a long discourse of the miseries of the Mantiniens, as if hee thought it were the duty of an Historiographer onely to relate cruell and vniust actions. In regard of the virtue and magnanimity of the Megalopolitains, which they shewed at that time, he makes no mention, as if the duty of an Histo∣ry were rather to remember the wickednesse and vices of men, than things well and commendably done: Whereas the Readers of Histo∣ries shall reape more profit by deeds which are worthy to bee imbra∣ced and followed, than those which are vniust, and to bee auoided. Moreouer hee pursues his Discourse, how that Cleomenes tooke the Citty, and that hee sent Letters to Messena to the Megalopolitains, aduising them to returne into their Countrey which was whole, and to be of his party: And how the Megalopolitains could not endure they should finish the reading of the Letters, and could hardly forbeare from doing outrage to the messenger, with many other petty triuiall things, to shew the magnificence and modesty of Cleomenes towards his Ene∣mies. But he forbeares to tell that which followed, and which was very proper to the History, which is the praise and memory of things well done. But who hindred him? If we hold them honest men who in words and will maintaine a Warre for their Allies, and if wee doe not onely praise with admiration, but also giue thankes with Presents, to those that endure the spoile of their Countrey with fire and sieges,The great  Megalopolitains what commendations shall we giue then to the Megalopolitains? what affection shall wee beare vnto them? Shall it not be great and ample?
First, they left the Prouince to Clomenes, and abandoned their owne ountrey, rather than to breake their Faith with the Acheins. Fi∣nally, although that contrary to hope, and the opinion of all the world, they might haue returned into their Country with safety, yet they de∣sired rather to be banished, forsaking their houses, Sepulchers, Tem∣ples and goods, and finally, all their estates, than to be taxed to haue broken their Faith with their Allies. Was there euer any thing done that was more rare and excellent? Whereunto then should an Histori∣ographer make his Auditours more attentiue? With what examples could hee better exhort men to keepe their Faith, and to follow things well done. But Philarchus makes no mention hereof, and is in my o∣pinion blind, when as braue exploits which are worthy of memory offer themselues. Hee saith moreouer,The third part of the booty is due to the Ge∣nerall. that the Lacedemonians made a spoile within Megalopolis of three Millions, and sixe hundred thousand Crownes, whereof Cleomenes according to the custome had twelue hundred thousand. But who will not maruaile at the beastlinesse and ignorance of this man, touching the Riches and power of Greece: the which are things which an Historiographer ought to know. Truely, I dare boldly affirme, that they could not gather together this Summe in all Morea, out of the money of all their moueables, excepting their per∣sons: I meane not in the time when it was impouerished by the op∣pressions of the Kings of Macedony, and by the diuers Warres which they had amongst themselues, but at such time when as all the Townes were firmely vnited together, and when as Fortune seemed to smile on them. But to shew that what wee say, proceeds not from ouer-wee∣ning or want of reason, it appeares thus. Who knowes not that when the Acheins ioyned to the Thebeins, made Warre against the Lacede∣monians, and that they were to raise an Army of ten thousand men, and another at Sea of an hundred Triremes, and that they had calcu∣lated the charge, it not onely emptied their publicke Cofers, but al∣so their houses and the whole Prouince: and that finally, they could hardly draw together three Millions, and sixe hundred thousand Crownes, whereof there wanted an hundred and fifty thousand. You must not hold that strange which I now affirme of Morea. There is not any man that dare assure, that the spoile of Megalopolis at that time, did amount to aboue ninescore thousand Crownes: and that the people, as well Burgesses as Slaues retired to Messina. Where∣of behold a great argument: For when the Mantineans were not lesse strong, nor of meaner estate than the Arcadians, as this Historiogra∣pher sayth, were enuironed by a siege, so as when they yeelded, no man could steale away, nor carry away any thing: Yet the whole spoile,The pillage of Mantinia came to ninescore thousand Crownes. reckoning it at the vttermost, accompting the bodies, was estee∣med but ninescore thousand Crownes. Moreouer, who will not won∣der at that which hee saith afterwards, that an Embassie from Ptolomy came ten dayes before this battell, to let Cleomenes vnderstand that he was not resolued to contribute any longer to the charges of this Warre, and that hee aduised him to agree with Antigonus? The which Cleome∣nes
hearing, he resolued to hazard the battell, before his Souldiers should heare the newes, lest they should mutine, when they should be out of hope of their pay. But if it were true, that he had lately gotten three Millions, and sixe hundred thousand Crownes in Mega∣lopolis, what neede hath he of Ptolomyes contribution, seeing that ninescore thousand Crownes were more then sufficient to defeate An∣tigonus forces? Is it not a great weakenesse in him to say, that Cleoma∣nes did expect pay for his Souldiers from Ptolomy, and withall, that he had taken so great a booty of money in Megalopolis? My Discourse should be long if I should pursue the vices wherewith this good Histo∣riographer doth generally abound: but this shall suffice for this present. After the taking of Megalopolis,An Ay leui∣ed by Cleome∣nes. at such time as Antigonus win∣tred in the Citty of Argos, Cleomenes drew his Army together, as soone as the opportunity of the time would giue him leaue. And ha∣uing preached vnto his men, he entred into the Countrey of Argos. Many blamed him for this attempt, as being too bold and rash, in regard of the scituation of the Countrey, which is difficult and strong by Nature. Others which were of a better Iudgement, held it wisely done. For when as he saw that Antigonus had left the greatest part of his Army in the Countrey, and had with him but a small handfull of Mercenary Souldiers, he had a conceit, that hee might easily enter the Prouince without danger: And if he put all vnto fire and Sword, euen vnto the Walles of the Citty, the Argiues through necessity would charge Antigonus, who tho∣rough his basenesse must endure such outrages. Finally, if hee be forced to come to fight, moued with the cries of the people, who shall hinder him to haue the Victory, seeing he hath a greater Troupe of men? If he doth not abandon the Citty as it is fitting, hee can carry backe his men without danger into his Countrey, after that he hath ouer-runne the Champion: Leauing a great amaze∣ment and terrour to his Enemies, and assuring the hearts of his owne Souldiers.Antigonus blamed. The which succeeded according to his proiect. For when the people saw the whole Prouince thus spoyled, they began to blame Antigonus: who notwithstanding discharging the Duty of a wise and discreet Captaine, would not goe to field. Cle∣omenes in the meane time ouer-ran their whole Countrey without feare. By this meanes he returned safely into his Countrey, after that hee had at pleasure ruined the Prouince, and left a great amaze∣ment amongst the Argiues, and made his owne men more hardy for the future VVarre. But when the Spring came, the Macedonians and the Acheins re∣turning from wintering,The number of Nations which were in Antigonus Ar∣my. went to field: Antigonus marcht to La∣conice with his Army, consisting of ten thousand Macedonians, three thousand Archers, three hundred Horse, a thousand Bow∣men, and likewise as many of the Gaules: Moreouer, three thou∣sand Foote which were Mercinaries, with three hundred Horse, and about a thousand Megalopolitains armed after the manner of
the Macedonians, whereof Cercies had the leading. As for the Al∣lies, hee had two thousand Foote of Bauere, and two hundred Horse: a thousand Foote of the Epirtes, and fifty Horse: and as many of the Acarnanians: and besides all these, a thousand and sixe hun∣dred Sclanonians, whereof Demetrius of Phare was Captaine. Thus the whole Army consisted of twenty eight thousand Foote, and twelue hundred Horse. Cleomenes being aduertised by his Spies of the Enemies descent, hee placed forces vpon the passages, by the which they might enter into his Countrey, fortifying them with Trenches and Trees cut downe: And hee himselfe went with his Ar∣my to a passage which they call Sellasia, thinking as it happened, that the Enemy would take that way.Sellasia. His Army was about twenty thousand men. There were two Mountaines in this passage, where∣of the one is called Eua by the people of the Countrey,Eua. and the o∣ther Olympus.Olympus. There is a way betwixt both which runs along a Ri∣uer vnto Sparta. When as Cleomenes had lodged himselfe in these two Mountaines, and had carefully fortified them with Trenches and Pallisadoes, hee put the Souldiers which were drawne toge∣ther with the Allies into Eua,Euclide. whereof his Cozen Euclide had the Commaund, and stayed himselfe in that of Olympus with the Lace∣demonans and Mercenaries. Moreouer, hee placed his Horse-men in the Plaine, with some of the Mercenaries, vpon the two Bankes of the Riuer. When as Antigonus was come into those places, and finding the scituation of them, and the wonderfull industry of Cleomenes to dispose of his Army, hee was not resolued to fight at that time. And there∣fore hee camped neere vnto him, vpon the banke of the Riuer of Gor∣gile: whereas staying some dayes,Antigonus Campe seated vpon the Bankes of Gor∣gile. hee turned about the Countrey and the Enemies Campe and sought to draw them to battell by skir∣mishes. But when hee found nothing without defence, for that the Prouidence of Cleomenes had carefully rampired all places, hee gaue ouer his enterprize: But in the end they resolued by a common con∣sent, to make an end of their Warre by a battell. Behold how For∣tune had drawne together two great Captaines, equall in virtue, Counsell and Wisedome.The order of Antigonus Bat∣tell. Thus Antigonus opposed in Front to those which held the Mountaine of Eua, the Macedonians with their Targets, and the Sclaonians: and hee put the Leginaries in di∣uers bands to succour the one and the other: to whom hee gaue for Commaunder, Alexander, the Sonne of Ameta, and Demetrius of Phare. After these marcht the Acarnanians and they of Candy: Finally, he placed two thousand Acheins for a supply, to succour them at need. Then he set his Horse-men neere vnto the Riuer-side in Front of the Enemies Horse, whereof Alexander had the charge with two thousand Foote-men. As for Antigonus, hee lodged neere vnto Mount Olympus with the bands of Aduenturers, and the Macedoni∣ans: where hee resolued to fight with Cleomenes. VVhen hee had put the Mercenaries into battell, hee caused the Battalion of the
Macdonians to march. The place which was straight, would not suffer them to doe otherwise. They had giuen charge to the Sctauo∣nians to begin the battell, as soone as they should see a white cloth, which should be aduanced neere vnto Mount Olimpus, at the foote whereof they lodged at Night, vnder the Riuer of Gorgile. The Me∣galopolitains also with the Horse-men were to enter the combate, as soone as they should see a purple Robe, aduanced in the Aire from the Kings Quarter. The houre of the battell was now come, the Sclauonians had alrea∣dy discouered Antigonus signe. They encourage their Companions according to the opportunity of the time, making no doubt but they had the victory in their hands. Then they endeauoured with won∣derfull resolution to gaine the Mountaine. But the Foote-men which were lightly armed, whom Cleomenes as wee haue sayd, left in the Plaine with the Horse-men, seeing that the Bands of the Acheins had not the courage to second them, charg'd them vpon the Reare, so as they were in great danger: For on the right hand, and in Front Eucli∣de had the better with his men: and the Mercenaries on the left hand, fighting obstinately, made a great spoile vpon the Reare. By this meanes they were suddainly enuironed with two Troopes of Ene∣mies. When Philopomene the Megalopolitaine saw this disorder, hee suddainly gaue good aduice to the Captaines. But for that hee was a young man, and had neuer had charge they gaue no eare vnto him. Wherefore addressing himselfe to those of his Nation, Com∣panions sayth hee, the Victory is ours if you will follow mee. And in charging the Enemies Horse, they assailed them with great cou∣rage. Wherefore the Aduenturers strangers, who fought in the Reare of those which assail'd the Mountaine, hearing a great noise, and seeing the Combate of the Horse-men, retired to aide and succour them, whereunto they had beene at the first ordained. The order of the Enemies being by this meanes broken, the Scla∣uonians and Macedonians with others whom Antigonus had ap∣pointed, fell vpon them with great violence and fury. So as after∣wards all the World was of opinion,The courage of Philopomene is the cause of the Victory. that the industry and courage of Philopomene had defeated Euclide at that time. And therefore they say, that when as Antigonus demaunded of Alexander why hee had sent the Horse-men against the Enemy, before hee had seene the signe, and that hee had answered, it was not hee, but a young Megalopolitaine which had done it without his priuity, hee then re∣plied, that this young man had performed the duty of a good Cap∣taine, and Alexander that of a young foole. But they which kept the toppe of the Mountaine with Euceli∣de, shewed their basenesse, seeing the Enemies ascend: for they should not haue attended vntill they had gain'd the top with safety: But relying vpon the aduantage of the place, they should haue en∣countred them, and charged them from aboue: and if necessity had required, they might haue retired safely on the right hand, to charge the Enemy againe. In doing this they had easily broken, defeated
and put the Macedonians to flight. But they did the contrary, as if they had the Victory certaine in their hands; for without moouing from the place which the Cleomenes had appointed them, they staied expecting the enemy, with hope of a greater defeate: For that they should be repulsed and beaten from the highest place of the Mountaine. But they soone suffered the pennance of their basenesse. For after that the Macedonians had recouered the Mountaine, without any resistance, and were come into the Plaine, they fell vpon their enemies, fighting hand to hand with so great sury, as they presently draue them backe into the hollow Caues and inaccessible places. In the meane time the Combate was cruell among the Horse-men, where it was worth the sight, to behold with what heate, force, and courage the Acheins fought, considering they all fought for the li∣berty of the Countrey.Philopomene. But among all others they made great esteeme of Philopomene; for when his Horse was ouer thrown with a Pertuisane he fainted not, fighting long on foote with great courage. Finally in the end hee died valliantly, being shot thorough the shinne-bones with an Arrow. On the other side the Kings had begunne the fight at Mount Olympus with the mercenaries and such as were lightly armed. They were about fiue thousand men, who fought sometimes man to man, and sometimes they tried the Fortune of the whole Troupe. There the Victory was long in suspence, finally they parted equally from the battell. But when as Cleomees was aduertised that Emlide had abandoned the Mountaine, and that the Allies had turned head, and that the Horse-men were in great despaire, and that all trembled for feare, hee resol∣ued to goe out of his Fort, and to put his whole Army in Front vpon one side of the Campe; and therefore hee caused them to sound a Re∣treate. By this meanes when those that were lightly armed were drawne together, the two Armies charged with their Pikes and Iaue∣lings. The Combate was cruell, and the charge performed with so great courage on either side, as the Victory was long doubtfull, and the iudgement difficult who deserued the greatest honour: For that sometimes the Lacedemonians retired, and againe they made the Ma∣ceonians giue backe. Finally,The victory of Antigonus a∣ginst Clome∣es. when as the Lacedemonians were vanquished and put to flight, they were slaine heere and there like sheepe. Cleomenes saued himselfe in Sparta without any wound, beeing accompanied by some of the Horse-men. From thence hee retired the night following to Sythia, where he imbarqued in certaine shippes which lay long ready for the necessities of the Countrey, and sailed with his friends to A∣lexandria.Lacedemon ta∣ken by Antigo∣nus. When as Antigonus was entred into Lacedemon finding no resistance, hee intreated the Lacedemonians graciously and courteously in all things; but especially in suffering them to liue and gouerne their Common-weale after the Lawes of the Country. When he had stai∣ed certaine daies there, he returned into Macedony with his Army, ha∣uing newes of the descent of the Sclauonians, and of the spoile they made. Behold how Fortune disposeth of great affaires as she pleaseth.
There is no doubt but if Cleomenes had deferred the battell a little, or staied in Sparta after his defeate,Sparta or La∣cedemon. keeping them in hope, in the end he had preuailed in his affaires after the retreate of Antigonus. Antigonus came from thence to Tegee; to whom hee left their Common-weale intire. Three dayes after he arriued at Argos, at such time as the peo∣ple were gathered together to celebrate the Nemean games; who pre∣sently went foorth to meete him. All the Citty had their eyes fixt vp∣pon him and beheld him, all the World commended him; all the as∣sembly of Greece, and euery Citty in perticular did him Honour, not onely Humane but Diuine. From thence he made hast to go into Macedon, where as he found the Sclauonians spoiling the Country;The Victory of Antigonus a∣gainst the Scla∣uonians. to whom hee gaue battell, and got the Victory after a long combate. But hee cried so much during the fight, as within few dayes after hee died of a fluxe of blood; so as the Grecians lost the great hope they had conceiued, not so much for his skill in Warre, as for his vertue and royall perfections. He left the Realme of Macedony to Philip the sonne of Demetrius. But if you demaund of me why I haue helde so long a Discourse of this present Warre, you must know I haue done it of purpose. For as this time concurres with that whereof wee meane to speake, I haue held it fit and necessary, to let the World vnderstand, according to my first re∣solution,The Death of many great Princes what the estate of the Macedonians and Grecians were at that time. At that time Ptolomy died of sicknesse; to whom succeeded Ptolomy Philopater. The like did Seleucus the sonne of Seleucus, who was surnamed Callinice; and in like manner Pogon; to whom his brother Antiochus succeeded in the Realme of Syria. The like in a manner hapned to those which helde the Kingdomes of Alexander after his death, as Seleucus, Ptolomy, and Lysimacus; for those died in the hundreth foure and twenteth Olympiade, as wee haue formerly related; and these in the hundreth thirty nine. Seeing wee haue exposed the preparation of all our History, and sufficiently decla∣red at what time and how, and for what causes the Romanes after the conquest of all Italy assailed forraigne Realmes, and what the estate then was of Greece, Macedony, and the Carthaginians. I haue thought it fit to make an end of this Booke, with a Commemoration of these actions, and this alteration of Kingdomes: Seeing that according to our intention we are come vnto the times when as the Grecians made the VVarre of the Allies; the Romanes against Hannibal; and to that when as the Kings of the lower Asia, fought for the Empire of Syria. The end of the Second Booke of Polybius.
THE THIRD BOOKE of the History of POLYBIVS. WEe haue shewed sufficiently in the First Booke, how that wee haue taken for the beginning and foundation of the Romane actions, the VVarre betwixt the Allies, that of Hannibal, and that of Syria: Wee haue in like manner set downe the causes, for the which wee haue beene for∣ced (in reducing the beginnings farther off.) to write the History of the Second Booke. Now we will indeauour to make you vnderstand the Warres themselues, and the causes why they were vndertaken, and dispersed in so many places, hauing let you vnderstand, in as few words as possible we may, the attempts of the people of Rome. Seeing that which wee haue vndertaken to write is but a Worke, and as it were a spectacle; (that is to say,) how, when, and wherefore all the Countries of the VVorld haue beene reduced vnder the obedience of the Romans, and that this hath a notorious beginning, a prefixed time, and the end certaine. VVee haue thought it good to deliuer summarily the acci∣dents which hapned from the beginning vnto the end of these VVarres: Immagining that they which desire to see our Worke, will more easily come to the knowledge of the whole History. Beleeue me that our vnderstanding conceiues many things necessary for a perticular History, by the knowledge of the generall; for the vnderstanding whereof, the experience of perticular actions is of no small importance; and if they
be both ioyned together, so as it may bee but one description, they will be wonderfull profitable to the Reader. But as for the contents of our Worke, wee haue sufficiently spoken thereof in the two first Bookes. And as for the perticular actions which haue hapned, they haue taken their beginning in the Warres which we haue Related; and there end at the death of the Kings of Macedon. So as from the be∣ginning vnto the end there were fifty yeares; during the which there were as great and admirable things performed, as euer were in so short a spce. To speake whereof, wee will beginne to write from the hundreth and fortieth Olympiade, and will obserue this order. First wee will shew the causes for the which this VVarre, which they call of Hanni∣bal, beganne betwixt the Romanes and Carthaginians: So as entring in∣to Italy, they reduced the Romans to so great an extreamity, as they suddainly grew in hope to be Lords, not only of the rest of Italy, but also of the Citty of Rome. And afterwards we will continue our nar∣ration, vpon what occasion Philip King of Macedon, after that he had made VVarre with the Etoliens and pacified Greece, entred into hope with the Carthaginians. And as for Antiochus, Ptolomy, and Philopa∣ter, they in the end had Warre together for the lower Syria, after a long dissention. Moreouer the Rhodiens and Prufiens making VVarre against them of Constantinople, forced them to abandon Pontus. And there ending our Dicourse, we will beginne to speake of the manner of liuing of the Romanes, of their Lawes and of their Common-weale: By the which as proper to them,The Countries conquered by the Romanes. they haue attained vnto such great power, as they haue not only made subiect to their obedience, Italy, Sycile, and the Gaules, and likewise Spaine in a short time; but in the end they haue vndertaken the Empire of the whole World, after they had vanquished the Carthaginians by Armes.Hiron. Then passing on we will shew, how the Kingdome of Hieron of Saragosse was defeated and rui∣ned. The like we will do of diuers troubles which were in Aegypt. Moreouer how after the death of King Ptolomy, Antiochus,The Warres which Anti∣chous and Phi∣lip made. and Philip, being agreed touching the diuision of the Realme left vnto the Sonne, began the Warre. Philip against Aegypt and Samos, and Antiochus a∣gainst Syria and Phenicea. And when as we haue summarily set downe the affaires of Spaine, Lybia, and Sycile, we will presently turne our Discourse to Greece, as the affaires shall change. For after that we haue related the VVars at Sea,Attalus. which Attalus and the Rhodiens made against Philip: and hauing set downe the Romanes VVarre against him, how and by whom it had beene mannaged, and what successe it had, obseruing the order of things, we will come to the indignation of the Etoliens, who proclai∣med VVarre against the Romanes, and drew Antiochus out of Asia. And when we haue deliuered the causes, and related Antiochus naui∣gation into Europe, we will first shew how he fled out of Greece; and being vanquished by Armes, how he abandoned vnto the Romanes, all the Counries which lie on this side Mount Taurus.Mount Taurus Thirdly, we will shew with what power the Romans conquered the Empire of Asia, after
they had wholy defeated the Gaules, who wandred vp and downe; and how they freed the whole Countrey on this side Mount Taurus, from the feare of the Barbarians; and the insolency of the Gaules. And when we haue related the mis-fortune of the Etoliens and Cophalins in their Warres,Eumenides. Ariarate. Morea. we will make mention of those of Eumenides, of Prshia, and of the Gaules; the like we will do of that of Ariarate against Phar∣nace. From thence dispatching the accords of them of Morea, and the increase of the Rhodien Common-wealth, we will make an end of our worke, setting downe in the end the Voyages which Antiochus sirna∣med Epiphanes, made into Aegypt. And in like manner the Warres of Persi with the ruine of the Kingdome of the Macedonians. These are things whereby we may easily vnderstand how the Romanes in a short submitted the whole Earth vnder their obedience, assailing them in per∣ticular. And if it were lawfull to discerne vertue from vice, by the good or bad successe of affaires,The Conquest of the Romanes in 53. yeares▪ or from the praise or dishonour of men, we must of necessity make an end here, and turne our Relation to things which in the beginning we propounded to set down; for this hath con∣tinued fifty three yeares: during the which the Roman Empire hath got∣ten so great an increase, as the whole World might well know, that they must do what their people commaunded. But for that such things, cannot be rightly iudged by the good Fortune of affaires, considering that many times those that seeme to be well done, are the cause of great inconueniencies, if they be not done in time: And contrary-wise they which are fallen into some disaster, many times turne their mis-for∣tunes to good, if they know how to haue patience. We haue thought it fitting to adde to that which we haue Written, what the nature of the Victors were, what meanes they held in the gouernment of their Empire, and how the rest of the Townes, Regions, and Countries yeilded willingly vnto them? And moreouer what course of life, and what Lawes they held with all the World, aswell in particular as gene∣rally with all their Common-wealths. By this meanes they which liue at this day, shall plainy see, whither it be good to flie, or voluntarily to submit to the Empire of Rome; and they which shall come after may iudge whither the actions of the Ro∣manes be commendable and worthy of memory, or altogether blame∣able. Behold, wherein the profit of our History will consist, aswell for the present as the future time. They which mannage a Warre, and they which vndertake to iudge of it, do not propound the Victory for the last end, nor wholy to subiect himselfe. Beleeue me, a wise man doth not make Warre with his neighbours, to see the defeat and ruine: Neither doth any man saile in diuers Seas, onely to make Voyages; nor pursues many Sciences and Disciplines, in regard onely of them. Without doubt we pursue these things, for that which followes, seemes pleasant, profitable, or decent, and therefore wee may with reason say, that the end of our Worke hath beene to know the condition of all things, after the Conquest of the World made by the Romanes, vn∣till they fell againe into new combustions. Of which troubles I haue resolued to write, making as it were, a new
beginning:Polybius hath been preent at a great part of the things which he hath written. For that there hath beene great and memorable things, hauing not onely beene present at the greatest part, but also a com∣fot and assistant. This trouble grew, when as the Romans made Warre against the Celtiberans, and the Carthaginians against Massinissa, King of Ly∣bia: and what time Attaus and Prusias were at Warre in Asia. And then Ariarate King of Capadocia expell'd his Realme by Roferne, by the meanes of Demetrius, was soone after restored by him. But Demetrius the Sonne of Seleucus, lost his Realme and life by the con¦spiracy of other Kings,Demetrius lost his Rlme and life by con¦spiracy. after hee had held Syria twelue yeeres. And the Romans restored the Grecians to their Citties, whom they had charged to bee the Authours of the Persian Warre, after they had accepted the excuse of their innocency. Soone after they made Warre against the Carthaginians, for the causes which wee will specifie, so as they resolued first to transport them, and after∣wards wholly to ruine them. And for that the Macedonians abandoned the part of the Ro∣mans, and the Lacedemonians the Common weale of the Acheins, there followed the vtter ruine and destruction of all Greece. This shall serue for the Preamble of our Worke. I haue neede of the fauour of Fortune, to the end that by the meanes of life I may finish this my resolution, although I hold it for certaine, that if a long life should faile mee,Th desire and affection of the Authour vpon the end of his Booke. yet there would bee alwayes some one found among so great a multitude of wise and learned men, that would finish our Worke, and endeuour to bring vnto per∣fection that, which suddaine Death might hinder and preuent in vs. As wee haue related at large the deeds which seeme most memo∣rable, desiring that our whole worke might bee knowne to the Reader, as well in generall as perticular, it is now time vnto the de∣claration of our designe. The greatest part of those which haue written the deeds of Hannibal, desiring to shew the cause of the Warre which kindled betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, say, that the siege of Sagonte was the first: and the second, that con∣trary to the accord made with the Romans, they had past the Ri∣uer of Ebro. For my part, I am of opinion that these were the beginnings, but not the causes; for there is a great difference betwixt the causes and beginning of things:The beginning of a worke and the cause . vnlesse some will say, that the Voyage of Alex∣ander the great into Asia, hath beene the cause of the Warre which he made against the Persians: Or that the descent which Antiochus made at Demetriade, hath beene the cause of that which was be∣gun against the Romans: the which is neither true nor likely. But what man is so much blinded with ignorance, that will affirme and maintaine, that the preparations which were made part∣ly by Alexander, and partly by Phillip in his life time, for the Warre of Persia: Or by the Etoliens, to make Warre against the Ro∣mans, before the comming of Antiochus hath beene the causes of the
Warre? These are the opinions of men, who doe not obserue how much the beginnings and the cause differ: and that the causes in all things are the first, and the beginning are the end of causes. I am of opinion that the beginnings are called the first workes of things which are resolued and concluded, and that the causes are those which preceed the decree and resolution, and makes vs so to iudge: as are the thoughts, the aduices, the discourses of reason and such other things. This will be apparent for that which followes: For it will be easie for any man to see for what cause the Warre of Persia was made,The eauses of Alexanders Warre in Per∣sia. and whence the beginning came. The first was the returne of the Greci∣ans with Xenophon into their Countrey, by infinite fierce and barba∣rous Nations: where not any one durst make head against him in so long a Voyage. The second hath beene the Voyage of Agesilaus King of Lacede∣monia into Asia by Sea.Agesilaus. Where hauing found nothing answerable to his forces, nor that presented it selfe, hee was forced to returne into Greece,Phillip. for the troubles which were kindled there: as if he had triumphed ouer the Barbarians. For which causes Phillip King of Macedon, hauing experience of the basenesse and sloth of the Per∣sians and relying vpon the readinesse of the Macedonians in matters of War: being likewise drawne with the hope of great gaine he pre∣pared Warre against them with all his forces, as soone as he found himselfe assured of the amity and friendship of the Grecians: ta∣king his occasion, that the Persians had vsed great cruelty against them. And therefore wee must say, that the causes of this Warre are those which wee haue first related, and the occasions are those where∣of we now speake: and the beginning was Alexanders Voiage by Sea into Asia:The cause of the Etoliens Warre against the Romans. And in that which was made against the Romans vn∣der the conduct of Antiochus, the wrath and indignation of the E∣toliens was the cause. You must vnderstand that for the opinion which they had conceiued, that the Romans made no accompt of them as long as the Warre of Phillip continued, they not onely called Antiochus vnto their Succours, but also resolued to put all in hazard, so great their spleene and fury was for that which was past. It is true, the liberty of Greece was the occasion, vnder hope whereof they laboured by all meanes to draw the neighbour Citties to their Enterprize: But the beginning of the Warre was the Voy∣age to Sea of Antiochus to Demetriade. Wee haue beene tedious in this Discourse, not to blame any one of the auncient Historio∣graphers, but for the profit of those which haue a desire to learne. For as Phisitians cannot cure their Patients,A good com∣parison. if they haue not know∣ledge of the causes of the Diseases wherewith they are troubled: So they which treate of Histories, are altogether vnprofitable, if the rea∣son of the place, of the time, with the causes and occasions bee not knowne.
There is therefore nothing more necessary, nor more to be desired, than to know the causes of all things that happen: For opportunity doth many times rectifie great affaires, and it is easie to preuent their be∣ginnings. It is true that Fabius a Roman Historiographer faith,Fabius. that the cru∣elty and inhumanity of Hannibal towards the Sagontins, and the am∣bition and insatiable desire of Rule in Asdrubal, haue beene the cau∣ses of the Warre betwixt the Romans and Hannibal, Generall of the Carthaginians. Then hee sayth that he had much augmented the Carthaginians Empire in Spaine, and that being returned to Carthage, hee sought to tirannize the Common-wealth, and to ouerthrow their Lawes. The which the chiefe men discouering, they opposed them∣selues against Asdrubal. Wherefore leauing Affricke in a rage, hee returned presently into Spaine, and afterwards mannaged the affaires according to his owne fancy, and without the authority of the Senate of Carthage. Moreouer, he saith, that Hannibal who from his youth had beene at the Warre vnder him, was of the same enterprize: and therefore after he was Lord of Spaine, hee followed the courses of Asdrubal. So as this Warre which was made against the Romans, was begun by him in spight of the Carthaginians, and that there was not any man in Carthage which loued the Common-wealth, but did much blame the deeds of Hannibal against the Sagontins. More∣ouer, hee sayth, that after the taking of Sagont, there was an Em∣bassie sent from Rome to Carthage, demaunding Hannibal to bee pu∣nished for the breach of the accord, and if they would not yeeld vn∣to it, they should declare Warre against the Carthaginians. But if a man should demaund of Fabius what could succeed bet∣ter, nor more reasonable, and expedient for the Carthaginians, than to deliuer vpon the Romans request the authour of the offence, and him that had committed the fault, to punish him: Seeing that as hee sayth, they had dislik't the actions of Hannibal: and by this meanes might reuenge by another the common Enemy of the Countrey, and maintaine the estate of their Citty in peace, chasing away the authour of the warre, considering that this might bee well effected by a bare resolution? What can he answere? Nothing without doubt. Con∣trariwise they were so farre from doing it,The Warre of Hannibal continued 17. yeeres. as they maintained the Warre seuenteene yeeres continuall against the Romans: Neither did they cease vntill destitute of all hope, they not onely hazarded their Countrey, but also their liues. Finally, to what end doe wee vse this discourse of Fabius or of his writings? It is not to cry him downe: For his lying writings are ap∣parent to those which reade them. It is onely to aduertise those which giue the credit, not somuch to regard the title of the Authour, as the truth of things: For there are men which doe not beare so much respect to the writings, as to him that made them, and which thinke that for as much as Fabius liued in those times, and had beene of the Senate, that hee could not but speake truth. It is true, and I am of opinion, that we must giue beleefe and credit vnto him in
many things, but yet wee may not beleeue all: for wee must consider things as they are, and how they agree. Finally, to returne to our Discourse, we must not thinke that the first cause of the Warre,The first cause of the Warre betwixt the Ro∣mans and the Carthaginians. which the Romans had with the Carthaginians, was the indignation of Amilcar, sirnamed Barca, Father to Hannibal. And we must vnderstand that he was not vanquished by the Romans, du∣ring the Warre of Sicily; (for he preserued the Army which was a∣bout Erix with great Iudgement) but when he saw the Carthaginians had lost the battell at Sea,The fore sight of Amilcar, Fa∣ther to Hanni∣bal. hee thought good to veeld vnto the time, and made a peace with the Romans, yet hee left no his indignation, so as he expected continually an opportunity to be reuenged of them. And if the Carthaginians had not found themselues troubled with the mntiny of their Souldiers, hee would presently haue renewed the VVarre with all his power: and therefore being hindred by an intestine mischiefe, he deserr'd it to another time. The Romans considering the danger wherein the Carthaginians were by the mutiny of their Souldiers, threatned them with VVarre. To preuent the which, the Carthaginians made an accord as we haue spe∣cified in the former Booke, without which no man can vnderstand that which wee haue now sayd,Sardinia aban∣doned by the Carthaginians. nor that which followes. Finally, they quit them Sardinia, as vnfurnished both of counsell and aide: For that the Romans would not otherwise desist from their Enterprize, and they payed them beside the Summe already accorded, seuen hundred thousand Crownes: which was the second and the greatest cause of the VVarre which after wards began.The second Cause. VVhen as all the people of Carthage were entred into the like indig∣nation with Hannibal, and that Amilcar saw the mutiny of the Soul∣diers supprest, and the affaires of the Countrey pacified, he began to make VVarre in Spaine, seeking to make vse of it, as a preparatiue to leade them against the Romans.The third Cause. Behold that which we must imagine for the third cause, that is to say, the good fortune which the Car∣thaginians had: For that their hearts grew great, and therefore they vndertooke ths VVarre more boldly. There is proofe sufficient, that Amilcar was the principall cause of the second Punique VVarre, al∣though he were dead ten yeeres before: but it shall suffice for the pre∣sent to relate that which followeth: At what time that Hannibal was vanquished by the Romans, he retired to Antiochus leauing Affricke, the Romans aduertised of the Etoliens attempt,Antiochu san Enemy to the Romans. sent an Embassie to An∣tiochus to know his will, and to discouer by this meanes his preparati∣on for Warre. But hauing vnderstood that he held the party of the Etoliens, and that he was resolued to make Warre against the Ro∣mans, they frequented daily with Hannibal, seeking by their conti∣nuall familiarity, to draw him into suspition and dislike; wherein they were not deceiued: For Antiochus thinking he had beene gain'd by the Romans, suspected him long. But it happened on a time when as the King called him to his Councell, whereas he had good liberty to speake. And then after many discourses, in the end as it were by in∣dignation, hee began to vse these termes. VVhen as my Father
Amilcar was to passe into Spaine with an Army I was about the Age of nine yeares: and when as he sacrificed to Iupiter, I was neere vnto the Altars. But when as the Sacrifices were ended,Hannibal his speech to An∣tiochus. my father caused the rest to retire backe; and hauing called me alone, he demaunded kindly of me, and as it were with imbracings, if I would go the Voyage. The which when I had not onely accepted, but moreouer intreated him like a childe; then taking my right hand, and laying it vpon the Altar, hee would that touching the things sacrificed, I should sweare that present∣ly when I came to age, I should be an enemy to the Romanes. And therefore Sir, as long as you shall be their enemy, you may relie confi∣dently in me,Hanibal swears that when hee came to age, he would be an enemy to the Romanes. and haue no suspicion of Hannibal: but when you shall be reconciled, or that you shall contract friendshippe with them, then expect no other accuser, and haue a care to keepe your selfe from me, as from an enemy to the people of Rome; for I shall be alwayes oppo∣site vnto them with all my power. Antiochus hearing this kind of Speech, and that Hannibal spake tru∣ly and with affection, in regard of his griefe, he presently abandoned all suspition.Asdrubal sonne in Law to Han∣nibal. Behold then a manifest testimony of the harred and bad affection of Amilcar towards the Romanes; for hee left Asdrubal his sonne in Law, and his sonne Hannibal for their enemies, such as there could be none greater. It is true, that Death tooke an order that As∣drubal could not shewe the hatred he bare them. But Hannibal had time at will, so as preuailing in his interprize, he hath sufficiently made knowne the hatred which he held from his Father.A good consi∣deration, and necessary for al Gouernours. And therefore they which haue the Gouernment of a Common-weale must carefully con∣sider this, and ruminate in their vnderstanding to know the humours of those, with whom they make any accord or friendship; whither it be for the necessity of the time, or to giue ouer the Warres; to the ende they may alwaies defend themselues from those which seeke an oppor∣tunity to do euill, and to make vse of those whom they know to bee their Subiects or true friends, when necessity shall require. These cau∣ses which we haue specified, are those of the second Punique Warre, and the beginning of that which we will now relate. The Carthaginians hardly induring the losse of Sycile,The causes of the Carthagini∣ans hatred. which the Romanes had taken from them. It is true that as we haue said, Sar∣dinia which they had surprized by Treason during the mutiny of Af∣fricke, and this summe of money which they had caused them to pay, did much increase their hatred. And therefore it was likely that as soone as they should grow great in Spaine, they would transport the VVarre into Italy. But after the death of Asdrubal, who after the death of A∣milcar was Generall of the Carthaginians,Neuer Com∣maunder did any thing wor∣thily which was not pleasing to the Souldiers. they desired to know the will of the Souldiers, before they would place a new Commaunder. And when as the newes came from the Campe, that Hannibal had bin chosen Captaine by a generall consent, they presently assembled, and confirmed with one accord by the election of the men of VVar. Han∣nibal hauing receiued all power, and considering that to linger was of no worth, he marcht with his army to the skirts of the Olcades to ruine
them. And therefore he besieged Carteia, the chiefe Towne of that Countrey,Carteia taken by assault. and tooke it by assault after some dayes resistance. So as the other Townes being terrified yeelded of themselues to the Cartha∣ginians. After this Victory the Army retired to winter at Carthagena with great booty: whereas Hannibal vsing great bounty, deuided it amongst the Souldiers: So as hee gained their hearts wonderfully, leauing them in great hope for the future. In the Spring hee led his Army a∣gainst the Vacceens,Countries con∣quered by Han∣nibal. and presently conquered Ermandique: After∣wards hee tooke Arbacale by force, not without great danger, hauing held it long besieged: For that it had beene well defended by the great∣nesse of the Citty, and the multitude and courage of the Inhabitants. After this, hee suddainly fell by chance into a maruellous danger, by a charge which the Toletains haue him,The Toletains. at his returne from the Vac∣ceens with a great booty: For it is a people which exceeds all the rest of this Prouince in courage and multitudes of men, with the which also there ioyned the Fugitiues of Ermandique. Whereunto the banished men of the Olcades had perswaded them. Without doubt the Carthaginians had beene vanquished and defeated, if they had offered Battell;The riuer of Tagus. but Hannibal gaue order to the contrary, and striking Sile to enemy, he planted himselfe vppon the Banke of the Riuer of Tagus: giuing charge vnto his Horse men, that when they should see the Ene∣mies enter into the Water, they should charge the Battalion of foote. He lodg'd forty Elephants along the Bankes. By this meanes all things succeeded happily, for that he had the ri∣uer and the Elephants as it were, for Combattants: For the Barbari∣ans thinking that the Carthaginians were retired for feare, they cast themselues confusedly into the Riuer with great cries. Wherefore a great number of them were defeated vpon the Bankes of the Riuer by the Elephants which stood there,Hanibals victo∣ry vppon the Barbarians. and flew them at their landing. Some were also sline in the Riuer by the Horse men, for that the Horsemen being at ease and without Armour, could better helpe themselues, and annoy the enemies, who durst not relye vpon the Ford. They which were in the Reare, and might easily recouer the Banke, retired, vntill in the end the Carthaginians cast themselues into the riuer with all their bands and companies,An Army of a hundred thou∣sand men. and put them to flight. The Toletains army, with the Olcades and Vacceens, consisted of a hundred thousand men. After which defeate, there were not any found beyond the riuer of Ebro, that durst resist the Carthaginians, except the Sagontins. It is true that Hannibal would not fall vpon them, least hee should offer an occasion of Warre to the Romanes, before hee had seized vppon that which his Father Amilcar had aduised him to do. In the meane time the Sagontins sent often to Rome, aswell for the care of their owne priuate affaires,An Embassie from the Ro∣manes to Han∣nibal. as also fore-seeing future things, and likewise to aduertise them of the good Fortune of the Carthagini∣ans in Spaine. Finally the Romanes hauing thereupon many and diuers aduertisements, they sent an Embassie into Spaine, to discouer the course of Hannibals actions: But he was retired to Winter at Carthagena,
hauing mannaged his affaires to his owne liking. Being suddainly arriued there, he cals them and giues them audience, and power to deliuer their charge. The Embassadours at the first signifies vnto him, that he should demaund nothing from the Sagontins, being allied vnto the Ro∣manes: And moreouer that he should not passe the riuer of Ebro, for that it had beene so concluded by the Treaty made with Asdruball. The which being heard by Hannibal, like a young man and greedy of War, and who easily did what he would with the Senate of Carthage, by the meanes of the heads of his faction,Hannibals an∣swer to the Ro∣man Embassa∣dours. together with the hatred he bare against the Romanes, he answered the Embassadours as a friend to the Sagontins, blaming the people of Rome, who when they had late∣ly receiued Letters from the Sagontins, for a mutiny which was growne amongst them, to the end they might send some Embassie to pacifie it, they had wickedly put to death some of the principall of the Citty: Whereof he threatens them to take reuenge, saying that the Cartha∣ginians had a Custome not to disdaine outrages: On the other side, he sent vnto Carthage, to aduertise them of that which they were to do, considering that the Sagontins relying vppon the Alliance with the Ro∣manes, had done great outrages to many Townes subiect to the Car∣thaginians. Finally as one full of inconstancy and rage, and inflamed with a de∣sire to make Warre, he propounded no other valuable reason, pursuing only certaine friuolous and impertinent causes. The which is incident to those, who transported by their passion forget their duty. But had it not beene much better to say thus? That the Carthaginians do right∣fully demaund of the Romanes, that they restore vnto them Sardinia, and the siluer, which for so many yeares they had vniustly drawne from them, during their great affaires, and if they did it not, they will proclaime Warre against them. Where as contrariwise it seemes now, in leauing the true cause, and supposing a false one of the Sagon∣tins, they would make it not only without occasion, but also with great outrage. And although the Embassadours vnderstood well, that vp∣pon necessity they must enter into Warre; yet they went vnto Carthage, where they vsed the like speech. It is true the Romanes meant to Transport it into Spaine and not into Italy, and to haue Sagont for a Fort. Wherefore in the interim, they laboured first to pacifie the Wars of Sclauonia, as if they intended to make a Warre that was long and tedious and farre from Italy. It hap∣ned at that time,Demetrius: King of Sclauonia. that when as Demetrius King of the Sclauonians for∣gat the many fauours which the Romanes had done him, for that hee saw them prest on the one side with the feare of the Gaules, and on the ther by the Carthaginians, and that all his hope was in the King of Macedon: for that hee had bin a pertaker of that Warre, which Antigonus made against Cleomenes, ruining the Townes of the Sclauonians which were subiect to the Romanes, forcing the Citty, and exceeding the bounds limitted in the Treaty. The like hee did to most parts of the Iland of Cyclades: So as he ruined all like a Tempest, beeing accompanied with fifty strong Vessels. Whereof the Romanes
being aduertised, seeing at that time the Principallity of Macedon to Triumph, they laboured with all their present meanes to pacifie the affaires of Sclauonia, hoping it would prooue easie: And that soone after, they should punish the basenesse of the Sclauonians, and the ingratitude of Demetrius. But matters past otherwise then they ex∣pected. For whilest they imploy their time therein, Hannibal takes Sagont much sooner then they conceiued. So as the Warre grew hot, not in Spaine, but against the Citty of Rome, and thoroughout all Italy. Yet the Romanes pursuing their enterprize, sent Lucius Emilius into Sclauonia, the first yeare of the hundred and fifteth Olympiade, with a very great Army to keep that Prouince in peace, and from future danger. Hannibal parting from Carthagena with his whole Army, goes to Sagont, a Towne scituated beyond the Riuer of Ebro, at the foote of the Mountaine,The scituation of Sagont. which deuides Spaine from the Celtiberiens, about a mile distant from the Sea. The people of this Countrey exceede all the rest of Spaine in abundance of fruites, and in multitudes of men, and they are the most Warlike. Hannibal entring into these limits with his Army, and hauing ruined all the Countrey, he besiedged it with all manner of Engines, conceiuing that the taking thereof would prooue wonderfull commodious for his present Affaires. First he considered that he should depriue the Romanes of all hope to make Warre in Spaine;The discretion of the head of an interprize. and that moreouer he should strike a great ter∣rour into the rest; and that by this meanes the Townes of Spaine re∣duced already vnder his obedience, would keepe their faith the bet∣ter: Besides it was likely, that they which desired to liue still in their liberty, would soone yeild: And that thirdly he immagined, that he might then confidently pursue the Remainder, leauing no enemy be∣hind him. He hoped more ouer, to gather much Treasure for the intertaine∣ment of his War; and that he should gaine the hearts of the Souldiers for the booty that euery one should get at the sacke of the Towne; and that finally he should purchase the loue of the Cittizens remayning in Carthage, with presents that he will send them of the spoiles. Beeing mooued with these reasons, he wholy attends the siege of this Towne, and inflames the hearts of the Souldiers, spurring them on sometimes with rage against the Enemy, sometimes with hope of Recompence; and sometimes he serues them for an example, aswell in making the Engines, and approaching them to the Wals, as in going sometimes to those places which were most dangerous. Finally, hee performed all things so extraordinary well, as if hee had beene but a simple Souldier. And when he had toyl'd his Body and minde herein for the space of eight moneths,Sagont forced by Hannibal. in the end he forced Sagont. Whereas after he had made a great booty of gold and siluer, and taken many men, he kept the money for the charges of the War, as he had formerly resolued, deuiding the Prisoners among the Souldiers, according vnto their seuerall dignities, and set the rest of the spoile vnto Carthage.
After these things, hee was not deceiued in his hope, so as things suc∣ceeded according to his desire: for his Souldiers were much more ready to vndergoe all dangers: and the Carthaginians much more ready to please him. Moreouer, this booty of money was a great meanes for the enterprize he had in hand. During these actions, Demetrius King of the Sclauonians, discoue∣ring the enterprize and preparation of the Romans,Demetrius for∣tefied Dimale. hee presently caused the Towne of Dimale to bee carefully furnished with men and victuals: and as for the other Townes of Sclauonia, hee chased away those that were of a contrary faction, suffering none but such as held his party. Then hee made choice of sixe thousand old Soul∣diers out of his Army,The arriuall of Emilius into Sclauonia. and put himselfe into Phare. In the meane time the Consull Emilius arriues safely in Sclauonia with his Army: where being aduertised that the Enemies were confident and reso∣lute, for that they were in hope, that the descent of the Romans should not preuaile against them, relying much in the scituation and munition of Dimale, hee thought good before all things, to doe his vttermost endeauour to take it: thinking (as it afterwards happened) that this being taken, all the rest amazed with feare, would easily yeeld vnto the Romans. And after that hee had made some speeches vnto the Souldiers, hee planted his Engines of Bat∣tery against the Towne, and besieged it: which being forced on the seauenth day, did so much amaze the Enemies, as presently Embassies came from all the rest of Sclauonia, yeelding vnto the Romans. The which being receiued into Friendship,The Towne of Sclauonia reduced to the Romane obedi∣ence. and hauing treated with euery one according to their condition, hee causeth his Army to march directly to Phare, whereas the King of the Sclauonians made his abode. But for that hee found this Towne strong by sci∣tuation, and mann'd with the choise of the Army, and moreouer, well furnished with Victuals, and all kinds of munition, hee feared the siege would bee long and difficult. Finally, being long in supence,The warlike pollicy or Emi∣lius. he takes this counsell. Hee vseth all diligence and labour to gaine the Iland in the Night, and doth lodge a great part of his Army in the thickest of the Forrest: as for himselfe, at the breake of day, hee gaines the neerest Port vnto the Towne with twenty shipps. The Sclauonians seeing the Enemies shipps, and making no accompt of their number, they goe forth with a great Fleete to hinder the landing of the Romans, where they charg'd them, and for a time the Combate was very furious, there comming still Succours vnto them from the Towne by files, so as in the end all the Citty was drawne thither. Then the Romans who had layne all night in Ambush in the For∣rest, hearing the noise, ranne with all speed by couered places, and gaining a little Hill which was strong by nature, within the Towne and Port, they tooke from their Enemies all meanes of returne. The which the Sclauonians well perceiuing, they leaue their first enterprize to repulse the Enemy, and drawing together in one troupe,
they encourage one another, as men resolued to go and fight against those which held the Hill. On the other side the Romans seeing the Sclauonians approach, put themselues in battell, and charg'd them, fighting with great resolution and courage: The other part of the Army at Sea, landed, march't, and prest the enemy in the Reare. Where∣fore for as much as the Romans charg'd them on all sides, and that the Sclauonians were prest before and behind, the Combate was long and cruell. Finally, the Romans had the Victory. The greatest part of the Sclauonians were most miserablely slaine,The victory of the Romans vp∣on the Sclauo∣nians. some saued themselues within the Towne, and the rest fled into the Desarts of the Iland. Demetrius the Night following saued himselfe contrary to the opi∣nion of all the World, by meanes of certaine Vessels which hee had appointed in three places for his safety, the case so happening: and retired to Phillip King of Macedon, with whom hee spent the Re∣mainder of his dayes. Hee was a man of great courage and ouer∣weening, but of little iudgement in Martiall affaires. And there∣fore hee ended according to the life which hee had formerly led:Demetrius a man of great courage and little iudge∣ment. For when as at Phillips desire hee had begunne to besiege the Towne of the Messenians, hee was most shamefully slaine by the Enemy, for his great and ouerweening boldnesse. But wee will speake of these things more particularly, when wee shall come vnto that time. When as Emilius had so suddainly gotten Phare, hee razed the Towne to the ground. And hauing within few dayes reduced the rest of the Townes of Sclauonia to the Romane obedience,The Towne of Phare razed. and decided all the affaires of the Prouince as hee had resolued, hee returnes to Rome in the beginning of Autumne: where hee was receiued with wonderfull great glory, triumph, and good esteeme of all men, to haue done not onely like a wise and discreete man, but like a resolute. But when in the meane time newes came to Rome of the razing of Sagont, some haue written, that the Lords of the Romane Coun∣cell were not of opinion to make Warre, and they alledge causes and reasons which held them in suspence. But what can bee spo∣ken more vnreasonably? How is it likely, that they which the yeere before had signified Warre vnto the Carthaginians, if they entred the Sagontins Countrey, should now growe doubtfull, whe∣ther after the taking of Sagont, they should make Warre, or not? But is there any thing lesse worthy of credit, to say, that the Se∣nate on the one side was wonderfully heauy and afflicted, as if all had beene vtterly lost: On the other side that the Fathers brought all their Children to the Senare, so as they were aboue twelue yeeres of age, and that being partakers of the Councell, they ne∣uer reuealed, or made knowne the secrets to any? Without doubt these things are neither true nor likely, vnlesse the Romans haue that gift of nature, to bee wise from their Cradles. We haue discoursed sufficiently of these writings which are of Cherea and Solilus: neither haue they so much shew of a History, as of old wiues
Tales: and are like vnto those which they vsually tell in Barbers shops. The Romans then after the newes of the taking of Sagont, and the murther of their Allies, sent presently an Embassie to Carthage, to let them vnderstand two things, whereof the one seemed to bee of consequence, for ignomy and losse of the Carthaginions, and the o∣ther had a shew to draw their Empire in hazard. For they demaun∣ded, that they should either deliuer Hannibal to bee punished for the breach of the publique Faith, or else they should hold them∣selues assured of Warre. When as the Embassadours were come to Carthage,Roman Embas∣sadours sent to Carthage. and that the Senate had giuen them audience, they deli∣uered their Commission: which was not without the indignation of of the Carthaginians: who made choice of Hanno to debate their Right, who at the first made no accompt of Asdrubals treatie,Hanno's answer to the Romane Embassadours. as hauing neuer beene made with the Romans: and if it were so, the Carthaginians were not bound vnto it, for that Asdrubal had excee∣ded his Commission, and had done it without the authority of the Senate or people of Carthage. Whereunto hee alleadged in the like case, that the Romans had beene of opinion, that the accord made in Sicily by the Consull Luctatius should bee broken, for that it had beene made without the authority of the people of Rome. Finally, hee insisted still vpon this accord whilest his Speech conti∣nued, and reade it often, saying, that there was no mention made of Ebro, and that the Allies of the one and of the other were onely reserued: and that moreouer, it did nothing concerne the Sagontins, for that at the time of the accord they were not allied vnto the Ro∣mans. The Embassadours repuls'd with great words this contenti∣on concerning the right of the accorde, as a thing which concernes the honour of the people of Rome: saying that the quarrels might bee decided, if the Sagontins were in there entire. But now that Sa∣gont is razed, and that the faith and accords are wickedly broken, they should either deliuer the Authour of the Crime to the Romans, to the end that all the World might know, that Sagont hath not beene ouerthrowne and ruined with the consent of the Carthagini∣ans: Or if they will not, but confesse that the Towne hath beene destroyed with their consent, that they should prepare to Warre. Thus ended their discourse, which they held more amply and in generall. I haue held it most necessary not to passe ouer this particular in si∣lence, to the end the truth may not bee hidden to those which deale in publique affaires, or which haue cause to consider exactly of these things: Or else haue a desire to know whether they erre, being deceiued by the ignorance and sottishnesse of Historiogra∣phers, for want of knowledge of the treaties which from the first Punique Warre, vnto our times haue beene made betwixt the Ro∣mans and the Carthaginians. The first then was made betwixt these two Nations, immediately after that the name of King was chased out of Rome, Lucius, Iunius, Brutus, and Marcus
Valerius being Consuls, vnder whom also a Temple was dedicated to Iupiter Capitolinus,The Temple of Iupiter Capitoli∣nus. eight and twenty yeeres before the first voyage of Xerxes into Greece: the which wee haue interpreted with the greatest diligence wee could possibly. Beleeue me, the Romane tongue hath beene so changed since that time vnto our dayes,The Romane tongue chan∣ged. as they which are the best instructed in Antiquities, vnderstand not much of it, but with great difficulty. This accord containes in a manner thus much:The first ac∣cord betwixt the Romans and the Carthagi∣nians. The people of Rome, and the Carthaginians shall liue in Amity and Friendship: The like shall their Allies doe. The Romans and their Allies shall not saile beyond the Promontory of Beauty, vnlesse they be forced by storme, or the violence of their Enemies. If any one takes Port for these causes, hee shall not buy,I conceiue that this Promonto∣ry is that which they call the Promontory of Mercure, in Affricke, where as now the Cit∣ty Clipca stands. nor take anything, but what necessity shall require for Sa∣crifices and for Ships. And that within the fift day they shall set faile for their retreate. They which shall arriue there for the trade of Mer∣chandize, shall be free, except the duties which belong vnto the Re∣gister, and to the Citty, who shall giue a Certificate of all that which shalbe sold in their presence, in Affricke or Sardinia. If any Romane arriues in Sicily, where the Carthaginians are Lords, they shall doe him no wrong. The Carthaginians shall doe no outrage to the Arde∣ates, Anciates, Arrentins, Circins, Tarraconnois, nor the other Latins which are subiect to the Romans. And if there bee any other Citty which is not subiect, it is not comprehended. If the Carthaginians take any one, they shall restore it entire to the Romans, neither shall they build any Fort in Italy. And if they be entred into the Prouince as E∣nemies, they shall not stay a whole night. Behold in a manner what the first Treatie contayned. You must vnderstand that the Promonto∣ry of Beauty,The Promon∣tory of Beauty. is right against Carthage, hauing its aspect to the North. Beyond the which towards the South, the Carthaginians would not suffer the Romans to saile with any ships of Warre. The reason was as it seemes, for feare they should come and disco∣uer the places which are about the Banks of Barbary, which the Cartha∣ginians call the Merchants Countrey, by reason of the fertility thereof. And therefore if any one driuen by a storme, or prest by the enemy, cast himselfe vpon that Quarter, it was not lawfull for him to take any thing but what was necessary to repaire his ships, or to sacrifice: Be∣ing likewise forced to weigh Anchor, and set saile the fift day. As for Carthage and the other Countries of Affricke, which are on this side the Promontory, and as for Sardinia and Sicily, whereas the Carthagi∣nians were Lords, it was lawfull to sayle thither for trafficke: For the effecting whereof the Carthaginians had sworne to obserue and keepe it. But it seemes that in this treaty, that the Carthaginians make mention of Affricke and Sardinia, as of their owne Prouinces, holding other termes of Sicily, which adde the Countrey wherein they are obeyed. The Romans also doe the like for the Countrey of the Latins: and as for the rest of Italy, they make not any mention, for that it was not yet sub∣iect vnto them. Afterwards there was another treaty made, where∣in
the Carthaginians comprehended the Tyrriens and Bisarthins: There was also added to the Cape of Beauty, Mastia, and Tarseron: Without the which it was not lawfull for the Romanes to pretend any Countrey, nor to purchase or build any new Citty. Behold the Contents: The Romanes and their Allies, the Carthaginians, Tyrriens,The second Accord. and Bisarthins, and their Allies, shall liue in friendship. The Romanes not their Al∣lies shall not saile beyond the Promontory of Beauty, nor or Mastia, or Tarseion, to rob and spoile, nor to Trafficke, nor to build any Towne. If the Carthaginians take any Towne in Italy, which is not subiect to the Romanes, they shall haue spoile, and restore the Towne vnto the Romanes. If they haue taken any of the free people, which were Allied to the Romanes, they shall not bring them vnto any Port which belongs vnto the Romanes. And if they bring any one thither, and he be knowne to the Romanes, they shall be set at liberty. The like shall be done vnto the Romanes in those Townes which are subiect to the Carthaginians. If a Roman refreshes himselfe with Water and Victuals, the Cartha∣ginians shall do him no wrong, with whom they haue concluded a peace and friendship, and if they do it, the outrage shall be held pub∣licke. And as for Sardinia and Affricke, the Romanes nor their Allies may not Trafficke nor haue any Towne, or buy any thing but what is necessary, for Sacrifice or the repairing of their shippes. And if any ship be cast vpon that Coast by Tempest, they shall set Saile within the fifth day. In regard of Sicily, the Romanes may Trafficke where the Carthaginians are obeyed: The like they may do at Carthage, and vse the same righ's which the Carthaginians obserue. The which in the like case the Carthaginians may doe at Rome. In this Treaty it seemes that the Carthaginians shew that Sardinia and Affricke were wholy theirs, and that they would depriue the Romanes of the right of Por∣tage. But as for Sicily of that part onely which they hold. It was also Articulated,Other Articles past betwixt the Romanes & the Carthagini∣ans. that the Carthaginians should not make Warre against the Ardiatins, the Antiates, the Circins, Tarraconnois, nor against the other Latine Citties which lie vpon the Sea, and com∣prehends the Latine Region. As for the rest of Italy, there was no men∣tion made. Since there was a third Accord made, at such time as Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes past into Italy,The third Accord. before the beginning of the Punique Warre. Wherein were comprehended the same Articles, adding moreouer, that if they agreed with Pyrrhus, they should giue succour one vnto another in the Country that was assailed: And if ey∣ther of them had need of assistance, the Carthaginians should furnish Ships aswell for the passage, as for the Combate, either of them pay∣ing their Souldiers. The Carthaginians should succour the Romans by Sea, and no man should be forced to Land his men. But as I haue vn∣derstood, the oath of the first Treaties was made in this manner. The Carthaginians sware by the gods of their Countrey:The manner of Swearing of the Romanes & Carthaginians in their treatis. And the Romanes by the Stone, according to their auncient Custome, calling thereunto the powers of Mars the Warlike. Behold the manner which they obserued to sweare by the Stone. The Herald of Armes, after
the Treaty of Peace was concluded betwixt the two Nations, hauing the Stone in his hands, vsed these Words. I pray vnto the gods that all things may come successefully vnto me, if this Accord and Oath which I take, be done iustly and without fraud. But if I do or thinke otherwise that I may die alone, as this Stone shall fall out of my hand, all the rest being sound and safe in their owne Country, their Lawes, Houses, Temples, and Sepulchers, and without speaking any Word more, he let the Stone fall out of his hand. As these things are true, and are at this day to be seene, grauen in Ta∣bles of Brasse, in the Temple of Iupiter Capitolium, where they are carefully kept by the Ediles,Phisinus a Hi∣storiographer. Who will not wonder at the Historio∣grapher Philinus, not for that he knew it not (for without doubt ma∣ny auncient Romanes and Carthaginians, I say of our time, and which haue beene very curious of such things, do not know it:) But for that he hath dared to write things quite contrary; saying that in these Ac∣cords was contained that the Romanes should quit all Sycily, and the Carthaginians all Italy? Wherefore the Romans has broken their faith and promise, at their first Voiage into Sycily. And yet this is not found Written. Philinus hath written this Discourse in the second of his Books, the which relating lightly in the first Booke, we haue reserued to this place, to the end we may debate it in perticular: holding it necessary, least some one might stray from the Truth, following the errour of Philinus. It will not be happily without reason, if some one will hold the Voy∣age of the Romans into Sycily worthy of blame, for that they had re∣ceiued the Mamertins into friendship, and presently sent forces after in their extreame necessity, considering that a little before they had spoiled Messina and Rhegium with great cruelty, beeing two of the ri∣chest Townes in Sycily. But this were to iudge like an ignorant man, that in passing into Sycily they had broken their faith and promise. Af∣ter that the Warre of Sycily was ended there was another Accord made, whereof this is the Tenor. That the Carthaginians should not onely voide out of Sycily,Another accord made betwixt the Romans and the Carthagi∣nians. but out of all the Islands which are betwixt it and Italy. And the Allies of the one and the other should haue no Rule in neither of their Countries; nor should make any Forts, nor draw foorth any Souldiers, nor make Alliance with either of their Allies; and that the Carthaginians should pay thirteene hundred and twenty thousand Crownes within ten yeares: Whereof sixe hundred thousand should be presently paied, and that moreouer they should deliuer all the Romane Prisoners without ransome. Besides all this the Romanes declaring Warre vnto them, when they were much troubled and afflicted in Affricke,Another ac∣cord. they forced them to make a new Treaty: Where it was sayd, that the Carthaginians should leaue Sardinia, and pay (besides the summe agreed vpon,) seauen hun∣dred thousand Crownes. After all these Treaties, the last was made in Spaine with Asdrubal,Another ac∣cord made with Asdrubal. where the Carthaginians were forbidden to passe the Riuer of Ebro or Iberus in Armes. Behold all the Treaties which the people of Rome and Carthage made, from the first Punique Warre
vnto the second, which the Carthaginians mannaged vnder the Con∣duct of Hannibal. But it is doubtlesse, that as wee haue shewed that the Romanes did not breake their faith when they past into Sycily, as doth plainly appeare: So afterwards they declared Warre against the Carthaginians without reason: when as they made the Treaty for Sar∣dinia: for truely there can be no reason found therein. Contrariwise we see plainely that besides all the agreements, the Carthaginians left Sardinia, and payed a greater summe of mony, being forced by the malice of the time. And as for that, wherewith the Romanes shelter themselues, that they were forced thereunto, for that they had out∣raged their Merchants at Sea: This had beene formerly decided, when as the Carthaginians deliuered the Prisoners without Ransome. These are things whereof we haue spoken, when in the precedent Booke we haue related that which was to be said in perticular. Let vs now come to the causes of the second Punique War, and let vs see which of the two Nations is to be blamed. The Carthaginians obiected those causes which we haue related.The causes pro¦pounded by the Romans for the Warre. In regard of the Romanes they brought none for the present, for the in∣dignation they had for the razing of Sagont. Yet behold those which they and others do vsually obiect. First there is no comparison betwixt the Treaty which Asdrubal made and that of Luctatius, although the Carthaginians will haue it so. For it was sayd in that of Luctatius, that it should hold good if the people of Rome consent vnto it. And as for that of Asdrubal, there was no such condition: Where it was ex∣presly sayd, that the Carthaginians should not passe beyond Ebro. And it was sayd in the other, that the Allies of either part should liue in peace: Vnder which termes were not only comprehended those which then were not Allied: For it would haue beene Articulated, that the one nor the other should make any new Alliance; or that they which should newly enter, should not be comprehended, whereof there is nothing Written. For with that whereof formerly they had giuen or∣der that none of those which should enter newly into Alliance, should be wronged: Who will beleeue that eyther of these powerful Nations would restraine himselfe from receiuing those he should think good in∣to Alliance, or to defend those that were receiued? In trueth I con∣ceiue that in making their Treaty, their chiefe intent was, that their Allies should liue in safety, and that it should not be lawful for them to receiue the Allies of the one and the other into alliance: and it was pro∣uided that the new alliances might not draw Souldiers out of the others Prouinces, nor beare any rule there; and that they should all Line in peace. Matters standing in these Termes, it is manifest that the Sagontins were allied vnto the Romanes long before Hannibal:The Sagontins Allied a long time with the Romances. The which is so probable as the Carthaginians cannot deny it. For the Sagontins for a mutiny which grew in their Towne, sent not vnto the Carthaginians although they were their Neighbours, and held the greatest part of Spaine; but retired to the Romanes, by whose meanes the sedition was pacified and supprest. If they say that the razing of Sagont hath beene
the cause of this Warre, they must likewise confesse that the Carthagi∣nians had no reason to make Warre against the Romanes, aswell by the Treaty made with Luctatius, wherein it was contained that they should do no outrage vnto the Allies, as by that which was made by Asdrubal, by the which the Carthaginians were restrained from passing the Riuer of Ebro in Armes. Likewise if they will say, that the Carthaginians had taken this Warre to heart, for Sardinia which had beene taken from them, and for the summe of money which they had payed: I make no doubt that they were not to bee blamed, if attending the opportunity of the time they sought to reuenge: Yet I con∣ceiue there wilbe some, who not duly considering heereof, will i∣magine it idle and to no purpose, that I examine these reasons so dil∣ligently. For my part I am of opinion,The opinion of Polybius in the diligence of a History. that if a man be so well furnished with all things necessary, as he needes not any assistance, yet the know∣ledge of things past wilbe pleasing vnto him, and it may be necessa∣ry. If likewise any one dare not relie vpon this, aswell in priuate affaires as publicke, considering he is a man: and that he knowes well that this present felicity may be lost, considering that the Fortune of men is fraile and without continuance: Then I say that the know∣ledge of things past is not onely pleasant but necessary. But how may a man finde aide and succours to defend himselfe, being wronged in his owne Countrey? Or draw all the VVorld vnto his owne opi∣nion, making a new enterprize? Or assure the hearts of his men when Fortune fauours him, if hee haue not a true particular know∣ledge of the deedes of his Ancestors? Beleeue me by this meanes he shalbe ready and instructed in present affaires to be able to say, and doe things, whereby all enterprizes shalbe discouered, and the Truth vnderstood. For things that are done and past, are good in∣structions for those that shal succeed and come after, shewing vs the meanes, aduise, and policies, whereby wee may purchase grace, helpe, and comfort: Or contrariwise, procure hatred, malice, or in∣dignation, and so mooue to Iustice and reason. All which are of great Consequence vnto a man, aswell for his priuate affaires, as for the publicke. And therefore I am of aduice, that Historiographers and they which giue themselues to read Histories, should not so much respect the Actions, as their Consequence and that which goes before. For if you take from a History which mentions but the deeds, how, nor wherefore it hapned, and what the end was, that which shall re∣maine will haue no instructions, and will be but a kinde of Contenti∣on: Although happily it may seeme at the first sight something plea∣sant, but for the future they shall reape no profite. It is true, some will say that it is no easie thing to recouer such a History, and that they cannot well finde it for the greatnesse and number of Bookes.Polybius hath made forty Bookes. Beleeue me, they doe not vnderstand how much more easie it is to haue, and to read forty Bookes made with good order, whereas the deedes and actions of Italy, Sycily, and Affricke, from the voiage
of Pyrrhus into Italy, vnto the taking of Carthage are comprized: And as for those of the other parts of the World, from the flight of Cleo∣menes vnto the Warre which the Romans had against the Acheins, neere vnto the Isthmus: Then to make prouision, or to reade so many Bookes of so many particular Histories: For as they exceede ours in greatnesse and number, so it is a difficult thing to comprehend any thing certaine. First, that all write not of the same things, and omit those which haue beene done at the same time: the which if they were conferr'd together, would the better discouer the truth. Finally, they cannot attaine to that which is necessary to the Histo∣ry, which are the things which precede the actions, and concerne the causes. For our part, wee will consider the Warre of Antio∣chus, as hauing taken its occasion from that of Phillip, and that of Phillip from the Punique Warre, and the Punique from that of Sicily: Whereas all the accidents which haue happened in the meane time, and may bee referred to one beginning, are diligently obserued. All which things may be easily vnderstood by him that hath written a ge∣nerall History: the which is impossible by them which speake of particular Warres, as of the Persique or Phillippique: vnlesse perchance some one holds opinion to be able to vnderstand a whole Warre by the knowledge of one Battell: which is impossible. And therefore our History ought to be more esteemed, than that of particular Warres, for that it is more excellent to haue learned some thing perfectly, than to haue onely heard of it. But to returne from whence wee strayed, when the Roman Em∣bassadours saw that the Carthaginians disguised matters, they spake no more. But the most ancient among them taking vp the skirt of his Roabe,The Roman Embassadours signifie Warre vnto the Car∣thaginians. and shewing it to the Senate, Behold saith hee, wherein I bring you Warre or Peace: take which you please. Whereunto the Chiefe of the Carthaginians answered, deliuer which you will. And when he had spoken, he deliuered them Warre, many of the Senate cryed out, that they accepted it. Vpon this discourse the Embassa∣dours and Senate retired. Hannibal wintering at Carthage, had giuen leaue to his Souldiers to returne into their Countrey, if happily there were any that desired to see their Kinsfolkes and Friends:The order which Hanni∣bal gaue for the defence of Spaine. To the end that hauing endured so much toile, they might fortifie their bo∣dies and mindes, to endure new labour. Moreouer, he instructs his brother Asdrubal by what meanes (if hee were forced to part out of the Prouince) he should defend and gouerne Spaine against all the attempts of the Romans. Then hee sends a great Garrison into Affricke of men which he drew out of Spaine: for hee had caused Souldiers to come out of Affricke into Spaine, making cunningly this diuision of his men: to the end that the Affricans being there, and the Spaniards in Affricke, they should grow better by mutuall obligations. They which past into Affricke, were Thersites, Mastianes, Orites, Spa∣niards and Olcades: hauing appointed the number of them to be twelue hundred Horse, and thirteene thousand eight hundred & fifty Foot: and
besides these eight hundred and fifty Slingers of Maiorque and Mi∣norque, called Balleares, with their Iland, by reason of the vse of the Sling. He commaunds they should lodge the greatest part in Affricke, and that the rest should remaine at Carthage for its strength. He doth also leauy foure thousand Foote, the choice of the youth within the heart of Spaine: the which hee causeth to march to Carthage, not so much to fortifie it, as to serue for Hostages. Hee also left in Spaine to his Brother Asdrubal fifty Quinqueremes,The equipage of Warre as well for Sea as Lad, left in Spaine by Han∣nibal, to As∣drubal his Bro∣ther. two Quadri∣remes, fiue Triremes, and among the Quinqueremes, thirty two ar∣med and furnished, with the fiue Triremes. Hee also left him about foure hundred and fifty Libyphentces, which is a mixt Nation of Phenicians and Affricans: and three hundred Iergetois: Eighteene hundred Numidians and Moores, bordering vpon the great Sea: E∣leauen thousand eight hundred and fifty Foote, Affricans: Three hundred Geneuois: Fiue hundred men of Maiorque and Mnorque: and one and twenty Elephants. No man onght to wonder at our diligence in this description, If I so obserue it in the affaires of Hannibal in Spaine, that euen they which practised it, could hardly obserue: Nor blame vs for that after the manner of lyars, we relate I know not what pet∣ty triuiall things,The number of Hannibals Ar∣my in a Table of Copper seene by Poly∣bius. the more easily to giue credit vnto our writing. For when I had seene at Lauynium a Table of Copper, which Hannibal had left there, when as he ouer-ran Italy, wherein this number was contai∣ned, I thought sit to giue credit vnto it; and therefore wee haue fol∣lowed it heere. When as Hannibal had prouided for Affricke and Spaine, hee re∣spected the returne of such as hee had sent to moue the Gaules, by whose Country he was to passe his Army. You must vnderstand that he had sent men to winne them by Presents, and to view the passages of the Mountaine, for that he was aduertised that this Region was very fer∣tile, and very well peopled with resolute men, and good Souldiers, and mortall Enemies to the Romans, for the Warre which they made against the Gaules, expecting that his Warre should be onely in Ita∣ly, if hee might passe his Army safely by the streights of the Alpes with their helpe. After the returne of his men, and that he was ad∣uertised of the expectance and desire of the Gaules, and that the pas∣sages of the Hills were rough and painefull, not altogether inacces∣sible, he drew his Army together in the Spring. It is true, that the newes which at the same time hee receiued, of that which happened at Carthage, inflamed his cholle the more against the Romans, ha∣uing thereby a confident hope of the fidelity and affection of his Na∣tion. When as all the Army was drawne together, Hannibal made an Oration,The Oration which Hannibal made to his Souldiers. not to any one part, but publickely to all the Souldiers, by diuers meanes perswading them to imbrace the Warre against the Romans: and how that hee and the other Captaines of Carthage had bene demanded of them for to be put to death, for the taking of Sagont. Hee acquaints them likewise of the fertility of the Prouince whither they made their voyage, making great esteeme and respect of the Friendshippe and alliance of the Gaules. After which speech, seeing
them all resolute, and that they demaunded nothing but to parte, he commended their good will and prowesse. And after he had told them the day when they should trusse vp their baggage, he dismist them. In the meane time, when he had made all necessary preparations for his Voyage,The number of Horse and Foot which were in Hannibals Ar∣my at his par∣ting from Spaine. hee dislodg'd suddainly, when the day of parting was come, with fourescore and ten thousand Foote, and twelue thou∣sand Horse, and past the Riuer of Ebro. Then within few dayes, hee brought vnder his obedience the Ilerge∣tins, the Bargusins, the Erinosins, and Andolisiens: the like they did to all other Townes vnto the Pyrenee Mountaines, razing some. And as hee performed this sooner than any man could conceiue, so he did it not without many cruell battels, and great losse of men. He set∣led Hanno Gouernour of this Countrey, and made him likewise Lord of the Bargusins: for that hee did not greatly trust those people, for the Alliance they had with the Romans: and hee gaue him ten thousand Foote,The number of men which Hannibal left to Hanno for the guard of Spaine. and a thousand Horse for the guard of their Countrey, leauing with him all their baggage which march't with him. Hee sent backe the like number of Spaniards to their houses, partly for that hee vnder∣stood they were grieued with the length of the Iourney, and the diffi∣cult passages of the Mountaines: and partly to giue hope vnto others, to returne sometimes into their Countrey: and that they which he left in their houses, should march more willingly into Italy, if he needed suc∣cours. He march't then with the rest of his Army,Hannibals Ar∣my of 50▪ thou∣sand Foote and nine thousand Horse. which amoun∣ted vnto the number of fifty thousand Foote, and nine thousand Horse. And passing the Pyrenee Mountaines, he drew neere vnto the mouth of the Riuer of Rhone, not so well accompanied with great numbers as good men, who had beene alwayes victorious. But to the end this may not seeme too obscure by the ignorance of places, wee haue thought it fit to shew in few words, from whence Hannibal parted, and what great Countries hee past, and into what parts of Italy he entred. It is true, wee haue not set downe the names of the places, as many Hi∣storiographers doe, thinking that all will the better bee vnderstood, if they haue the knowledge thereof: For my part, I am of opinion, that the relation of the names of places, whereof we haue knowledge, are of great profit, for the more easie vnderstanding, and more certaine memory of things. But where the places are vnknowne, their names are like vnto that manner of voice, which besides the hearing, signifies nothing. By this meanes it happens, that seeing our vnder∣standing doth not comprehend any thing by the name, and the which knowne, cannot breed any great profit, that the relation is altogether fruitlesse. And therefore wee must finde meanes, by the which speaking of places that are vnknowne, we may make the truth to be vnderstood by the Readers with all our power. The first and principall knowledge, common to all men, is the Diuision of this World wherein wee are contained, by the which wee know (euen Ideots) the East, West, South and North. The second is by the which attributing to euery one of these parts the parties of the
World wee come in some sort to the knowledge of places which we haue neuer seene. But as the round Circle of the Earth consists of ma∣ny parts, whereof some are inhabitable, and others in scituation op∣posite to ours,The diuision of the World in three parts. inhabited by the Antipodes: Wee must for the present speake onely of the scituation of the Countrey which wee inhabite. And for that it is diuided into three parts, and hath three names, where∣of they call the one Asia, the other Affricke, and the third Europe. It is a diuision which the Riuers of Tanais and Nile make, ioyning to the streights of Hercules Pillars. Asia is seated betwixt Nile and Ta∣nais, taking its extent towards the East and South. In regard of Af∣fricke, it is seated betwixt the Nile and the Pillars of Hercules, taking its extent vnder the South, and towards the Hiuernall west vnto the Equinoxiall, and to the streights of Gibeltar. Finally, these two parts seeme to hold more the Countrey vnder the South, from the East following our Sea then towards the West. And as for Europe, it is limited drawing towards the North, and continuing from the East vnto the West: whose greatest extent lies to∣wards the North, betwixt the Riuer of Tanais and Narbonna, which is not farre from the Countrey of Marcelles towards the West, and the mouthes of the Riuer of Rhone, which lose themselues in the Sardini∣an Sea. The Gaules hold all that Countrey, from Narbonna vnto the Perinee Mountaines, the which extend themselues from our Sea vnto the Ocean, and as for the rest of Europe from the Perinee Mountaines vnto the West, I meane vnto the Pillars of Hercules, it is enuironed on the one side by our Sea, and on the other by the maine Ocean. The Countrey about which our Sea doth flowe, vnto the Pillars of Hercules, is called Spaine. And as for that which hath its aspect to the Ocean, it hath not yet any knowne name that hath come to our know∣ledge: although it bee fully inhabited by Barbarous people, of whom we will speake particularly when we come to their Ranke. For as the Region which is neere vnto Ethiopia, whereas Asia and Affricke ioynes, is at this day vnknowne, whether it be firme land continued towards the South, or inclosed by the Sea: So likewise the Countrey is at this day vnknowne, which betwixt Tanais and Narbonna drawes towards the North: so as they dreame which speake or write any thing. It was necessary to make this digression, to the end that the deeds which we are to relate, might not be altogether obscure to those which know not the places, and that they might come the knowledge of the truth as much as is possible, by the Regions of Heauen and Earth. For we haue beene alwaies accustomed to turne our face continually to that which they teach vs by reason and example: The vnderstanding must alwayes haue regard to those Countries which are interposed in the re∣lation. Leauing then our discourse,What the Car∣thaginians held in Affrick. let vs returne to the continuance of our speech. The Carthaginians at that time held all the Affricaine shore, whereas our Sea flowes, from the Philonien Altars, neere vnto the Bankes of Barbary, vnto the Pillars of Hercules (this containes a∣bout sixteene thousand Furlongs) and in passing that little Sea which is
betwixt Affricke and Europe they had Conquered all Spaine, vnto the Perinee mountaines, which diuide that Prouince from Gaule. From the which vnto streights of Gebeltar, where stand the Pillars of Hercu∣les, there is about eight thousand Furlongs: And from the streight vn∣to the new Towne, which some call Carthage, from whence Hanni∣bal parted to go into Italy, three thousand furlongs: And from Car∣thage to Ebro, two thousand sixe hundred furlongs: From thence to the Empories, sixteene hundred: And from thence to the mouth of the Riuer of Rhone sixeteene hundred furlongs. Behold the measure of those places which the Romanes haue made with great diligence. From the passage of the Rhone, following the Bankes towards the Spring, vnto the passage of the Alpes into Italy, thirteene hundred furlongs; and the passage of the Mountayne is held to be twelue hundred. After which they come into the Champion Countrey which is about Poe. And therefore Hannibal was to march nine thousand furlongs, from Carthage vnto the entry of Italy. And if we will obserue the way, he had already past the one halfe: But if we will consider the difficulty of the Country, he had the most troublesome taske to performe. Han∣nibal endeauoured by all meanes to passe the Perinee Mountaines, not without some feare of the Gaules; least knowing the passages, they should interrupt his voyage into Italy. In the meane time newes came to Rome of that which had beene spo∣ken and done at Carthage, by the Embassadours, and that Hannibal had past the Riuer of Ebro with his Army, much sooner then they ex∣pected, making hast to go into Italy; for the which the great men of Rome were not a little amazed: Coiuing that hee would mooue the Nation of the Gaules against them,A diuision of the Prouinces to the Consull. being alwayes desirous of Warre. Wherefore after the Election of the Consuls, the diuided the Pro∣uinces: Whereof Spaine was for Publius Cornelius, and Affricke with Sycily for Tytus Sempronius: To whom they appointed sixe Legions for that yeare, and as many Allies as they should thinke good; and as great an Army at Sea as they could make. Whilest they Luied men at Rome, and that the Army at Sea and Munitions were preparing, and all the necessary Equipage for the Sea, they laboured to people their Collonies, which they had lately in Gaule neere vnto the Poe. There were Citties newly built, and Cittizens enioyned to be there within thirty dayes, to either Citty sixe thou∣sand men:The building of Plaisance and Cremona. whereof the one which was on this side the Poe, was called Plaisance, and the other on the further side Cremona. The Boloniens discontented herewith, and remembring the auncient quarrels, aban∣doned the Roman party,The reult of the Boloniens. being aduertised of the Descent of the Car∣thaginians, leauing the Hostages which they had giuen in the former Warre, whereof we haue made mention in the last Booke: And ta∣king Armes suddainly, they solicited the Milanis to do the like, making a tumultuous hurly-burly in the Countrey assigned to the Collo∣nies, so as all the people terrified fled to Modena,Modena besiged by the Gaules. with the three Deputies which were come to diuide the Land: Whom the Bolonieus pursued, and besieged the Towne. The siege continuing some time,
they made a shew to parley of Peace: And when as the Princes of the Gaules had caused some Embassadours to come vnto them, they staied them contrary to the Law of Nations, refusing to send them backe, if their Hostages were not deliuered. When the newes of this accident was come vnto them, Lucius Man∣lius the Pretor, who was then present with an Army, inflamed with Rage,A Surprize made by the Boloniens vpon the Romans. makes hast to succour the Besieged, whereof the Boloniens be∣ing aduertised, they layd an Ambush in the Forrest neere the way, and surprizing their enemies at their comming, they slew a great number of the Romans: The rest with great difficulty recouering the fields, sa∣ued themselues: Where although the Souldiers assured themselues for a time, yet finding that the Boloniens pursued them in the Reare, they ed to recouer the Towne of Cannet. When the newes came vnto Rome, the Romans fearing that their Army would be indangered by a long siege, they appointed Attillius the Pretor to succour the Besieged with the Troupes prepared for the new Leuy of the Consull, enioy∣ning him moreouer to make a Leuy of others:The parting of the Roman Armies. Behold the estate where∣in the affaires of the Gaules stood vntill the comming of Hannibal. In the meane time the Consulls hauing made ready all their necessary Equi∣page, parted from Rome: whereof Publius Cornelius bent his course to Spaine, with threescore vessels of warre, and Sempronius into Affricke with a hundred and three score Quiqueremes, taking the Warre so to heart, as he made so great a preparation at Lylibeum, that it seemed he should presently besiege Carthage. As for Cornelius, he tooke his way by the Country of Tuscany and the Geneis; and arriued on the fifth day at Marcelles, and entred with his Army at the first mouth of Rhone, for it passeth into the Sea by many mouthes. And although he were aduertised that Hannibal past the Pyrenee mountaines, yet he made his accompt that hee had a long way to go, aswell for the difficulty of the Country, as for the multi∣tude of the Gaules, those parts being very well peopled. But Hanni∣bal made hast daily to passe the Rhone with his Army, neere vnto the shore of the Sardinian Sea, with incredible diligence, after that he had pacified the Gaules partly with gifts, and partly by feare. The which the Consull hearing, and beleeuing but in part this suddaine arriuall; desiring likewise to know the truth, he Lands, to refresh his Men wearied with a torment at Sea. Then he acquaints the Tribunes with the places, by the which they must go to encounter the Enemy, and sends three hundred choise Horse before, vnder the Conduct of Pronencials, and some succours of the Gaules, to discouer the Enemies enterprize. Hannibal being now neere the Rhone with his Army, and within foure daies iourney of the Sea, makes hast to passe it with all possible speed. And therefore he cals all the inhabitants thereabouts, and wins them by Presents, from whom he buies Skifs and small Boates which they ordinarily vse, and whereof there were at that time a great number, by reason of the Faires for the Trade of the Sea: And he causeth others to be made in making hollow the bodies of Trees.
The which the Souldiers likewise did, being mooued with the abun∣dance of stuffe and the facility of the Worke: So as in lesse then two daies, there were so many Boates and Skifs, as they were sufficient to passe: Euery man striuing not to be at the mercy of his Companion or Comrade, but to passe himselfe and his baggage into his owne Skiffe or Boate. In the meane time there were an infinite number of men drawne to∣gether vpon the further Banke of the Rhone,The Gaules en∣deuour to stop Hannibals pas∣sag ouer the Rhone. to hinder the Carthagi∣nians passage. The which Hannibal perceiuing, and knowing well that he could not passe the Riuer by force, for that the Enemy held the other Banke, nor stay there long, but he should be inuironed by the people of the Country, at the setting of the third Watch of the night the sends Hann sonne to King Bomilcar with a part of his Army, to whom he gaue some guides of the Country; who mounted vp the Riuer two hundred furlongs, staying aboue an Iland, about the which the Rhone did runne: Where by reason of the Ford it seemed good, for that the Riuer diuided it selfe in two. They suddainly cut downe wood, and made floates sufficient to passe the men, and other things necessary. By this meanes they past the Rhone without danger or impeachment. Afterwards they recouered a place strong by nature, where they re∣fresht themselues a day, for the toile which they had taken, aswell for their march by night, as for the paines they had indured, being all at∣tentiue to affect their enterprize in time. Hannibal likewise made hast to do the like, with the rest of the Army. But he was troubled to passe the Elephants, being thirty seauen in num∣ber.Hannibal cau∣seth his Army to passe the Rhone. The night following, they which had past the Rhone, marching along the Riuer side, at the breake of day approached neere vnto the Barbarians, who as we haue sayd were there assembled. Hannibal on the other side, hauing his men ready, commaunds them all to be reolute to passe, and that they should put the Horse-men prepared for the Combat in Boates, to the end that being past they might serue if necessity required: And that the most actiue and nimblest foot-men should enter into the Skifs. And to the end they might passe with more ease and safety, and might the better breake the vehemency of the Waues, he placed Boates aboue the Riuer to breake the Violent▪ and swift course. He also caused three or foure Horses to be tyed to the Poope to swim it ouer, and there were two men set of either side of the Poope. By this meanes the greatest part of the Horses had bin past in the first Voyage. The which the Barbarians seeing, they came out of their Fort, and runne vnto the shore in a great throng and without order, as if they should easily defeat the Enemies. But after that Hannibal had stayd a little, and seeing his men approach by the smoake that they cast, ac∣cording to his appointment, he gaue a signe to his whole Army to passe, the which the Carthaginians seeing, they laboured with all their po∣wer to passe the Riuer with great cries, and to breake the Violence of the streame, so as euery one laboured to passe first. When as the Carthaginians held the two Bankes, and past the riuer with great noise,
the Gaules endeauouring with great fury to ressist them, crying, and singing after their manner. The Charge was terrible for the time, and the Combat horrible to see. All the Gaules were run downe vnto the Riuer, and had left their Tents. Hanno arriues presently with his Troupe,Hanno char∣geth the Gaules whereof one part fals vpon their Campe, and the other Charges them in the reare. The Gaules being amazed at this suddaine accident, recouer a part of their Campe, to keepe it from the Ene∣mies; the others were no lesse attentiue in the Combate. When Hannibal saw his enterprize succeed so happily, he incourageth his Souldiers, putting them in minde of their auncient prowesse, and perswading them to repulse the Enemies couragiously. Whereupon they fall vpon them with great fury.Hannibals Vic∣tory ouer the Gaules. Finally, the Gaules retired into their Villages with a shamefull flight, for that they had begun the bat∣tell without order, and had bin terrified by the surprize which Hanno made with his Legion. When as Hannibal had at one instant, vanquished the Riuer and his Enemies, he causeth the rest of his Army to passe at leasure. And being all past in a short time, he planted his Campe without feare of the Gaules, and spent the night in peace vpon the Riuer side. Three dayes after he was aduertised of the entry of the Roman Consull, with his Army at Sea into the mouthes of Rhone. Wherefore he sent fiue hundred Numidians, to discouer the Enemies, to view their num∣bers, and to learne what they resolued. In the meane time he giues order vnto the maisters of the Elephants to be carefull to passe the Rhone.Remonstrances of the Gaulish Kings vnto the Carthaginian Campe. And hauing drawne his men together, he causeth the Kings to be called, who were come vnto him from Gaule which lyes be∣yond the Poe. Who speaking vnto the whole Campe by an Inter∣preter, aduised them to passe the Mountaines, promising that both themselues, and the rest of the inhabitants of Gaule should giue them both aide and assistance: That the waies were safe, and well furnished with all things necessary: And that moreouer the mountaines were not very difficult to passe, and they should finde the places where they were to goe, abounding in all things. Besides, they should finde such Allies, whose Courage in times past was not a little feared by the Romans. After these or the like words, the Kings presently re∣tired. Then Hannibal entring into the Assembly,Hanibals speech vnto his Soul∣diers. he shewes them first their Actions past, wherein following his Councell and opinion, they had bin alwaies Victorious: And that Fortune had neuer bin auerse vnto them. Moreouer he intreates them to be of good courage, being assu∣red that they had ended the greatest of their Labours, hauing past so dangerous a Riuer, considering the good affection of their Allies, who were ready and prepared. Finally, that they should lay the burthen of affaires vpon him, shewing only their Obedience, where it should be needfull, with a remembrance of his Vertue and Prowesse, which he had performed with so great resolution. His speech being ended, seeing the ioyfull Countenance of his men, carrying the shew of reso∣lution, he commended them all. Then hauing made his prayers
vnto the gods according to their manner, he retired, and sent them a∣way to feed, giuing them charge to be ready to part the next day. The Company was scarce dismist when as the Numidians, who as wee haue sayd, had beene sent to discouer, returned, defeated and broken by the Enemy: for as they encountred neere vnto their Campe, the Roman Cauallery, whom Scipio had sent for the same cause, they charged one another with such fury, as there were slaine seauen score Horse as well Romans as Gaules, and aboue two hundred Numidi∣ans. The Romans pursuing the Carthaginians vnto their Campe, where hauing diligently obserued all,A defeate of the Numidians by the Roman Cauallory. they returned to the Consull, and reported certaine newes of the Enemy, and of the Combat they had with the Numidians. Which things being heard, Publius Cor∣nelins seeing that his stay there, would bee of no great moment, im∣barkes his Baggage: and parting with all his Troupes along the Bankes of Rhone, and makes haste as if hee would giue battell to the Enemy. Three dayes after that Hannibal had made his Oration to the Soul∣diers, at the breake of day hee sets all his Horsemen vpon the Sea∣shore, as it were for a guard: and causeth the Foote-men to march a slow pace, being parted from their Campe: vsing the greatest dili∣gence he could possible to passe the Elephants: For the effecting whereof hee tooke this aduice. Hee made prouision of many floats, and tied two together from the Land vnto the Riuer, being fifty foote broade:The meanes to passe the Ele∣phants. to the which they added two others on the side of the Bankes: The which they tied fast vnto Trees which were vpon the Bankes, to the end they might swimme safely: their length being of two hundred foote. Finally, they tied vnto these last two other long floats gently, to the end they might bee easily vntied: to the which were fastned cer∣taine Cords, wherewith they might drawe the Boats to the other Banke, after they should bee vntied from the other floats. Finally, they couered them all with Earth, to the end that the Elephants might march vpon them without feare as vpon the Land. This E∣quipage being prepared, they brought the Elephants, who had beene accustomed to obey the Indians in all places, but vpon the water, by the meanes of two Females which marcht before vpon the floats as vpon the firme land, which after they had past vnto the last, which pre∣sently were vntied, and were drawne by the Boats without any feare whilest they were all together: But when as the last floate was sepa∣rated from the rest, and that they saw themselues carried vpon the water, they made some shew of affrightment, for the feare which they had of all parts, for that the last fled from the water:The feare of the Elephants vpon the Rhone. yet this feare made them quiet, for that they saw nothing but water about them. When the first were past, they went to fetch the rest, and past them. Some of them tormenting themselues with feare, fell into the Riuer, and were retired safe, although their Masters were slaine: For in march∣ing slowly, and finding alwaies footing, they recouered the other side of the Banke: for that their waight kept them firme, and by rea∣son
of their greatnesse they had their Tronks alwaies aboue the Riuer, wherewith they might cast out the water if they had drunke any: and so recouer their breath. The Elephants being past, Hannibal marcheth with them, and all his Cauallery along the Rhone towards the firme land,The Spring of the Riuer of Rhone. drawing all his prouisions in the meane time from the Sea. The Rhone comes from three heads of Fountaines aboue the Sea of Venice, taking their course towards the West, and bending at the foote of the Mountaine something towards the North. Then it enters into the Lake of Ge∣neua, where it is not so violent: and passing through the middest of it, it tends to the Hyuernall West, diuiding the Gaules in some sort: and then taking its course towards the South, it enters into the Sar∣dinian Sea. The Valesien Gaules inhabite that part which tends to∣wards the North: and on the South side is enuironed with the Mountaines which bend towards the North. And as for the Plaines which are about Poe, whereof wee haue formerly spoken, the Alpes separate them from the Rhone, which beginning at Marseil∣les, extend vnto the Gulfe of Venice.Hannibal pas∣seth the Alpes along the Rhone. The which Hannibal then past about that Countrey which lies neere vnto the Rhone, and came into Italy. Some Historiographers seeking in this passage to terrifie the iudge∣ment of Readers, doe not obserue that they fall into two strange er∣rours, contrary to the reason of the History: For they are forced to write lies, and actions quite contrary: shewing Hannibal (whom they will haue inimitable, as well for his knowledge in Martiall af∣faires, as for his great courage) to be wholly voide of sense and rea∣son. And in the end when they cannot free themselues from their lies, they haue recourse vnto the gods, for their History made at pleasure. For in making the passage of the Alpes so great and difficult, so as not onely the Horse-men, Baggage, nor Elephants could not passe, nei∣ther yet the Foot men lightly armed; and that moreouer, there is so great a Desart, that if God, or some Angell had not guided the Ar∣my, without doubt it had perished in the Caues and hollow places; they fall directly into two errours. First, where should you finde a Commaunder more sencelesse then Hannibal,Polybius his re∣monstrance a∣gainst Historio∣graphers. who hauing the charge of so many troupes, and of so great an Army, wherein consisted all his hope to preuaile in his enterprize, knew neither the passages, nor the places, as they say, nor which way hee should passe, nor against whom? For their meaning is, that with so great a hope, and with such a triumphant Army, he should doe that which others after many Com∣bats doe not attempt, but through extreame despaire. But what can be spoken more vnreasonable? And whereas they say the places are de∣sart and rough, they shew themselues apparent liars. They doe not say how the Gaules inhabiting the banks of Rhone,The Gaules in∣habiting along the Rhone haue often past into Italy. before that time haue past into Italy, not once nor twice: Nor how in times past, they haue past the Mountaines with a great Army against the Romans, to succour and helpe the Cisalphin Gaules: nor how that those Mountaines are very well peopled: But as men ignorant hereof, they say,
that I know not what God appeared to Hannibal, and shewed him the way. By this meanes they seeme rather Tragedians than Histo∣riographers. For euen as they which write Tragedies, doe many time their Playes with the gods, or some other inuention, for that they haue taken a false and strange beginning: Euen so these kinde of Historiographers are in the like paine: For that taking false begin∣nings, they are forced to fly to some gods, or Heroes. But how can it bee that from a false beginning the end should bee true? Without doubt Hannibal hath not carried himselfe as they imagine, but contrariwise like a wise and politique Captaine, for hee duely considered the fertility of the Countrey whither hee went, and the hatred of the Inhabitants against the Romans. And he had to passe the Mountaines (which is a hard and difficult thing) the peo∣ple of the Countrey for his guides,Hannibal con∣ducted by guides at the passage of the Mountaines. whom he had already wonne a∣gainst the Romans. This we haue learned from those which were at that time imployed in affaires, and wee our selues haue beene pur∣posely to see the Alpes,polybius visited the Alpes. and therefore we haue written it the more boldly. Three dayes after the Romans departed from the Bankes of Rhone, Publius Scipio the Roman Consull being come to the Enemies Campe with a resolution to fight, hee stood for a time amazed, seeing the place voide: For he made his accompt that the Enemy should ne∣uer take that Countrey to passe into Italy, as well for the difficulty of the way, as for the multitude of Barbarians which held it. But after he had well waighed the great courage of the Carthaginians, he presently recouers his ship, and drawes his Army together: Then he sends his Brother into Spaine with part of his men, to the end it should not be vnfurnished of Forces, and himselfe takes his course towards Italy, to encounter Hannibal at the descent of the Moun∣taines with more ease and safety. Foure dayes after Hannibal arri∣ued at Lisle,Lisle made by the  of Saone and Rhone. a rich and fertile Countrey: The which was so called, for that the Riuers of Saone and Rhone falling from the Mountaines, embracing a little quantity of Land, runne together and make an Iland like in figure and forme to another that is in Egypt,Doltaan Iland in Egypt. called Dea. It is true, that that in Egypt hath on the one side the Sea, with the which two Riuers ioyne: But this hath rough and stony Mountaines, which in a manner are inaccessible. Where Hannibal being arriued, hee found two Brothers in quarrell for the Kingdome, and their Armies fron∣ting one another. But being called by the eldest, and increased to restore him to his Fathers inheritance, he obeyed him, thinking it would assist him much in his Enterprize. And when hee had chased away the younger, and put him in possession of his Realme, hee had not onely store of victuals, and abundance of all things for a re∣compence: But moreouer they were furnished with all sorts of Armes and other furniture, whereof the roughnesse of the cold Mountaines forced him to make prouision. His Army, and himselfe were like∣wise conducted safely by the King and his forces, through the Sauoy∣ards Countrey vnto the Mountaines, which was a great benefit to him.
When he in ten daies after his departure from the Rhone had march't labou an hundred miles, he began to ascend the Mountaine, where he was in great danger. It is true, that whilest the Carthaginians past the Plaine, the Lords of Sanuoy suffered them to goe on quietly, part∣ly fearing their Horse-men and partly the Gaules forces, which did accompany them. But when as they were retired to their houses, and that the Cartha∣ginians began to ascend the rough and steepe Mountaines: then they drew together in great multitudes, and seiz'd vpon the passages, by the which Hannibal must of necessity goe. And if they had layed seatte∣ring ambushes in the (Valleyes),The Sauyards hindet Hanni∣bal and his Ar∣my. and had charg'd them suddainly, with∣out doubt they had made a great slaughter of the Carthaginians. But being discouered by Hannibal, they did not so much annoy the Ene∣my as themselues: For when he found that they held all the passages, he causeth his Army to stay, and lodging among the Rocks and hol∣low places, he sent some no the Gaules that were with him, to visite the places, and to discouer the Enemies intention and and preparations. Being aduertised by them, that the Enemy stayed there onely in the day, and that by night euery man retired to his house, to a Towne which was neere by, he vsed this inuention. At the breake of day hee recouers the Hills with his whole Army,Hannibals pol∣licy: as if he had an intent to force through the Enemy. But when he was neere vnto them, he setled his Campe, and fortified himselfe. And when hee found the Villains of the Mountaines had retired themselues from their Hills, he makes many fires in his Campe, lea∣uing the greatest part of his Army there, and steales through the streights with the best and ablest men of his Army, staying vpon those Hills which the Enemy formerly held. This done when the Villaines of the Mountaines saw, it  the breake of day, they made a stand for a time: But finding that the baggage and the multitude of Horse-men disordered the Army in the streights: thinking likewise that the least a∣mazement were sufficient to defeated them, they charge them in diuers places by the inaccessible Rocks. Then the Carthaginians were not so much annoyed by the Enemy, as by the difficulty of the place: for that the Horses and baggage made a great spoile of men and goods:They of the Mountaines charge the Car∣thaginians. For as the streights were of either side sleepe and like a Gulfe, many Hor∣ses fell with their burthens a wonderfull height. The Horses being strucke or hurt, were wonderfully troubled, the way being narrow, falling partly for feare, and partly for the griefe of their hurts. The which Hannibal seeing, and thatthere was no hope in flight, after the losse of his baggage, he descends with great fury from the place where he had remained all night. And although he gaue a great de∣feate to the Enemy, yet he slew many of his owne: For the motion increasing on either side,Hannibals victory against the Sauoyards. many fell. Finally, after that the Sau. yards had beene slaine, some in fighting, and some in the route: Hannibal past the rest of his Horse and baggage with great paine and trouble. And hauing drawne together the rest of his Army, hee marcht to the Citty from whence the Sauoyards had
sallied, the which he tooke without resistance, finding no man in it. It was a great reliefe vnto him for all things necessary, not onely for the present but for the future: for he carried away a great number of Horses and Prisoners; and victualled his Army for three daies with Corne and Cattell: Amazing the other Inhabitants of the mountaines, who durst not make the like attempt: Which was a thing more to be esteemed. He staied there one day, and parting with his Army, he march't but little the two daies following, and on the fourth he was againe in great danger. He was come vnto a place among the Mountaines very well peopled with Inhabitants, who altogether had Conspired to de∣ceiue the Carthaginians. Wherefore they go to meet Hannibal, car∣rying Garlands of Flowers:Conspiracy of them of the Mountaines,  colour of friendship. which is a signe of friendship and peace a∣mong the Barbarians, like vnto the Caducei among the Grecians. Han∣nibal did not thinke it fit to giue credit easily vnto them, and inquires what their will and intent was: Who answered, that they did like well of the taking of the Towne and the defeate of the Gaules, who were Enemies vnto them: And as for themselues they would obey his will, and would not do, nor suffer any ourrage; promising to giue him Hosta∣ges for the assurance of their promises. And although that Hannibal was long in suspence what to do, yet he considered that he might hap∣pily pacifie the Barbarians, if he accepted these Conditions, and if he refused them, they would declare themselues his Enemies. Where∣fore in giuing them a gracious answer, he makes shew to receiue their Alliance. And when they had not only giuen him Hostages, but furnished him with abundance of Victuals,The Treason of the Barbarians against Hanni∣bal. and put themselues into his hands: Hannibal had so great Confidence in them, as he made no doubt but to make vse of them for Guides in difficult places. When they had marcht two daies, and were come vnto a streight Valley, hauing the Mountaine on one side, the Carthaginians were in danger to be wholy defeated: For that the Barbarians fallied from all sides out of their Am∣bushes. If Hannibal (who had not yet so great confidence in the Gaules, and who fore-saw future things,) had not put the Elephants and Horse-men in the foreward, and had followed in the Reare with the force of his foot-men, hauing an Eie ouer all. By this supply the losse proou'd the lesse; yet it was great both of Men, Horses, and Bag∣gage: for the danger was so great, as Hannibal was inforced to conti∣nue a whole night there with halfe his Army, without his Cauallery of Baggage: For that the Enemy held the top of the Mountaine, which was very neere vnto them, rolling downe pieces of the Rocke into the Army, and sometimes casting stones. The day following, when the Gaules began to grow cold, he re∣couered the Mountaine, ioyning with his Horse and Baggage: Then the Gaules presented themselues no more to Battell, charging like Theeues, sometimes in the foreward, sometimes in the Reare, as time and place gaue them opportunity. The Elephants were very vse∣full to the Carthaginians; for wheresoeuer they marcht, the place was
assured from Enemies, for that they durst not approach neere them, hauing not bin accustomed vnto them. On the ninth day they came vnto the top of the Alpes, and there they planted their Campe two daies, partly to refresh the Souldiers which were weary with toile, and partly to retire those that were straied. During which time, many Horses freed from their burthens, and following the Rout of the Ar∣my recouered the Campe. Those places were then full of Snow, for it was in Nouember: Whereby the Souldiers grew in a manner into despaire, being tired and vext with so many Crosses. The which Hannibal perceiuing, he draws them together, resoluing to make a Speech vnto them. For the effecting whereof he had but one occasion, which was to shew them Italy so neere,Hanibal makes a Speech vnto his souldiers. and the fertillity thereof. In truth it is so neere the foot of the Mountaines, as if it be well obserued, the Hils seeme to serue as Rampiers to Italy. And therefore he shewed it them from a high Hill, from whence they might see the whole Extent. The like he did of the plaines about Poe, lying at the foot of the Mountains, relating vnto them the friendship of the Gaules inhabiting those Coun∣tries, and the Territory of Rome: wherewith he reuiued their spirits. Three dayes after he began to dislodge, the Enemy making no attempt against them, but after a Theeuing manner: Yet he had no lesse losse at the descent of the Mountaines by reason of the bad Country, and the coldnesse of the Snow, then he had at the ascent by the attempt of his Enemies: For they which did stumble in any sort, fell presently in∣to a Gulfe, considering that the place was narrow and rough by na∣ture: And all the Country newly couered with Snow, so as there was no shew of any path, neither could they hold their footing. It is true the men accustomed vnto so many miseries, did easily indure this Trouble. In the meane time they came to another Rocke, where as neither the Elephants nor Horse could passe: for a late fall of the ground, had streightned the Way two hundred paces, which had formerly bin as large. Here againe the Army began to be troubled and tormented. Hannibal in the beginning laboured to lead his Army by vncough and vnknowne places, whereas neuer soule had bin: But for that the Snow hindred them that they could not passe, he desisted from his Enter∣prize. There had Snow fallen newly this yeare vpon the old, which was yet whole and entire, vpon the which they had firme foo∣ting, for that which was newly fallen was soft and not very thicke. But after that it had bin trodden and beaten by so many men and horses, no man could keep his footing: As it happens to those which go vpon places which are slippery with durt, where their footing failes them: For that they marcht vpon the Ice, and vpon the Snow that was moulten. Moreouer the men (which was more miserable) falling back-wards (for that they could not keep their footing in those slippery places) tum∣bled downe into the Caues and hollow places, where they laboured to rise vpon their Hands and Knees. The Horses of burthen fell some∣times,
brake the Ice and could not stirre: for that they were laden and could not retire their feete out of the Ice. Then Hannibal frustrate of his former hope, for that the men and Horses laboured in vaine, planted his Campe vpon the top of the Mountaine, hauing cleansed the place of great difficulty. Then he Commaunded them all to leuile the way vnto the Rocke where they were to passe: The which was done with much toile. When as the way was made in one day for the Horses and Sumpters, he caused them presently to passe, seating his Campe in those places that were without Snow, and there to feed. In the meane time he giues charge to the Numidians, to make a way for the Elephants: The which was effected with great difficulty, they being in a manner dead for hunger; for the tops of the Mountaines are without Grasse or Trees, for that they are continually couered with Snow. It is true, that the Vallies of either side of the Mountaines, hauing goodly Pastures and Trees, and places which are very well in∣habited. When as Hannibal had drawne all his Troupes together,Hannibal goes on his course. he began to pursue his course: and hauing past the Rocke aboue mentioned, in three daies, he came vnto the Plaine, hauing lost the greatest part of his Army, aswell by the Enemy and Riuers in his way, as by the roughnesse of the Mountaine in passing them, and not only men, but also Horses and Carriages. Finally, hauing recouered Italy in this manner, fiue moneths after his departure from Carthage, and past the mountaines in fifteene daies,The number of men which Hannibal had remayning af∣ter he had past the Alpes. he enters boldly into the Countries about Poe and Millan, hauing yet remaining about ten thousand, two hun∣dred foot Affricans, eight thousand Spanriards, and sixe thousand Horse at the most. This he testifies in a pillar where the whole num∣ber of his Army is set downe at Lauynium. At the same time Publius Cornelius Scipio the Consull, hauing sent his brother into Spaine to make head against Asdrubal, he sail'd to Pysa with few men, taking his way through Tuscany where he receiued the Army of the Pretors Manlius and Attilius, which they had against the Bullonois; and marcht directly to the Riuer of Poe, to fight with the Enemy before he had refresht himselfe. Seeing we haue turn'd our Discourse to the Warre of Italy, and to the Commaunders of these two people, we haue thought it good to deliuer in few words some things which are not vnfitting for a Histo∣riographer, before we come to those which haue bin acted in that Prouince. It may be some one will demaund of me how it happens, that seeing we haue handled the Affaires of Lybia and Spaine at large;Polybius his Excuse. yet we haue not spoken of Hercules Pillars, nor of that Arme of the Sea which diuides Affricke from Europe nor in like manner of the great Sea or Ocean, nor of those things which depend thereon, nor of the Ilands of England & Scotland, nor likewise of the abundance of Tinne, Gold, and Siluer wherewith Spaine abounds. It is certaine, that the auncient Historiographers haue spoken many things and diuers, being of contrary opinions. It is true we haue not omitted them, as thinking that they were not fitting for a History, but we haue done it
to the end that our Relation might not be diuided, nor diuert the Rea∣ders often from the order of the History: Being of opinion that these things should be deliuered with all possible truth, in time and place, and not out of season. And therefore no man ought to maruaile, if in the following Bookes we passe on, when we shall come to these passa∣ges, for we do it of purpose and for the reasons aboue mentioned. If there be any one that desires to heare them at euery passage, he may well be compared to a Glutton, that is inuited to a Feast: for as tasting of all the meates, as soone as he is set at the Table, he shall receiue lit∣tle pleasure or profit for the future, considering that he hath no per∣fect taste, and that all being put together into the Stomacke, it hinders digestion. They in like manner which do the like in reading of Hi∣stories, hauenot pleasure for the present, nor profit for the future. It is apparent, that a History among other things hath need to be corre∣cted in this, aswell for other reasons, as for that the auncient Historio∣graphers, who haue laboured to describe Countries, and the Nature of Regions to the remotest parts of the World, haue in many places straied from the truth. Finally, we must speake against them, not by hazard and rashly, but with reason, nor reprehend their ignorance, but rather to commend them and correct them: Who no doubt would haue repaired their er∣rour, if they had liued in these times. For there are few men found a∣mong the Grecians, which in former times could haue gone to search out the extremities of the World, for the danger and tediousnes of the way: For that there are many, and in a manner innumerable dangers at Sea; and if any through necessity, or of his owne free will, had gone to the extremities of the World, he could not easily haue found out the scituation of places, nor those things which are worthy to be sought after: For that the greatest part was inhabited by Barbarous nations, and some Desart and inhabitable: Besides that, for the diuersity of Tongues, the enterprize was much more difficult; for there was no meanes to inquire, nor to learne, for want of vnderstanding one ano∣ther. It was no lesse difficult to relate truly those things which they had seene, for that euery man was giuen to augment, and to make things seeme more admirable. Seeing then it was not only difficult, but in a manner impossible, to haue a true History of these things before this time, we must not blame the auncient Historiographers, if they haue forgotten or committed some Errours; but rather we ought to wonder and commend them that they haue bin able to make any search. It wilbe therefore necessary to make a true and diligent search of those things, which our Predecessors knew not: for that in our times all the passages are open, aswell by Sea as Land, by the meanes of Alexander of Macedon his Forces into A∣sia, and of the Roman Empire ouer the rest of the World: And like∣wise when as people were no more troubled with Warre, nor with any desire or ambition of publicke Affaires: So as they had great op∣portunity to search out the truth of these things. For the effecting whereof we will striue by all meanes, as soone as we shall find an oppor∣tunity.
There is nothing that was more pleasing vnto me, then to know that they which desire to vnderstand these things, come vnto the truth by our meanes, and that wee haue not taken so much paines, nor vndergone so great dangers, to visite Affricke,Polybius hath visited Affricke Spaine and the Gaules. Spaine and the Gaules, by the meanes of the Ocean, but in repairing the errours of the ancient Historiographers, & make those Countries knowne to our men. Let vs now returne to our Discourse of the Warres which are in Italy, betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. Wee haue formerly related the number of men which Hannibal had remaining after hee had past into Italy, who planted his Campe at the foote of the Mountaines to refresh his Army: for it was toi∣led and wearied, not onely with the passage of the Mountains which was very difficult, but also for want of victuals: Besides, it was continually afflicted with diseases, misery and pouerty: The grea∣test part were dead of famine, and their insupportable toile:Miseries com∣mon among Souldiers. for it was impossible to carry things necessary for so great an Army, in a Countrey that was rough and difficult: And if they carried any thing, the greatest part was lost with the Horses. By this meanes it fell out, that although a little before hee had parted from the Riuer of Rhone with thirty eight thousand Foote, and eight thousand Horse,A decrease of Hannibals Ar∣my. hee had scarce then halfe his Army en∣tire: and yet by the reason of their continuall labour and toile, they were in a manner become wilde. The which Hannibal perceiuing, hee not onely laboured to cheere vp the bodies and hearts of the Souldiers, but likewise to refresh their Horses. After which hee marched with his Army, and laboured by all meanes to procure the Friendship of the Turinois, which was the neerest Nation, and were at that time in Warre with the Millanois, and seemed to haue no great trust and confidence in the Carthaginians. Who see∣ming not much to regard him, hee assaults one of their strongest Townes, the which hee takes vpon the third day: where put∣ting all vnto the Sword that would not follow his party, hee so terrified and amazed the Barbarians which inhabited there-abouts, as presently they yeelded themselues into the hands of the Cartha∣ginians. It is true that the other Gaules inhabiting along the Riuer of Poe, would willingly haue ioyned to Hannibal as they had resolued, if at∣tending an opportunitie to doe it, the suddaine comming of the Consull had not preuented them. So as they stirred not, and some of them ioyned to the Roman Army. The which Hannibal perceiuing, he resolued to make no longer stay, and that he must attempt some good enterprize, to make the rest more bold to follow his partie. Being care∣full hereof, he had newes that Publius Scipio had past the Poe, and that he was not farre off: the which at the first he seemed not to regard, as a thing not likely: For he remembred that hee had lately left him at the mouth of Rhone, and vnderstood that the passage from Mar∣seilles vnto Tuscany was long and inaccessible, and the way from the Tuscan Sea which leades to the Alpas through Italy, was rough,
where an Army could not passe. But vpon diuers aduertisements of the certaine newes hee was amazed, wondring, much at the Consuls industry and diligence. The Consull in like manner wondred no lesse. For where as he thought that Hannibal would neuer presume to passe the Mountaines with an Army consisting of strange Nations: And that if hee attempted it, hee would dye by the way, hee wondred much at his great courage and boldnesse, when as hee found that hee had not onely past safely, but had also forced some Townes of Italy. At the same time the Romans were full of affaires. It is true, that the last newes they had receiued, was of the taking of Sagont: where∣fore they called an assembly and made choice of two Consuls,The Romans aduertised of Hannibals de∣scent into Italy where∣of the one was sent into Affricke to make Warre against Carthage, and the other into Spaine against Hannibal. But when they had sud∣daine newes of the comming of Hannibals Army, and that he held some Townes of Italy besieged: they were so amazed, as they presently countermaunded Sempronius from Lybia, aduertising him of the descent of the Enemy into Italy, and that leauing the affaires of the Prouince, he should make hast to succour his Countrey. Af∣ter which newes, Sempronius presently sends backe the Army by Sea, giuing them charge to saile directly to Italy, and he gaue the conduct of the Army by Land to the Tribunes, appointing them a day when they should come to Rimeny. It is a Towne seated vp∣on the Adriatique shore, at the end of the Plaines which are about Poe towards the South. By this meanes matters being altred, and that all seemed to fall out contrary to the hope and opinion of the World, euery man vsed diligence to prouide for the future. The two Armies were now opposite one to another, whereof the Com∣maunders for the time they had, laboured to giue courage vnto their men. But Hannibal striuing to encourage them vsed this meanes, put∣ting into the middest of the Army assembled together the Prisoners of the Mountaines, who were in Chaines: The which by their conti∣nuall toile, and partly by his commaundment were growne leane and feeble: for (the better to attaine vnto his intention) hee had caused them to haue great fetters,The policy of Hannibal for an example to his Souldiers. and had in a manner starued them, and finally, had commaunded that they should bee cruelly beaten naked. Hauing drawne them into the midst of his Army, he caused armes to be laid before them after the manner of the Gaules, and such as Cap∣taines vse to arme themselues with when they fight single Combats: he also gaue them Horses, and Cassocks made with great Art. Then he demaunded of the Prisoners, which of them would fight man to man, propounding to the Victor the afore said gifts, and to the van∣quished that by death he should be freed from his present miseries. And as they all cried out that they were ready to fight, Hannibal causeth Lots to be cast, and makes two men to enter the list arm'd, vpon whom the Lot had fallen. The which the prisoners hearing, they lifted vp
their hands to Heauen, praying vnto the gods, that they would bee pleased to choose them for the Combate. As soone as the Lot was cast, they vpon whom it fell, were wonderfully ioyfull, and the rest remained sad and pensiue. But when as the Combate was en∣ded, the other Prisoners did no lesse commend the fortune of him that was defeated, then of the Conqueror: Conceiuing that hee was freed from the great and many miseries, wherewith they were tor∣mented liuing. The like thought the Carthaginians; for in making comparison of the misery of the suruiuours, and of those who fight∣ing died valiantly, they found the fortune of these men good, and that of the others moued them to pitty. When as Hannibal saw his Army moued to pitty at this spectacle, he presently came into the midst of the assembly,Hannibals speech to his Souldiers. saying, that hee pre∣sented it vnto them, to the end they should make vse of the example of anothers mans fortune, to consider of their owne: for that they were to vndergoe the same Combate, and that Fortune propoun∣ded vnto them the like time, and the like rewards: for they must of necessity liue or dye, or fall into their Enemies hands aliue. If they vanquished, their spoile should bee more then a Horse or a Cassocke, being the happiest men in the World, after they had conquered the good fortune of the Romans. And if in fighting they died like braue men, they should end their liues with good hope, free from all mi∣series and calamities: But withall they must expect all miseries and po∣uerty, if being vanquished, they should flie, with a desire of a longer life, or with a resolution to seeke some other meanes to liue: and that there is no man so voide of sence, which thinkes (if hee flies) that his safe returne into his Countrey is possible, if hee will remem∣ber the length of the way, with the multitude of Combats which must bee maintained during the Voyage: If hee likewise considers the narrow streights, and so many troublesome Riuers which were to passe. Wherefore it was needfull for them, that in laying aside all hope of flight, they should vse the like pitty to themselues in their affaires, as they haue shewed lately in the example of other mens fortunes: For as in the others they commended the fortune of the Victor and the vanquished, and held those which remained miserable: so they must iudge the like of themselues. And therefore they must goe resolute∣ly to the Combate, to get an vnspeakable Victory; or else to dye like braue men in battell, if auerse fortune deny it them: and that they must not expect that being vanquished, they should finde any meanes of safety. Finally, if they march to the field with this resolution, there is no doubt but the Victory and their safety is in their owne hands: for there was neuer any man that haue fought with this intention, or with a resolute courage, or forced by necessity, but hee hath preuailed ouer his Enemies. And that this is very easie to doe, when as all these things concurre together contrary vnto the Enemy, as it happens this Day vnto the Romans: For as their flight hath a manifest and an apparent safety in their houses which were neere them,
so the courage of desperate men will be found insupportable. And when as after this Oration (together with the example) the Soul∣diers hearts were much inflamed to Warre, and that their Ge∣nerals comparison was pleasing vnto them, Hannibal commending them, sent them away, and commaunded them to bee ready at the breake of day. But after that the Consull Publius Scipio hauing past the Poe, had caused his Army to march to the Riuer of Tesin, he commaunded a Bridge to be made by such as were skilfull, and made a Speech vnto the assembly according to the opportunity of the time. In the begin∣ning he spake many things concerning the Maiesty of the people of Rome, and the prowesse of their Ancestors: But concerning the pre∣sent affaires, this was the substance. They must of necessity (sayd he) hold the victory certaine.Scipio his speech to his en. although they had not yet tried their val∣lour with the Enemy: But onely for that they were to fight with the Carthaginians. Neither must they expect that they would dare to come to Battell against the Romans, hauing in the last Warres so of∣ten beate them both by Sea and Land, to whom they had also so long payed tribute: and whose power they had so often tried. And to the end I forbeare to speake of the times past, why should men of iudge∣ment doubt of the future, seeing we haue some experience, that they dare not looke vs in the face? It is certaine that when lately the Roman Horse-men encountred the Carthaginians in Gaule, on this side the Riuer of Rhone, they not one∣ly returned safe, but they beate them backe into their Campe: and that presently, when as Hannibal and the Carthaginian Army found the Romans to be so neere, they steale away in manner of a flight, and passe the Mountaines otherwise then they had resolued, in feare and amaze∣ment. Now behold Hannibal, who in passing the Alpes, hath lost two parts of his Forces. And the rest is so tired and broken with toile, hun∣ger, cold, and pouerty, as they can hardly support themselues: and the remainder of his Horses (if any be escaped) are so worne with labour, and the tedious wayes, as they could not make vse of them. Finally, it sufficed the Romans onely to present themselues, and that moreouer, his presence should with reason make them more resolute, seeing that he had not left the Army at Sea, nor the affaires of Spaine, nor had not transported himselfe thither with such speed, going so great a cir∣cuite both by Sea and Land, if he had not knowne it necessary for the Countrey, and the victory to be certaine. The Army being inflamed with this Speech, and making shew of a resolution to fight, Scipio com∣mending their good will, sent them away, and gaue them charge to feed, and to be ready, and in Armes at the sound of the Trumpet and Drumme. Three daies after, the two Commaunders marcht with their Army along the Riuer, on the side of the Mountaines. The Romans had the left hand, and the Carthaginians the right. And when as the day fol∣lowing they were aduertised by their Spies of their approach one vnto another, they stayed. The third day after, the two Commaunders
fronted one another with all their Horse, Scipio being moreouer ac∣companied with men that cast Darts, chosen out of the bands of foot-men: The which they did to discouer the number of the men, and what they were. But when they came to affront one another, and the dust beginning to rise by reason of the Horses, they presently prepared themselues to Battell: Scipio puts in Front the Gaulish horse-men, with those that Darts, and appointed the rest to second them marching a slow pace. In regard of Hannibal, he makes his point of the strongest of his horse-men, and presents it to the Enemy, casting the Numidians vpon the Wings. But when the two Armies began to enter the Combat furi∣ously, they had scarce begun the Crie but the Darters fled, without any fight,A Combat of the Horse be∣twixt Hannibal and Scipio. and passing through their supplies, they recouered the Bat∣tell. They were in truth amazed at the violent charge, fearing to be ouerthrowne by the encounter of the Horse-men. In the meane time the Combat was great betwixt the Horse-men; for both the one and the other fought with great courage; which made the Battell to conti∣nue long in suspence. There was fighting both on horse-backe and on foot, for that many had left their horses in the Battell. And when as the Numidians in turning about, had fallen vpon the reare of the Dar∣ters, who in the beginning had fled from the fury of the Horse-men, they were inuironed by them, and defeated in great Troupes. They also which fought with the Carthaginian Horse-men, after they had receiued great losse of their men, and slaine many of their Enemies, in the end they gaue backe, for that the Numidians charged in the reare. Some were dispersed here and there: others retired to the Campe in a throng, sauing the Consull (who was wounded) in the middest of the Troupe, from thence Scipio Commaunded his men to follow him without noise,The retreate of Scipio. and marcheth with his Army to the Bridge which he had made vpon the Poe, there to passe without tumult or danger; but when he saw the fields about the Poe so great and spacious, and that the Carthaginians were stronger in horses, and being moreouer troubled with the Wound which he had receiued, he held it the safest course to passe his Army before the Enemy should pursue him. Hannibal made his account that the Romans would fight sometime with their foot-men, but when he was aduertised of their flight, and that abandoning their Fort they had past the Poe, by a Bridge which they had made, he pursues them with speed. The end of the Bridge was already broken and the guard was yet remaining; of the which he presently tooke about sixe hundred. Hannibal aduertised that the rest of the Army was not farre off, hee returnes to his Fort, seeking care∣fully for a place fit to make a Bridge: The which two daies after he found with great difficulty, and then effected it, ioyning many floats together. Afterwards he gaue the Charge to Asdrubal, to passe the Army, whilst that he busied himselfe to heare the Embassie of the Gaules, which were come vnto him from diuers neighbour Countries: For as soone as it was bruted that the Romans had bin defeated by the Carthaginians, all the neighbour Gaules made hast to ioyne with Han∣nibal,
as they had formerly resolued, and to giue him succours, and to go to the Warre. After he had giuen them a good reception, he past his Army beyond the Poe, and takes his way along the Riuer, hoping more easily to ouer-take the Enemy. When as Scipio had led his Ar∣my to Plaisence, (which was a Roman Collony) he had a care to cure those that were Wounded, and thinke of a place whither he might lead his Army. The third day after that Hannibal had past the Poe, he puts his men in order before Plaisence in view of the Enemies, and presented them Battell. And when as no man offered himselfe, he Camp'd hauing found a conuenient place within sixe miles of them. The Gaules who had come to succour Scipio,The treason of the Gaules a∣gainst the Ro∣mans. seeing better hopes with the Carthaginians, resolued among themselues to abandon the Romans. And when at mid-night they found all men asleep, they being in Armes in their Tents, they part, and kill'd most of the Romans they met in their way, cutting off some of their heads. Finally they retired to the Carthagi∣nians, to the number of two thousand foot, and two hundred Horse. Being graciously receiued, and inflamed with hope of good, Hannibal sends them home to their Houses; to the end they might make those things knowne, and induce their Country to seeke the Alliance of the Carthaginians. He saw plainly, that of necessiy they would leaue the Roman party, considering the foule crime which their men had committed. Moreouer there was an Embassie come from the Boloni∣ans,An Embassie from the Bolo∣nians to Han∣nibal. deliuering vnto Hannibal the Triumviry who (as wee haue for∣merly said) had bin sent by the Romans to diuide the Lands being taken by Treason. Hannibal commending their good affection, makes an Alliance with them, and restores vnto them the Triumviry, to serue them as a meanes to retire their Hostages, as they had formerly resolued. Scipio being troubled, not so much for the Treason of the Gaules, and the slaughter of his men, but for that he fore-saw that all the Gaules Coun∣try (which had bin a long time Enemy vnto the Romans) would reuolt, which made him study how to giue order in time for his Affaires. Wherefore the night following about the breake of day, he dislodg'd without noise,The Riuer of Trebia. and seated his Campe neere vnto the Riuer of Trebia, on the highest Hils of the Country, relying vpon the scituation of the place, and the multitude of their Allies inhabiting thereabouts. Han∣nibal being aduertised of his Enemies flight, he causeth the Numidians to march first, and then all the Cauallery, and soone after he follows with the rest of his Army. The Numidians turning to the Campe abandoned by their Enemies, they set it on fire, to the great benefit of the Romans: For if they had not staied in the Campe, they might haue pursued them in the Reare, and haue made a great slaughter of the Roman Army. But whilst they loose time in burning the lodging, the greatest part of the Army past the Riuer in safety: Some of the Reare-ward were surprized by the Carthaginians, who were either slaine or taken Prisoners. In the meane time Scipio made choise of the Hils, which were neere vnto the
Riuer, for that they seemed fit to make a ort. The which being in∣uironed with a Ditch and a Pallisado, hee attended in this distresse the returne of his Companion Tyberius from Sycily with an Army: causing his Wounds to be carefully looked vnto, to the end that their assailes being in so great danger, he might be a pertaker. Hannibal seated his Campe, within fiue miles of the Enemies Fort, whom the Gaules did furnish abundantly, not only with Victuals, but with all other things necessary, and were very ready to vndergoe any danger with the Car∣thaginians. The newes came to Rome of the defeate of their men. And although they would neuer haue thought it, yet the Romans made no shew to be amazed therewith, disguising the defeate of their Horse-men to haue hapned, not so much by the Prowsse of the Carthaginians, as by the ouer-weening of the Commaunder, and the Treason of the Gaules, who had yeilded themselues to Hannibal. Finally, they were in good hope of their Warre, seeing that the Bands of foot-men were yet entire. Wherefore Sempronius being returned, and passing by Rome, they all perswaded him publickely to giue Battell to the Cartha∣ginians. Sempronius at his comming vnto Rimeny, receiues all the Troupes which were come from Sycily, according to his commaund∣ment. From thence marching to Trobia, he ioynes with his Compa∣nion, where he refresht his Army, toil'd with the rediousnesse of the way, hauing marcht forty daies together comming from Lylibeum to Rimeny. He also vsed diligence to prouide all sorts of munition. More∣ouer he consulted with Scipio, inquiring of the actions past, and confer∣ring of the future. At the same time Hannibal tooke the Towne of Clastidium by Trea∣son, corrupting Brengusin the Captaine of the Garrison,Clastidium ta∣ken by Hanni∣bal. where as the Romans had lodged a great quantity of Corne, whereof he made vse in his necessity, and sent away the Souldiers in safety; to the end that by the fame of his Clemency, others might yeild more easily vnto the Carthaginians. He extended his bounty also vnto him that betraide it. And being aduertised that the Gaules inhabiting that little Country which lies betwixt Trebia and the Poe, and had made an Alliance with him, had sought the friendship of the Romans by Embassie: To the end that during the trouble of these two powerfull Nations, they might haue the grace of an vncertaine fauour: He sends (being mooued with rage and despight) two thousand foote, and about a thousand Numi∣dian Horses, with some Gaules intermixt, to spoile the Country. The which hauing performed and taken a great Booty, the Inhabitants sent presently an Embassie to the Consull to  succours. Smpronius presently imbracing this occasion to giue battell, which hee had long desired, sends a great part of his Cauallery, with a thousand foote with Darts, beyond the Riuer of Trebia, who charging the Gaules, and surprizing them in disorder,The Gaules Repue. for that they were in contention tou∣ching the diuision of the Booty, they put them into a great confusi∣on, and forced them to retire, killing and chasing them into their Fort: Where by the sally of the Troupe which guarded the Campe,
the Gaules resuming Courage, they were forced to turne head, and to recouer their Campe. The which  perceiuing, he sent a simply of all his Horse with the Darters, and forced the Gaules to retire into their Fort. But for that Hannibal was not then ready to giue bat∣tell, he was not of aduice to vndertake it without great consideration, nor to hazard all vpon all occasions. And therefore like a well aduised Captaine, he caused a Retreateto be sounded, and retires his men in∣to the Fort. And when as the Romans had skirmished with their enemies in vaine, they returned to their Campe, hauing lost few of their men, and made great slaughter of the Carthaginians, Sempronius growne ioyfull and proud of this good Fortune, had a will to giue Battell onely for the desire of glory, whilst that his Companion was weake and infirme. And therefore he discouers himselfe to Scipio, to whom the time did not seeme conuenient to do it, but rather to deferre the Battell, to the end that the Roman Souldiers being yet fresh and greene, might gaine experience, and that in Temporizing, the Gaules as people light and without faith, might abandon the Carthaginians, and that finally he might be present, for that his Wound at that time made him vnprofit∣able. Although that Sempronius knew well that Scipio spake the truth, yet mooued with ambition, either that Scipio should not be present, or that the Warre should not be prolonged vntill the comming of the other Consuls, for that the time of the election was come, he resol∣ued to giue Battell alone. Hannibal being of the like opinion with Scipio, was carefull how to finde an occasion to fight, whilst the Gaules faith was firme, and the Enemies Souldiers of little experience, and Scipio vnprofitable to vn∣dergoe the danger: But especially he feared to loose time: For seeing he led an Army in a strange Country, and had a great enterprize in hand, there was no other meanes of safety, then to keepe his Allies. Where∣fore seeing the desire of Sempronius, he prepared himselfe willingly to Battell. There was betwixt the two Armies a plaine Champaigne, but very conuenient to lay an Ambush; hauing a deepe Riuer, with high Bankes, and Thickets and Bushes round about it: Which Hannibal hauing viewed, he resolued to lay an Ambush. It is true, that the Romans fled the Forrests, by reason of the Ambushes which the Gaules often layd for them, trusting onely in a Champaigne Country: Being ignorant that a plaine is more fitting then a Forrest, for the couering of an Ambush:A plaine is sometimes the occasion of an Ambush. For they may see the Enemy come farre off, and haue sometimes fit meanes and opportunity to couer themselues, so as when they finde a Riuer with low Bankes, the Reedes, Flagges of the Marishes, Bushes, and such like things doe couer the foote, and ma∣ny times the Horse-men, if they bend downe their Helmets which are apparent. Hannibal after he had acquainted his Brother Mago, with his resolution to giue battel,Mago Brother to Hannibal. and being both of this aduice, he caused him to be called whilst the Souldiers supp'd: His brother Mago was a young man, of a braue Spirit and Resolute, and had bin alwaies bred
vp in the Warre. To whom he gaue a thousand Horse, and as many Boote chosen out of the whole Army, whom he called vnto his Tent after supper, and made a speech vnto them according to the opportu∣nity of the time, declaring vnto them what he had resolued. More∣ouer, he giues euery one of them charge, to choose out of all the Troupes nine others like themselues, and that they should repaire to a certaine place in the Campe. These presently obeyed the command∣ment of their Generall.An Ambush laid by Hanni∣bal for the Ro∣mans. Thus Mago accompanied with a thousand Horse, and as many Foote, and with a guide, came to the place of his Ambush, being well instructed by Hannibal what hee was to doe. At the breake of day Hannibal calls the Numidian Horse-men able to beare labour: to whom when he had made a speech, and promi∣sed great rewards, if they carried themselues like braue men, hee dis∣couers his Enterprize. Hee giues them charge to passe the Riuer of Trebia, and to runne vnto the Gates of the Enemies Campe, and to draw them forth to fight with their Darts, desiring much to surprize them in disorder, and to fight with them before they had taken any re∣past, the which he did much esteeme. He also giues charge to all the other Captaines appointed for the Combate, to feed their men and their horses, and commands them to be ready armed, attending the sound of the Trumpet. But when as Sempronius saw the Enemy ap∣proach, he first sent out all his Horse-men, and after them sixe thou∣sand Darters: Finally, he drawes all his Troupes to field, as if hee meant that day to make an end of the Warre: and who (for the good fortune which two daies before hee had in fight, together with the great number of his men) was in hope to get the Victory. It was by chance in Winter, and did snow that day with a vehement cold. Moreouer, the Souldiers were come forth in confusion with the Hor∣ses, and had no great heat, neither had they fed. And therefore al∣though in the beginning they were ready and resolute, yet being en∣tred into the Riuer, they came forth wet vnto the brest: for that the show which had fallen in the night, had made the Riuer swell, so as they began to be so afflicted with cold and hunger, that as the day came on, they were scarce able to hold their Armes. In the meane time the Carthaginians oyl'd and warm'd themselues at fires neere vnto their Tents, hauing their Horses ready after they had fed well. When as Hannibal (who had an eye euery where) saw that the Ene∣mies had past the Riuer, he sets before the Ensignes the stingers of Maiorque and Minorque, and those that were lightly armed, to the number of eight thousand men, and puts the rest of his Army in Bat∣talion.Hannibal puts his men in Bat∣taile. When he had marcht about a Mile, he sets vpon the wings twen∣ty thousand Foote, Spaniards, Affricans, and Gaules: the like he did of his Horse-men, who with the Allies that the neighbour Townes of Gaule had sent him, were ten thousand men. After them on either side were placed the Elephants. Then Sempronius caused a retreate to be sounded, to call backe the Horse-men, lest pursuing the Nuidi∣ans inconsiderately, they might be suddainly inclosed by them, for their
custome is to flie here and there at the first charge, and to stay suddain∣ly when they thinke good,The manner of the Numidions fighting. recharging the Enemy with incredible courage and resolution. Then hee ordered his Foote men after the manner of the Romans. Among the which there were about six∣teene thousand Romans,Sempronius put his men in bat∣taile. and about twenty thousand Latins their Allies: for when they were to vndergoe any great Warre, and that the two Consuls were ioyned together, the perfect number of their Army was of so many thousands. Then hee placed three thousand Horse-men vpon the wings. When he had thus disposed of his men, he marcht in battaile a slow pace, scarce mouing. The two Armies being neere one vnto the other, those that were lightly armed began the fight, wherewith the Romans were suddainly opprest. All things fore-told good vnto the Carthaginians: for the bodies of the Roman Foote were growne feeble with hunger and wea∣rinesse, and numm'd with cold: Being moreouer slaine by the mul∣titude of Darts which the Numidians cast. For their parts they had abandoned their Darts, as vnprofitable by reason of the continuall hu∣midity: The Horse-men suffred the like with the whole Army. Con∣trariwise the Carthaginians being in their force, in good order and fresh, were diligent and ready at need. Wherefore when as they had made way for their forlorne hope to retire, and that the Armies had charged one another: the Carthaginian Horse-men fell vpon the E∣nemies wings, and quite defeated them. It is true, the Romans were weake in their numbers of Horse: and the Souldiers were tired with labour and hunger. After the rout of the Horse-men,A defeate of the Roman Horse-men. the Foote resisted more with the equality of courage then of force: But the Numidians besides the Am∣bush which the Army had past without discouering them, shewing themselues vpon the Reare, put them in a great amazement, yet the Battallions stood firme for a time, although they were inuolued with so many miseries. But in the end when as the two wings were prest, ha∣uing the Elephants in front, and that those which were lightly armed, had compassed them in, they fled directly to the neere Riuer. This done, when as the Romans which fought in the battell, saw their sup∣plies broken, they were partly enuironed by them of the Ambush, and partly defeated and slaine: Others past through the Battalion of the Gaules, where were many Affricans, making a great slaughter of the Enemies. But when as they could neither succour their men, nor get to their Fort, as well for the multitude of the Enemies Horse, as for the swelling of the Riuer and the raine, they recouered Plaisance, to the number of ten thousand men: the rest for the most part were slaine along the Riuer by the Elephants and Horse-men. Some few Foote and Horse flying dispersed ouer the Fields, drew to Plaisance, fol∣lowing the route of the Army. The Carthaginians hauing pursued them to the Riuer of Trebeia,The Victory of Mannibal a∣gainst the Ro∣mans. returned to the Campe, for that they could not proceed any farther by reason of the raine: being very ioyfull of the vic∣tory, whereas the losse of Spaniards and Affricans was small, and that of the Gaules great. But they were so tormented with raine & cold that all
the Elephants except one, and the greatest part of the carriage-hor∣ses, with many men and horses died. After this action Sempronius desirous to couer and conceale so great a losse, sent men to Rome,The Romans feare for the losse of th Battell. to let them vnderstand that the violence of the raine had depriued them of an absolute Victory: the which the Romans did easily beleeue. But when as within few dayes after, they had newes that the Carthaginians held their Army in strength, and that all the Gaules held for them, abandoning their party, and withall that their Army kept the Towne, for that it was not well as∣sured within its Fort, and that they drew victuals from the Sea by the Riuer of Poe, they grew into so great a feare and amazement, as they thought Hannibal would come a Conquerour to Rome. Wherefore they leuied a new Army,A new Army leuied by the Romans both by Sea and Land. and sent supplies into Sicily and Sardinia, fortifying Tarentum and the other Townes in Italy. They likewise prepared an Army at Sea of fifty Quinqueremes: Fi∣nally, they were wholly attentiue to Warre. At that time Cneus Seruilius, and Caius Flamiius were chosen Consuls, and a new leuie of men was made, and succours required from the Allies. One of them led his Troupes to Rimeni, and the other into Tuscany. They had resolued to lead their Armies into Gaule. They had besides sent to Hieron to demaund succours, who sent them fiue hundred Candiots, and a thousand men which beare Targets. Without doubt the Romans at that time drew all the Fr∣ces they could possible against Hannibal: for the feare was not onely generall, but euery mans in particular. During these accidents in Italy, Cneus Cornelius Scipio (who as we haue formerly said,Scipio ariucs at Empories, and coquers vnto Ebro. had beene left by his Brother in Gaule with an Army at Sea) parting from the mouth of Rhone, arriued at Em∣pories. And beginning there, hee made all the Maritime Countrly vnto Ebro subiect to the Romans, renewing the ancient leagues with some, and making new with others. When hee had pacifid the Sea-coasts, aud had left Garrisons where neede required, he led his Army vp into the firme land. Hee had now drawne together some Companies of succours from the allied Townes. By this meanes he takes some Townes, some by Composition, others by force. The which Hanno perceiuing (whom Hannibal had left for the de∣fence of Spaine) he resolued to encounter the Enemies,Hanno▪ and planted himselfe right against them, neere vnto a Towne which the people of the Countrey call Cisse. Scipio in like manner did not hold it fit to deferre the Battell. And therefore after hee had gotten the Victory, and taken the Enemies Fort, hee recouered great store of Treasure: For all they which went to the Warres of Italy vnder Hannibal, had left all their wealth with these men, lest the Baggage should bee tedious and troublesome vnto them. Afterwards Scipio made a league with all the Inhabitants which were within the Riuer of Ebro, and made them Allies and Friends. There were two Commaunders taken aliue, whereof the one was Hanno, who had the leading of the
Carthaginians, and the other Andubal, King of a Region which lies in the heart of Spaine,King Andubal taken. who had alwayes held the party of the Car∣thaginians. Asdrubal hearing the newes, passeth Ebro, marching with his Army against the Romans: who vpon the way had newes that the Souldiers and Sea-men wandred the fields vp and downe, being confident and carelesse with the ioy of their Victory. Where∣fore hee marches thither speedily with eight thousand foote, and a thousand Horse,A defeate of some Romans by Asdrubal. where killing a great part, he forced the rest to re∣couer their ships: yet hee durst not stay long, but repast the Riuer of Ebro. And when hee had put Garrisons in necessary places, hee went to winter at Carthage. Cneus Scipio aduertised hereof, drawes his men suddainly together, and goes vnto his Sea-army, punishing such as had beene the cause of the defeate, after the manner of the Romans. When hee had drawne his Army both by Sea and Land together, he went to winter at Taracona, where he diuided the spoile, so as hee purchased the loue of them all, making them more reso∣lute for the future Warre. Behold the estate of the affaires of Spaine. In the beginning of the Spring Flaminius marching thorough Tus∣cany, came to Aretzo. As for Seruilius, hee attended (after hee had brought his Army to Rimeni) when the Enemy would dislodge. And whilest that Hannibal spent the Winter in Gaule, hee kept the Romans that were Prisoners straightly fetter'd, and poorely fed, in∣treating the Allies courteously from the beginning: and afterwards causing them to assemble, he made many remonstrances vnto them, telling them that he was not come to make Warre against them,Hannibals speech to the Prisoners that were allied to the Romans. but to fight with the Romans for their liberty: and therefore if they were wise, they should imbrace the alliance and friendship of the Cartha∣ginians: and that he was there to set the people of Italy at liberty, and to restore those whom the Romans had outragiously chased from their houses, their Townes, and Countries. When hee had vsed these, or the like speeches, hee sent them all away without ransome, desiring by this meanes to winne the hearts of all the people of Ita∣ly, and to make them abandon the Romans party, and to encou∣rage those whom they had depriued of their Townes and Coun∣trey. It is true, that whilest hee wintred, he was many times in dangers by the Gaules, the which he preuented by an Affrican tricke, for that the Gaules discouered it as lightly vnto him,Hannibals poli∣cy to keepe himsele from killing by trea∣son. as they had giuen their consent: so as hee caused periwigges of diuers ages to bee made with great art, the which he vsed, changing his apparrell of∣ten: so as he was not onely vnknowne to them which had neuer seene him, but also to his familiars. By this meanes he was in safety, they not knowing whom to assault for Hannibal. Moreo∣uer, when as the Gaules were discontented, that their Countrey was made the seate of the Warre, making a shew to be desirous to fight, to the end it might be transported to some other part, Hannibal resol∣ued to goe the sooner to field, and to lead his Army to the Warre which he desired.
The Spring time approached, when calling vnto him those which knew the wayes, he inquired of the passages, which went into the Enemies Country. And being aduertised that all the wayes were long and knowne to the enemy, they discouered vnto him one that was shorter, but troublesome, which would leade him through the Mari∣shes of Tuscany, whereby he might passe his Army, vnknowne vnto the enemy: But when the newes came into the Campe of their Voy∣age by Marishes, the apprehension discouraged them,The Way and Order which Hannibal held to passe into Italy. fearing the Quagmires and Pooles. Yet he tooke this way with his whole Army, causing the Spaniards and Affricans to march before, with the ablest of his men and their Baggage, to the end that if they were forced to plant a Campe, they should not want things necessary. It is true, that before, he had not resolued to carry any Baggage, for that hee knew well that the Carthaginians should not want any thing if they were van∣quished; and if they won the Countrey they should not likewise want. Next he causeth the Gaules to march, and in the Reare the horse-men, whereof he gaue the charge to his brother Mago, to the end that by their helpe, the Gaules by their basenesse should not turne head, being discontented with the toile. The Spaniards and Affricans marching through the Marishes, came vnto the end without any great toile, as inured to paines, and accustomed to such miseries. Contrariwise the Gaules went with great difficulty, as men amazed, falling into the Quagmires of the Moares, and carrying this misery with griefe and discontent, like men vnaccustomed to such calamities, the Horse-men kept them from returning. Finally the whole Army was in great trouble and paine; and they languished the more, for that they had watch'd foure daies and three nights, going through the Waters. But amongst all the rest the Gaules were most tormented. Most part of their carriage Horses falling into the Mire, dyed, seruing the tyred Souldiers, to rest themselues vpon and the baggage, lying downe vpon them in the Water, so as they tooke their necessary rest some part of the night. Many Horses also lost their hoofes, by their continuall going in the mire. Hannibal could hardly escape the moares, but that he was carried vpon an Elephant which was onely remaining:Hannibal loo∣seth an Eye. Who by a great paine in his eyes, which had hapned by the bad condition of the Ayre, in the end hee lost an eie, for that he had neither time nor place to prevent it. After that he had past the Moares contrary to the opinion of all the World, and was aduertised by his Spies, that Flaminius was about the Wals of Aretzo, he planted himselfe neere vnto the Marishes, partly to refresh his army being tyred with so great toyle, and likewise to learne the Resolution and forces of the Enemy, with the scituation of the Country and Wayes. But being aduertised that among the Regi∣ons of Italy, that was very fertile, and that the Champaigne betwixt Aretzo and Fesula was very rich in Corne, and all other things ne∣cessary; and that moreouer the Consull was a proud man, affecting the applause of the people, but without experience of Warre, and rely∣ing much vpon Fortune, he thought it fit, that in leauing the enemy on
the left hand, he should drawe towards Fesula, to spoyle the Country of Tuscany: being conceited that the Consull, for the naturall desire he had to purchase the fauor the people, would neuer suffer the Coun∣try to bee spoi'd: Nor attend his Companion, as desiring him not in things well done: But contrariwise would follow him wheresoeuer he went without feare, hauing a desire to fight. By this meanes he fore∣sawe good opportunities to giue Battaile, making therin a wise and po∣litique discourse of future things. Beleeue mee he is deceiued, that thinkes any duty greater in a Captaine,The duty of a good Captain. then to discouer the opinion and Nature of the enemy. For as you must obserue in a Combate be∣twixt man and man the place where you meane to strike, and consider diligently where he lies open and discouered: So in a great Ware, you must seeke the Enemy, not so much to vnderstand where the the parts of the body are naked, but by what meanes you may discouer the Nature and proceedings of the Generall. There are many which not onely forget the publicke Affaires by a dulnesse and negligence, but also many times those which concerne their priuate Liues. Others subiect to Wine, cannot rest vntill they be drunke, and some giuen too much to women, not only ruine Townes and Common-weales, but also their Liues with infamy. Moreouer, Cowardize and feare in priuate men is full of Reproach and disgrace, but in a Commaunder, it is sometimes the cause of great losse. Ouer∣weening rashnesse, Choller, and vaine bragging is preiudiciall, and pro∣fitable to the Enemy. Beleeue me, such kind of men, doe easily fall in∣to the Snares and Ambushes of their Enemies. And therefore if any one hauing discouered the Vices of the Enemy, findes some occasion whereby he may circumvent the Generall, he may easily preuaile ouer the rest: For as an Enemy doth easily boord a Shippe when it is with∣out a Gouernour: So if any one during the Warre, defeates a Com∣maunder by his Iudgement and good aduice, hee will soone be master of the rest of the Army. As Hannibal had made this Discourse of the Roman Consull, so he was not deceiued in his opinion;The Country Spoil'd by Hannibal. for parting with all speede thorough the Fesulans Countrey, leauing the Enemy behind, he began to put all Tuscany to fire and Sword. The Consull inflamed herewith, think∣ing that the Enemy made no account of him, holding it a great disho∣nour to suffer the Goods of their Allies to bee thus spoil'd ad carried away before his face, could not take any rest. And therefore although that many aduised him not to pursue Hannibal. nor to fight with him, but to keepe his Horse and foote entire, vntill the comming of his Companion, to the end that both Armies being ioyned, they might mannage the Warre by a common Councell, hee would not doe any thing, giuing them no other answere, but that they should consider what the people of Rome would say, seeing the Enemy Camp'd in the middest of Italy, and march directly to Rome without resistance, they sleeping in Tuscany at his backe. Hauing vsed this Speech, he began to pursue the Enemy, after that he had suddainly drawne his Troupes to∣gether, without consideration either of time or places, desiring onely
to fight, as if the Victory had beene certaine. He had put his whole Army in hope of winning the Battaile, so as there were more which charged themselues with chaines and fetters, and such like things, then with armes to fight. Hannibal marching directly to Rome, spoil'd all the Champaigne Country, which lies betwixt the Towne of Cortone, and the Lake of Perouze, vsing all manner of cruelty to draw the enemy to fight. But when he had newes of Flaminius pursuite with his Army, seeing the place conuenient to lay his Ambushes, hee began to prepare himselfe for a battaile. There was a large plaine enuironed round about with high Mountaines ioyned together: hauing within it a lesser Hill, which was painfull and difficult, and behind lies the Lake of Perouze, betwixt the which and the Mountaines, there is a narrow passage, whereby they enter into the plaine. Hannibal gaines these first Hils, planting his Campe there, and lod∣geth with the Spaniards and Affricans,An Ambush layd by Hanni∣bal. laying behind the Mountaines, the Souldiers of Maiorque and Minorque, with others that were light∣ly armed. He doth also place in the streight, the Horse-men with the Gaules, to the end that as soone as the Romans should be entred, they should be wholy inuironed by the Lake and Mountaines, opposing the Horse-men in Front. And hauing thus disposed of his men in the night, he went to take his rest. Flaminius pursuing his enemy with great heate, came vnto the Lake before the Sun setting, and the next day early began to lead his Army through the streight. The day was thicke and misty, by reason of a Fogge which came from the Lake, and the Neighbour mountaines. When as Hannibal saw the greatest part of the Army entred into the Plaine,The Romans Surprized and Defeated. and that the fore-most ap∣proached neere vnto him, hee then gaue his men a signe of battaile. Which done, they fall vpon them that were neerest. The Romans were amazed at this suddaine surprize,The Battaile of Perouze. for that the mist hindred their sight, and with all the Enemies charg'd them on all sides at one instant, so as they could not put themselues into battaile, nor make vse of their Armes, nor scarce know what had beene done, being assailed by some in front, by others in the Reare, and likewise vpon the Flankes. So as many holding on their way, they were slaine like sheepe, for that they could not succour one another, and they were sooner defeated, then they could consider what they had to doe. Flaminius himselfe, when there was no more hope,Flaminius slayn in the battale. was enuironed and slaine by certayne Gaules. There were slaine in this battaile fifteene thousand men, who for the most part stood firme vnto the end, after the manner of the Romans, neuer abandoning their rankes: The others inclosed betwixt the Mountaines and the Lakes by reason of the narrow passages, and out of hope, were slaine basely or rather miserably: For being forced in the Lake, some were drowned striuing to swimme in their Armes: Others going into the Water as farre as they could possibly, continued for a time in that estate. Finally, when the enemies horse were entred, they were slaine without pitty: Although that lifting vp their hands, they humbly begged to haue their Liues saued, or taking Courage
kild one another. There were about sixe thousand of the fore-ward, which forcing through the enemies, escaped this passage: Although it were in their power to inclose them, and to succour their friends, yet not knowing what was done behind them, they marcht on still, doub∣ting to make some encounter, before they had gotten the top of the Mountaines. And hauing made a stand vpon a little Hill, and seeing (the Mist being past) the great slaughter of their Souldiers, they hastily got vnto a neere Burrough, like men which had no more hope of safe∣ty, for that they saw the enemy to hold the whole Countrey. The battaile being won,Sixe thousand Romans taken in a Burrough by composition Hannibal Commaunds Maherbal to pursue them, who parting with the Spaniards and the Souldiers that were lightly ar∣med, besieged the Burrough. The Romans being brought to extremi∣ty, in the end left their Armes; and after they had concluded to haue their Liues saued, they yeilded to this Affrican. Behold how that famous battaile past, which was giuen betwixt the Romans and the Car∣thaginians neere vnto the Lake of Perouze. After this Hannibal cals for those which Maherbal had taken, and for all the rest being aboue fifteene thousand, telling them at the first that Maherbal had no power to contract with them for their liues with∣out his consent: And after he had vsed proud speeches vnto the Romans, he distributed them among the Souldiers to be carefully kept in chaines, sending away the Allies without Ransome: Telling them that hee was not come into Gaule to make Warre against the Latin Nation, but with the Romans for their Liberty. Afterwards he sent them home to their Lodgings, and Commaunds to bury the bodies of those which were of most note, being about thirty: For hee lost of all his Army onely fifteene hundred men, whereof the greatest part were Gaules. Hee then held a Councell with his Brother and other friends concer∣ning their affaires, who were growne so glorious for this Victory, as they held nothing impossible. The Newes of this great Defeate was now come to Rome, and the Senators could not long conceale it from the Common people,The great a∣mazement which was at Rome for the battaile lost. nor dissemble the greatnesse thereof: So as assembling the Court, they were forced to relate it vnto them in particular. As soone as the Prae∣tor (being set in his Chaire) began to say, we haue lost a great battaile; the amazement and trouble grew so great, as they which were at the bat∣taile and there present, report that the terrour was greater then in Rome, then it had beene in the fight. And it is likely; for it is not possible that they which for a long time had not felt any great disaster, neyther in Word, nor Deede, should patiently indure so great a losse. Yet the Senate made a good shewe, as it was fitting, aduising what was to be done, and what Commaunders they should choose, and with what Troupes they should resist the Carthaginians. Whilst these things past in Tuscany, the Consull Seruilius aduerti∣sed that Hannibal was past, hee resolued to ioyne with his companions Army. But for that it was a difficult thing, to passe so great a number of men together, he sent Caius Centronius Propraetor before with foure thousand Horse, to the end that if any occasion were offered, they
should doe that which his Companion should commaund him. Han∣nibal hauing gotten this Victory, and aduertised by his Spies of the comming of the Enemy, hee sends Maherbal to meete them, with the best of his Foote,A defeate of the Roman Horse-men by Maherbal. and part of his Horse-men, who being met, they defeated the greatest part at the first charge: the rest retiring to the first Hill, within three daies after they were taken aliue. When as the newes of this defeate came to Rome, three daies after the o∣ther, wherewith their hearts were much aflicted, then not onely the people, but also the Senators were in so great distresse and mise∣ry, as all the Citty was in teares. Wherefore leauing the Annall Magistrates,A Dictator created. they had recourse to the election of a Dictator; for that the condition of the time, and the affaires then required a Commaun∣der, which should haue soueraigne power. And although that Han∣nibal were very glorious for the good successe and fortune of his af∣faires, yet hee did not hold it fit to goe vnto Rome. Wherefore putting the Prouince to fire and sword,Hannibal runs along the Coast of the Adriatique Sea. and passing by the Dutchy of Spolett, and the Marquisat of Ancona, hee came within ten dayes to the Region which is neare vnto Adriatique Sea, so rich and abundant in all wealth, as the Army was not able to carry it away. Finally, hee made a great slaughter of men in his iourney: for he caused a Proclamation to bee made in his Campe, that they should kill all those that they found carrying Armes,The cruelty of Hannibal. as they had common∣ly done in Townes that were taken by assault. Hee carried so great a hatred to the Romans, as there was no cruelty that hee omitted. And after they had found a fit and conuenient place along the Coast of the Adriatique Sea, abounding with all sorts of commodities, hee laboured by all meanes to refresh his men and horses: for both the one and the other were fallen into diseases and the Scuruy, which they had gotten as well by the extreame cold in the Winter which they had endured in Gaule, being alwaies in field, as by the continu∣all toile which they had lately suffred in passing the Marishes, and the continuall sweat and filth, by reason of their harnesse. In the meane time hee inures the Affricans to carry Armes after the manner of the Romans, whereof hee had gotten abundance, con∣sidering the great spoiles of the Enemies. Moreouer, hee sent newes to Carthage of his Victories by Sea. This was the first time that hee approach't neare the Sea, since his first comming into Italy. The Carthaginians being ioyfull at this newes, were wholly attentiue vn∣to the affaires of Italy and Spaine. The Romans made choice of Quin∣tus Fabius for their Dictator,Quintus Fabius chosen Dicta∣tor. a man of so great virtue and pru¦dence, that for his prowesse hee purchased and obtained the name of Maximus, the which his family retaines vnto this day. The Dictator differs from the Consull in this,The difference betwixt a Dictator and a Cnsull. that the Consull hath but twelue Axes before him, and the Dictator hath foure and twenty. Moreouer, the Cosull must referre many things to the aduice of the Senate: but this other hath a soueraigne and free power, vnder whom all other Magistrates cease, except the Tribunes. But this
shall be for a larger discourse. Moreouer, they gaue vnto the Dicta∣tor Marcus Minucius for a Constable, or master of the Horse, which is a Magistrate subiect to the Dictator,Marcus Minu∣cius Constable. and supplies his place, when as the necessity of affaires forceth him to be absent. In the meane time Hannibal marching along the Coast of the A∣driatique Sea by small iournies, fed his Army in a rich and fertile Prouince, causing the Horse-feet to be washt with old Wine, where∣of there was great abundance, the better to cure them of their Scabs. Hee also caused the Souldiers which had beene wounded, to bee carefully looked vnto, and fortified the rest for future affaires. Ha∣uing past the Countries of Pretutian and Adrian, hee ruined the Countrey of the Marrucins and Franqueuille: Moreouer, he bent his course towards Iapygia, diuided into three, whereof some are called Dauniens,Many Coun∣tries ruined by Hannibal. and the others Messapiens. Hee first ouer-runnes Daunia beginning by Lucerna, a Collony of the Romans, thundring ouer all the Countrey. Then setling his Campe at Ibonium, he falls vpon the Artins, and vtterly ruines all Daunia without any re∣sistance. At the same time Quintus Fabius hauing taken his charge of Dicta∣tor, and performed the accustomed Sacrifices, parts from Rome with the Master of the Horse, and foure Legions leuied in haste: And within few daies came to Appulia, whereas receiuing the Army from the Consull Cneus Seruilius, being come from Rimeni, he sent him to Rome with some troups, giuing him charge to raise an Army at Sea at Hostia, and to defend the Coasts of Italy, if the Carthagi∣nians should attempt any thing by Sea. Finally, he marches with all his troups, and plants himselfe in front of the Enemy, neare vnto Aigues, and within sixe miles of them. Hanniball aduertised of the comming of Fabius, and meaning to amaze them suddainly, drawes his Army to Field,Hannibal pre∣sents Battaile to Fabius. and presents it in the Battaile before the Romans Fort: But when he had stayed some time, hee retired to his Campe, seeing that no man came forth to fight. You must vnderstand that Fabius had resolued from the beginning not to hazard any thing, nor to fight, thinking it would bee very beneficiall to the Romans, if he might defend their Townes from the Enemy. Hee was constant in his opinion,The constancy of Fabius. so as at the end hee purchased the reputation of a slacke man, and Coward, as if hee fled from danger onely for feare. But soone after hee forced the World to confesse, that they could not make choice of a Captaine that was more constant, nor wiser to mannage the Warre, the which appeared soone after in their af∣faires. Beleeue mee, this wise Dictator vnderstood well what great difference there was betwixt the Carthaginians Army, and that of the Romans: Considering that the others had from their Youth fre∣quented the Warre, hauing a Commaunder which was bred with them in the Campe, in the raine and winde, and who from his very Cradle had learn'd the trade: hauing gotten so many famous victories both in Spaine and Italy, against the Romans and all
their Allies: and who moreouer, distrusting in all things, put their one∣ly hope of safety in the Victory: the which would proue contrary to the Romans. Wherefore he was not resolued to fight, fearing the Numidians, for that hee was too weake in Horse: so as retiring for his aduantage with good consideration, he stayed, and led away his Army. The aduantages which the Romans had, were abundance of munition and victuals, and a great Army. And therefore hee ledit alwaies by the hilly Countries, following the Enemie neare, yet giuing him no meanes to fight, being alwaies well victualed, and ne∣uer suffring the Souldiers to goe forth, but kept them alwaies close to∣gether. By this meanes his men were alwaies in safety, ad beate the Enemy, if at any time they went from the Army for pillage, so as many times there were some taken, and others slaine. This he did to the end that by little and little hee might weaken their forces, and encourage the Souldiers by these petty Victories, being amazed with their former losses, nor to distrust their Forces, or Fortune. Moreouer, they could not perswade him to come to a Battaile. But Marcus Minucius discontent with his temporizing, blamed him of cowardise and feare. Hee was a proud and rash man, who found nothing more tedious and troublesome then to bee absent from a Battaile. The Carthaginians after they had ruined the former Countries, and had past the Appenine Hils,The Carthagi∣nians poie the Countrey. they goe to Samnium, which is a very fertile Countrey of Italy, and which for a long time had not felt any Warre: There they found so great abundance of all things, as they could not consume the Bootie, neither in vsing it moderate∣ly nor wastfully. From thence they spoiled Beneent, a Collony of the Romans: They tooke the Towne of Telesia which had strong walles, was well victualed, and furnished with all things necessary, the Romans followed the Enemies still within a daies iourney or two. When as Hannibal saw that Fabius fled from all occasions of fighting, and yet did not abandon the field, but followed him still by the hilly Countrey, hee resolued to goe speedily into the Countries of Capu and Falerna, thinking that of necessitie one of the two would hap∣pen: either that the Romans would come to a Battaile, or that the World would soone see that the Carthaginians camp't, and that the Romans kept themselues within their Forts. By this meanes he did hope that the Townes of the Prouince being tertified, they would yeeld vnto the Carthaginians: For vnto that day not any one had fallen vnto them, although the Romans had lost two great Battailes, and there were many to whom their perswasions were very vnplea∣sing. Whereby wee may see of what authoritie and power the maiesty of the Roman Common-wealth was with their Succours and Allies. Certainly Hannibals conceit was not idle: for the Capuan is an excellent Countrey,The descripti∣on of the Coun¦trey of Capu and its scitua∣tion. for abundance of wealth, fertility of land, and the beauty and pleasure of the place. First, it is seated along the Sea: whither infinite number of people come from all parts of the World
to Italy. Moreouer, the noblest Townes of Italy are scituated there: for vpon the Borders of the Sea, stand the Switzers, the Cumans, the Fozolois, the Neoplitans, and at the end the Nucerins. And towards the North vpon the firme land, are the Calleniens and Teanins: towards the East and South are the Dauniens and Nolains: and in the mid'st of the Region Capua stands, the richest of them all, whose Lands are famous amongst the fabulous Poets, which they call Phlegrees: and it is likely that the gods haue spoken principally of them, by reason of their wonderfull beauty and excellency. More∣ouer, this scituation is strong by nature, and in a manner impreg∣nable. For on the one side they are inclosed by the Sea, and on the other they are wholly enuironed with Mountaines. There are onely three entries which are narrow and painefull: the one is at Samnium, the second at Eriban, and the third among the Arpins. The Car∣thaginians made a shew to goe into these Countries, as into a Theater, to amaze them all: and thereby to flye from the Enemy, and then to campe alone. Wherefore Hannibal moued with these reasons, leades his Army by Samnium to the streights of Mount Eriban, and plants his Campe neere vnto the Riuer of Vantour,The Riuer of Vantour. which diuides the said Champaigne from Rome. Then the most pleasant Countrey of Italy was ouer∣runne, and the Villages put to fire and sword. And although that these things were very troublesome to Fabius, yet he continued con∣stant in his resolution. But Marcus Minucius, and all the Tribunes of the Horse, were of opinion not to temporize any longer, but to fall vpon the Carthaginians with all their strength and forces, not suffring the spoile of so goodly a Countrey in the view of the Ro∣man Army. Fabius dislodging more suddainly then he had beene ac∣customed, seemed to make haste to preserue the Countrey of Ca∣pua from spoile: But when hee came to Falerna, hee did but shew his Army vpon the Mountaines, lest the Allies should thinke he held not a Campe. Yet he would neuer drawe downe into the field, fearing to fight with the Carthaginians, as well for the reasons which wee haue formerly mentioned, as for that he was the weaker in Cauallery. When as Hannibal had often attempted in vaine, to drawe the Ene∣my to fight, in the end he studied of a place to winter in, hauing ruined all parts of the Countrey, and taken a wonderfull spoile: ha∣uing no intent to lose his Pillage, but to transport it to some place where he might passe the Winter: to the end his Army might not want any thing,The meanes which Fabius held to stop Hannibals pas∣sage. as well for the present as the future. Fabius know∣ing well that the returne of his Enemy would be by the same streight by the which he had entred, hee imagined that this passage would be beneficiall to the Romans: and placeth about foure thousand men within these streights, intreating them to carry themselues like braue and valiant men, when occasion should require, making vse of the aduantage of the place. For his part, hee recouered the next Mountaine with the rest of the Army, looking earnestly
about him what was to be done, and from whence and by whom the Enemy should be Charged, holding himselfe assured to defeate their whole Army, or at the least to make them abandon the Booty which they carried. But Hannibal saw that Fabius fought with his owne wea∣pons: and hauing duly considered thereon, he disappointed his enter∣prize with an excellent stratagem, causing many Faggots of dry stickes to be drawne together, and bound to the hornes of Oxen,Hannibals policy against Fabius. and Bugles, whereof he had to the number of two thousand; and gaue charge to Asdrubal, that in setting fire to the stickes at a certaine houre he should chase the Troupe to the next Mountaine, which was betwixt the Camp and the streight they were to passe, and that as soone as they should see a signe which he would giue, they should force the Oxen against the Mountaine, vntill they had gotten the top. When as all things were ready, he makes them to feed and to take some rest. About mid-night hee causeth them to march which had the charge to tie the Torches to the hornes of the Oxen. This being suddainly done by reason of the multitude of assistants, he giues order to kindle them all, and to chase them to the top of the Mountaine. Finally, hee giues charge to them that were lightly Armed, to follow them to a certaine place, commaun∣ding them that as soone as the Troupe should begin to runne furiously through the Mountaines, they should recouer the places of aduantage, whereby they might succour his men in passing,The course which Hanibal tooke ipassing the streight kept by the Ro∣mans. and annoy the enemy if they encountred any. In the meane time hee dislodgeth with his Army, and marcheth directly to the streights, ordring in Front the Souldiers that were best armed, and after them the Horse-men, then the Baggage, and in the Reare the Gaules and Spaniards. The Romans which had been appointed to guard these passages, thin∣king that Hannibal came where they saw the fire on the toppe of the Mountaines, abandoned their places, retiring to the highest Hils. And when at the first they encountred some of these Oxen seperated from the rest, they made a stand, seeing their heads on a flaming fire, wondring as at a miracle. But when the Souldiers were discouered, they entertained one another with casting of Darts. And when in the end the Oxen came on, they all made a stand on the top of the moun∣taines, expecting day with great desire to be more certainly informed of the businesse. Fabius aduertised of this noise, conceiuing it was some Ambush, and flying the battaile as they resolued, kept his men within the Fort. In the meane time Hannibal (to whom matters suc∣ceeded according to his desire) past his Army by the mountaine, and carried away all his Spoiles without any obstacle. Then seeing at the breake of day the Romans in front against his men, and to bee stronger in number and in their kind of Armes, he sent them a band of Spaniards to second them: Who after they had slaine about a thousand at the first Charge, they brought their men safe backe vnto the Campe. Han∣nibal being freed by this policy from the streights of Falerna, from thenceforth he was more carefull to choose a safe place to Campe in, seeking where he might Winter, greatly terrifying the Townes and people of Italy.
During these actions, many taxed the Dictator of Cowardize, for that he had suffered the enemy to escape so easily, being inclosed with∣in the streights; but hee continued still constant in his opinion. Some few daies after he was called backe to Rome for the Sacrifices, and left the Gouernment of the Army and all other affaires to the Constable, giuing him charge that he should not study so much to offend the Ene∣my, as to defend his owne men. But Minucius (whom the Dictator aduised in vaine) had no other care but to fight. During these actions in Italy, Asdrubal hauing repaired thirty good ships,Asdrubals par∣ting from Car∣thage to go into Spaine. which he had receiued from his brother Hannibal, adding there∣unto ten others, parts from Carthage in the beginning of Summer, and giues the charge to Imilcon, who ran along the Coasts, and Asdrubal led the Army by Land neere the shore, hoping to meete at one instant at the mouth of the Riuer of Ebro, with the Army by Sea. Cneus Scipio aduertised that Asdrubal was gone to field, hee was first of the same opinion, but afterwards he resolued to fight rather by Sea then Land, by reason of the bruite of their new succours, and preparation for war. Wherefore after hee had prepared an Army at Sea of fiue and thirty Vessels,The Romans Army at Sea. he made choise of the ablest men of his whole Army, and most actiue to fight at Sea. The which being imbarqued, he set saile to encounter the enemy: and three dayes after hee had sail'd from Tar∣racona, to places neere vnto Ebro, hee comes vnto a Hauen ten miles distant from the Enemy. From thence hee sends two Vessels of Mar∣ceilles being very swift to discouer. This was a people which had a great League with the Romans, and had held their party, during the time of the second Punique Warre. But as soone as these Scouts had made Relation, that the enemies Army at Sea was in the mouth of the Riuer of Ebro, he weighes Anchor and sayles towards them, being desirous to surprize them vnprouided. Asdrubal had beene aduertised of the comming of the Roman army, by a signe which was giuen him from a Beacon or watch-Tower; and therefore after he had ordred his Army by Land along the shore, and and caused his Rowers to imbarque, hee puts all into armes. When the Romans not onely approacht, but also put their shippes in battaile, they gaue warning to fight. The Carthaginians assayling them resolute∣ly, had for a time some shew of Victory. But afterwards Fortune be∣gan to turne, for they which were vpon the shore, gaue not so much courage to their men to fight, as hope of safety for those that would flye. And therefore the Carthaginians got to Land, after that two of their ships had bi taken and foure sunke. But when as the Romans pur∣sued them with all their forces,The Romans Victory at Sea, against the Carthaginians. the Carthaginians fled to shore, abando∣ning their ships, and retired to their Army which was there in Battaile. Finally hauing followed them with great speede, they towed away with Ropes all the Vessels which floated: And after they had vanqui∣shed their Enemies they parted ioyfully as being masters of the Sea: and of the forty shippes they tooke fiue and twenty. Being there∣fore proud of this Victory, they were afterwards more carefull of the affaires of Spaine.
The Carthaginians aduertised of this mis-fortune, sent three-score and ten Vessels, Rigg'd sooner then they could imagine,An Army at Sea prepared sudainly by the Carthagini∣ans. vnderstand¦ing well of what consequence it was to be masters of the Sea. Who sail'd first to Sardinia, and afterwards to Pisa in Italy, to the end they might ioyne with Hannibal if it were possible. But when as the Romans were aduertised of the comming of the Carthaginian Army, they so terrified them with sixe score Quinqueremes which they sent, as they presently returned to Sardinia, and from thence to Carthage. Cues Seruilius Commaunder of the Army at Sea, had them long in chase;The Roman▪ great Army at Sea. but when as he heard there was no hope to ouer-take them, he came vnto Lylibeum with his Fleete. From thence soone after he sailes vnto the Iland of Cercinetes, where taking siluer of the Inhabitants not to ruine the Country, he turnes backe, and takes the Iland of Cossyron in pas∣sing: Where after he had put a Garrison into the Towne, he returned to Lylibeum, where lodging his Vessels in the Port, within few dayes after he went to the Army at Land. In the meane time the Senate hauing newes of Cneus Scipio his Vi∣ctory at Sea in the mouth of Ebr, they not only held it fit, but also ne∣cessary to pursue the War in Spaine, and to annoy the Carthaginians with all their power both by Sea and Land. And therefore they pre∣sently prepared twenty shipps of War, and sent them to Publius Scipio in Spaine,Supplies sent from Rome in∣to Spaine. continuing his authority after his Consulship was ended, to the end that being ioyned with his brother Cneus Scipio, all the affaires might be mannaged by their common Councell. For the thing which the Romans feared most, was, that the Carthaginians preuailing in Spaine, would be masters of the Sea: So as afterwards they might Saile into Italy, and furnish and supply Hannibal easily with men and Treasure. Publius Scipio going into Spaine, ioyned with his brother; after which the War was gouerned by their common Councell. Wherfore present∣ly they past the Riuer of Ebro, the which before they neuer durst at∣tempt. Then Fortune began to smile on the Romans. And after they had made subiect those which dwelt in the passage of Ebro, finding no resistance, they came to Sagont: Where being within fiue miles of Cape Decrux, they camped in a place safe from the Enemy, and con∣uenient to draw Victuals from the Sea. Soone after that their Army at Sea arriued; whereas this accident hapned. You must vnderstand that Hannibal at his going into Italy, had taken the Children of the noblest Families in Spaine, and had left them in guard at Sagont: For that the place was strong, and they which kept it, confident to the Car∣thaginians. There was at time within the Towne a certaine Spaniard, whom they called Acedux of a noble house, and as honest a man as any other Spaniard; and among the rest very loyall to the Carthaginians:Acdux o Abilux. But at that time after the manner of most of the Barbarians, hee chan∣ged his faith together with his Fortune. This Spaniard seeing the Ro∣mans to prosper in Spaine, had a desire to deliuer the Hostages; hauing a conceite that it would be a great meanes to purchase their fauour. When he had well considered of all the meanes to bring his enterprize
to an end, he goes to Bostar Chiefe of the Carthaginians. Asdrubal had sent him into Spaine,Bosta Chiefe of the Cartha∣ginians. to keepe the Romans from passing the Riuer. The which not daring to attempt, he seated his Campe beyond Sagont vpon the Bankes of the Riuer. He was a mild man, and (contrary to the nature of the Affricans) not very politicke: He drawes him a part, as a man which held his faith assured to the Carthaginians, and lets him vnderstand the estate of the affaires. The Carthaginians sayd he, haue held vnder their obedience vnto this day, the people of Spaine by cru∣elty, for that the Romans were a far off: But now the Enemies Campe hath passed Ebro, so as euery man hath thereby occasion of a new enterprize. And therefore it is necessary to bind those by benefits and fauours, whom they could not retaine by feare: Moreouer, that the Romans were neere vnto Sagont in Armes, and furnished with Armies both by Sea and Land, so as the Towne was in danger: For this cause he was of opinion that hee should send backe all the Hostages to their Townes: The which if hee did, hee should first of all frustrate the Romans of their hope, for that they did chiefly besiedge Sagont to haue them: And that moreouer, he should purchase the loue and fauour of the Spaniards to the Carthaginians. He likewise thought that it would be for the safety of the Hostages, and that if hee would giue him the charge to carry them backe, hee would do him no small seruice to winne their loues, and that he should not only bind their hearts by the sending backe of the Children vnto their Parents, but he should set before their eies, how much the kind∣nesse and Clemency of the Carthaginians was to be esteemed. More∣ouer he propounded vnto him the expectance hee should haue of their gifts and presents, to whom he had sent the Children, and that there was not any man would forget so great a benefit. After he had held this kind of Speech and others to the same end, he returned to Sagont, as soone as he had perswaded Bostar to that which he desired, appointing a day when hee should ioyne with those which should carry backe the Hostages. The night following he goes to the Enemies watch, and hauing spoken to some Spanish Souldiers of the Allies, they lead him vnto the Captaines: Where hauing vsed much speech, what profit it would be for the affaires of Spaine, if the Ho∣stages fell into their hands, in the end hee promiseth to deliuer them. The Romans giuing a willing eare vnto him, weighing the greatnes of the action, take his faith, & promise him theirs with great rewards. And after they had aduised of the place and day, when they should attend to receiue the Hostages, he returnes. Afterwards he takes with him such as seemed fit for this businesse, and goes to Bostar: Where recei∣uing the Hostages, he goes out of Sagont as it were to flie the enemies Watch: But hauing past their Campe a little, hee leads them all into an Ambush which they had prepared, as not knowing any thing. The Romans gaue great rewards to Acedux, and made vse of him to carry backe the Hostages to their Townes,Acedux con∣spires with the Romans. as he had resolued with Bostar, sending men with him to make them fauourable. Acedux went with them, and by this perswasions caused many to enter into League with
the Romans, by the meanes of these hostages: laying before their eyes their mildnesse and great courage, and detesting the iealousies and cruelty of the Carthaginians, propounding himselfe for an ex∣ample. Bostar after the losse of the hostages by the aduice of a Childe repented too late. And then the season of the yeare forced both Ar∣mies to goe and winter, after that fortune had fauoured the Romans in this enterprize of the hostages. Behold the present estate of the af∣faires of Spaine. Hannibal being aduertised by his Spies of the great prouision of Corne within Lucerna and Geryona, and that moreouer Geryona was a very good place, hee resolued to winter his Army there. And passing the Mountaine of Lyburna, hee drawes to those places. Being come to Geryona, fiue and twenty miles from Lucerna, hee began first to summon the Inhabitants to yeeld,Geriona taken by assault. vsing faire pro∣mises, and assuring them of his faith. But losing his time hee besie∣ged the Towne, the which hee tooke presently, and slew all the In∣habitants, preseruing the greatest part of the houses to serue him for Garners: then hee planted his Campe close vnto the Towne, being well ditched and pallisadoed. This done, hee sends two parts of his Army to gather in the Corne, and continued in battaile with the third part, as well to guard the Campe, as to preuent all op∣pression of those which gathered in the Corne. They brought in dayly a wonderfull quantity, for that the Region was very large, and the number of the people in a manner infinite,Marcus Minu∣cius. and haruest was now at hand. But Marcus Minucius Commander of the Romans▪ in the beginning followed the Carthaginians by the Mountaines, ho∣ping hee should sometimes encounter the Enemy in some bad passage. But being aduertised that they gathered in the Corne, after the taking of Geryona, and had seated their Campe neare vnto it, hee goes into the plaine and recouers a high Hill vpon the way, where hee planted his Campe: and there hee studied by what policy hee might fall vpon those which were in battaile. But when as Han∣nibal found the Romans to bee so neare, hee sent onely the third part of his Army for Corne, and kept the two other parts in the Campe. After which hee plants himselfe nearer vnto the Enemy, about two miles from Geryona, to the end hee might seeme to bee care∣full to defend those which gathered the Corne, if they made any attempt against them. In the meane time there was a little Hill be∣twixt the two Campes, which was very fit and conuenient for the Carthaginians, if they could take it, and dangerous for the Romans. Hannibal sent Numidians thither in the Night, who tooke it. But when as Minucins at the breake of day, saw that they held it, hee puts forth those that were lightly armed, and giues an assault vnto the Hill. The Combate for a time was very fierce and cruell: but in the end the Romans had the best successe,The Cartagi∣nians defated by the Romans vpon a Hill. for they wonne the Hill by force: whither presently the whole Army retired. Hanni∣bal
continued for some dayes within his Campe, for that the Romans were still in front. But soone after necessity forced him to send some to feed the Horses for the Baggage, and others to the Har∣uest: to the end that as hee had resolued, he might not consume that which hee had gotten, but might draw together some great quan∣tity of Corne to Winter, hauing alwayes a great care the Army should not haue neede of any thing in that time, especially the Horses and sumpters, for that all his hope and confidence was in the Cauallery. Minucius seeing the Enemies dispersed, and wandring vp and downe, hee drawes his men to field, and marching directly against their Campe, puts them in battaile, and sends the Horse-men with the best Foote-men against the Forragers,The Carthagi∣nians surpri∣zed by the Ro∣mans. giuing them charge to kill all, and not to receiue any to mercy. Hannibal surprized with this suddaine accident, durst not put his men in battaile, neither could hee succour those that were disperced. The Roman Horse-men with those that were lightly armed, made a great slaughter of their Ene∣mies thus scattred. They likewise which were with Minucius, grew so resolute and couragious, as they durst in a manner force the Ene∣mies Fort, and besiege them. Hannibal finding himselfe destitute of counsell and helpe, kept himselfe within his Fort, which hee guar∣ded with great difficulty, when as Asdrubal gathering the Souldi∣ers together which fled to the place where their Campe had former∣ly beene, neere vnto the Walles of Geryona, came to succour him with about foure thousand men. Then resuming a little courage, he comes out of his Fort, sauing his Army from that present danger with great difficulty. Minucius hauing made a great slaughter before the E∣mies Fort, and not much lesse in the field, he retired with a wonder∣full hope for the future. And three dayes after hee lodged in the Campe abandoned by the Enemies. For Hannibal fearing left the Romans by night should lodge in the Campe which he had left neere vnto Geryona, and so get all the spoiles, he returned thither with speed with his whole Army. After this defeate, the Carthaginians were more wary how to for∣rage and goe for Corne, and contrariwise the Romans more hardy to vndergoe dangers. In the meane time the newes of the victory was (ac∣cording to the vsuall manner) made farre greater then it had beene: so as all the World reioyced. First for that they imagined that after so many losses, this was the beginning of a better fortune: and iudge there∣by, that the slacknesse and cowardize which had seemed to bee in their Army, was not the fault of the Souldiers, but of the Dictator. And therefore all the World contemned Fabius, and held him to bee dull and a Coward. Contrariwise they did so highly extoll and praise Minucius, as they gaue him equall power with the Dictator, the which had not beene formerly seene, hoping that hee would soone make an end of the Warres of Italy. Thus there were two Dictators at one time, and in one Army:Two Dictators at Rome at one instant. which was a new thing.
Minucius much more proud then it is credible, as well for his good fortune as the peoples fauour, grew so glorious as if the Enemies were already defeated and vanquished. Fabius fainted not, nor lost his courage, for the iniury they had done vnto him,Fabius retur∣neth to the Campe. but returned to the Campe alwaies constant in his opinion. But when hee saw that his Companion was much troubled to finde an occasion of fighting, fea∣ring lest hee should commit some folly, he gaue him the choice, ei∣ther that one of them should for a certaine time, or euery other day, or for a longer space, haue the Gouernment of the Campe,The diuision of the Roman Ar∣my betwixt the two Dictators. or else they should diuide the Legions betwixt them after the manner of the Consuls, and that either of them should doe with his Army what hee pleased. Wherefore they parted their Troupes, and had their Campes separated about a Mile and an halfe distant one from a∣nother. When as Hannibal was aduertised not onely by the Fugitiues, but also of their actions, of the hatred betwixt the Commaunders, and of the ouerweening of Minucius, thinking that this would further his intention, he sought occasion to fight with him: hoping hee should easily abate his fury and presumption. There was a little Hill betwixt Minucius Campe, and that of the Carthaginians: whereon whosoeuer seazed, it would proue very preiudiciall to the other, And when as Hannibal made haste to get it, being certaine that Mi∣nucius would come to preuent him, as hee had other times done, he vsed this stratagem. First of all the whole Plaine betwixt them at the first sight seemed vnfit to lay an Ambush,The policy of Hannibal. being void of woods and bushes: Yet there were about it many turnings and hollow Rocks, where they might easily hide Souldiers. Hee sends by Night to these hollow places, according to the capacity which hee knew to bee in them, two hundred, and three hundred, and fiue hundred Horse together with fiue thousand Foote. And to the end they should not bee discouered by the Fotragers, hee send at the breake of day, some that were lightly armed, to take this Hill. The which when Minucius perceiued, contemning so small a number, he marcht with his Army to repell the Enemy from thence. First hee sent those that were lightly armed, commaunding them to charge: then the Horse-men. Finally, hee followes with those that were compleatly armed, not changing the order which hee had held in other encounters. The summe was now risen, and all the World looked vpon this Hil. The Ambushes were couered: Hannibal sent succours continually to his men, and afterwards followed with all his Cauallery. Finally,A Combate betwixt the Romans and the Carthagi∣nians. the two Armies fought with all their Troupes: and in the end the Roman Foote-men that were lightly armed, were forced by the Horse-men to retire to their Companions that were better armed. Then the Ambush brake forth, and charged on all sides with great cries, so as they not onely distressed and aflicted those that were lightly armed, but likewise the whole Army. The which Fabius perceiuing, and fearing that the Roman Army might be wholy defeated,
parts from his Campe and succours his Companion: At whose com∣ming the Romans reioyced,Fabius succours Minucius. and retired presently to their Ensignes, al∣though they were broken and scattered here and there, with the losse of many Souldiers that were lightly Armed, and diuers others of the Legions. Hannibal seeing the Enemies re-inforced with Succours, and that they marcht directly towards him, he caused a Retreat to be sounded. Then all the Romans which were in the fight confessed publickly that the Vertue and Wisedome of Fabius,The great Re∣putation of Fa∣bius. had saued the Roman Empire, which the ouer-weening of Minucius had lost and ruined. When as the newes came to Rome, all the World knew plainly, what difference there is betwixt the ouer-weening and ignorance of Souldiers, and the iudgement and aduice of a wise Captaine. From that time the Romans contented themselues with one Campe, and all obeyed Fabius. The which I find related after this manner by another Author. VVHen the two Armies were returned to their owne Campes, Mi∣nucius hauing his Souldiers about him speake vnto them in this manner.Minucius his Speech. I haue often heard say, louing Souldiers, that hee is most Wise that can giue good Councell, and tell what is to be done in his difficult Affaires: And hee is next Wise that can obey him that giueth good councell; but hee that can neyther giue good councell himselfe, nor obey other mens councell, is of all others most ignorant and foolish. Seeing that Fortune hath denied s the first of these Gifts, let vs keepe the second, and whilst we learne to Rule, let vs propound vnto our selues to obey them that be Wise. Wherefore let vs ioyne our Tents with Fabius, and when as you shall heae me salute him as my Protector and Father, you likewise shall salute his Souldiers as your noble Patrons, by whose strength and resolution you are preserued this day. Whereupon they presently remoued their Tents, and went to Fabius Campe, whereat he maruailed much. There Minucius submitted himselfe and his men to the protection of Fabius, resigning the authority of the Empire into his hands. The Carthaginians thought to accōmodate a place to passe the Win∣ter hauing inuironed it with Ditches, betwixt the Hill and their Campe, and fortified the top of the Hill with men and Pallisadoes: In the meane time the day of the Election of Consuls was come, where they deposed the Dictators, and made choise for Consuls of Lucius Emilius,Lucius Emilius and Caius Tar∣rencius chosen Consuls. and Caius Tarrentius Varro. And when as Emilius had crea∣ted for Pro-Consuls, the Consuls of the precedent Army, Cneus Ser∣uilius and Marcus Attileus Regulus, who had beene subbrogated in the place of Flaminius, they tooke the charge of all the Troupes that were in the Campe, mannaging all the Affaires of Warre. The Con∣suls make a new Leuy of men to furnish their Army: and giue charge vnto the Pro-Consuls, that they should not dare to fight a Battaile with the Carthaginians, but entertaine their Souldiers with light skirmishes, and invre the Youth to hardnesse and labour for the time to come: for that they imputed the defeats past vnto the ignorance and slacknesse of
the Souldiers. Lucius Postumus was created Praetor, and sent into Gaule with an Army,Lucius Postu∣mus Praetor. to do the like vnto those Gaules which were in Hannibals seruice. They also prouided Rowers for the Vessels which were at Lylibeum: And they sent whatsoeuer was necessary to the Cap∣taines that were in Spaine. During these actions at Rome, Cneus Serui∣lius, and his Companion Attilius, following the Commaundment of the Consuls, did not any thing worthy of memory, but make light skirmishes, both by reason they were forbidden by the Consuls, and for the roughnesse of the Weather: Finally, they mannaged the affaires wisely and with great policy. By this meanes the two Armies wintred in view one of another. Hannibal dislodged in the beginning of the Spring, and leauing Ge∣ryona, (for that he had resolued so to presse the Romans, as they should be forced to come to a battaile,) he takes the Fort of Naples, well fur∣nished with Corne and all other munition:The Fort of Naples taken by Hannibal. For the Romans had drawne thither a great quantity of Corne from Canusium, and other neighbour Countries, wherewith the Campe was vsually Victualed. This done they were in great perplexity, not so much for the losse of the muni∣tion, as for that the whole Country was left in prey to the enemy. They send men to Rome, to acquaint the Senate therewith, and that they might aduise what was to be done: For that they had resolued to giue battaile if the Enemy approached: Seeing there was no meanes of flight, and that the whole Prouince was ruined, and their Allies wa∣uered. The Senate sent them word that they should not attempt any thing, but expect the comming of the Consuls, whom they after∣wards commaunded to depart. All the World had their eyes fixed vp∣on Paulus Emilius: They had their hope in him, aswell for his Wise∣dome, as for that he had in former times done great exploits against the Sclauonians. BEing ready to depart, I finde it Written that Fabius stayed him for a time, speaking thus vnto him. If thou good Lucius Emilius wert matcht with a Companion like vnto thy Selfe,Fabius Speech to Lucius Emi∣lius. or if thou wert like vnto thy Fellow, then were my Speech in vaine, which I will now make for you both, for being good Consuls you would worke effectually for the common wealth, although I should be silent. But if you were both bad, then would you neither heare my words, nor admit of my Councell. But knowing thy integrity, and the conditions of thy Companion, I fore-see that thy good∣nesse shall little auaile the Common-wealth, through the folly of thy Compa∣nion: So as the Common-wealth doth halt, and is halfe same; whereby euill Councell shall preuaile aswell as good. Wherefore to Thee onely my Speech tends, fore-telling Thee that Thou shalt haue as much Warre with thy fel∣low Tarentius, as with Hannibal: Neither doe I know which of them will be a more deadly enemy vnto thee. For thou shalt not onely fight with Han∣nibal in the field, but with thy fellow thou shalt haue continuall Warre in all places, and at all times. With Hannibal thou shalt fight with thy Hor∣ses and foote-men, but Varro will assatle thee with thine owne men. I pray thee remember Caius Flaminius, who being Consull and hauing his men
about him in his Campe, beganne to grow mad. This man (before hee was made Consull, and now being Consull, euen in the Senate-house, before hee sees his field or his enemy,) is already mad. And hee that thus talketh a∣mong the Senators, what thinke you will he doe when hee shalbe in the field among a number of fresh young Souldiers, where as one word speaking, all the matter shalbe decided. But in case he make haste to fight, as he aith he will, either I know not what belongeth to the Warre, or else we are like to suffer greater losses, then we did at Trasimenum. There is but one way to maintaine warre against Hannibal, the which I haue fore-seene, and none will be found so good to make him weary of Italy. We are in our owne Country, hauing Citties and faithfull Allies ready to assist vs at all times with Horse, Harnesse, Victualls, and all other necessa∣ries. Hannibal is in a strange Country among his enemies, farre from home, he looketh for no peace both by Sea or Land: Hee hath no Citties to receiue him; he hath nothing but what he stealeth, and taketh by rapine: he hath scarcely the third part of his Army left, which hee brought ouer Iberus: more are dead by famine then with the Sword; and heere hee can hardly feede those that are liuing. Wherefore doubt not but in sitting still, you shall vanquish such an Army, which decreaseth daily in strength, and cannot haue their wants supplied. This is the onely meanes to dally and de∣ceiue your enemy. Varro desireth battaile, and Hannibal hath the like desire. Wherefore thou alone must wisely oppose thy selfe against them both, and regard not what they speake of thee, let not the vaine glory of thy Fellow, nor the false aspertions which shalbe cast vpon thee, mooue thee to the contrary. Suf∣fer thy Selfe to be called fearefull, slow, and vnskilfull in the Warre. It is better to be feared of thy wise enemy, then to be praised of thy foolish com∣pany. My meaning is, not that thou shouldest do nothing, but what∣soeuer thou shalt attempt, do it soberly, and according to reason, not rashly, trusting to Fortune; follow not the occasions that the enemy will giue Thee: And be not ouer hasty; for haste is blind and worketh vnsafely. To these and his other Words the Consull answered little, saying onely that were more true then easie to be followed: But hee would professe one thing, that his desire should alwayes be, to haue things succeede well: But in case it should otherwise happen, hee would ra∣ther expose himselfe, to the danger of his enemies Weapons, then to the exclamations of his angry Citizens. With these words he parted out of the Citty, and went to the Campe with his hasty Companion. It was ordred that the Warres should be mannaged with eight Legions, the which had neuer beene done, and that euery Legion should con∣sist of fiue thousand men. The Romans as we haue sayd, make a com∣pleate Army of foure Legions,A Legion of fiue thousand Men, and the manner how the Romans raise n Army. euery Legion being foure thousand foote, and two hundred Horse, or else of fiue thousand foote, and three hundred horse, if there be any great necessity. To the which they adde as many foote of theis Allies, and thrice as many Horse. All the Troupes are equally deuided betwixt the Consuls. Most com∣monly one Consull giues battaile with two Legions, and with the suc∣cours
of their Allies. They seldome fight with all their Troupes. But the feare and amazement of the Romans, was then so great of the Car∣thaginians, as they thought it fit not to fight onely with foure, but with eight Legions together. And therefore after they had giuen faire admonitions to the Consuls, and had laied before them the conse∣quence of the affaires which way soeuer Fortune should turne, they Commaunded them to goe vnto the Campe intreating them to doe the duties of good men, in the administration of the Warre, as the Ro∣man Maiesty required. After the comming of the Consuls to the Campe, they mingled the new Bands to the old Army, and let many vnderstand the will of the Senate, wishing the multitude to be of good Courage, considering the season of the time: Wherewith Emilius made an Oration, where∣of this in a manner is the Substance. THat for losses lately made, they should not faint like men amazed:Paulus Emilius speech vnto the Souldiers. For the losses in former Battailes had not hapned for one or two cau∣ses, but for many. And if at this day they be Men of Courage and Resolution, there was nothing could hinder, but they should obtaine a good∣ly Victory. That neuer vnto this houre, the two Consuls had fought with all the Legions together, nor with more warlike Men, nor of greater Ex∣perience. And if on the other side they haue made vse of young Men, and little acquainted with the Art of warre, and who moreouer were so ill ad∣uertised of the Enemies enterprizes, of the scituation of places, and the nature of the Region, so as many times they haue found themselues in dan∣ger, when they had scarce seene the Enemy; which was a matter of great consequence: For they which were defeated in Gaule, neere vnto the Riuer of Trebia, came to fight without reason, neuer inquiring of the enemies en∣terprize, within three daies after their arriuall from Sicily; and they which were neere vnto the Lake of Peronza, were defeated before they could see the enemy, by reason of a great Fogge. But now Companion, saith he▪ all things are for vs; for wee are two Con∣suls vnited in one will, and the same forces, and we haue with vs those of the last yeare. And for your part, you haue not onely seene the daily com∣bates, the order which Souldiers obserue, and the enemies Troupes: But moreouer behold the second yeare, wherein you haue had experience of all this, in practising your selues, and fighting continually. Wherefore see∣ing that things are contrary to those which hapned in former Battailes, it is not likely but the end should prooue otherwise. It is not credible, nay I say it is impossible, seeing that in fighting with the enemy with an equall number in so many incounters, you haue parted Victors, that now you should be vanquished by them with all the Troupes, seeing you haue a double Army. Seeing then Companions that you haue the Victory in your owne hands, you haue no more neede of our Counsell and care. I might make you a lon∣ger Speech, if I did hold it necessary; for this must be expected from those which are mercenary, or being drawne from the Allies are Commaunders of an Army, to whom nothing is more troublesome then a day of Battaile.
In regard of those which are like vnto vs, whose liues are not onely in dan∣ger, but their Country, Wiues, and Children, whose remembrances happi∣ly should be of more force then any remonstrance. What man is he that would not eyther vanquish in fighting, or die in the Combat, then to liue in misery, and attend so great a storme and po∣uerty? Courage Companions, consider with your selues what a difference there is betwixt vanquishing and to be vanquished, and what followes the one and the other, and prepare your selues to Battaile, so as you will re∣member that it is not the Roman Army that is in danger, but the Countrey; and moreouer the head of the World. What shall the Romans haue remaining after your defeat? They haue put all their forces and pow∣er into your hands, and all their hope is in you. I intreate you for the ho∣nour of the immortall Gods, that you would not frustrate their expectati∣on. Yeeld the thankes which you owe vnto your Countrey, let all the world know, that the losses formerly made, were not by the prowesse of the Car∣thaginians, more then by the Romans: but for that the Roman Souldi∣ers were at that time new, and ignorant of the Warre. After this Speech or the like, Emilius dismist the Souldiers. Three dayes after the Army marcht towards the Enemies Campe, and on the third day they planted themselues neare vnto them. But Emilius seeing that the Plaine was large, hee was not of opinion to fight with the Enemy: for that hee was stronger in Horse-men, and that they must draw them into some place where the Foote-men might haue the aduantage. Contrariwise Varro being of little experience in the Warre, was of aduice not to deferre the battaile, lest the Enemy should escape from them. And therefore these two Consuls were in contention and debate,Discord be∣twixt the two Consuls. which is the worst thing that can happen in a Campe. That day (for they gouerne it by dayes) Varro had the Com∣maund: who dislodging from his Campe, made hae to approach neare vnto the Enemy, notwithstanding that Emilius opposed him∣selfe to the contrary. Hannibal marcheth against them with his men lightly armed, and his Horse-men, and assaults them with a fight more likely to their fore-runners, then to a pitcht Battaile. The Romans receiued them valiantly: Finally, the Night par∣ted them.A skirmish be∣twixt the Car∣thaginians and Romans. The Carthaginians hauing gotten little, retired to their Campe. And when as three dayes after Lucius Emilius had resolued not to fight, and could nor disswade the other, hee diuides the Army in∣to three,The Riuer of Fante. and fortifies two parts on this side the Riuer of Fante, which alone diuides the Appenine Hills, and bending towards the Sea of Italy, runnes into the Adriatique. The other third part hee lod∣geth on this side the Riuer, about two Miles and an halfe distant from the other two, and in a manner as much from the Enemies Campe. When as Hannibal had found out a conuenient place for his Horse-men to fight in, and thinking that the Consuls would come to the Combat, hee began to put his men in Battaile: But
fearing that the Army was amazed, by reason of this last Fortune, hee resolued to preach vnto them.Hannibals Speech vnto his Souldiers▪ He drawes them together, and commaunds them to looke vpon the Countrey which was about him, demaunding of them what they could desire of the Gods more beneficiall and profitable then the offer of a battaile, in those places where they might make vse of their Horse-men which were inuin∣cible. And when as all had confest it freely, therefore saith hee, giue thankes first vnto the immortall Gods: for in preparing vs the Victory, they haue brought the Enemy into this place of aduan∣tage for vs, and secondly to vs, who by our industry and labour haue forced them to come to fight. The Romans cannot flie, nor a∣uoide the Combate, and therefore the battaile and victory is in your hands. I hold it folly now to perswade you to performe the duties of braue men. It had beene well spoken, when you had no experience of the Roman Forces: the which at this present time wee made knowne vnto you by words and example. But what preaching can more in∣flame and encourage your hearts then the workes themselues: seeing you haue obtained the Victory in three great seuerall battailes? You haue beene Masters of the Field in the Combats past, and haue had a∣bundance of all things as wee haue promised you: So as hitherto I haue neuer failed of my promise. But the Combate at this day is for Townes and treasure: if you gaine this battell, you shall be Lords of all Italy. Finally, after so many labours and dangers, being deliuered by this alone, you shall purchase the felicity of the Romans: You shall bee the Head and Emperours of all the World. For the effecting where∣of, there is not any neede of words, but of effects. By the will of the Gods before it be long, you shall all see by experience that I am a man of my promise. After these Remonstrances,  commen∣ded their resolution, he planted his Campe vpon the Riuer-side, where the Enemies greatest forces lay. The day following hee commaunds them to treate themselues well, and to prepare themselues to battaile for the day following. And therefore at the third day he passed the Riuer at the Sunne-rising,Hannibal puts his men in bat∣taile. and put his men in battaile. But Emi∣lius (seeing that his Forces were not equall in that place, and know∣ing that Hannibal would dislodge for want of victuals) came not out of his Fort. When as Hannibal had stayed some time there, seeing that hee had in vaine called the Enemies forth to fight, he retired the rest of his Army to the Campe, and sent the Numidians to charge those which came from the Romans lesser Campe to water: which they kept and detained from them, pursuing them with great cries vnto the Fort. Whereat Varro disdaining much, that the Roman Campe should bee annoyed by these men, was the more inflamed and encouraged vnto battaile. The whole multitude wished nor de∣sired nothing more, so much the expectance in all things is tedious.
And as in the meane time the newes were come to Rome, that al∣though the Armies were not lodged in a place to giue battaile, yet they were one right against another, and that there were dayly en∣counters, all the World entred into great heauinesse and care. Cer∣tainly the Romans hauing receiued lately wonderfull great losses, fea∣red much the future.A great a∣mazement at Rome. Euery man fore-casts with him selfe what the Romans fortune would bee, after the defeate of this Army: All the World poured out threats against the Sybils Bookes, they saw no∣thing in the Temples and priuate houses but prodigies and strange signes. And therefore the whole Citty was addicted to Prayers, to sacrifices to the Gods, and to Ceremonies:The Romans in old time very ceremonious. for the Romans are great obseruers, as well in publique as in priuate, in the time of Warre, neither doe they let passe any thing out of their rememberance which in reason they ought to doe. Varro to whom the authority belonged the next day, at the Sunne-rising drawes forth the Armies out of both the Campes without the priuity of his Companion.Varro offers battaile, and the order which he held. And parting with those which were in the great Fort, hee ioynes vnto them those that were in the lesser. Then putting his men in Battaile, hee places the Roman Horse-men vpon the right wing, which was neerest vnto the Riuer. Next to the which continuing the order, hee disposeth of the Foote-men, with the greatest number of Ensignes, and the closest Bands: and the Horse-men of the Allies were vpon the left wing, and in Front those that were lightly armed.The Roman Ar∣my of foure score thousand Foote and sixe thousand Horse They were with their Allies, to the number of fourescore thousand Foote, and about sixe thousand Horse. Hannibal passing the Riuer at the same time, sends them of Maiorque and Minrque with those that were lightly armed before: and pas∣sing the rest of the Army at two places, hee plants himselfe before the Enemy, ordring the Horse-men of Gaule and Spaine neere vn∣to the Riuer vpon the left wing against the Roman Horse-men.The order which Hannibal held to put his men in bat∣taile. Af∣ter which he sets Foote-men in the midst of the Affricans, who were armed to proofe, and after them the Gaules and Spaniards, and fi∣nally the rest of the Affricans: and on the right wing he lodgeth his Numidian Horse-men. When he had put his whole Army in order, he placeth in the midst the Troupes of Gaules and Spaniards: he ordered them in a crooked forme, and a weake figure, meaning that the Affricans should vndergoe the danger before them, as a safegard to the Battaile. The Affricans were armed in such sort, as you would haue taken it for a Roman Battalion,The diuersity of Sword, be∣twixt the Gaules and Spaniards. by reason of the Armes which they had got∣ten at Trebia, and at the Lake of Perouza. The Gaules and Spani∣ards carried the like Targets, but their Swords differ'd: For the Spaniards were short, and therefore easie, werewith they did both thrust and strike:Hannibals Ar∣my consisted of forty thousand Foote, and ten thousand Horse. But the Gaules were long and without points. It was a strange and terrible thing to see the Gaules naked aboue the waiste, and the Spaniards attired in shirts of Linnen, wrought with purple after the manner of their owne Countrey. There were ten thousand Horse, and aboue forty thousand Foote with the succours
that came from Gaule. Lucius Emilius led the right wing, and Tar∣rentius Varro the left: Marcus Attilius, and Cneius Seruilius gouer∣ned the Battalion in the midst. And as for the Carthaginian Captaines, Asdrubal led the left wing, Hanno the right, and Hannibal was in the middest with his Brother Mago. The Romans looked towards the South, and the Carthaginians to the North: but neither of them were annoyed with the Sunne. After they had giuen warning to battaile,The battaile of Canna. the encounters and skir∣mishes were for a time equall. But when as the Gaules and Spaniards of the left wing,The defeate of the Roman Horsemen by the Gaules and Spaniards. had charged the Romans, the Combate was fierce and cruell, so as they did not charge and recharge, but ioyning to∣gether, they did fight Foote to Foote, and man to man, after they had left their Horses. There the Carthaginians vanquished and slew most of the Romans, fighting valiantly, and with great cou∣rage. In regard of the rest, they slew them retiring neare the Riuer without any mercy or compassion: And then the Foote-men recei∣ued those that were aduantagiously armed, charging one another. The Spaniards and Gaules resisted the Romans valiantly for a short time, but being forced, they retired, breaking their Lunary order. Then the Roman Battalion pursuing with great courage, did easily disorder the Enemies Rankes:The Gaules Battalion of Foote broken by the Romans and reunited againe. for that of the Gaules was weake, as hauing fortified the hornes, being in the midst of the danger. Wherefore the hornes and the midst were not equall: so as the midst of he Gaules Battalion aduanced farre vpon the hornes, like an halfe Moone, the crookednesse turning towards the Enemie. Finally, the Romans pursuing them, marcht thorough without any resistance, so as at their cōming they had vpon their Flancks the Affri∣cans that were best armed, who couering themselues with their Targets, charg'd their Enemies vpon the sides thrusting with their swords. So as by the prouidence of Hannibal, the Romans were inclosed among the Lybians, by the encounter which they had made against the Gaules. They did not fight by Battalion, but Man to Man, or by troupes, tur∣ning against those which charged them vpon the Flancks. And al∣though that Lucius Emilius,Lucius Emilius. who commaunded the right wing, had beene in the Combat of the Horsemen, Yet hee was safe and well, meaning therefore that in giuing courage, his deedes should bee answe∣rable to his words, seeing that the hope of Victory consisted in the Footemen, hee thrust into the hottest of the Battaile, whee in fighting hee gaue courage to the Horsemen,Hannal. the which Hannibal did in like manner. In the meane time the Numidians of the left wing with all their Horse-men, falling vpon the right wing of the Romans, they neither did nor suffred any thing that was worthy of memory, so e∣quall were the two Troupes both in force and courage: yet they made the Romans vnprofitable, scattering them heere and there. In the meane time Asdrubal went to aide and succour the Affricans with the Horse-men of the left wing.Asdrubal. The which the Horse-men of the Roman Allies perceiuing, they presently turned head. Asdrubal seeing this, performed the duty of a wise and discreet Captaine: and sent the
Numidians, (whom he knew were more in number, and terrible to make a chase,) to pursue them that fled, and went himselfe speedily with the Footmen to succour the Affricains: where assailing the Romans in the Reare, he fortified his owne Men, making a great slaughter of the Ene∣mie. Lucius Emilius hauing receiued many wounds,Emilius slaine in the Battaile. died in this Bat∣taile: Hee was a Man who vnto his death had done good seruice vnto the Common-wealth. They write that Caius Lentulus a Tribune leading an empty horse in his hand as hee fled, saw Paulus the Consull sitting on a stone, all couered with blood, to whom he said: Lucius Emilis whom the Gods should hold innocent of this cruell slaughter, take this horse, whilest any strength remaines within, and I being thy friend will lift thee vp, and keepe thee on, lest thou make this Battaile dolefull thorough the death of a Consull: without the which there is cause enough of mourning and weeping. Whereunto the Consull answered,Emiliu speech to Lentus. Caius Cornelius increase thou in vertue, but beware lest whilest thou doest bewaile this accident, thou finde little time to escape thy selfe. Goe therefore and bid the Senate make strong the walls of Rome, and to fortifie it with Succours, before the Conquerour come: and tell Quintus Fabius secretly, that Lucius Emilius Paulus doth constantly remember his precepts, liueth in them, and will die in them. And I pray thee suffer me to passe this life, among these my dead Knights, lest by longer li∣uing, I become an accuser of my fellowe, defending my innocencie by the tres∣passe of another, and yet at length dye being held guilty of this action. The Romans holding still good in so long and furious a Battaile, were in the end all slaine.The Romans lose the Bat∣taile. Among the which died the Consuls of the prece∣dent yeare, Marcus Attilius and Cneius Seruilius, braue men, and wor∣thy of the Roman name. At the same time the Numidians ouertooke the horsemen which fled, whereof they slew a great number, and dismoun∣ted the rest. Some retired to Venusium: among the which was the Consull Varro,Varro flies with threescore and ten Horse. whose life was base, and his command vnprofitable for his Country. Behold the end of the Battaile of Cannas, so famous as well for the victors as the vanquished: whereof the reason is, for that of sixe thousand Roman horse, there escaped but threescore and tenne to Venusium with Varro; and of the Allies about three hundred scattered here and there,Ten thousand Romans taken aliue. who fled to the Neighbour Townes. And as for the Bands of Foote, the Enemie tooke about tenne thousand aliue, so as there hardly escaped three thousand. The rest to the number of three∣score and tenne thousand were slaine in the Battaile.Threescore and ten thou∣sand slaine in the Battaile. The Carthagini∣ans got not the victory without losse. There were slaine about foure thousand Gaules, fifteene hundred Affricains and Spaniards, and two hundred horse.Hannibals losse. The Romans which were taken aliue were not in the Battaile: for Varro had left tenne thousand Men in the Campe, to the end that if Haniball led forth all his Army to fight, that in assailing the Enemies Campe whilest they were otherwise busie, they might spoile the Carthaginians Munition. And if Haniball left a sufficient Garrison for the Campe, then his Forces would be the lesse, for the Romans were stronger in numbers of Men. Behold the manner how they were taken. Haniball had left a sufficient Garrison in his Campe to guard it: But when as the Romans saw the Battaile grow hot, they go vnto the Campe
as they had resolued to besiege it. The Carthaginians defended them∣selues: But for that the Romans charged them furiously, they were for∣ced to abandon the place. In the meane time Hannibal hauing gotten an absolute victory, falls vpon those which assailed his Campe, and put them to flight, shutting them vp within their Forts, of whom hee slewe two thousand, and tooke the rest. The Numidians on the other side brought vnto Hannibal the Roman horsemen, who flying, were dispierced in the Fields. Thus after the Battaile ended, neither of them were de∣ceiued in their expectation:Tarent, Capua and Naples re∣duced vnder the obedience of Hannibal. for presently the Carthaginians were Ma∣sters of the Prouince, which they call great Greece, so as Tarent, Capua, and Naples, came vnder their obedience, and all the Townes wauered for Hannibal, neither was he out of hope to take Rome speedily. Finally, the Romans wholy dispairing of the Empire of Italy, were in feare not onely of their owne ruine, but also of the whole Country, ex∣pecting hourely their cruell Enemie at the walls of Rome. The Citie being thus troubled▪ Newes (to the end the measure of their miseries might be full) came from Gaule of the Defeat of Lucius Postumus the Pretor,Lucius Posthu∣mu defeated in Gaule. with his Army by an Ambush. Yet the Senate inuolued in so many miseries, made a good shew; aduising the people to fortifie the Citie with Men, and to consider of their affaires with courage and con∣stancie. The which the things which succeeded afterwards did verifie, for being now vanquished by the Carthaginians, and seeming to acquit vnto them the glory of Armes, within short time after, by the constancie of the Common-wealth, and by the Councell and wisdome of the Se∣nate, they came (after they had vanquished and ruined the Carthagini∣ans) to be Lords not onely of Italy, but also of the whole world. And therefore we will conclude this booke, and likewise the actions of Spaine and Italy, which were during the hundreth and fortieth Olimpiade. And when we shall come to those of Greece, during the same Olimpiade, we will speake more at large of the Roman Common-wealth: For I hold it not onely necessary for the Reader, for the knowledge of the History, but also profitable, to correct and gouerne a Common-wealth. The end of the Third Booke of Polybius.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE of the History of POLYBIVS. WEE haue in my opinion sufficiently shewed the causes of the second punique warre in this last Booke, and then the descent of Hannibal into Italy: Wee haue also related many Combats betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, vnto the Battaile which was fought neere vnto the Riuer of Fante, and the Towne of Cannes. Now wee will pursue the warres of Greece of the same time, deliuering in few words, the things men∣tioned by vs in the second Booke of the preparation of our worke, and especially of the Common-weale of the Acheins: Considering that their manner of gouernment tooke a great increase, as well before as in our time.Tisamenes. And therefore beginning with the time of Tisamenes (one of the sonnes of Orestes) we haue said that the Acheins liued from his time vnto the Reigne of Gyges, vnder Kings descending from him: And that hauing chased them away, the Citie being well aduised, gaue the go∣uernment vnto the Commons: Some few yeares after the Townes and Burroughes began to fall into dissention, by the meanes of the Lacede∣monian Princes. Yet afterwards as we haue said, the Acheins reunited themselues, which was the first meanes that all Morea tooke the sirname of Acheins. Wee haue moreouer deliuered their actions in perticular, vnto the Defeate of Cleomenes King of the Lacedemonians.Cleomenes And there we haue concluded our preparation, with the death of Antigonus, Se∣leucus,
and Ptolomy:The time of the death of Antigonus, Se∣leucus, and Pto∣lomy. for they all died in one Olimpiade. It rests now, that in writing the Remainder, wee should begin there. The subiect seemes good: first, for that the deedes which Arate hath written, end at that time, to the end that to continue the Narration of the Grecians actions, wee should prosecute (as wee haue promised) those which fol∣low: And for that the times are so vnited, as one part hath beene in our age,Polybius writes nothing but what he hath seene, or re∣ceiued from those which had seen them▪ and the other in the time of our Parents. By this meanes we haue seene part, and heard the rest from those which haue seene them. I haue not held it fit to seeke things farre off, nor to make a relation grow∣ing from heare-say or report, for that I conceiue it would not be profi∣table for the Reader: And therefore let vs begin with the time, when as Fortune seemed to haue made a new world. Philip the lawfull sonne of Demetrius,Philip. being in his younger yeares, had taken possession of the Empire of Macedon.Acheus. Acheus Lord of all the Prouince neere vnto Tau∣rus, had not onely the Name of a King, but also the Forces.Antiochus. Antiochus sirnamed great, succeeded his Brother SeleucusSeleucus. lately dead, in the Realme of Syria, although hee were but young: and Ariarates had taken the Realme of Capadocia.Ptolomy Philo∣pater. At the same time also Ptolomy Philopater had gotten the Empire of Egipt: and soone after LycurgusLycurgus. was chosen King of the Lacedemonians. The Carthaginians likewise had chosen Hanni∣bal for their Generall in the Warres as we haue mentioned. And there∣fore it seemes that there was an alteration, seeing that all the Potentates were renewed, which is a naturall thing, and which happened at one time. The Romans and Carthaginians made the warre which we haue men∣tioned: and Antiochus and Ptolomy that of Syria. In regard of the Acheins and Philip,The causes of the warre be∣twixt the A∣cheins and Phi∣lip, against the Etoliens and Lacedemoni∣ans they had warre against the Etoliens and Lacedemo∣nians. Whereof see the causes. The Etoliens being long discontented with peace, were not content to liue vpon their owne charges, as being accustomed to liue vpon their Neighbours, for the necessity of their great expences, by reason of their Naturall arrogancie, whereunto be∣ing subiect, they lead a cruell and brutish life, obseruing no law of friend∣ship nor alliance: so as all things are of good prize vnto them. And although that during the life of Antigonus, they did not stirre, fearing the forces of the Lacedemonians: Yet after his death when as Philip had succeeded him, they began (disdaining his youth) to seeke occasi∣ons of warre with them of Morea: and namely, for that by an ancient custome of iniuries, they had vsed to rob and spoile at Sea: And that moreouer they held themselues more powerfull to make warre then the Acheins. Being in this humour, soone after they found this occasion, together with the fauour and fortune of their enterprize. Dormiache Triconee was sonne to Nicostrates, who violated the affaires of the Pambiotins: who being yet young and full of arrogancie and pride, an Etolien had beene sent by the Common-wealth to Phigalea:The scituation of Phigalea. It is a Towne scitua∣ted right against the Messenian Mountaines, and which by fortune was then allied to the Etoliens. Hee let them vnderstand that hee had beene sent thether to gouerne the Towne and the Country: Although they
had done it of purpose to discouer the estate of Morea. But for that in regard of the alliance, they could not victuall the Pyrats, who wandring there abouts, retired to him to Phigalea for their Munition, and the ra∣ther for that the peace made with Antigonus continued still, hee aduised them to carry away the Messeniens Cattell, who were their Friends and Allies.The Etoliens spoile the Mes∣seniens. The which they began at the first to chase out of their limits: and afterwards as their obstinacie increased by little and little, to ruine the houses in the night standing scattered in the Fields, and to spoile and ruine the whole Country. The Messeniens discontented herewith, send an Embassie to Dorimache, to complaine of the outrages done by the Py∣rates, who at the first made no account of it, doing it partly for the be∣nefit of the Pyrates, and partly for his owne interest, hauing a share in the Booty. But being often prest by Embassies, by reason of the con∣tinuance of the wrongs, he told them that he would be soone at Messena to doe them right, for the complaints they made against the Etoliens. Being arriued, and that many presented themselues vnto him hauing bin wronged, hee sent some away with scoffes: others with iniuries, and some he terrified with bigge and outragious words. During these pur∣suits at Messena,The Etoliens take Chiron by Scalado. the Pyrates came in the night to a Burrough called Chi∣ron, and tooke it by Scalado, and sacking and spoiling it, they slewe some of those which were found in Armes, and carrie away the rest Prisoners with the Cattell. The Messenians being more incensed herewith, considering his Pre∣sence, and finally thinking that they were deluded, they cause him to come before the Magistrates. By good fortune Schiron, a man of good esteeme, and at that time Gouernour of the Messeniens, was of opinion, not to suffer Dorimache to part out of the Towne, before hee had resto∣red the spoiles which the Pyrates had made, and repaired the houses in the Country, and deliuered those which had committed the Murthers. And when as all the assembly approued of this Councell, Dorimache in∣flamed with choller, told them they were fooles, and if in doing that, they thought to wrong Dorimache, and not the Etoliens: And that more∣ouer they did him great wrong, and that within a short time reuenge would be taken. There was at that time in Messena a man of base condition, called Ba∣byrthe, so like in face,Babyrthe. body, lineaments, and voyce to Dorimache, that if they had giuen him his Crowne and Robe, you could hardly haue dis∣cern'd them. This Dorimache knew well. And when he vsed proud and audatious words to the Messeniens, Schiron grew into choller, telling him, thinkest thou that we care for thee or Babyrthe for this thy rashnes. After which words, Dorimache thought good to strike saile, restoring to the Messeniens all the pillage. And going then to Etolia, he tooke this speech of Schiron so to heart, as without any other cause he made warre against the Messeniens.Ariston. At that time Ariston was chiefe of the Etoli∣ens, who by reason of the weakenesse of his body, growne by a long in∣firmity, could not mannage this warre. Although hee were allied to Scope and to Dorimache, yet he gaue the conduct to Dorimache. But he durst not openly incense the Etoliens to make warre against the Messe∣niens:
for that hee could no propound for a sufficient cause, as grow∣ing onely vpon choller for an iniury spoken to him. And therefore leauing this aduice, hee adresseth himselfe to Scope in priuate, per∣swading him to oppose himselfe against the Messeniens: being then as∣sured of the Macedonians, by reason of the minority of their King, for that Philip had not seauenteene yeares compleate: and that moreo∣uer the Lacedemonians held not the party of the Messeniens, acquain∣ting him with the Friendship and alliance hee had with the Grecians. Wherefore hee found not any man that could hinder his passage to Messena. Then hee propounded vnto him with an Etolien perswasion, the great profite that would redowne thereby: considering that all the Countrey liued in assurance, and that they alone had not felt the Cle∣omenique Warre: and that finally the Etoliens would bee well plea∣sed, and ready to doe them honour vnto the vtmost of their ability and power. As for the Acheins, they would giue them occasion of Warre, if they sought to hinder their voyage: But if they did not budge, they would passe easily to Messena: and for that the Messeniens had made a promise to the Acheins and Macedonians, to enter into their league, they gaue sufficient occasion of Warre.Warre attemp∣ted by the Etoliens against Morea. Hauing vsed a long Speech touching this enterprize, hee soone moued Scope and his Friends, as without assembling the people, or attending the will of the Ma∣gistrates, or obseruing any order o serutice, they made Warre a∣gainst the Messeniens, the Epirotes, Acheins, Acarnaniens, and Macedonians. Wherefore they presently sent forth many Pirates, who encountred with the royall ship of Macedony, laden, and carri∣ed it to Etolia, where they sold the Pilots and Marriners, and in the end the ship. Then they ranne along the Empire, spoyling all those which they met, being assisted by the Cephalonien Vessels, to commit their outrages, taking Townes by Treason. For in Acarnania they tooke Orea, and seized vpon a Castle which is in the midst of the Megalopolitains Countrey, which they call Claire, by men whom they had secretly sent into Morea: whereof making vse afterwards for a retreate, they committed great spoiles at Sea. At that time Timoxenes which was Chiefe of the Acheins,Taurion taken by assault. tooke the Towne of Taurion by assault, the which Antigonus had taken in the time of the Warre of Morea. You must vnderstand that King Antigonus held Corinthe with the good liking of the Acheins, as we haue shewed heretofore, in speaking of the Cleomenique Wa: But he had not restored Orchomenes vnto them, the which hee had taken by force, and had made himselfe Lord thereof, requesting and desiring (as it seemes) not onely to haue an entry into Morea, but also to keepe the heart thereof by meanes of the Garrison of Orchomenes. Dorimache and Scope making great choise of the time, when as Timoxenes had not no many dayes to continue and stay in his Ma∣gistracy, and that Arate who was to succeede him, could not execute
his office, they assembled the Etoliens neere vnto the Mountaine of Rhie: and hauing prepared the Cephalonian ships, they sayled to Mo∣rea: and in passing by the Coasts of the Patrenses, Pharences, and Tri∣tenses, they march against the Messeniens. It had beene forbidden not to doe any outrage to the Acheins. But who can prescribe an order to a multitude, who spoile all where they come? Comming in the end to Phigalea, and making their attempt against the Messe∣niens, without any regard of their ancient Friendship, and with∣out any feare of God or Men, they ouer-runne and spoile the Coun∣trey, putting all to fire and sword. In the meane time the Messeni∣ens finding themselues too weake, kept themselues close within their Towne. The time of election approaching for the Acheins, they assem∣bled at Egea, whereas holding their Diet, when as the Embassadours of Patres on the one side, and those of Pharos on the other, made their complaints for the outrages done by the Etoliens, and that on the other side the Messeniens demanded Succours with great compas∣sion, they were induced, partly by the wrongs done vnto their Al∣lies, and moued partly with pitty, which they had of the Messeni∣ens, being likewise discontented that the Etoliens had past their Ar∣my thorow their Countrey without their priuity, they resolued to giue succours to the Messeniens, and thereby to accustome the A∣cheins to Warre: and what the assemblies should ordaine, should be obserued. Timxenes chiefe of the Acheins, who was not yet depo∣sed, fearing to make any attempt, as if there were no other meanes but the multitude: for that after the Warre of Cleomenes, when as all quarrels were pacified, hee knew well that the people of Mo∣rea were giuen to pleasure, and that making no more accompt of Warre, they were growne idle. Contrariwise, Arate not able to endure the outrage done vnto his Allies, and incensed the presumption of the Etoliens, remembring in like manner their ancient hatred, hee made haste to cause the A∣cheins to take Armes, and to fight with the Etoliens. And therefore fiue dayes before hee should enter into the Magistracy, hee receiued the Seale from Timoxenes, and wrote vnto the Towne, willing them to leuie men, and to assemble at Megalopolis. But before wee pro∣ceede. I haue thought good to speake something of his nature and disposition. Arate was a man perfect in all things for the Gouernment of a City: for hee spake well,The disposition of Arate. and had a good inuention; being also diligent, and of execution: There was not his equall to endure a Ciuill dissen∣tion patiently, nor to contract leagues and alliances. Finally, hee was a wise and discreet man in his Magistracy and charge, and to lay Ambushes for his Enemy, bringing them vnto a good end by his la∣bour and patience. Whereof there are many proofes and testimo∣nies, but especially for that he deliuered Sicyon and Mantinea to the Acheins: and had taken Pellene from the Etoliens. hee likewise con∣quered the strong Fort of Corinthe, which they call Acrocorinthe.
Yet if hee were to fight, he was carelesse to take Councell, and faint-hearted in the fight.The diuers Natures of men. Wherefore he filled Morea, with the triumph of the spoiles taken by him: so as Nature hath not onely framed a di∣uersity in mens bodies, but also in their soules: So as many times the same man doth not carry himselfe onely in diuers things, an able man in some, and slacke in others: But also hee doth many times in one and the same action make shew of extreame heate, and some∣times of incredible slacknesse: so as sometimes hee seemes a man of great courage, and another time very fearefull. These are no strange things, but vsuall, and well knowne vnto those that doe obserue them. Wee likewise see many men in hunting to bee wonderfull hardy against the cruellest sauage Beasts that can bee found: whom if you leade to the Warre against the Enemy, would be found Cow∣ards and faint hearted. You shall likewise finde many in the Warre, which are resolute to fight man to man, but in pitcht Battaile are of no esteeme. It is certaine that the Horse-men of Thessaly being ioyned together,The nature of the Thessalonans. are not to bee forc't in a Battaile, but if you charge them by small Troupes, it is easie to cut them in peeces: the which is contrary in the Etoliens. They of Candy are the most actiue men in the World,Etoliens. as well for Combate at Sea and Land,Candiots. for Ambushes, Robberies, Rapines, surprizes in the Night, and for all manner of deceipts: But in a pitcht Battaile; they are faint-hearted Cowards, and of no seruice. To whom the Acheins and Macedonians are quite contra∣ry. I haue deliuered these things in few words, to the end that no man should maruaile, nor giue lesse credit to the History, if sometimes wee shew that one and the same man hath carried him∣selfe diuersly in the like affaires. Let vs now returne where wee left. After the assembly had beene made at Megalapolis, of able men for the Warre,The Messeniens seeke the alli∣ance of the Acheins. the Messeniens came againe to the Acheins, intreating them to helpe and assist them, being so apparently wronged by the Etoliens: and desiring withall if it were their good pleasure to bee receiued in∣to their league, hereafter to beare the necessary charges for the pre∣seruation thereof. The cheife of the Acheins make answere, that as for the alliance, they could not hearken vnto it, for that it was not in their power and ability to receiue or fauour any one without the consent of Philip and the other Allies: For that the accord con∣tinued yet firme, which had beene made in the time of the Cleome∣nique Warre, vnder the command of Antigonus, betwixt the A∣cheins, Epirotes, Phocenses, Macedonians, Beociens, Arcadians, and Thessalians. And yet they would willingly giue them suc∣cours, so as they will giue their Children for hostages vnto the Acheins: promising neuer to make peace, nor any accord with the Etoliens, without the consent of the Acheins. It is true, the La∣cedemonians had drawne downe an Army neere vnto Megalopolis, not so much in regard of their Alliance, as to see the euent of the Warre.
When as Arate had thus concluded with the Messeniens, he sends an Embassie to the Etoliens signifying vnto them to retire their Army out of the Messeniens Countrey, and that hereafter they should doe them no wrong,An Embassie sent from Ara∣te to the Eto∣. nor touch the Acheins Countrey: And if they did otherwise, hee declared himselfe their Enemy. Scope and Dori∣mache, hauing heard the Embassadours charge, and being aduer∣tised of the preparation of the Acheins, thought good to yeeld vnto Arate. Wherefore they sent Letters presently into Cylene to Aristo, chiefe of the Etoliens requiring shipping: and two daies after they parted, causing the Baggage to march before, taking their way to∣wards the Elienses: a people which had beene alwayes faithfull to the Etoliens. But Arate thinking simply they had gone away, as they had resolued, gaue leaue to all his Bands to retire vnto their houses: and went directly to Patras, accompanied onely with three thousand Foote and three hundred Horse, which were vnder the charge and command of Taurion, to cut off the Enemies retreate. Dorimache being aduertised, and fearing they should hinder the passage, hee sent all the booty with a good Conuoy to the ships, gi∣uing charge to those which had the conduct, that they should come and meete him at Rhie, where he had resolued to imbarke. When he had conducted the booty a little way, hee presently turnes head and comes to Olympia. Being there aduertised that Taurion was about Clitoria with his Troupes, fearing that he should not be able to imbarke at Rhie without fighting or danger, hee held it best to fight presently with Arate, who had but small Troopes, and was ignorant of his Enterprize. Hee conceiued that hee should make his retreate safely that way which he had resolued, if he defeated the Enemy, in running the whole Prouince, before the Acheins should make a new head: and if they fled the Combate for feare, hee should passe where hee pleased without danger. Dorimache moued with these reasons, seated his Campe neere vnto Methydrie, which is not farre from Megalopolis. The Acheins aduertised of the com∣ming of the Etoliens, made so little vse of those things which were visible, as they forgot nothing that might augment and increase their folly. First, in leauing Clitoria, they planted their Campe neere vnto Caphies. And when as the Etoliens parting from Methydrie, had pastat Or∣chomene, the Acheins marcht by the Countrey of the Caphiens, be∣ing inclosed with a Riuer, as with a Rampier. The Etoliens fearing to fight with the Enemy according to their first resolution, as well for the difficulty of the places, (for there were before the Riuer Dit∣ches and inaccessible places) as for the comming of the Acheins. They marcht vnto Oligrte in good order, being loath that any one should force them to runnne into danger. When as the Bands of Horse-men followed them vpon a Plaine neere vnto them, Arate sent the Foot-men that were lightly armed after the Horse-men, vnder the conduct of Acarnane, giuing them charge to fight with them, and to trie
the Fortune wherein hee committed a great errour, for seeing hee had an intent to fight, he should not haue charged them in the Reare, for that they were not farre from the Mountaines, but in front, be∣fore they should haue gotten the top: By this meanes the Battaile had beene in the Plaine. Whereby vndoubtedly the Etoliens had beene defeated by reason of their kind of Armes and order. Contrariwise Arate by bad aduice left vnto the Enemies the opportunity of the place, and of time which was offred him. When as the Etoliens saw the Acheins march, they vsed all diligence to gaine the Mountaine, making haste to ioyne with their Foote-men. Arates men not duely considering what had beene done, and being ignorant of the Ene∣mies enterprize, when they saw the Horse-men runne, they sent those that were lightly armed of two wings, thinking it had beene a flight: and giue them charge to succour the Horse and Foote. Then Arate marched with the rest much discontented, making a long wing. The Etolien Horse-men approaching to the Foote of the Mountaines, began to march a slow pace, and called downe their Foote-men with great cries: who comming suddainly to succour them, and seeing they were not fewer in number then the Enemy,A fight betwixt the Acheins and the Etoli∣ens. they turned head against the Achein Horse-men, and charged them, for that they had an aduantage in the number of men, and the opportunity of the place. The Combate was fierce on either side, and the victory for a time was in suspence. Finally, the Achein Horse-men, were repuls'd. And when as they which were lightly armed▪ which had beene sent to suc∣cour them, met with them that fled, they were forced to doe the like being amazed with this new accident, and partly broken by them that fled. So as the defeate was but of fiue hundred, whereas the light was of aboue two thousand. The Etoliens seeing plainely what they had to doe, pursued the Acheins with cries and ioy. Who think∣ing to finde their men in Battaile where they had left them, retired to Arate. And therefore their flight in the beginning was honest, and for their safety.A defeate of the Acheins. But when as they saw them dislodge, and to come by files, and in disorder, then some flying here and there, sought for their safety: others marching directly to their owne men, disordred one another without any Enemy: Finally, they all flie, and saue themselues in the neighbour Towns: for Orchomenes and Caphi∣es were not farre off, otherwise they had beene all taken or slaine that day. Thus the Acheins were defeated neere vnto Caphies. The Megalopolitains being aduertised, that the Etoliens had plan∣ted their Campe neere vnto Methydrie, they assembled all with one consent, and went to Field three dayes after the Battaile, to succour the Acheins: but they were forced to bury those, with whom they did hope to fight against the Enemy. And therefore they made a great Ditch, wherein they put all the dead Bodies, and performed their obsequies after the manner of the Countrey. The Etoliens being Victors, past through Mroea without feare of danger. At what time after they had sought diuers wayes to gaine the Pellenesiens, and
had ruined the Country of the Sicyoniens, in the end they retired by the streight of the Isthmus. These were the cause of the warre of the Al∣lies, whereof wee haue formerly spoken: whereof the beginning was by a Decree which was afterwards made among the Allies, and confir∣med at Corinthe: where they were all assembled for that cause: Philip King of Macedon consenting thereunto. Some few dayes after, the Acheins being assembled, they blamed Arate both in publique and priuate, as if he had beene the cause of this defeat and losse, and the Commons were the more inflamed, for that the Enemies league made it to seeme greater. First, it seemed hee had committed a great fault, to haue seazed vpon the Magistracie before his time, and to haue made enterprizes doing another mans office: wherein hee had many times before beene vnfortunate. But it seemed hee had done worse, dissoluing the Acheins Army, the Etolien Commaunders being still in the midst of Morea. Thirdly, that being ill accompanied, he had giuen Battaile without force: considering that hee might easily haue retired to the Neighbour Townes, vntill the Acheins had made a new head: and then giue Battaile if he had thought it fit. Finally, that hee had carried himselfe so inconsiderately, that in leauing the Plaines (where without doubt his Men had beene the stronger) he had assailed the Enemie in the Mountaines with Souldiers lightly armed: whereby the Etoliens could haue no greater aduantage. Yet suddainly when as Arate was returned, and  into the as∣sembly, and that he began to deliuer the things which he had formerly done for the publique good, and had made knowne the causes of the last Defeat, and giuen them to vnderstand that he was not the cause thereof, as his Enemies had falsly slaundred him: and that finally hee would haue craued pardon, letting them know that if hee had commited any fault, the Acheins should not consider the euent of things, so bitterly nor with such rigour, but with fauour and mildnesse, the opinion of the Commons was suddainly so changed, as where before they seem'd to be wonderfully incensed against Arate, they sodainly turned their chol∣ler against his ill-willers, so as from that time they followed the Coun∣cell and opinion of Arate. These things happened in the hundred and nine and thirtieth Olympiade, and those which follow in the hundred and fortieth. It was then resolued by the Acheins, to send Embassies to the Epirotes, Peociens, Phocenses, Acarnaniens,The aduice of the Acheins touching the warre against the Eteliens. and to Philip King of Macedon, to let them vnderstand that the Etoliens had entred twice into Acheia, con∣trary to the former accords: and likewise to demaund succours accor∣ding to the league, and moreouer that the Messeniens might bee recei∣ued: and that the chiefe of the Acheins might leauie fiue thousand Foote, and fiue hundred Horse, and succour the Messeniens, if the Etoli∣ens did reassaile them. Finally, that he might agree with the Lacedem∣nians and Messeniens, touching the number of Foote and Horse, which they should keepe ready for the common affaires of the league. After these things thus resolued, the Achiens stomacking the Defeate whereof we haue spoken, did not forget the Messeniens affaires, nor their resolu∣tion.
The Embassadours execute their charge diligently. The chiefe likewise assemble the youth as it had beene decreed, and agree with the Lacedemonians and Messeniens, that either of them should furnish two thousand fiue hundred Foote, and two hundred and fifty Horse, to the end that the whole might amount to ten thousand Foote, and a thousand Horse. The time being come, when as the Etoliens were to hold their Diet, they assembled the Commons, and consulted how to make a peace with the Lacedemonians and Messeniens, and with other people their neighbours, being forced partly by pouerty, and partly weakned by the Acheins Allies. As for the Acheins, they resolued to contract with them, if they would leaue the Alliance of the Messeniens: But if they would hold it still, they were of aduice to make Warre against them, which was a most idle and sencelesse thing. For being allied to the Acheins aud Messeniens,The idlenesse of the Etoliens▪ they declared Warre against the Acheins, if they contracted any Friendship or alliance with the Messeniens: and contrariwise a peace was confirmed, if they held them for their Enemies. And therefore their villany could not take place, by reason of the contrariety of their subtill inuention. The Epirotes and Philip hauing heard the Embassadours charge, re∣ceiued the Messeniens into the league: and although they disliked the outrages of the Etoliens, yet it seemed they made no great accompt of it: for that they had done no new action, considering they had beene accustomed to such things. Wherefore they willingly conti∣nued a peace with them. Thus sometimes outrages growne old and continued, are sooner pardoned then those of new date. The Etoli∣ens vsing this course of life, in ruining Greece by their incursions, and making Warre many times before they declared it, did not vouchsafe to answer to the complaints: Many times also they made no accompt, and mockt at those which demanded satisfaction, for those things which they had done, or would doe. And although that the Lace∣demonians had beene lately restored to liberty by Antigonus, by meanes of the Acheins, hauing promised to Philip and the Macedonians, not to attempt any thing against them, yet they sent an Embassie secretly to the Etoliens, and confirmed friendship and alliance with them. When as the Acheins Army was assembled, and the succours of the Lacedemonians and Messeniens ready, as it had beene decreed:Scerdilaide and Demetrius. Scerdi∣laide, and Demetrius sayling from Sclauonia with fourescore and ten Vessels, past to Lisse, contrary to the accord made with the Romans. And attempting first to take Pyle, they were shamefully repuls'd after some dayes siege. Demetrius afterwards made a voyage with fifty Saile vnto the Cyclades, and spoiles the Ilands, taking some by Trea∣son. Scerdilaide with the other forty, drawes towards Naupacte, re∣lying vpon the friendship of Amiclas King of the Atheniens, to whom he was allied. There an accord was made with the Etoliens, by the meanes of Agelaus, that in marching with them into Achaia they should diuide the booty by halfes.The descent of Scerdilaide, A∣gelaus, Dori∣mache & Scop into Acheia. The which being concluded betwixt Scerdilaide and Agelaus, Dorimache, and Scope, they entred in∣to Acheia with an Army of Etoliens and Sclauonians, the Towne
of the Sithians being of their party. Ariston chiefe of the Eto∣liens stayed at home, saying that he had peace and no warre with the Acheins, as if hee had beene ignorant of the Enterprize: which was a simple and idle course. Is there any thing more foolish, then to thinke long to couer with words things that are plaine and euident? This done Dorimache comes with his men to Cynethe with wonderfull speed. The Cynethenses were tormented with great diuisions and seditions, hauing beene long time Arcadiens: whereas many murthers had beene com∣mitted, with Banishments, Rapes, and Spoiles: Finally it fell out, that they which held the Acheins party, had the command of the Towne. Wherefore their chiefe men, and the guards of their Towne were of Acheia. Matters standing in this estate some yeares before the descent of the Etoliens, when as the banished men had sent to them of the Towne, intreating them to receiue them into grace and concord, the Gouernours perswaded by their words, sent an Embassie to the Acheins, desiring to make this peace and agreement with their Councell and ad∣uice. Whereunto the Acheins consented, for that they conceiued that the affection and loue of the one and the other, would by this meanes be more firme vnto them, considering that they which were within had all their hope in them, and that the banished men would conceiue, that they had beene preserued by the benefit of the Acheins: The Cyne∣thenses sent backe the Garrison of the Acheins with their Captaine, and called the banished men into their Towne, which were to the number of three hundred, in taking their Faith with Oathes, whereby men may be most religiously bound. But presently after they were receiued into the Towne, they resolued among themselues to betray it, and to be reuenged on those which had preserued them, without any consideration of the cause of this new pra∣ctise: So as I am of opinion, that at the time when they sacrificed, and gaue their Faith and Oathes, that euen then they resolued to contemne the Gods, and vse cruelty towards those which had saued their liues: for they had scarce set footing within the Towne, but they called the Etoli∣ens to deliuer it vnto them. The businesse was mannaged in this manner. Some of the banished men, were created Polemarches:Polemarches. It is a Magistrate which hath charge of shutting of the Gates, and keeping the keyes at night, and in the day time to attend the Guard thereof. The Etoliens hauing their ladders and other things necessary, attended the execution of the enterprize. The Polemarches slew their Companions which were not of their faction, and opened the Gate. This done, the Etoliens en∣tred, some by the Gate, some by Ladders. The whole Citie being troubled by this new accident, ranne vp and downe full of feare and la∣mentation: for that they could not runne to the Gate, for that the Ene∣mies cast themselues from the walls, neither could they goe to the walls, for that they came by multitudes in at the Gate. And thus the Etoliens tooke the Towne presently,Cynethe taken by the Etliens. where among all the outrages which they committed, they did one act of great iustice, for they slew all the Tray∣tors, and spoiled their goods. The like they did to others, taking away all their substance. Men were tormented to confesse their Goods, if
they had hidden away, and many others slaine. Hauing thus taken the Towne, and after some fewe dayes leauing a sufficient Garrison, they marcht with their Army towards Luses. Where approaching neere to Diana's Temple, which is betwixt Clitoria and Cynethe, and is held by the Grecians as a place of Freedome, they had an intent to carry away the Cattell of the Goddesse, and to rauish all the Treasure of the Temple. But the Lusiates offered them part to temper their wickednesse. The which being receiued, the Etoliens parting from thence, planted their Campe neere vnto Clitoria. At that time Arate, chiefe of the Acheins, had sent an Embassie to Phi∣lip for succours, and had assembled the choyce of the youth from all parts, and demanded from the Lacedemonians and Messeniens, the num∣ber of men, which they were to furnish by the accord.The Clytoriens assaulted by the Etoliens. The Etoliens began first to perswade the Clytoriens, to leaue the alliance of the Ache∣ins and to imbrace their party. The which being refused, they tormen∣ted them with diuers assaults, and scaling the walls, they laboured to en∣ter the Towne: But for that the Inhabitants defended themselues cou∣ragiously, they rais'd the Siege, being in despaire to take it; and retur∣ned to Cynethe, spoiling the Sheepe and Cattell of the Goddesse, mea∣ning to deliuer the Towne to the Elienses: Vpon refusall they resolued to keepe it, making Euripides Captaine. But being afterwards terrified with the Newes of the succours of Macedon▪ and the preparation of the Acheins, they burnt it,Cynethe burnt by the Etliens. and taking their wayes againe towards Rhie, they resolued to passe there. Taurion aduertised that the Etoliens marcht, and of the ruine of Cynethe, and that Demetrius of Phareh, was come from the Cyclades to Cenchrea, hee perswaded him to succour the Ache∣ins, and to hinder the passage of the Etoliens, in transporting the ships by the Isthmus. Demetrius had parted from the Iland with profit, but with little ho∣nour, for that the Rhodiens came against him with an Army at Sea, hee yielded easily to Taurion: and the rather for that he furnished the ne∣cessary expences the transport of the Shippes, wherefore after hee had transported them, and was aduertised that the Etoliens were past two dayes before, hee sail'd againe to Corinthe, after he had spoiled some of the Etoliens Coasts: with whom the Lacedemonians hauing secret in∣telligence (as we haue said) they deferr'd to send the succours promised by the accord, sending onely some Horse and foot for a colour. Arate made shew to his people, that for the present hee would performe the duty of a Citizen, rather then of a Captaine without any trouble, for the remembrance of the losse which he had made, vntill that Scope and Do∣rimache were retired, hauing ruined the whole Prouince, and what they pleased: although it were no difficult thing to defeat them in their rough and narrow passages. And although the Cynethenses had suffered a wonderfull losse of all their goods, and were in a manner all slaine, yet the world held them worthy of the punishment which they endured. And for that the people of Arcadia haue a certaine fame and re∣nowne of good men,The customes of the Arcadi∣ans. not onely for their easie kinde of life, and their good dispositions, and great honesty towards all the world, but also for
the honour and reuerence they beare vnto the Gods. I haue thought it good to relate in few words, something concerning the rudenesse of the Cynethenses, and to let the world vnderstand (seeing they were held to be Arcadians) how they did so much differ from the other Grecians of that time, in wickednesse and cruelty. For my part I thinke this hath happened, for that they haue beene the first and the onely men which among all the Arcadians haue neglected that which their Ancestors had wisely inuented. It is certaine that Musique,Musique pro∣fitable to all the world. (I meane true Musique) is profitable to all the world, and necessary for the Arcadians: Neither is that true which Ephorus (speaking without reason) writes in the Proeme of his Histo∣ries, that Musique is inuented to deceiue and abuse men: Neither must wee thinke that the ancient Candyots and Lacedemonians, had without reason, preferr'd the Flute and Songs before the Trumpet in Warre: Neither had the ancient Arcadians Musique in so great honour in their Common-wealth, as they not onely caused Children to learne it, but also young men vnto the age of thirty yeares, who otherwise were rude and vnciuill. It is no vnknowne thing, that in Arcadia alone, they did accustome their children from their infancies, to sing praises in Hymnes, by the which euery one did vse to commend the Angels of his Birth, vertuous Men, and the Gods. And after all this they doe yearely make Games to father , with Songs and Dances, instructed in the Disci∣plines of Philoxenes, and Tymotheus. And those of Children,The Games of Children and Youth. are cal∣led the Games of Children, and the others the Games of Youth: Fi∣nally, all their life is adicted to this kinde of singing, not so much for the pleasure they take to heare the Musique, as to excite them to sing toge∣ther. Moreouer, if any one be ignorant in other Arts, it is held no shame: but none of them may be ignorant of Musique: for they learne it by necessity: Neither may he confesse that he vnderstands it not, for that among them is reputed infamous. Finally, the young men doe yearely present Shewes and Games in the Theater to the Burgesses, with Songs and Dances, at the publique charge. Which things (in my opinion) were wisely inuented by their Ancestors, Not for laciuious∣nesse or delights, but for that they see the continuall toile of the people in manuring the land, with a rudenesse and brutishnesse of life, and more∣ouer with an austeere kinde of liuing, which proceedes from the cold∣nesse and roughnesse of the Ayre, to the which of necessity we growe like. It is apparent that the Region of heauen, made Nations to differ in their manner of liuing, in their forme and complexion, and in many dis∣ciplines. Seeking then to make Nature pleasing and tractable, which of it selfe seemes fierce and rude, they first propounded all those things which we haue mentioned, and afterwards common assemblies, and many sacrifices, where as men and women frequented, and finally dan∣ced of Virgins and Children. All which things they haue done to the end that that which by Nature was rude in the hearts of men, might be made milde and pleasing by custome.The occasion of the ruine of Cynothenses. But for as much as the Cyne∣thenses, after some tract of time, became to disdaine these things, which
were aboue all things necessary for them, (inhabiting in the coldest part of Arcadia) they grew in a short time to such a rudenesse of life, as there was not any Citie in Greece, where there were more villanies and Mur∣thers committed. The testimony of their wicked life is most manifest, for that the other people of Arcadia detested their manner of liuing: For at what time as they sent an Embassie to Sparta, after this great se∣dition, in what Towne so euer they entred during their voyage, they were chased away ignominiously, and forbidden to returne: and the Mantiniens, after their departure, purged the Citie, and all places there∣abouts with sacrifices. We haue related these things, to aduise the Cities of Arcadia, not to giue ouer the custome of their Countrey: and to the end men should not thinke that they were so much giuen to the Musique of lasciuious∣nesse, and that by this meanes no man should mocke at their custome: I haue also done it for the loue of the Cynethenses: to the end (the Gods permitting it) that in punishing them, they may leade a better life and loue Musique, for it is the meanes by the which they may leaue their naturall Rusticitie. Seeing then we haue spoken sufficiently of the Cynethenses manner of liuing, and of their ruine, let vs returne where we left. The Etoliens hauing ouer-runne all Morea, and put the Country to fire and sword, returned to their houses. Finally, Philip King of Macedon,Philip comes to Corinthe. came to Corinthe succour the Achiens with an Army. But hearing that all was past, he sends post to his Allies, aduising them to send men vnto him to Corinthe, to conferre of their common affaires. In the meane time he causeth his Army to martch towards Tegee,A mutinie among the Lacedomoni∣ans. for that he was aduertised that the Lacedemonians were in mutinie among them∣selues. And for that they had liued long vnder Kings, and had then re∣couered their liberty vnder the conduct of Antigonus, being subiect to no man, they fell into diuers factions, euery man seeking to haue autho∣rity in the Common-wealth aboue his fellow. There were two among the Gouernours, which held their Councell so secret, as no man could discouer it: the rest to the number of three, carried themselues openly for the Etolien party, being confident that Philip considering his age, could make no alteration in Morea. But when as contrary to their hope and expectation, they had newes of the flight of Etoliens in Morea, and of the comming of Philip King of Macedon: These three Gouernours of the Citie, hauing no confidence in one of the other two, called Adi∣mant, for that knowing their secrets, he seemed to dislike of their pro∣ceedings, and fearing that at the comming of Philip all would be disco∣uered. They declared themselues to certaine young men, and after∣wards caused all the people to assemble in Armes, at Iuno's Temple, by the sound of the Trumpet, as if the Macedonians were come against the Spartains: who suddainly assembled vpon this new accident. Adimant disliking this, came into the assembly, saying: The Trum∣pet should haue sounded some dayes past, and this assembly of men in Armes should haue beene made, when as wee heard that the Etoliens, Enemies to the Lacedemonians, approached their Mountaines, not now
when as we are aduertised, that the Macedonians our Benefactors and preseruers came with their King. And whilest he continued this speech, the young men falling vpon him, slew him cruelly, with Sthenelaus, Al∣camenes, Thyestes, Byonides,The Murther of the Gouer∣nours of the Lacedemonians. and diuers others. As for Polyphonte, hee retired with his friends to Philip, hauing long before foreseene the fu∣ture. Things passing in this manner,Ambassadours sent from La∣cedemon to Philip. the Lacedemonian Gouernours sent an Embassie to the King to lay the wrong vpon them that were slaine, and to perswade him to proceede no farther, vntill that all the troubles of the Citie were pacified: Ciuing him to vnderstand, that the Lacede∣monians kept their faith and friendship with the Macedonians inuiolable. The Ambassadours meeting the King neere vnto the Mountaine of Par∣thenia, deliuered their charge. Who being heard, Philip aduised them to returne speedily, and to aduertise the Gouernours that hee would soone returne with his Army to Tegee, and that they should presently send the chiefe of their Citie to Corinthe, to conferre of their present affaires. By this meanes the Ambassadours being returned, and hauing ac∣quainted them with Philips answere, the Gouernours sent him tenne of the chiefe of the Citie, among the which Omias was the first, who com∣ming to Tegee, and entring into the Kings priuie Councell, they vsed dis∣gracefull speeches of Adionant and his confederates: as if he had bin the cause of this Mutinie. Finally, they omitted nothing, which they thought fit to purchase the Kings loue, promising to doe any thing, whereby it should appeare plainely, that they continued constant in the Kings alliance and friendship. Hauing deliuered these things, the Lacedemonians went out of the Councell. The Macedonians were of diuers opinions concerning these affaires: for some being aduertised of the Enterprizes, which the Spartains made with the Etoliens, being also of opinion, that Adimant had beene slaine for the loue he bare vnto the Macedonians, beganne to counsell the King, to make the Lacedemonians an example to others, as Alexander had done the Thebains,Alexander the great. when he came to be King. The other Senators said, that this kinde of punishment was more rigorous then their deedes deserued, and that they should onely let the offenders know their offence, and depriue them of the gouernment of the Com∣mon-weale, and giue it to his friends. All which being heard, the King deliuered his opinion, (if it be credible that it was his owne) for it is not likely that a young man who had scarce attained the age of seauenteene yeares, could giue iudgement in so great affaires. But it becomes a Hi∣storiographer to attribute the resolution taken in Councell to Princes, by whose will all things are gouerned. So they which read or heare this History, must conceiue that these kinde of sentences proceede from those which are the wisest, and neerest vnto Princes: as if they should attribute this to Arate, who at that time was in great authority with the King▪ Philip therefore said,Philips wise and wre that if the Allies attempted any thing in parti∣cular among themselues, it did not concerne him, but onely to warne
them by words or letters: But if they offended their Allies openly, they must receiue a publique punishment, and that the Lacedemonians had not infringed the common alliance in any thing, but contrariwise had offred to doe all things for the Macedonians: and that moreouer hee must not study to intreate them worse, considering that it were a∣gainst reason, to take reuenge on those for a light cause, who being Enemies his Father had pardoned. The Kings Sentence being confir∣med, Petreus a Friend to Philip, was presently appointed to goe to Lacedemon with the Embassie, hauing charge to aduise the Spar∣tans to liue in Friendship, and to take an Oath for the preseruation of their Faith and League. In the meane time Philip razeth his Campe, and returnes to Co∣rinthe, leauing a great hope in the Allies of his good disposition, ha∣uing vsed the Lacedemonians so graciously. And hauing found the Embassadours of the Allies at Corinthe, who were assembled there by his command,Complaints of diuers people against the E∣toliens. they began to hold a Councell for the common af∣faires of Greece, where as all with one voice, had the actions of the Etoliens in execration. The Beociens charged them that in the time of peace they had spoyled Minerua's Temple: and the Phocenses that hauing planted their Campe neere vnto Ambryse and Daulia, they had a resolution to take them. The Epiretes shewed that they had put all their Countrey to fire and sword: the Acarnanians that they had attempted to take a very rich Towne in the Night by Scala∣doe. Finally, the Acheins propounded, that they had taken Caria belonging to Megalopolis: That they had ouer-run and spoiled the Bounds of Patras and Phare, and put Cynethe to fire and sword, and then razed it: And moreouer, had spoiled Diana's Temple at Luses, and besieged the Clitorins: and that finally they had made Warre at Sea to Pyle, and at Land to Megalopolis, ioyning with the Slauonians. The Councell of the Allies hearing these things, all with one con∣sent concluded to make Warre against the Etoliens. It was resolued in Conncell,Warre conclu∣ded against the Etoliens. that all they should bee receiued into the league, whose Townes of Prouinces had beene taken by the Etoliens after the death of Demetrins, who was Father to Philip. And that moreouer they which through the necessity of the time had beene forced to make an alliance with the Etoliens, should be restored to their former liberty, and it should bee lawfull for them to liue according to the Lawes and customes of their owne Countries. Finally, they ordained that the Amphictions should bee restored to their Lawes,The Amphicti∣ons. and haue the su∣perintendency of the Temple, which at that time the Etoliens held, who had made themselues Lords. When as these things had beene thus resolued, the first yeare of the hundred and fortieth Olympiade, suddainly the Warre of the Allies was kindled, which tooke its iust beginning from the outrages done by the Etoliens, whereof we haue spoken. They that were in the assembly, sent presently to the Allies, to aduertise them, that according vnto that which had beene or∣dayned, euery one for his part should make Warre against the Etoliens. Moreouer, Philip writes vnto the Etoliens, that if they
would answere any thing to that they were charged, they should send vnto him: And that they were mad with folly, if spoiling and rui∣ning all the World without any open Warre, they which were vn∣iustly wronged, would not seeke reuenge: and that in doing so, they would be held to begin the Warre. The Etoliens hauing receiued these Letters, making no stay for the Kings comming, appointed a day to goe to Rhie, to meete the King. But when as they were aduertised of that which had beene concluded in the assembly, they sent a Post vn∣to the King, to let him vnderstand that they could not resolue any thing concerning the affaires of the Common-weale, before the Etoliens had called an assembly. The Acheins hauing held their Diet at Egia according to their cu∣stome, they confirmed the resolution: and presently signified Warre to the Etoliens. In the meane time Philip comming to Egia, vsed a gracious and friendly Speech vnto them, the Acheins embraced his words with great affection, renuing that ancient Friendship which they had held with his Predecessours. At that time the day of the Election was come, and the Etoliens had made choice of Scope for their Captaine,Scope chosen Head of the Etoliens. who had beene the first Author of the former alterations. Wherevpon I know not what to say: for a warre mannaged by a com∣mon consent; a spoile committed by souldiers vpon al their neighbours; not to punish such crimes; to aduance and honour the Captaines, and Heads of such actions, seemes to mee an absolute villany. For how can wee otherwise call this kind of Malice? That which I say, is mani∣fest herein.Phebidius. When as Phebidius had violated the Cadmian league, the Lacedemonians punished the Authour of the Crime, yet they did not with-draw their Garrisons: as on the other side, it is fit to make satis∣faction for the vniust wrongs committed. The Thebains did other∣wise: For when as by a publique edict, they had restored the Townes to their liberty, and to their owne Lawes, according to the Antalci∣dan peace, yet they did not depriue the Magistrates. And when as hauing a league with the Mantiniens, they had ruined them, they said they had done them no wrong, for that they had transported them from one Towne into many. Hee is simple, and accompanied with Malice, who shutting his owne eyes,Enuy the cause of great mis∣chiefe. thinkes he is not seene. Beleeue me, En∣uy hath beene a great occasion of the mischiefe of these two Citties: the which no man of iudgement should follow in his priuate or pub∣lique affaires. But when as Philip had receiued money from the Acheins, hee retired into Macedony with his Army, to leuie men, and to make necessary preparations for the Warre. Finally, hee left a great hope of Clemency, not onely in the Allies, but throughout all Greece, for the conclusion which was generally confirmed. These things were done at such time as Hannibal chiefe of the Cartha∣ginians, besieged Sagont after that he had conquered all beyond the Ri∣uer of Ebo. If then the beginning of Hannibals actions fall out at the same time with those of Greece, it is apparent that we haue not vnadui∣sedly related his vallour in the last Booke: considering that wee follow the order of time. And for that the Affaires of Italy, Greece, and
Asia, had their proper beginnings, and their common-ends, it hath beene necessary to make a particular relation of either of them, vntill wee come vnto the time: when the said affaires being intermixt toge∣ther, haue begun to draw vnto the same end. By this meanes the re∣lation of euery part is more manifest, and the vniting of all more plaine. You must vnderstand, that they were intermixt and turned to the same end, in the third yeare of the hundred and fortieth Olympiade. Where∣fore we will relate in common that which followed. As for that which was before this time, we haue deliuered it in particular, euery thing in its place in the last Booke: to the end that the time should not only fol∣low, but there should be an vnion of all things. Philip wintring in Macedony, made a new leuie of men, and ne∣cessary prouisions for the Warre: he fortified the Townes against the attempt of the Barbarians, which dwelt about Sparta. After∣wards he went to Scardilaide, with whom hee made a league, pro∣mising him aide and succours to pacifie the affaires of Sclauonia: and in blaming the Etoliens, he perswaded him to what he would:The difference betwixt a pri∣uate and pub∣lique iniury. For a pri∣uate iniury doth not differ from a publique, but by the number and greatnesse of things which happen. It is also an ordinary thing that the alliance of wicked men is easily broken, if Equity and Iustice bee not obserued. The which happened at that time to the Etoliens. You must vnderstand, that when as they had compounded with Scerdi∣laide, that the Booty should bee equally diuided, if hee would fall vpon the Acheins with them; who giuing credit to their words, marcht with them to Cynethe, where after the taking and razing there∣of, the Etoliens carried away great store of Gold, and a great number of Cattell, diuiding the Booty among themselues, whereof they did frustrate Scerdilaide. Wherefore he grew into choller and indignati∣on: and when as Philip put him in minde thereof, hee suddainly con∣firmed the alliance vnder these Conditions: that he should haue twelue thousand Crownes yearely, and should saile with thirty ships, ma∣king Warre by Sea against the Etoliens. Behold the things with such like which Philip contriued. In the meane time the Embassadours sent vn∣to the Allies arriued, first in Acarnania: whereas letting them vnder∣stand what they were enioyned, they presently and freely confirme what had beene decreed, and make Warre against the Etoliens: al∣though they had beene to bee pardoned, if they had forborne longer then the rest: considering that for their neighbourhood, they seemed to haue iust cause of feare, and that they had formerly had experience of what consequence the hatred of the Etoliens was vnto them, and for that they alone might be ruined. It is true, and I am of opinion, that honest men, and such as respect their honour, should hold nothing more deare, then to giue order that their duty may in no sort be forgot∣ten,The commen∣dation of the Acarnanians. the which the Acarnanians haue alwayes obserued aboue all the Greclans, although they had but a small beginning: whereby it fol∣lows, that no man should forbeare to make this people a Companion in his affaires: for they haue naturally something in them that is generous and noble, and desirous of liberty. The Epirotes on the other side, after
they had heard what the Embassadours had in charge, they allowed of the resolution: Yet they made answere, that they would not make War against the Etoliens, before they were aduertised that Philip had begun it. And afterwards they made answer to an Embassie of the Etoliens, that they had decreed to maintaine peace with them, shewing themselues in such affaires fearefull and inconstant. For they sent Embassadours vnto King Ptolomy, to intreate him not to furnish the Etoliens a∣gainst Philip and his Allies, with money, victuals, or any other succours. But the Messeniens (for whose cause this Warre was kindled) an∣swered the Embassadours,Answeres to Embassadours. that they would not make Warre against the Etoliens, before they had recouered (by the meanes of their Allies) the Towne of Phigalea, scituated in the Mountaines, which then the Etoliens detained from them vniustly. Which aduice was giuen by Oenes and Nicippus, Gouernours of the Towne,The blame of the Epirotes. with the con∣sent of some of the principall, notwithstanding that the Commons opposed. Wherein I conceiue they vnderstood not their Duty, nor the profit of their Common-wealth. I am of opinion that we should flie and auoide Warre, but not in such sort, that wee should choose to endure, and suffer all things rather then to enter into it. But why should wee commend an equality in a Common-wealth, or Faith, or the name of liberty which is so pleasing, if there were any thing to be preferr'd to peace? I doe not commend the ▪ who in the time of the Warre of Media, made choice of it for feare, to free them∣selues from the common calamity and danger of all Greece, where∣by they were after ruined. Neither am  of the opinion of Pindarus, who in his Poefies exhorts the Burgesses, that in neglecting all other things, they should onely seeke for peace and rest: and hauing sought for peace, hee defines it to bee the end of rest and a cleare light. But when as hee thought to haue spoken with great perswasions, soone after hee deliuered a sentence, the most scandalous and incommodious thing in the World. It is true that peace is a most excellent thing, if it bee iust and honest. Yet wee may not doe an vnreasonable act, nor suffer an infamy to enioy it. It is certaine that the Gouernours and chiefe men of Messene, hauing a regard to their priuate profits, were much inclined to peace, which was not reasonable. Wherefore as of∣ten the times were propitious vnto them, according to their desires, and sometime dangerous, they fell continually into the same inconue∣nience: so as alwayes hauing the same resolution to keepe the peace, they many times brought their Countrey into great danger. Where∣of I conceiue the cause was,The Messeniens. alwayes friends to the Arcadi∣ns, and Ene∣mies to the La∣cedemonians. for that they were Neighbours to two principall Citties of Greece, that is to say, the Arcadians, to whom they had beene alwayes Allies and Friends, and the Lacedemonians, to whom they had beene continuall Enemies, yet they did not openly car∣ry themselues as Enemies to the Lacedemonians, or Friends to the Arca∣dians: By this meanes they liued in peace, when as the said Citties made war betwixt themselues, or with other. But when as the Lacedemnians (after they had made a peace with their other enemies) ran vpon them,
they were forced to serue them with ignominy: or abandon the Coun∣trey with their Wiues and Children, to auoide seruitude: Considering that they were not able with their owne forces to resist the power of the Lacedemonians, nor to defend themselues with the helpe and succor of the Arcadians, whose Friendship they were not able to keepe. The which hath often happened vnto them of late yeares. I pray vnto God if it bee his will, that the estate wherein the affaires of Mo∣rea now stands, may be such, as that which wee haue to say, may not take place. Yet if there happen any alteration, I see but one hope for the Messeniens and Megalopolitains, to preserue and defend their Countrey, if following the sentence of Epaminondas, they liue alwayes well vnited, and gouerne their Councels and Affaires with one consent, whereof they haue ancient testimonies of the truth. The Messeniens as Calistines doth report, erected a Pillar in the Temple of Iupiter of Lyce, in the time of Aristomenes, on the which these Verses were ingrauen. Time on a wicked King hath vengeance showne, The Traytour to the Messaine state Ioue hath made knowne: Nor could hee shunne the most reuengefull fate Of Ioue, who fauours the Arcadian state. You must vnderstand that for as much as they had beene chased from their Countrey, they wrote these Verses, as meaning to pray vn∣to the Gods for their second Countrey. For the which in my con∣ceit they had good reason. For the Arcadians not onely receiued them into their Citty, during the Warre of Aristomenes, being ba∣nished and chased away, making them Burgesses, and assisting them with Councell and Wealth: But they also suffered them to marry their Daughters vnto their Sonnes. Moreouer, hauing examined the Treason of King Aristocrates,Aristocrates. they not onely put him cruelly to death, but punished all the Race proceeding from so wicked a stocke. But leauing the times past, let vs come to things of a fresher Date, and are happened since this alliance betwixt the two Citties, which gaue sufficient testimony of that which we haue spoken. You must vnderstand that at what time the Lacedemonians began (after that great Victory which the Grecians had neere vnto Mantinea by the death of Epaminondas) to enter into hope to make the Messe∣niens subiect, not comprehending them in the accord, the Megalo∣politains and all the Citties of the league tooke these things so to heart for the Messeniens, as presently they receiued them into their Alli∣ance, and excluded the Lacedemonians alone of all the Grecians. Mat∣ters standing in this estate, who will not thinke but wee had reason to say that which wee haue formerly spoken? Wee haue continued this discourse of the Arcadians and Messeniens at length, to the end that remembring the outrages which the Lacedemonians had many times done them, they should continue alwayes true and con∣stant in their Faith and Friendship: and that for no feare of
their affaires, nor for any desire of peace, they should neuer aban∣don one another when it concernes their safety. But let vs returne now to the discourse where we left. The Lacedemonians according to their manner of liuing, sent backe the Embassadours of the league without any answere: they were so sot∣tish and ouer-weening. Wherefore I hold that to bee true, which is commonly spoken, that ouer-weening doth many times make men mad, and drawes them to ruine. After all these things, when as the new Megistrates were created, they which in the beginning made that sedition in the Common-wealth, and were the cause of the Murthers before mentioned,Machate sent Embassadour from the Eto∣liens to the La∣cedemonians. sent to the Etoliens, requiring them to send an Em∣bassie. The which when they had easily obtained, and that Macha∣te Embassadour for the Etoliens, was come to Lacedemon, they goe presently to the Gouernours of the Citty, telling them, that they must assemble the people to heare this Embassie, and to create accor∣ding to the custome of the Countrey: and that they must no longer suf∣fer the Empire of the Heraclidis to be lost, contrary to the Lawes of the Citty. And although the Gouernours were discontented to see the present estate of their affaires, yet not able to resist their force, fearing also the young men, they made answere, that as for Kings they would aduise of it afterwards, and presently they would assemble the people to heare Machate. The assembly being made, they caused  enter, who be∣gan to perswade them to imbrace the alliance of the Etoliens: blaming the Macedonians much without reason, and speaking many false things in praise of the Etoliens. Hauing ended his speech, there was a long debate among the people, and their opinions were diuers: for some held it fit to follow the Etolien party, and to embrace their alliance: others were of a contrary opinion, insisting that they should preserue the Friendship of the Macedonians. Finally, after that some Sena∣tors were risen, and had put them in minde of the benefits of Anti∣gonus, and of the Macedonians, and of the losse they had in the time of Carixenes and Timee, when as the Etoliens entred the Spartains Coun∣trey,Carixene. Timee. and put all to fire and sword, attempting to surprize the Towne, restoring the banished men by force and policy, they caused many to change their opinion: and in the end the people were perswaded to en∣tertaine their Friendship with Philip and the Macedonians. Matters thus decided, Machate returnes into Etolia, hauing effected nothing of that for which hee came. The Heads of this Mutiny, whereof wee haue spoken, being discontented herewith, began to plot a most cruell En∣terprize. Soone after the Youth were to assemble in Armes, to performe a Sacrifice which was done yearely, after the manner of the Countrey in Pallas Temple, where the Gouernours of the Citty had the authority, and continued some dayes in the Temple. Wherefore they corrupted some of the Yong men which should be there in Armes with gifts. who at a time appointed amongst them, seeing the Gouernors busie at the Sacrifices, should assaile them suddainly, and kill them like Sheepe. And
although they were in the Temple, the which the Lacedemonians ho∣noured as a Sanctuary, and where all malefactors,The murther of the Lacede∣monian Gouer∣nours by the young men. (although they were condemned to dye) were in safety, yet the insolence of men was growne to so great a cruelty, as they slew all the Magistrates before the Altars, and on the Tables of the Goddesse. The like they did afterwards to the Senators, which had followed the opinion of Herides. Finally, af∣ter they had chased out of their Citie those that were opposite to the Etoliens, they created new Magistrates of their owne faction: making a league with the Etoliens.A league made betweene the Lacedemonians and Etoliens. By this meanes they declared themselues at one instant Enemies to the Acheins, and vnthankfull to the Macedoni∣ans. They had a great hope in the loue of Cleomenes, whose comming they expected with great affection. Beleeue mee, the mildnesse and courtesie of Princes hath so great power,The power of clemoncie in Princes. as it leaues in the hearts of men, not onely by their presence, but also by their absence, a generall zeale of loue and good will towards them. The Lacedemonians hauing the Gouernment of their Common-wealth, almost for the space of three yeares, after that Cleomenes had beene chased away, they neuer thought of chusing a King: But when they had newes of his death, they had an humour to chuse one: where∣of the first Authors of this practise, were the heads of the sedition, who had made the league with the Etoliens. Wherefore they elected (accor∣ding to their lawes and customes) for one of their Kings, one named Agesipoles, being yet very young, the sonne of Agesipoles, who was sonne to Cleombrotus. It happened that he raigned at such time, as Leonides was deposed from the Magistracie: for that hee was the neerest of that race. And they gaue him for Tutor Cleomenes, the sonne of Cleombro∣tus, and brother to Agesiples. And although that Archidamus had two sonnes by the daughter of Hippomedon, who was sonne to Eude∣mides: and Hippomedon liuing still, who was sonne to Agesilaus, and Nephew to Edemides: and that there were many others of the same blood, yet they made choise for their King, (making no account of the rest nor of their race) of Licurgus,Licurgus cho∣sen King. who was of another house, and had no expectance to raigne. In truth it was said, that he was of the race of Hercules, and created King of Sparta, in giuing to euery one of the Ma∣gistrates sixe hundred Crownes. Thus you see that all wicked things haue alwayes beene set to saile. But it was not long but the heads of this crime suffered the punishment of their folly and ouer-weening. Machate aduertised of that which had beene done at Lacedemon, returnes againe to Sparta, and perswades the Kings and Magistrates to make warre against the Acheins, saying, that by this meanes, the ambition of those Lacedemonians which held the contrary party, and fled the alliance of the Etoliens, might be easily sup∣prest.Marchate pre∣uailes in his enterprize. When as the Kings and Magistrates were perswaded by his words, he returned into Etolia, hauing done what he desired by the fol∣ly of the Lacedemonians. Afterwards Licurgus leuying mercenary men, and assembling the people of the Citie, enters into the limits of the Ar∣giues: whom he assailes vnprouided, expecting no such vsage from the Lacedemonians:Townes taken in Argos by Li∣curgus. And suddainly takes Polychne, Parsie, Lece, Cyphas,
and some other of their Burroughes, putting all the Countrey to fire and sword. These things being done, the Lacedemonians declared warre against the Acheins. And in the meane time Mahbate went to the other neighbour Townes, perswading them as he had done the Lacedemoni∣ans. By this meanes the Etoliens (to whom all things succeeded hap∣pily) vndertooke the warre boldly. Contrariwise, all things were auerse to the Aecheins. For King Philip (in whom they chiefely relied) did but then leuie men: the Epirotes had not yet begun the warre with the Etoliens, and the Messeniens liued in peace. The Etoliens hauing drawne vnto them the Elienses, and Lacedemonians, prest the Acheins of all sides. It happened that Arate had left the gouernment, and his sonne Arate was chosen chiefe of the Acheins, and that Scope was Cap∣taine Generall of the Etolien Army, but he was not to stay long in it: for the Etoliens at that time made their election, after the middest of Sep∣tember, and the Acheins about the beginning of May. Summer being past, when as young Arate had vndertaken the gouern∣ment, all the warres in a manner had one beginning. For Hanibal pre∣pared at that time for the siege of Sagont: The Romans sent Lucius Emi∣lius into Sclauonia against Demetrius of Phare: Antiochus began the warre in Syria, by the meanes of Ptolomais and Antyrus, which were de∣liuered vnto him in treason by Theodotus: and Ptolomy against Antiochus, Licurgus to follow Cleomenes, besieged Athence, a Towne of the Mega∣lopolitains.Philips Army. The Acheins leuied both Horse and Foote. Philip parted from Macedon with his Army, hauing about tenne thousand Leginaries, and fiue thousand men arm'd with Targets, and about eight hundred Horse. This was the preparation for warre at that time. The Rhodiens made warre at the same time against the Constantinopolitains for some such causes.The scituation of Constanti∣nople. The Constantinopolitains inhabit a City strong by scituation, and wonderfull commodious to finde all things that may giue content vnto man: For it is so well seated vpon the Gulfe of Pontus, as no Mar∣chant can enter nor goe forth, but at the mercy of Constantinople. And as the Pontique Sea, brings any things necessary for man, the Constanti∣nopolitains are the Masters: for the Countries there-abouts supplies them with great aboundance of Leather for their common vse, and a great multitude of Stags, and they send to vs honey for daintinesse, wax, flesh salted, and such like things: They draw also from vs other things which abound in our Countries, as Oyles, and all sorts of Wines: Som∣times they furnish Wheat, and we doe the like to them. These are the things whereof the Grecians make vse, or else the vent would bee vnprofitable vnto them; whereas the Constantinopolitains should shew themselues malicious in allying themselues to the Gaules, or to any other barbarous Neighbours: So as the Grecians should be for∣ced to abandon the Pontique Sea, for the straightnesse of the places, and the multitude of Barbarians. Wherefore the Constantinopolitains haue great commodities by reason of their scituation, transporting those things whereof they abound, and drawing vnto them what they want without any paine or danger. They are also very profitable to the other Cities of Greece. And therefore the Grecians did honour and
esteeme them worthy, to whom they not onely giue thanks, but they are bound to giue them Succours against the Barbarians, as doing good to all men. We haue thought good to shew the cause, why this Citie is so happy: for that there are many which know not the nature and property of the place: and it hath beene alwayes our desire, that such things might come to the knowledge of many: and that if it might be, they might be visible to the eye, if not, yet at the lest as much as should be possible, they might be comprehended in the vnderstanding. The Sea then which they call Pontique,The circuit of the Pontique Sea. hath in circuit two and twen∣ty thousand furlongs, or there-abouts, hauing two mouthes opposite one to the other: whereof the one comes from Propontis, and the other from the blacke Sea, the which hath in circuit eight thousand furlongs. But for that diuers great Riuers fall from Asia into it, and more out of Europe, it sometimes flowes into the Pontique Sea by its mouth, and from thence into Propontis.Bosphorus Ci∣meriques. The Mouth of the blacke Sea is called Bosphorus Cimeriques, and is thirty furlongs broad, and threescore in length. As for the mouth of the Pontique Sea, it is called the streight of Con∣stantinople, whose length is not in euery place equall: for from the Pro∣pontis the space betwixt Chalcedon, and Constantinople, containes foure∣teene furlongs, and from the Pontique Sea, the which they call Fanum, scituated in Asia (whereas Iason first as they sacrificed to the twelue Gods, returning from Cholchos) is distant from Europe tenne furlongs. Moreouer,Two causes why the black Sea and the Pontique run continually. they deliuer two reasons, why the blacke Sea and the Pon∣tique runne continually: whereof the one is well knowne, for that the water encreaseth by the multitude of Riuers which fall continually into it, and hauing no other meanes to voide it, it must of necessity encrease, so as it is forced to passe away by its mouth. The other is, that the bot∣tome is fill'd with aboundance of sand, which the Riuers bring conti∣nually into it: so as the water is forced to swell, and so to passe away. These are the true causes of their course, which neede not the relation of Marchants to purchase credit, but onely of naturall reason, which is the truest testimony that can be found. But seeing wee are fallen vpon this discourse, wee must not omit any thing, (as many Historiographers doe) to seeke out the secrets of Na∣ture: and wee must vse (as much as possibly wee may) a demonstratiue relation, to the end wee may leaue nothing in doubt to those which de∣sire to vnderstand. Neither were it sitting in these times, (when as all things haue beene discouered) to seeke the testimony of Poets or fabu∣lous Writers in doubtfull things: the which former Historiographers haue done. By this meanes, as Heraclides saith, they haue not propounded testi∣monies worthy of credit, in doubtfull things, and which are in debate. Wee therefore say that the Pontique Sea fills it selfe continually with sand, which the Riuers bring into it, and that in time it will be made euen with the land. The like we say of the blacke Sea, so as the scitu∣ation of places continue as wee see them at this day, and that the causes of the sand which fall continually into it cease not. For seeing the time
is infinite, and the bottomes whereof wee speake are enclosed with cer∣taine limits, it is manifest, that by a long succession of time, they would be fill'd vp by the descent of that which falls into them, bee it neuer so little, so as it continues. And for that the sands which are brought in∣to them, are of no small quantity, but in a manner infinite, it is apparent that what wee say will soone happen: and wee see it partly already, for that the blacke Sea is in a manner fill'd vp: for, the greatest depth hath not aboue fiue fathome, or seauen at the most, wherefore they cannot saile without great Ships, vnlesse the Marriners towe them off by their Masts. And although in the beginning the blacke Sea was like vnto the Pontique in taste, as the Ancients confesse, Yet it is now a very sweete Marish: for that the sea hath beene surmounted by aboundance of sands, and the many sweete Riuers which fall into it. The like will happen to the Pontique, and begins already: But it cannot be so easily discouered by reason of the great depth. And yet if we shall obserue it well,The Danowe. we shall finde it euident: for there are made within it by the sub∣stance (which by the descent is carryed, for that the Danowe enters by many mouthes) hills which the Marriners call Shelfes, a daies iourney from the shore:The shelfes in the Sea. where many times in the night they suffer Ship∣wracke. Behold the cause why these Shelfes are rather made farre within the Sea, then neere the shore: for the greater force the Riuer hath in their course, driuing the waues into the sea, it is necessary that the sand and other substance should be carried farre into it: And whereas the vio∣lency of the Riuers ceaseth by reason of the depth of the Sea, rather then by a naturall reason, all the sands sinke and findes a bottome where it stayes. Wherefore it happens that the shelfes of swiftest Riuers are found farthest into the Sea, and their depth neere vnto the shore: where as they which haue a slow course, are not farre from the mouth. Fi∣nally, wee must not wonder at the great quantity of wood, stone, and sand, which is carried into the Pontique Sea: for that many times wee see a torrent or land flood ouerflowe a great Countrey in a short time, carrying away earth and stone. So as it sometimes happens, there is such an alteration made of a great Countrey, as in seeing it soone after, we doe scarce know it. Wherefore wee must not wonder, if so many and such great Riuers fall continually into the Pontique Sea, in the end fill it vp: for this is not onely likely, but also necessary, if wee will dili∣gently examine the reason, the likelihood it should proue so, is great, for as much as the Pontique Sea differs from ours, for that the blacke Sea is sweeter. Wherefore it followes, that when as the Pontique Sea hath past as much more time as the blacke, for that it is of a greater depth, it will be sweet and moorish like vnto it: and the sooner, for that there are more Riuers, and greater fallen into it. Wee haue spoken these things for those which thinke that the Pontique Sea cannot bee fill'd vp, nor become moorish, being now a full Sea. Wee haue like∣wise done it, for that Saylors report such variety of lyes, to the end that like children we should not alwayes giue credit vnto them, for that wee haue not visited the places: and that hauing some knowledge of the
trueth, we may discouer whether that which they relate be true or false. But let vs returne to the commodity of the scituation of Constantinople, as the length of the Sea, which ioynes the Pontique, and the Propontis hath sixe score furlongs, and that Fanum limits the part which is from the Pontique Sea, and Constantinople. On the other which is from the Propontis, there stands a Temple be∣twixt both, which they call the refuge of Europe, seated vpon a Pro∣montory on the mouth of the Pontique Sea, and is distant from Asia fiue furlongs. It is scituated vpon the greatest streight of the Sea, where as King Darius made a Bridge as they report,King Darius. at such time as hee made a descent against the Sythians. From the Pontique Sea vnto this place the Waues runne equally, for that the shores of either side are of one distance.The refuge of Europe. But when it comes to the refuge of Europe, where (as we haue said) the Sea is narrowest, the Water of the Pontique Sea beats violently vpon the opposite Country, and those places of Asia which are right against it: Then it doubles its course, against the Pro∣montory of Europe neere vnto the Altars; and then it falls into the Country which the inhabitants call Oxe.The Country of the Oxe. This stands in Asia whereas Io (hauing past the Sea first) staied, as fables report. Yet in the end it takes its course to Constantinople, hauing bin beaten backe by the Oxe. Whereas dispersing it selfe about the City, it partly diuides it sylfe, and seperates that place which they call the Horne; and on the other side it flowes againe in its owne course. Yet this violence cannot passe into that Country which is right against it, where Calcedon stands: For where as it makes so many turnings here and there, and that the Gulfe is of no small breadth, it failes in a manner in this place, pas∣sing to the opposite part, not in a direct Line but bending: So as lea∣uing Calcedon, it takes its course by the Gulfe. This drawes so ma∣ny Commodities to the Constantinopolitains, and the contrary to the Calcedonians. And although it be apparent that the scituation of these two Cities are equally commodious, yet the passage is difficult for those which will saile to Calcedon. Contrariwise they are carried to Constantinople by the violence of the Waues: So as it seemes that they which will goe from Calcedon to Constantinople, cannot Saile directly thither by reason of the Violent course of the streame: And therefore they recouered the Oxe, and the Towne which they call Chrysopolis, from whence they are afterwards Transported by force vnto Con∣stantinople.Chrysopolis. Finally the Constantinopolitans haue a good commodity to Saile any way,The commodi∣ties of Constan∣tinople by the Sea of Abydos and Sestes. whither they bend to Hellesponte with a Southerly Winde, or else from the Pontique Sea to Hellesponte. You must vnderstand that the direct and common course from Constantinople to the streights of Propontis, is by Abydos and Sestes; and in like manner from the streights to Constantinople. But it fals out otherwise with the Calcedonians, for the reasons which we haue mentioned, and for the distance of the Re∣gion of the Cyziceneins; for it is a difficult thing for them which Saile from Hellesponte to Calcedon, to keepe the Coast of Europe, and in ap∣proaching the Country neere vnto Constantinople, to turne vnto Cal∣cedon,
for the violent course of the streame. And againe, it is impos∣sible to Saile from thence into Thrace, as well for the violence of the Waues, which go crosse, as the contrariety of the Windes, for a Southerly winde is good for those which enter into the Pontique Sea, and the contrary for such as go foorth; and these two winds only serue to go in,The continuall Warre of the Constantinopoli∣tains with the Thracians. and come out. These are the things whereby the Constantino∣politains draw such great commodities from the Sea. Now we will shew the discommodities which the City is to suffer by reason of the firme Land. Thrace enuirons the Country of Con∣stantinople in such sort, as it imbraceth it from Sea to Sea. So as they are in perpetuall Warre with the Thracians: For although they get a Battaile or two against this cruell and barbarous Nation, yet they can∣not quench the Wars, the multitude of people and Princes is so great: For that after they haue gotten Victory ouer one, there doth suddain∣ly arise three other mighty Princes, who ouer-runne the Country for spoile: Neither can they doe any thing to haue an accord, or to pacifie the Warre by paying of Tribute; for presently they find their Enemies multiplied. And therefore they are wasted and consumed with a con∣tinuall and cruell Warre. But what can you finde more disloyall then a neighbour enemy? Nor a Warre more dangerous then with a barba∣rous Nation? And with all these miseries wherewith they are oppres∣sed by Land, they are moreouer tormented with Tantalus paine, as the Poets feigne: For the Barbarians (considering that they haue a fer∣tile Region) ouer-run the Country and spoile it, after that the Land hath bin well manured, and that the fruite which is very beautifull, and in abundance, is in Season. The Constantinopolitains seeing so great a spoile of their goods, and the losse of their labour and charges, are wonderfully grieued. Yet bearing this War with the Thracians by a Custome, they alwaies held their auncient accord with the Gracians. But when as the Gaules be∣ganne to be their neighbours, vnder the Conduct of King Comontoire, they were in great danger. You must vnderstand that the Gaules which had made Warre vnder the leading of Brennus,Brennus Chiefe of the Gaules. and had escaped a great danger at Delphos, past not into Asia when as they came to Hellesponte: But allured with the commodity of the place, they staied neere vnto Constantinople, whereas after they vanquished the Thracians, and built Tyle the Royall,The Thracians vanquished by the Gaules. they made Warre against them of Constantinople. Who at the beginning pacified their fury with presents, when as they first assailed them vnder King Comontoire, in giuing them sometimes thirty thousand, another time fifty thousand, and sometimes a hun∣dred thousand Crownes, to the end they should not ouer-runne their Country.An absolute de∣feate of the aules Empire. Finally, they were forced to giue them foure score thou∣sand Crownes yearely vntill the time of Clyare, at what time the Gaules Empire had an end, and this Nation was wholly vanquished and ex∣tinct by the Thracians. Their Treasure being at that time exhausted by reason of these Tributes, they sent first an Embassie into Greece to demaund their assistance. But for that most of the Greecians made no account of it, they resolued to take a Tole vpon all these which should
passe into the Blacke Sea.A Tole impo∣sed vpon those that failed into the Blacke Sea by Constantino∣ple. The which all the rest disliking for the no∣uelty of the thing, they blamed the Rhodiens for suffering it, as being then Lords of the Sea. This was the beginning and Fountaine of the Warre which wee are now to describe. The Rhodiens mooued, aswell with their owne losse as with that of their neighbours, hauing first called their Allies, sent an Embassie to Constantinople to abollish the Tole. VVho per∣forming their Voyage according to their Charge, could not perswade the Commons: For that Hecatondore and OlympiodoreMecatondore & Olympiodore. (who had then the Gouernment of the Common weale) opposed themselues: So as they returned without effect. So one after they sent to declare VVarre vnto them for the afore-said causes. Presently after the Rhodiens sent Embassadours to Prusias,Prusias. to perswade him to make Warre against the Constantinopolitains: for they knew well hee was offended with them for certaine causes. The Constantinopolitains in like manner solicited Attalus and Acheus by many Embassies,Attalus and Achens. to succour them against the Rhodiens. It is true that Attalus was at liberty, but hee was much op∣pressed with pouerty: for that Acheus had forced him to retire himselfe within the liberties of his Fathers Empire. Finally Acheus, who tear∣med himselfe Lord of all the Countrey which lies on this side Tauris, and publishing himselfe for King, promised succours vnto the Constan∣tinopolitains, which gaue them occasion of great hope, and terrified very much the Rhodiens and Prusias: For Acheus was allied vnto Antio∣chus, who raigned in Syria, and had attained to this Principallity by such or the like meanes. After the death of Seleucus father vnto Antichus, and that his Sonne Seleucus the eldest of the brethren, had succeded in the Realme,The meanes of Acheus raigne. Acheus past the Mountaine of Tauris with him in regard of his kindred, about two yeares before the time whereof wee now speake. For as soone as Seleucus was King, and hearing that Attalus had taken the whole Country which lies on this side Mount Tauris, considering that hee must giue order to his Affaires, passeth the Mountaine with a great Army: VVhere within few dayes after hee was slaine by Apaturin a Gaule, and Nicanor. Acheus resoluing to reuenge the death of his kins∣man, kills them presently. And then he gouernes the Army and all other affaires with great VVisedome and Courage. For when as the opportunity of the time, and the generall consent of all the Souldiers, perswaded him to take the Crowne; yet hee would not doe it, but kept the Realme for the younger Brother Antiochus: and gouerning all o∣ther matters carefull, he resolued to subdue the whole Country which is on this side Tauris. But when as all things had succeeded happily, and that in the end he had left nothing but Pergamus to Attalus,Acheus causeth himselfe to be called King. hee presently changed his minde, and caused himselfe to bee called their King, being growne proud with the Victories which hee had obtained contrary vnto his Hope. So as it fell out that his name was more feared, by the Inhabitants on this side Tauris, then of any other King or Prince. Wherat the Constantinopolitains being moued, they made no difficulty
to vnder-take a Warre against the Rhodiens and Prusias: Who accused them, that when they had promised to set vp his Images, yet they afterwards forgot it thorough negligence: And withall, hee was much more incensed, for that they had done what possibly they could to pacifie the Warre which was kindled betwixt Acheus and Attalus: For that euery man knew that their peace was dangerous to him for many Reasons. Finally, hee obiected against them, that whereas they had sent an Embassie to Attalus, at the Games which he had made in the honour of Minerua, they had not sent any one vnto him when hee gaues thankes vnto the Gods. For which rea∣sons (being incensed) hee willingly embraced the Rhodiens party a∣gainst them of Constantinople. And therefore hee agreed with their Embassadours that they should send foorth a very strong Fleete, to assaile the Constantinopolitains by Sea, promising likewise to inuade them by Land with no lesse forces then they should. This was the the beginning, and the causes of the Warre which the Rhodiens made a∣gainst the Constantinopolitains. They also at the first entred into it with great Courage, hoping that Acheus would succour them, according vnto his promise. They had also called Thibete of Macedony, whom they opposed against Prusias: to take from him the meanes to make VVarre against ano∣ther, being much troubled for the defence of his owne. But Pru∣sias parting with great rage and fury against the Constantinopolitains, hee presently tooke Fanum,Fanum taken by Prusias from the Constanti∣nopolitains. a place very strong by Nature, and seated vpon the mouth of the Pontique Lea, which they of Constantinople had lately purchased for a great summe of money, mooued with the opportunity of the place: to the end that no man might enter or goe foorth of the Pontique Sea but by their fauour. Moreouer he put all the Countrey of Asia (which the Constantinopolitains had long helde) to fire and Sword. On the other side the Rhodiens hauing made sixe shippes, and taken foure from their Allies, whereof they made Xeno∣phante Commaunder, they sailed vnto Hellesponte with an Army of ten saile of very strong Shippes. And hauing left nine neere vnto Seste, for the defence of the entry into the Pontique Sea, the Commaun∣der hauing a good VVinde sailed with the tenth vnto Constantinople to view their Countenance: And whither at this first beginning of the VVarre they would be better aduised. But finding them ill affe∣cted, hee retired vnto his whole Army with the which hee returned to Rhodes. In the meane time the Constantinopolitains sent Embassies, some vnto Acheus, intreating him to hasten his Succours: Others into Macedony to draw downe Thibete; for it seemed that the Realme of Bythinia did as rightly belong to Thibete as to Prusias, for that hee was his Vncle. The Rhodiens being aduertised of the obstinacy of the Constantinopoli∣tains vsed Wisedome and Policy: For when they vnderstood that all their Hope was in Acheus, whose Father Ptolomy kept in Prison at Alexandria,An Embassie sent by the Rhodiens to Ptolomy▪ and that Acheus leauing all other Affaires whatsoeuer, was carefull of his deliuery, they thought good to send an Embassie to
Ptolomy, and to intreate him with great Affection, to deliuer vnto them the father of Acheus: to the end that by this means they should make him bound vnto them. Ptolomy after he had heard the Embassa∣dours, did not seeme very willing to deliuer Andromochus, ho∣ping to make vse of him at neede: for that hee was not yet well paci∣fied with Antiochus, and that Acheus hauing seazed vppon the Realme without any contradiction, and farre extended his power: For Andromochus was Father vnto Acheus, and brother to Laodicea Wife to Seleucus. Yet to please the Rhodiens hee deliuers him vnto them, to restore him vnto his Sonne if they thought good. The Rhodiens by this meanes hauing done according to their owne desires, and reconciling themselues vnto Acheus by some other meanes, they did frustrate the Constantinopolitains of their principall hope. There fell out also another accident which troubled them very much:The Death of Thibete. For Thibete whom they had drawne out of Macedony (as we haue said) died suddainly of sicknesse. For which accidents the Constantinopolitains began to faint. Contrariwise Prusias hauing a greater hope of his Enterprize, par∣ted from Asia to make Warre, and leuied men in Thrace, pressing the Constantinopolitains so neere, as they durst not issue or sally out of the Gates, which looked towards Europe. Wherefore being thus de∣stitute of all hope, and suffering all the iniuries of Warre, they sought and inuented some honest meanes to be freed. And therefore when as Canare King of the Gaules approached neere vnto the City, labouring by all meanes to pacifie this Warre,Canare King of the Gaules. both they and Prusias referred themselues vnto him for all their Quarrells. Whereof the Rhodiens being aduertised, and desiring to bring their Resolution to a finall end, they sent Aridix, and Polemocle to Constantinople with three Triremes, meaning (as they commonly say) to send them peace or Warre. After the comming of this Embassie vnto Constantinople, there was an Accord made with the Rhodiens;An accord be∣twixt the Con∣stantinopotitans and the Rho∣diens. that the Constantinopolitains should not take Tole of any one that sail'd into the Pontique Sea. The which if they performed, the Rhodiens and their Allies would make a firme peace with them. And as Prusias they concluded and agreed vppon these Conditions:An accord made with Prusias. that Prusias and the Constantinopolitains should liue in Peace and Amity, and neuer heereafter make Warre one against another. And that Prusias should make restitution of all the Prouinces, Townes, People, and Slaues, without any recom∣pence, in the like manner hee should doe of the Shippes, and other Booty which hee had taken from them in the beginning of the Warre. Moreouer the Carpenters VVorke, Tiles, and remainder of Houses, which hee had transported from Fanum, (for Prusias fearing the com∣ming of Thibete, had razed all the Burroughes whereinto the Enemy might retire himselfe:) and that finally hee should bind himselfe with all the Souldiers of Bythinea, to restore vnto the Inhabitants of Mysia, (which are vnder the obedience of the Constantinopolitains) all they had taken from them.
This was the beginning and ending of the Warre of Prusias and the Rhodiens against the Constantinopolitains. At that time the Gnosiens sent an Embassie to the Rhodiens, to draw from them three or foure well built Tritemes, with the which Polemocle had lately made his Voyage, with three other stately Vessels of Warre, against those which lately had Reuolted against them. The which being done, when as the Army arriued at Candy, the Eleuterneins doubting that some few daies before Polemocle had slaine Timarche their Burgesse to please the Gnosiens, made Warre against the Rhodiens, after they had made their complaine. A little before the Lyciens had so many seuerall crosses. Finally all Candy was in Combustion.Candy in a man¦ner reduced all vnder the obe∣dience of the Gnosiens and Gortiniens. The Gnosiens and Gortini∣ens making Warre with one Councell and consent, reducing all the Iland vnder their obedience, except the Lyciens Towne: For the taking whereof they did their vtmost power and indeauours, think∣king in the end to rare and ruine it quite: To the end it might serue for an Example to other Cities, to terrfie them from a Reuolt: For that it alone would not receiue them for their Lords. In the beginning all they of Candy made Warre against the Lyciens, but they beganne presently to fall into Discorde, vpon a very light cause: The which happens often with that Nation. So as the Polyreneins, the Certeins, the Lampeins, and moreouer the Noreins, and the Arcadians held the Lyciens party, forsaking the alliance of the Gnosiens. The Gor∣tiniens were in diuers opinions: The most aged held the Gnosiens party: and the young men that of the Lyciens. The Gnosiens seeing the will of their Allies thus changed, and that the Affaires went otherwise then they formerly expected, they drew a thousand men from Etolia by the right of Alliance. Which being done, the most aged of the Gortiniens seazed suddainly vpon the Fort, drawing in the Gnosiens and Etoliens, and deliuered them the Towne, chasing away the party of the young men, and killing some most cruelty. The Lyciens had by chance at that time made a Roade into the Enemies Country, leauing no forces within the Towne, whereof the Gnotiens being aduertised by their Spies, they tooke it vnfurnished of any forces,The Lyciens Towne razed and burnt. and sent the Women and Children to Gnoson. And when they had burnt and razed it with fury, they retired. The Lyciens returning, were so amazed when they saw all in fire and ruine, as no man durst enter into the Towne. But going about it in troupes, they lamented their Countrey and Fortune. From thence turning head, they returned to the Lampeins, who receiued them louingly and with great affection: Who being Fugitiues and strangers, were in one day admitted Burgesses, and made Warre against the Gnosiens with the Allies. Behold how Lycia a Collony of the Lacedemonians, and the most auncient of Candy, was suddainly and miserably ruined. The Poly∣reneins, Lampeins, with all their other Allies, seeing the Gnosiens to be in League with the Etoliens, and the Etoliens to be enemies to Philip and the Acheins, sent an Embassie to the King and the Acheins, to make a
League with them, and to draw succours from them. Who receiued them, and sent them foure hundred Sclauonians, vnder the Com∣maund of Plator, and about a hundred Phoceins,Plator chiefe of the Sclauoni∣ans. who at their arriuall did greatly assist the Polyreneins allied to the Achiens. For within a short time, their forces being increased, they forced the Eleuterneins, Cy∣doniates, Aptereins, and diuers others being shut vp within their Wals, to abandon the Gnosiens alliance, and to imbrace their party. Which things being effected, the Polyreneins and their Allies sent fiue hundred Candyots to Philip and the Acheins. Not long before the Gno∣siens had sent a thousand to the Etoliens. Thus the Warre was manna∣ged for the loue one of another. The banished men among the Gorti∣niens surprized the Port of the Pheastins and that of the Gortiniens, from whence they made many sallies against them of the Towne. And this was the estate of the affaires of Candy. At the same time Methridates made Warre against the Synopenses,Mithridates. which was in a manner the beginning and cause of his mis-fortune. And when as they required succours of the Rhodiens,The Rhodiens succour the Sy∣nopenses. they made choise of three men for this businesse: To whom there was giuen foure and twenty thousand fiue hundred pounds, to furnish the Synopenses with necessary prouision for the War. They which had this Commission, made prouision of ten thousand Goate skinnes fill'd with Wine, of thirty sixe thousand pound weight of Ropes made with Haire, and ten thousand made with sinewes, a thousand Armes compleate, three thousand pieces of gold coyned, foure Merchants ships, with Crosse∣bowes and other Engines of battery in great number. The Synopenses hauing receiued all this prouision, returned to Synope. They were in great feare least that Methridates should besiege them both by Sea and Land. Synope is seated on the right side of the Pontique Sea,The Scituation of Synope. where as the Riuer of Phasis enters into the Sea, and likewise vppon a Cape which stretcheth farre into the Sea: The necke whereof is closed in by the Towne, which ioynes vnto Asia, and hath in length about two Furlongs: The rest of the Cape aduanceth it selfe into the Sea, which is a flat Countrey and the approaches very easie, and contrariwise very difficult and inaccessible, to those which come from the Sea, neyther hath it any passages. The Synopenses fearing that Methridates should besiege the Towne, not onely on that side which ioynes to Asia, but likewise on the other, drawing his Army to Land, they did carefully fortifie that part which is inuironed by the Sea, leauing a good Guard there to keep the Enemy from landing: for the place is of a small Circuit, and requires no great guard. This is all which past at that time in Synope. King Philip parting with his Army from Macedony (for there wee left our former Discourse) caused it to march by Thessaly and Epirus, making hast to passe by those Regions into Etolia. AlexanderAlexander. and DorimacheDorimache. resolving at the same time to take Egirus,Egyrus. hauing drawne together twelue hundred Etoliens at Oeanthy,Oeanthy. which is one of their Townes, opposite vnto that whereof wee now speake, and their shippes being ready to passe, they only attended an opportunity to put
their enterprize is Execution. It happened that an Etolian hauing liued long at Egire, and finding that the Guard at the Gate kept no good Watch by reason of their Drunkennesse, hee acquaints Dorima∣che therewith, soliciting him to take the Towne by night: he being a man accustomed vnto such Actions.The scituation of Egire. Egire is a Towne of Morea, scituated neere vnto the Gulfe of Corinthe, betwixt Egia and Sicyon, vpon a certaine Hill which is rough and difficult, drawing towards Parase, and about seauen Furlongs distant from the Sea. When the time was come, Drimache hauing imbarqued his Army, and prouided carefully for all things necessary, he came before the breake of day to a Riuer which runs neere vnto the Hill whereon the Towne stands. From thence, he with Alexander and Archidamus the sonne of Pantaleon, accompanied with a great number of Etoliens, marcht directly vnto the Towne, along the way which leads to Egia. The Fugitiues was gone before with twenty of their best foote-men, for the knowledge he had of the places: And had gotten the Walls by Rockes which seemed inaccessible: Where as entring the Towne by a sincke, he found the Guards a sleepe: Who being slaine, and hauing broken the barres of the Gate without discouery,Egire surprized by the Etoens they made way for the Etoliens, who entred with great fury, and carried them∣selues simply and without discretion, which was an occasion of the Egirates Victory, and of their defeate and shame. For thinking that all had beene lost for the Egirates, they suddainly Armed, and put themselues in Battaile within the Towne, where they staied for a certaine time. But at the breake of day euery man thought of his owne priuate profit and gaine: And dispersing themselues through∣out the whole Towne, they fell vppon the Burgesses houses, and rifled their goods: Finally they had no care at all but of spoile and Rapine. The Egirates mooued at this strange accident, some fled out of the Towne amazed with feare: whose houses the Enemies had forced, for that the Etoliens were apparently masters of the Towne. But they who hearing the sound of the Trumpet,An assault gi∣uen by Dorima∣che to the Fort of Egire. were gone foorth with their seruants to aide and succour the City, retired vnto the Fort: Wherefore their number and force augmented continually, and the Etoliens grew weaker: For that the Egirates repaired still to the Fort, and the others dispersed themselues in houses for spoile. And although that Dorimache saw the apparent danger: yet without any amazement, he assaults the Fort with a wonderfull Resolution, imagining that they which were retired into it, being amazed at his comming, would presently yeild vnto the Etoliens. But the Egirates incouraging one another defended the Fort, with incredible resolution and assu∣rance. By this meanes the Combat was furious of either side. But for that the Fort was not inclosed with wals, they fought man to man; and the Combat for a time was furious and equall: For that the one fought for their Country and children, and the other for their liues. But the Etoliens
in the end beganto flie shamefully:The Etoliens defeated by the Egirates. whom the Egirate (growing more couragious) pursued: so as a great part of the Etoliens died in fallying out at the Gate, oppressing one another in the throng. Alexander was slaine fighting valliantly. Dorimache striuing to get forth, died in the presse. The rest were presently slaine,Alexander slaine. or kill'd themselues falling in∣to Pits.Dorimache smo∣thered. There were few saued, who abandoned their Armes, and fled to the ships. By this meanes the Egirates by their incredible cou∣rage recoueted their Countrey in a manner lost by negligence. At the same time Euripides, (who had beene sent by the Etoliens to be Chiefe of the Elienses, who after he had ouer-run the Countries of the Dimenses, Pharences and Tritenses) tooke his way through the E∣lienses Countrey, chasing before him a great Booty, whereof Mic∣chus of Dime being aduertised, who by chance was at that time subro∣gated in the place of the Commander of the Acheins, and following the Enemy vpon the retreate, with the helpe of the Dimenses, Pharen∣ses, and Tritenses,Micchus defea∣ted. fell vnaduisedly into their Ambushes, and was de∣feated with the great losse of his men: whereof there died forty Foot, and there were two hundred taken. Euripides glorious of this good fortune,The Castle of Mure taken by Euripides. soone after went againe to Field, and tooke a Castle from the Dimenses, which was of consequence, the which the people of the Countrey called Mure: and they say, that Hercules built it in old time, making Warre against the Elienses, to vse it as a Fort, and retreate in the time of Warre. The Dimenses, Pharenses, and Triteses hauing made this losse, and fearing for the future by the taking of the Castle by Euripides, they first sent Letters to the Chiefe of the Acheins, to aduertise them of their misfortune, and to demand succours against the Etoliens. And after∣wards they sent some of the Chiefe of their Towne in Embassie. Ara∣te could not raze any mercenary Souldiers, for that during the Warre of Cleomenes, the Acheins had payed them ill, and withall hee man∣naged the affaires fearefully and without consideration. And therefore Lycurgu tooke Athence, a Towne of the Megalopolitains: the like Euri∣pides did (besides the former prize) to Gorgon and Telphusia.Athence taken by Licurgus. The Dimenses, Pharences, and Tritenses being frustrate of the hope they had in the Chiefe of the Acheins, resolued among themselues not to con∣tribute any more money, to supply the necessities of their Warre: And that they would leuie at their owne charge about three hundred Foote, and fifty Horse to defend their Countrey. Whereby they seemed to haue taken good order for their priuate affaires, but they had no great respect to the profit of a Comminalty: For they haue giuen a very bad example to others, to make a new enterprize vpon any occasion: where∣of the blame may well be layd vpon the Commander, who by his sloth and negligence had frustrated his men of their expectance. It is a common course, that all they which are in danger, hold that Friendship is to be entertained and kept, so long as there is any hope to draw succours from them: and when that ceaseth, then they are to prouide for their owne affaires. And therefore the Dimenses, Pharen∣ses and Tritenses are to be pardoned, for that in the extreame danger
of their Townes, they had leuied men, considering the negligence of the Chiefe of the Acheins. But whereas they would not furnish mo∣ney for the common affaires of the league, that is not excusable: For as it was not fit to neglect their owne affaires, so it was a base and dis∣gracefull thing to omit that which concernes the preseruation of a com∣mon league: seeing they wanted not Victuals according to the common conuentions: and moreouer they had beene Authours of the league with the Acheins. And this was the estate of the affaires of Morea. King Philip had past Thessaly, Philips Army. and was in Epirus: whereas taking a number of Epirotes, with the Macedonians he brought with him, and three hundred Slingers out of Acheia, with a hundred Candiots which had beene sent by the Messeniens, hee comes vnto the Countrey of the Ambraciates: whereas if hee had entred presently into the heart of Eto∣lia, the Warre might haue had an end. But for that hee was solicited by the Epirotes to force Ambracia first, he gaue the Etoliens meanes to resist, and prouide that which was necessary for their defence. But the Epirotes preferring their priuate interest before the common profit of the Allies, hauing a great desire to make Ambracia subiect, per∣swaded Philip to besiege it, and to take it before he past: For they con∣ceiued that the Towne of Ambracia would bee very beneficiall vnto vnto them, if they might take from the Etoliens, and that it would easily fall into their hands. You must vnderstand that Ambracia is a place strong by nature, well fortified with double walles, and so en∣uironed with Moares and Marishes, as there is but one narrow passage by Land,The scituation f Ambracia. made by Art. Moreouer, it lookes towards the Towne, and the Prouince of the Ambraciates. Philip at the perswasion of the Epi∣rotes, plants his Campe neere vnto Ambracia, making prouision of that which was necessary for the Siege. At the same time Scope drawing together a great number of Etoliens, and passing thorough Thessaly,Scope makes an incursion into Macdony. enters into Macedony, and puts all that Region to fire and sword which lies neere vnto Mount Pierie, and drawes towards Die, making a great spoile. And for that the Inhabi∣tants of the Countrey were fled, he raed the houses, and places for Games: and not content therewith, he set fire on the Cloisters built neere vnto the Temple with great charge: moreouer, he ruined what∣soeuer was erected there for ornament or for vse: Finally, he beate in peeces all the Images of Kings. Thus Scope in the beginning and first fury of the War, hauing not onely assaulted Men, but euen the Gods themselues, returned into Etolia, not as a Church-robber, or exe∣crable to the immortall Gods, but he was honoured as a man of merit, and a good seruant to the Common-wealth: and withall he gaue great hope to the Etoliens for the time to come. For they conceiued that by this meanes no man durst presume to enter as an enemy into their Coun∣trey, and contrariwise they might easily run and spoile not onely Mo∣rea, as they had beene accustomed, but also Thessaly and Macedony. Philip aduertised of these thing which had beene done in Macedony, and suffring for the ignorance and couetousnesse of the Epirotes, held Am∣bracia besieged:Ambracia taken by Philip. whereas making vse of all Engins of Battery, he tooke
it within forty daies, where leauing a garrison, hauing first taken the oath he satisfied the will of the Epirotes, to whom Ambracia was deliuered. After these things he raiseth his Campe, and marcheth directly by the next valley, making haste to passe the Gulfe of Ambracia, the which is very narrow, neere vnto the Temple of Acarnaia, which they call Antia.The Gulfe of Ambracia. This Gulfe comes from the Sea of Sicily betwixt Epir and Acarnania, with a very narrow entry, being scarce sixe hundred pa∣ces broad. But when as it dilates it selfe towards the Land, it is in a manner a hundred Furlongs broad, and three hundred in length, be∣ginning at the Sea of Sicily. It diuides Epirus from Acaruania the one lying directly towards the North, and Acarnania directly towards the South. Hauing past this Gulfe with his Army, and entring into A∣carania, he came to a Towne of Etolia which they call Poetia, lea∣ding with him two thousand Foote,Poetia taken by Composition. and two hundred Horse of Acar∣nania. And planting his Campe about the Towne, and giuing many sharpe assaults, he tooke it the third day after his comming by com∣position, and let a Garrison of Etoliens therein taking their Oath. The Night following fifteene hundred Etoliens thinking that all things had beene safe,Fifteene hun∣dred Etoliens defeated by Philip. came to succour their fellowes. The King aduertised of their comming, layed an Ambush, and slew the greatest part The rest were taken, except some few which escaped by flight. After this hee distributed Wheat to the Souldiers for a Moneth, for hee had gotten a great quantity in this Towne: Then he marcheth to the Region of the Streteses, and plants his Campe neere to the Riuer of Acheloe, a∣bout ten furlongs from the Towne: And from thence ouer-running the Prouince, hee puts all to fire and sword, for that no man durst shew himselfe. At the same time the Acheins more tormented with the Warre then the rest, and aduertised that the King was not farre off, they sent an Embassie vnto him to demand succours. The Embassadours met the King at Straton, where acquainting him with their necessities accor∣ding to their charge, they intreate him to giue them succours, and perswade him by many reasons, that in passing the Rhe, he should take his way thorough the Countrey of the Eliences. Hauing heard them, the King sent them backe, promising to consider thereon: who raising his Campe, marcht to Metropolis and Conope. Whereof the Etoliens being aduertised, they abandoned the Towne, and retired to the Fort. When as Philip had set fire on the Towne,Metropolis ta∣ken and burnt. proceeding in his course, he drew to Conope. There the Etolien Horse-men had made a head, to encounter him at the passage of a Riuer,An assembly of the rolient to keepe the passage of a Riuer. twenty Furlongs distant from the Towne, to stop his passage, or to fight with him if he past. Philip aduertised of their enterprize, commands those that were ar∣med with Targets to enter the Riuer first, and that keeping close toge∣ther, they should striue to passe in Battaile. Hauing obeyed him, the Etoliens hauing skirmished in vaine with the first Troupe, for that it kept close together, and afterwards with the second and the third, in the end they retired to the Towne, despairing of their Enterprize. From that time the Etoliens Army kept the Townes: but Philip ouer-running
the Prouince at his pleasure,Ithoria very strong. spoiled Itoria it selfe. It was a place seated vpon the passage, of great strength both by Nature and Art: the which the Garrison abandoned vpon his approach. The King razed it to the ground. Finally, he ruined all, reducing vnder his obedience ma∣ny Townes which were strong by scituation and fortification: demol∣lishing all the Castles, whereof there were a great number in the Coun∣trey. Then abating his fury, he gaue leaue vnto his men to run where they pleased for their owne gaine. After which he led his Army full of wealth towards the Eniades, and layed Siege to Peania, resoluing to take it by assault:Peania taken by assault. The which he did after many attempts, for although the Towne were not very bigge, hauing but a thousand paces in circu∣it: yet it was not inferiour to the rest in the strength of Walles, Tow∣ers and Houses. He razed the Walles to the ground, and ruined the Houses, commanding to carry away the Timber and Tiles to the Eni∣ades by Water. The Etoliens first began to fortifie the Fort of the Ceniades to defend it, rampring the Walles, making of Ditches, and doing all things ne∣cessary for the fortification of a Towne. But being aduertised of Philips approach, they fled for feare. Philip taking this Towne without any resistance, led his Army into Calydonia, to a certaine Towne which was held very strong, called Claos, the which was well rampred with Walles, and all manner of fortifications. Attalus had furnished the E∣toliens with munition to defend it. But the Macedonians taking it by force, they ouer-ran and spoiled all Calydonia, and then returned vnto the Enlades. Whereas Philip considering the opportunity of the place, as well for other affaires, as for his passage into Morea, resolued to re∣paire the Walles. For the Eniades are Maritime opposite to Acarna∣nia by the Sea which ioynes vnto the Etoliens, neere vnto the mouth of the Gulfe of Corinthe. It is a Citty scituated in Morea, right against the Bankes of the Dimeens, and neighbour to the Countrey neere vnto Araxis, distant onely a hundred Furlongs. Which things Philip con∣sidering,Philip fortifios the Fort of the Enides. hee fortified the Fort apart, and ioyned vnto it the Port and Arsenall with a Wall, making vse of the materials which were brought from Peania. Whilest that Philip was busie about this worke, hee receiued Let∣ters from Macedony, by the which they did aduertise him that the Dar∣danians doubting of his Voyage into Morea, made hafte to leuie men, and to make preparations for Warre, to fall suddainly vpon Macedony. After which newes resoluing to succour it speedily, hee sent backe the Acheins Embassadours with this answere, that as soone as hee had gi∣uen order for his affaires of Macedony, hee would haue nothing in so great recommendation, as to come to their aide with all his forces. Af∣ter this hee returned speedily with his Army by those Countries where hee had formerly past. And as he past the Gulfe of Ambracia, par∣ting from Acarnania to Epirus, Demetrius of Phare (whom the Ro∣mans had chased out of Sclauonia) met him. Whom the King (imbra∣cing him with great courtesie) caused to saile to Corinthe, and from thence to march into Macedony by Thessaly. Where drawing to Epirus,
he presently transported himselfe into Macedony, to the Towne of Pella. But when the Dardanians were aduertised by some fugitiue Thracians of the Kings comming, they presently dissolued their Army, being terri∣fied with feare, notwithstanding they were neere vnto Macedony. Philip aduertised of the retreate of the Dardanians,The retreate of the Dardiant without doing any thing. gaue leaue vnto his Souldiers to gather new Corne, and euery man to retire into his Coun∣trey. For his part he went into Thessaly, and spent the rest of the Sum∣mer in Larissa. At the same time Panlus Emilius triumphed at Rome, after his re∣turne from Sclauonia. Hannibal after the taking of Sagont, had sent his Army to winter. The Romans aduertised of the razing of Sagont, sent an Embassie to Carthage, demanding Hannibal: and made their pre∣parations for Warre, Publius Cornelius and Titus Sempronius being then created Consuls: Of which affaires wee haue spoken in the precedent Booke. But we now make a briefe repetition, to refresh the memory: to the end that (as we haue promised) all the actions may be present to the eyes of the Readers. The first yeere of this Olympiade is past. And when as the day of the Election which the Etoliens make, was come, they made choice of Dorimache for Generall of the Warre.Dorimache cho∣sen Generall of the Etoliens. Who being seized of the Magistracy, he drew together a great num∣ber of Souldiers, and falling vpon the high Countrey of Epirus, hee made a most cruell spoile: so as it seemed, hee did it rather to ruine the Epirotes, then for his owne profit. Then passing the Temple of Iupi∣ter Dodone; he set fire of the Cloisters, and ruined all its beauty: and finally, he demollished it. Behold how the Etoliens cannot obserue any meane either in peace or warre, so as both in the one and the other they violate the common conuersation of men, and in a manner the Law of Nature. When as Dorimache had committed all these mischiefes and many greater, hee returned into his Country. But whilest that Winter lasted, and that euery man despaired of the comming of Philip by reason of the rough∣nesse of the time, and hardnesse of the Winter, the King taking three thousand men with Bucklers, and two thousand with Targets, with three hundred Candiots, and about foure hundred Horse, par∣ted from Larissa: and taking his way by Thessaly, he came to Negre∣pont: and from thence passing by Beocia and Megara, in the midst of December he ariued at Corinthe, making his voyage so secretly, as no man of Morea discouered it: then keeping the Gates of Corinthe shut, and setting Watches vpon the wayes, the day following hee sent to Si∣syon for old Arate. He then aduertised the Chiefe of the Acheins and Townes, of the time and place when they should be ready and in order. These things thus ordered, he continued his voyage as he had resolued, and seated his Campe neere to Dioscore, a Towne of Phi∣liasia. At the same time Euripides parting from Psophis accompanied with two Legions of Eliences, Pirats at Sea, and some voluntaries, so as all together made two thousand two hundred Foote, and about a hun∣dred Horse, tooke his way by Phenice and Stymphalia, being ignorant
that Philip was in field, and desirous to spoile the Countrey of the Si∣cyoniens. It fell out the Night that Philip camped neere vnto Dioscore, that Euripides passing further at the breake of day, entred into the Countrey of the Sicyoniens, and that some Candiots which were with Philip, abandoning their Ensignes, and going to forrage met him. By whose meanes knowing that the Macedonians were neere, hee drew his army out of the Countrey, hoping that after he had past the Coun∣try of Stymphalia, he might easily defeate the Macedonians in places of aduantage. Phillip hauing no aduertisement, raised his Campe the next day at the Sun-rising, as he had resolued,The retreate of Euripides from Symphall. to take his way vnder Stymphalia towards the Caphires: for there he had appointed the A∣cheins to meete in Armes. When the Macedonian Scouts were come to the top of the Moun∣taine, which the Countrey-men call Apeaure, about ten Furlongs distant from the Stymphalins Towne,The Moun∣taine of Ape∣ure. it happened by chance that the Scouts of the Eliences arriued there also. The which Euripides perceiuing, and amazed at the disaduantage of the place and time, hee flies with some of them,Thy flight of Euripides. and recouers Sophis by Groues which lay dispierced. The rest of the Eliences Troupe being amazed, as well for that they were a∣bandoned by their Commander, as for the newnesse of the accident, were for a time in suspence what they had to doe. But conceiuing af∣terwards that they were Megalopolitains, to see the manner of their Harnesse (for the Macedonians carried Helmets) they marcht in Bat∣taile, keeping good order for a time without any despaire. But when the Macedonians began to approach, (knowing then the truth) they abandoned their Armes, and fled. There were about twelue hundred taken aliue by the Enemy:A defeate of the Etoliens. the rest were slaine, some by the Macedoni∣ans like Sheepe, others falling downe the Rocks, so as there escaped not a hundred. Philip continued his course, and sent the spoiles and Prisoners to Corinthe. This seemed very strange to them of Morea, to whom the newes of the Victory, and of Philips arriuall came at one instant. When the King had past by Arcadia, hauing suffred much vpon the way by Snow, and the difficulty of the Countrey, hee arriued at mid-night at Caphies on the third day. Where after hee had refresh't himselfe three daies,Arate ioynes with Philip. and that Arate the younger had ioyned with him with his Troupes, so as the whole Army consisted of ten thousand men, hee arriued at Psophis, passing by Cliteria, and made great pro∣uision of Darts and Ladders taken out of the Townes where hee past. Psophis is a very ancient Towne of the Arcadians,The scituation of Psophis. scituated in the midst of Morea, ioyning to Arcadia vpon the West, and neere to the Couu∣trey of the Eliences, who at that time had the gouernment. Where Philip arriued the third day after his departure from Caphies, and sea∣ted this Campe vpon the Mountaines which are opposite, from whence he might discouer the Towne and Countrey round about without dan∣ger. Where viewing the strength, he was for a time in suspence: for towards the West there ran a swift Torrent along the walls: the which for the most part of Winter, was not to be waded thorough, so as no
man enters that way. And vpon the East it hath the Riuer of Eriman∣the,The Riuer of Erimanthe, which is great and violent: Of which the Poets and Historiogra∣phers tell many tales. Moreouer, the Torrent (whereof we haue spo∣ken) defends and assures the third part towards the South. In regard of the fourth which lookes towards the North, it hath aboue it a Mountaine which is steepe and difficult, and serues them for a good Fort. By this meanes the Towne is defended on three sides by water, and on the fourth by the Mountaine: And moreouer it is enuironed with good walls, made with great Art. Finally, there was a Garrison of Eli∣enses, with that which Euripides had brought with him in his flight. All these things considered, Philip was partly distasted to force it, for the difficulty thereof. And partly inflamed to besiege it, for the op∣portunity of the place. For hee considered that as this Towne was an anoyance to the Acheins and Arcadians (for that it was an assured Fort and safe retreate for Warre to the Elienses) so if it might bee ta∣ken, it would bee to them of great consequence, and a retreate to the Arcadians for the Warre. Wherefore in the end following this ad∣uice, hee sent vnto the Macedonians, that they should bee ready the next day in the morning, and in Armes after they had fed. Then pas∣sing the Bridge of Erimanthe without any opposition, considering the strangenesse and greatnesse of the accident, hee came boldly, and log'd at the foote of the Wall. Whereat Euripides and the Chiefe of the Towne were in great doubt what to doe: for they immagined that the Macedonians had no conceite to bee able to force this strong Towne, and that they should not bee able to continue the Siege long during that season. Wherefore when as they saw no likelyhood of a∣ny Treason within the Towne, the greatest part run to the walles to defend them. The Voluntaries of the Elienses made a sally vpon the Enemy by the Gate which lookes directly to the Campe.A sally of the Elienses vpon the Macedoni∣ans. But when as Philip had ap∣pointed men to set vp Ladders in three places, and a sufficient number of Macedonians for either of them, hee gaue warning for the assault. Which done, they all fell to fighting with wonderfull fury. The besie∣ged in the beginning defended themselues valiantly, and ouerthrew ma∣ny which laboured to scale the walls. But when as their Darts and o∣ther munition failed them, as to men which had run hastily to the walls: and withall the Macedonians retired not, but after the fall of one the next ascended the Ladder, in the end they fled, and retired to the Fort. Then the Macedonians of the Kings Troupe recouered the wall. On the other side the Candiots who fought with those which made their sally from the vpper part of the Towne, forced them in the end to flie, abandoning their Armes basely: And pursuing them with great fury, they slew ma∣ny vpon the way, and entred the Towne with them: so as it was taken in diuers places at one instant. All the Burgesses retired into the Fort with their Wiues and Children.Psoph taken by assault. The like did Euripides, with the rest which had escaped the danger. The Macedonians being entred, they spoyled both publique and priuate houses, and afterwards kept themselues quiet within the Towne. They which held the
Fort, being without victuals and other munition, they began to thinke of yeelding, fore-seeing the future. Whereupon they sent a trumpet to the King: and hauing obtained a passe-port for an Embassie, they sent the Princes of the Towne with Euripides to Philip, who com∣pounded with the King,A composition made betweene the Citizens of Psophis and Philip. that in yeelding him the place, the Burgesses and strangers might retire in safety. This done, they returned againe to the Fort according to the Kings command, not to depart before hee had retired his Army out of the Towne, lest falling into the Souldiers hands, they might bee spoiled. The King stayed some dayes there by reason of the roughnesse of the weather: during the which hee calls to∣gether the Acheins which were in the Army, and made a long speech vn∣to them of the scituation of the Town, and of its opportunity for the pre∣sent War, putting them in mind of the loue he bare them: Finally, he gaue them the Towne, to the end they should know plainely, that hee was resolued to please them in all things, and not to forget the affecti∣on and diligence which was requisite in their affaires. After which Speech, when as the Acheins had giuen him thanks for his loue and good-will,Philip giues forces to the Acheins. Philip leaues the Company, and drawing his Army presently together, he marcht directly to Lassion. The Psophi∣ens leauing the Fort, came into the Towne, and euery man returned to his house. Euripides retired with his men first to Corinthe, and after∣wards into Etolia. The Chiefe of the Acheins which were there pre∣sent, gaue the guard of the Fort to Proslae a Sycionian with a sufficient Garrison, and made Pythias Pellenense Gouernour of the Towne. And this was the end of the Psophiens Warre. When the Garrison of Lassion which consisted of Elienses, be∣ing (formerly aduertised of that which had happened at Psophis) saw the Macedonians,Lssion taken. they abandoned the Towne, as amazed at so strange an accident. So as Philip tooke it as soone as hee saw it. The which he likewise gaue to the Acheins, according to the loue and affection which hee bare them.Straton. Hee likewise gaue Straton to the Telpulsiens, which the Elienses had taken. This done, the fift day after hee arri∣ued at Olympia: where after he had sacrificed to the Gods, and made a solemne Banquet to all the Captaines, and refresht his men for the space of three dayes, hee marcht, and entring the Countrey of the Elienses, hee abandoned it to his Souldiers: Then planting his Campe neere to Artimisea, hee returned soone after to Dioscoria, bringing a great Booty from thence. Then making many Roads into the Coun∣trey, there were a great number of men taken. Many also retired in∣to the neighbour Townes, and into places of strength: For the Re∣gion of the Elienses is very fertile amongst the rest of Morea, in peo∣ple and abundance of wealth: for that the greatest part of the Coun∣trey people are giuen to tillage, imploying their time in labour, vnto the second and third generation: And alhtough they bee otherwise rich, yet they enter not into Townes. The which happens, for that the principall of the Townes haue the Labourers in recom∣mendation, and are very carefull that they may not be oppressed with the want of any thing of that which is requisite and necessary for them,
and that no man should do them wrong. In my opinion the ancients haue so ordained it, for that in old time the multitude was commonly giuen to tillage; or rather for that they led a holly and religious life, when as with the consent of all the Grecians, they liued in safety, free from all inconueniences and trouble of Warre, for the Combate which was made at the Olympicke Games. But when by the controuersie of the Arcadians, concerning Lassion and Pisa, they were forced to vnder∣take War for the defence of their Countrey, and to leaue their first man∣ner of liuing, they cared no more to resume that ancient and heredita∣ry liberty giuen them by the Grecians, remaining in the same estate, and making a bad discourse of the time to come. For if any may haue from the Grecians (in obseruing right and iustice) peace and quiet∣nesse for euer, which is a thing which wee all demand of the immor∣tall Gods, and for the which wee endure any thing, and which all the world confesseth to bee an vndoubted good, and yet they contemne it, and doe not esteeme it, or hold some other thing in greater recommen∣dation, are not they to be held fooles and mad men? But some one will say vnto mee, that they which shall hold this course of life, shall not be able to defend themselues, when they shall be opprest with War, or some other outrage. This without doubt happens seldome, and if it doth, they may be defended and relieued by all the Grecians. And if it be a particular offence it will be no difficult thing to leuie men with the money which they haue gathered together by long peac and rest. But now fearing that which happens seldome, and beyond all humane consideration, they consume themselues and their Countrey in con∣tinuall Warre and troubles Wee haue thought good to relate these things of the Elienses; for there was neuer time, when as a greater oppor∣tunity was offred, to recouer this liberty from all the Grecians, then at this day. The people then as wee haue said, dwelt in all assurance. Wherefore there were taken by the Macedonians a great number of men, although that many were retired in strong places. For there was assembled a great multitude of men and Cattell, with other wealth in a neere Burrough, which they call Thalame: for that the Countrey a∣bout it is very streight, the approach is difficult, and the Burrough very steepy, and in a manner inaccessible.Thalame. Philip aduertised of this great as∣sembly, and being loath to leaue any thing which hee would not vnder∣take, recouers the places of aduantage, to enter it with his Mercenaries: and marcheth in person by the streights of the Countrey with the men which bare Targets, and were lightly armed, leauing the Baggage, and the greatest part of his Army in the Campe, and came vnto the Bur∣rough finding no resistance. They which were therein, amazed at the greatnesse of this accident▪ and ill furnished for the war, and without experience: hauing moreouer many vnprofitable persons for their age, yeelded presently: Among the which were two hundred Souldiers of diuers nations,Thalame yeelds. whereof Amphi∣damus Chiefe of the Elienses had the charge. Philip hauing made booty of all things, as of fiue thousand men, and of an infinite number of Cattell, returned presently to the Campe. And when as afterwards
the Souldiers seemed vnprofitable vnto him for the Warre, being thus laden with spoiles, he raised his Campe and returned to Olympia. Appelles was one of the Tutors which was left to Philip in his infan∣cy by Antigonus, and had then great authority and fauour with the King.Appelles Tutor to Philip. Who beginning to practise with himselfe, by what meanes hee might reduce the Nation of the Acheins, to the same estate wherein the Thessalians were, he bethought himselfe of a notable villany. You must vnderstand that the Thessalians seemed to liue vnder their owne Lawes, and to differ much from the Macedonians, onely they endu∣red all things like vnto them, and obeyed the will of the King. Where∣fore Appelles tending hereunto, began to try the hearts of those that were in the Campe. And at the first hee commanded the Macedoni∣ans,The malicious policy of Ap∣pelles that if by chance the Acheins should take any place before them, they should alwayes chase them away, and strip them of their Booty. Afterwards he caused some to be whipt by the hangman for small offen∣ces: And if any one questioned this kind of outrage, or did succour them that were beaten, they were put in prison, hoping by this meanes to ac∣custome the Acheins to endure patiently what should please the King. Finally, when as some young men Acheins were assembled and come to Arate, relating vnto him the practise of Appelles. Arate considering that this must be preuented in the beginning, he came to Philip, and accom∣panied with these young men, deliuered all things in order. Who being heard, Philip wisht him to take no further care, and that hereafter they should not be so intreated. He giues charge to Appelles not to decree a∣ny things against the Acheins without the aduice of their Commander. Philip was held excellent in Eloquence and sweetnes of speech to per∣swade his Souldiers,The Nature of Philip. and of great wisedome and courage in the profes∣sion of Armes, not onely in the iudgement of Souldiers, but of all Morea: neither was it easie to finde a King which had so many gifts of Nature. He was a man of great diligence, memory, and of a good aspect, and held him worthy of an Empire, in whom there was a royall power, a great force, and an incredible courage in actions of Warre, and as he layd the foundation of his Empire by so many great virtues, it is hard to say for what reason he was in the end so peruerted, and made an execrable and wicked Tyrant of a good and iust King. Wherefore leauing this to ano∣ther season, we will returne to our discourse. Philip parting from Olympia with his Army, came first to Pharia, then to Erea, where the Booty was sold, whereof wee haue spoken. Hee made a Bridge vpon Alphia, meaning to passe from thence into Triphalia. At the same time Dorimache chiefe of the Etoliens, sent succours vnto the Elienses at their request,Succours sent to the Elienses by Dorimache. whilest they ruined their Countrey: being about sixe hundred Etoliens vnder the command of Philides, who passing by the Countrey of the Elienses, after that he had taken about fiue hundred voluntaries of theirs, and a thousand men of the City with the Tarentines, he came into Triphalia to succour the Al∣lies. It is scituated in Morea,The scituation of Triphalia and i Townes betwixt the Regions of the Elienses and Messeniens, hauing drawne its name from Triphalia in Ar∣cadia. Finally, it tookes towards the Sea of Lybia ioyning to Acheia
vpon the West. Wherein are comprehended the Townes of Sa∣mico, Lepres, Hygianne, Typanea, Pyrgon, Epion, Bolac, Tyla∣gion, and Phrixe. The which as the Elyences held before, so as they had also taken the Towne of the Alphirences, which formerly did belong to Arcadia, by the meanes of Alliades the Megalopolitaine, who deliuered it vnto them in exchange, at such time as hee was King. As soone as Phylides was entred into Triphalia, he sent the Eliences to Lepreon, and the Mercenaries to Alphira: and he remained at Tipanes, hauing the Etoliens with him. Philip leauing the Baggage, hauing past the Bridge of Alphia,The scituation of Alphira. which runs along the walls of Erea, he came to Alphira, which is seated vpon a certaine Mountaine full of Caues and Pits round about it, and hath a∣boue ren Furlongs in ascent. Finally, it hath a Fort vpon the top of it, and the Image of Minerua made of Copper, much differing from o∣thers in greatnesse and beauty:The Image of Minerua. The people of the Countrey know not who made it, nor at whose charge, nor at what time it hath beene e∣rected. All the World holds for certaine, that it is the most excel∣lent worke among all those which Hecatodorus and Sostrates haue made. The next Morning being cleare and bright, Philip commands many Ladders to be brought, before the which he had Troupes of aduentu∣rers, and then the Macedonians, commanding them all at the Sun-ri∣sing, to make haste to creepe vp the Mountaines,Philip assailes Alphira. and to assaile the Towne. Which being performed, the Alphirenses ran all to a place where they saw the Macedonians vse the greatest force. In the meane time Philip hauing with him the choice of all the Troupes, was come secretly to the wall by a difficult Countrey. And when as the Souldiers assailed the Towne of all sides, and scaled it, Philip commanded to doe the like vnto the Fort which was neere the Fortresse: the which hee tooke suddainly being vnfurnished of Souldiers. When as the Alphiren∣ses saw it on fire from their walles, they were terrified with this new danger, fearing that if the Macedonians should take the Fortresse, there were no meanes of safety, they retired suddainly, abandoning the walls the Macedonians tooke presently with the Towne. Afterwards they which held the Fortresse, yeelded it to Philip, to haue their liues saued, according to the Composition which they had made with him. After these actions, the people of Triphalia being amazed, were care∣full of their safeties: Philides also parting from Typanea, after he had ran∣sack'd and spoil'd some houses, retired to Lopira. Behold the recom∣pence which the Etoliens at that time made vnto their Allies: so as they not onely abandoned them in their greatest extremity, but made them suffer things which were scarce fit to be endured by an Enemy.The Typaneats yeele vnto Philip. The Ty∣paneates yeelded the Towne presently to Philip: the which they of Hip∣pane did in like manner. In the meane time the Phialences hauing newes of that which past in Triphalia, being in Armes, tooke a place neere vnto Polimarche, detesting the alliance of the Etoliens. The Etolien Pi∣rates who by chance were in that Towne in regard of the Messeniens, la∣boured in the beginning to resist the Phialences. But when they were aduertised that the whole Towne was of one accord, they gaue
ouer their enterprize, and trussing vp their Baggage, departed. The Phialences sent an Embassie to Philip,The Phialences yeld to Philip. and submitted themselues and their Towne vnder his obedience. This being done, the Lepreates gaining a place of aduantage within their Towne, resolued to chase a∣way the Garrison of Eliences, Etoliens, and Lacedemonians. Philides in the beginning was nothing moued herewith, but continued still with∣in the Towne. But when the King had sent Taurion with a part of his Army against him, and comming in person with the rest to Lepreon, Philides and his Company hearing the newes, began to faint. Contra∣riwise the Lepreates growing more resolute,The  of the Lpreates against the Eto∣iens, did an act worthy of me∣mory: For hauing within their Towne a thousand Eliences, fifteene hundred Etoliens, and two hundred Lacedemonians, Voluntaries, hol∣ding moreouer the Fort, yet their courage was so great, as they resolued not to forget the safety of their Countrey in so great a danger. But when as Philides saw the Lepreates to prosecute what they had begun with such courage, and the Macedonians to approach neere vn∣to the Towne, he fled with the Elienses and Lacedemonians, hauing no more hope of safety. So as the Lacedemonians taking their way by Messena, returned to their houses, and the Etoliens went to Samice with their Commander Philides. The Lepreates being Masters of the Towne, yeel∣ded to Philip. sent an Embassie to the King to yeeld it vnto him. Who be∣ing heard, the King sent part of his Army thither, and pursuing Phi∣lides for a time, with those that were lightly armed, hee tooke all the Baggage, and Philides saued himselfe within a Castle. There the King planted his Campe, and made shew to besiege the Towne, cau∣sing the rest of his Army to come from Lepreon: wherewith the Etoli∣ens and Elienses being amazed, as hauing nothing wherewith to defend the Siege but their hands, began to parley for their safeties. Who going forth vpon the Kings word, retired to Elis. The King was pre∣sently Lord of Samice. Afterwards diuers others came to submit them∣selues, so as he tooke Phrixe,Townes which yeeld to Philip. Tyangion, Epiron, Bolac, Pyrgon and Epicalion. After which he returned to Lepreon, hauing in sixe dayes made all Tryphalia subiect. There he made remonstrances to the Lepre∣ates according to the time, and put a sufficient Garrison into the Fort, he led his Army to Erea, leauing Ladix of , Gouernour of Try∣phalia Being arriued there, he diuided the spoile among the Souldiers, and hauing made prouision of victuals, he tooke his way to Megalopo∣lis in the heart of Winter. When as Philip was in Tryphalia,Chylon. Chylon the Lacedemonian imma∣gining that the Crowne of the City belonged vnto him, and being discontented at the insolency of the Magistrates in choosing Lycurgu, he began to plot an enterprize of reuolte. Hoping therefore to gaine the loue and fauour of the people, if doing like vnto Cleemenes, he put them in hope to diuide the Lands againe, hee doth his indeauour to bring it to effect. And communicating his practice to his Friends, he had 200. Confederates of his enterprize. But knowing that Lycurgus and the Magistrates which had made him King, would make a great opposition, he studied first how to preuent it. When as by chance all the Magistrates
supt together, he assailes them by surprize,The Lacedemo∣nian Magistrat slaine by Cylon. and kills them cruelly. Be∣hold how Fortune, prepared a punishment worthy the deedes which they had committed. Beleeue me, there is not any man but will say that they had well deserued to be punished by him, and for the cause for which they suffered. As soone as Chylon had done this Execution, he transports himselfe to Lycurgus house: And although he were there, yet he could not come at him; for hee was preserued by his Houshold Seruants and by his neighbours, and retired vnto Pellene by vnknowne wayes. Chylon frustrated of so great an opportunity, being wonder∣fully discontented, was forced to doe that which necessity required; and transporting himselfe to the place, he seazed vpon all his enemies, and gaue courage to his friends, labouring to induce the rest to reuolt. But when as he saw no man to like of it, and that the Citty was in mutiny against him, fearing what might happen, steales away from thence, and comes into Acheia alone, being chased out of his Coun∣trey. The Lacedemonians fearing the descent of King Philip, retired with whatsoeuer they had in the fields into their Townes: and fortified them with men and all sorts of munition, razing to the ground Athence of the Megalopolitains: For that it seemed a very conuenient place for the enemy. It is certaine that whilest the Lacedemonians maintained their good gouernment, according to the Lawes of Lycurgus, they were growne very great vnto the Warre of Leuctres.The Lacedemo∣nians were vn∣fortunate after they had left the Lawes of Licurgus. Since which time they be∣ganne to feele the crosses of Fortune, and their gouernment grew worse, being full of many discommodities and intestine Seditions, with Banishments and ruines vntill the Tyranny of Nabydane: whose name they could not endure. These are things which haue beene related by many and are well knowne, since that Cleomenes ruined the gouerne∣ment of the Country, whereof wee will speake heereafter when op∣portunity shall require. Philip passing by Megalopolis with his Army, drew to Argos by the Country of Tegetane, and there past the remain∣der of the Winter: purchasing a wonderfull renowne of all the World, aswell for his course of life, as for the things which he had done in this Warre, beyond the strength of his age. Appelles who (notwithstan∣ding the Kings Commaundment) desisted not from his dessigne,Appelles per∣sists in his en∣terprize. labou∣red by little and little to make the Acheins subiect. And when he found that Arate and the rest that were with him, were opposite vnto his ends, and that the King had them in great Reputation, especially olde Arate, for that he was in great Authority among the Acheins and An∣tigonus, and was moreouer a good and discreete man, he beganne to Traduce him with iniuries. Then hee inquires what men there were in Acheia of a contrary saction to Arate, and drawes them vnto him. To whom hee giues a curteous and gracious reception, drawing them by perswasions to his friendship, and afterwards recommended them in perticular to the King, he gaue him to vnderstand that if hee fauou∣red the party of , hee should enioy the Acheis, according to the Contrac of the League: But if vsing his Councell he receiued the others into friendship, hee should dispose of all Morea at his pleasure.
Moreouer the time of the Election approaching, hee had an intent to cause one of the other Faction to be chosen. Wherefore hee beganne to solicite the King to be at Egia at the Common Assembly of the A∣cheis, as if he meant to goe from thence into the Elienses Countrey. The King perswaded by his Words, came vnto Egia at the prefixed time:Eperate chosen chiefe of the Acheins. Where Appelles amazing the aduerse party, in the end preuai∣led with great difficulty. By this meanes Eperate was chosen Chiefe of the Acheins, and Tymoxenes quite reiected, whom Arate had named. After these things Philip drawing his Army from Egira, and mar∣ching by Patres and Dimes, hee went to a Castle, which the Coun∣trey-men call Mur, scituated in the Dimenses Country, and lately taken by Euripides, as wee haue formerly said. As hee hasted with great heated to yeild it to the Dimenses, hauing his Army ready in Bat∣taile,The Castle of Mur yeilded to Philip. the Garrison of Elienses was so amazed, as they presently ye∣ded themselues and the Castle, the which is not great in Circuit, but very strong by Scituation and Walles; For it had but two furlongs in Compasse, but the VValls had not lesse then seauen Fathomes and a halfe in height. Philip deliuering it to the Dimenses presently, hee o∣uer-ranne the Prouince to spoile it: After which he put all to fire and Sword, and returned to Dime, laden with great spoiles. Apelles supposed that hee had effected part of his dessigne, for that the chiefe had beene chosen according to his desire, hee chargeth Arate againe, desiring to him into disgrace with the King; and raiseth a slander vpon him vpon these causes. Amphidamu Chiefe of the Elienses in the Burrough which they call Thalam, being taken and sent with the other Prisoners, came to Olympia: And there hee beganne to seeke (by the meanes of some) to speake vnto the King: To whom when hee was brought, hee told him that it was in his power to make the Elienses imbrace his Alliance and Friendship. The King perswaded with his Words, let him goe without ransome, with a Charge to tell the Elienses, that if they would entertaine his Alliance, hee would deliuer all their Prisoners without ransome, and that hee would preserue their Prouince from danger, suffering them moreouer to liue in liberty, and that hee would giue them no Garrisons, nor pretend any Tribute, but would suffer them to leuie mercenary men where their Affaires required. The Elienses hearing these offers, would not accept of them, although they were great and profitable. Appelles making this the occasion of his slander,The slander of Appelles. goes to Philip, tel∣ling him that Arate and his Confederates kept no true Friendshippe with the Macedonians, nor entertained the League sincerely: For it was certaine they had beene the cause that the Elienses had not accepted the Conditions of the Alliance which had beene offered them: For at that time when as hee sent Amphidamus to Olympia, they had vsed speeches secretly vnto him, that it was not for the good and benefit of Morea, that Philip should be Lord of the Elienses; and by this meanes the Elienses, disdayning the conditions of Peace, obserued their League
with the Etoliens, and indured the Macedonians Warre. This Speech being ended, Philip caused Arate with the Acheins to be called, and Commaunds Appelles to speake the same Words in their Presence, the which hee performed boldly and without blushing:The accusation of Appelles a∣gainst Arate & the Acheins. Finally, the King speaking not any thing, hee said moreouer vnto them: And for that Arate the King hath found you ingratefull and deceitfull, hee hath re∣solued to returne into Macedony, hauing first called the Acheis, and acquainted them with the occasion.The Answere of Arate. Whereunto Arate answered: The King, sayd hee, ought not to beleeue lightly; but to consider well of the businesse, when they speake any thing against his Allies and Friends, before hee giue credite to a slander. This is proper for a King, and very profitable in all things. And therefore in this slan∣der you must call them that heard the VVords, and let Appelles enter with them, and omit nothing that may bee necessary to discouer the Truth, before it be reuealed to the Assembly of the Acheins. This answere was pleasing vnto the King, saying, That he would diligent∣ly search out the trueth, they then departed. But within few dayes after, when as Appelles could not finde any proofe of those things which hee had obiected, there was by chance a great testimony found of Arate his innocency: For whilst that Philip ruined the Prouince, the Elienses hauing some suspition of Amphida∣mus, had resolued to take him, and to send him bound into Etolia, The which Amphidamus discouering, hee steales away secretly, and comes first to Olympia: But hauing certayne newes that Philip stayed at Dyme to diuide the Spoile, he went speedily vnto him. As soone as Arate had newes of the banishment of Amphidamus from his owne Countrey, hee was wonderfull ioyfull, knowing that hee had not committed any thing against the Macedonians, and goes vnto the King, intreating him to call Amphidamus: For hee was the man that could giue best satisfaction in those things wherewith hee was charged, to whom the Words had beene spoken: And that moreouer he would willingly deliuer the trueth, seeing that for the loue of Philip hee had Banished his Natiue Countrey, and that all his hope consisted in him onely. At whose words the King was mooued, and calling for Amphida∣mus hee found that Appelles had falsly slandered him. Wherefore af∣ter that day hee held Arate in greater esteeme and fauour, but disliked the practise of Appelles; although hee were forced to indure this and many other things for the great Authority which hee held. But Ap∣pelles changed not his humour:Taurion dispos∣sest of the go∣uernment of Morea. Hee depriued Taurion of the gouerne∣ment of Morea, not taxing him with any offence, but commending and holding him worthy to bee in the Campe about the King, for that hee desired to put another in his place.The conditions of Courtiers. Behold a new inuention of slander to wrong any one, not in blaming him but in commending him. There is also found (but principally among Courtiers) a malici∣ous diligence accompanied with Enuy and fraud, by a mutuall Iealousie and extreame Auarice.Alexande Chamberlaine to King Anti∣gnus. Hee did likewise indeauour to disappoynt Alexander the Chamber∣laine,
and affected the care of the Kings Person for himselfe, and fi∣nally to breake all the Order which Antigonus had left. Who had duly performed his duty in the Gouernment of his Realme and Sonne during his life: And dying hee prouided wisely for the foure: For he left a Will, by the which hee set downe an order what the Macedoni∣ans should doe, and what charges they should execute, labouring to take away all occasions of Ambition and Discord, which might rise in Court. Hee appointed Appelles to be Tutour to his Sonne, who had beene at the Warre with him: And hee made Leonce Chiefe of the Souldiers which carried Targets, and Megalee Chancellor, and Tau∣rion Gouernour of Morea. It is true, that Appelles at that time held Leonce and Megalee in his Subiection, and was resolued to chase away Alexander and Taurion: To the end hee might supply their places in Person, or by his Creatures. The which vndoubtedly hee had done, if Arate had not preuented it. But now hee suffers the paine of his folly and Couetousnesse: For within a short time after hee suffered that, which hee laboured with all his power to doe vnto others. But wee will forbeare at this present to deliuer the causes, making an end of this Booke, and we will en∣deauour in the following Booke to set downe euery thing in its place. After this Philip came to Argos, where hee past the remainder of the Winter with his friends, and sent backe his Army into Macedony. The end of the Fourth Booke of Polybius.
THE FIFTH BOOKE OF the History of POLYBIVS. THe Yeare of Arate his Gouernment being ended about May (for so the Acheins mea∣sure the time) he left it,Eperate Chiefe of the Acheins and Dorimach of the Etoliens. and Epirate tooke it▪ And Dorimache was then Chiefe of the Etoliens. At the same time Summer be∣ginning, Hannibal was parted from Car∣thage with his Army, for that the Warre grew hoe betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, and made hast (passing E∣bro) to goe into Italy. Then the Romans sent Titus Sempronius with an Army into Affricke, and Publius Corneli∣us into Spaine. Antiochus and Ptolomy hauing no more hope to decide their Controuersie concerning Syria, neither by Embassies nor mee∣tings, had begunne the Warre. And then King Philip prest with want of Victuals and money for his Army, caused the Acheins to assemble by their Magistrates. But when as the people were met at Egia, according to the custome of the Countrey, the King seeing Arate much discontented for the affront which hee had receiued from Appelles, at the time of the Election, and that Eperate was disdained of them all, as a man simple by Nature and sloathfull, and was helde as a scorne, knowing also the treachery of Appelles and Leonce, he be∣ganne againe to turne his affection to Arate. And after that hee had perswaded the Magistrates to referre their Diet to Sicyon, hee spake cur∣teously to olde and young Arate, and perswaded them to continue in
their first affection, charging Appelles with all that had beene done. Whereunto they consenting, hee presently after his entry into the Assembly, obtained by their fauour was necessary for his present affaires: for it was ordred by the Acheins that they should pay vnto the King thirty thousand Crownes:Mony & Corne deliuered to Philip by the Acheins. That is to say, three moneths pay for the Souldiers; and threescore and eleauen mines of Wheate, (e∣uery mine being valued at fiue Quarters, a Combe and a Bushell of Lon∣don measure) and withall as long as Philip should remaine in Morea, he should haue sixe thousand two hundred Crownes monethly. Which being done▪ the Acheins returned euery man to his Towne. But win∣ter being past, and the Troupes returned, the King thought it best to assaile the enemy by Sea: for hee saw well that by this meanes hee might enter their Countrey, and surprize them on either side, and that they should not bee able to succour one another, aswell for the distance that is betwixt them, and for the newnesse of the Warre by Sea, as al∣so for that they should bee amazed at the suddaine descent of their Ene∣mies: for at that time hee made Warre against the Etoliens, Lacedemo∣nians, and Elienss. After this resolution, hee drew together the Acheins Vessels and his owne at Leche,The naure of the Macedoni∣ans a Port of Corinthe: Commaunding that in the meane time, they should inure the Souldiers to the Oare, wherein the Mace∣donians did him great seruice. Yo must vnderstand that they are ex∣cellent men at Land in a pitcht field, and ready at Sea in Combates of Surprize. Moreouer, they haue not their equalls to Rampire and For∣tifie: and they complaine not of their paines in such affaires: Finally, they are like vnto the Eacides, whom Hesiodus brings in reioycing more for Warre then a Banquet. The King stayed at Corinthe with the Ma∣cedonians, being busie in the preparation of the Sea Army. Appelles who could not alter the Kings humour and disposition,The Conspira∣cy of Appelles and . nor suffer any abatement in his credite, being full of disdaine, hee made a Conspira∣cy with Leonce and Megale, which was, that they being present, should hinder the Kings enterprizes, when opportunity did serue; and that for his part he would goe to Chalcis to stoppe the Victualls that should come to the Kings Army. When he had plotted this, hee went pre∣sently thither, to put it in practise against the King: wherein hee kept his Promise, and forced him to ingage his plate and all the rest of his mooueables. When as the Army at Sea was drawne together, and the Macedoni∣ans accustomed to the Oae, and that the Souldiers had receiued Corne and Money, Philip set Saile to Corinthe, and arriued three dayes after, hauing sixe thousand Macedonians, and twelue Hundred Mercenaries. At what time Dorimache Chiefe of the Etoliens sent Aglaus and Scope vnto the Elienses with twelue Hundred Candyets newly leuied. The Elieses fearing that Philip would come and besiege Cyllene, leuied Vo∣luntaries with all speede, and likewise made a leuy of men within the Citty,The forces which Philip left at Dyme. doing their indeauours to fortifie Cyllene. Philip aduertised hereof, hee left at Dime the Mercenaries of the Acheins, and the Candyots which hee had with him, and some Horse-men Gaules, and
about two thousand foote of the choice of the Acheins, for the guard and safety of the place against the assaults and attempts of the Eli∣enses. And as a little before he had Written vnto the Messeniens, Epi∣rates, Acarnaniens and to Scerdilaide, to meete him in Cephalenia with their Equipage by Sea, hee parts presently from Patres, and sailes directly into Cephalenia to the Burrough of Prones. But when he saw it difficult to besiege, and the Countrey streight, hee past on with his whole Army, and came to Palea: Where seeing the Region fertile in Corne, and in all other manner of munition, and fit to feede his Army, he landed his men, and planted his Campe neere vnto the Towne Wals. He also drew his shippes a shore, and inuironed them with deepe Ditches and strong Pallisadoes, fitting for their defence. Hee likewise sent the Macedonians to forrage, and himselfe went to view the Towne: and resolued to set vp his Engines, and to make all necessary preparations to force it, meaning to attend the succours of friends and Allies, and to make the Towne subiect to his obedience: As well to depriue the Elienses of the greatest benefite and commodity they had by Sea (for without doubt they sailed into Morea by night, with the Cephalenian shippes, and spoiled the Sea Coasts of the Epi∣rotes and Acarnaniens) as also to prepare this Towne for his Allies, as a retreate in the  Country. Now for the Scituation of Cephalenia,The scituation of Cephalena. it lyes within the shore of the Corinthian Gulfe, looking towards the Sea of Sycily, and bends towards the parts of Morea, which turne towards the North and West, and likewise towards the Prouince of the Elienses, and the parts of Epirus, Etolia, and Acarnania, which haue their aspect towards the South and East. VVherefore he resolued to do what possibly hee might, to Conquer this Iland, for the place was very conuenient to assemble the Allies, and well seated to offend the enemies Townes, and for the defence of those of the League. And when hee saw that all the Quarters of the Towne were inuironed, partly with the Sea, and partly with steepy Rockes, and that there was onely a little plaine which lookes towards Zacinthe, hee was fully resolued to plant his Battery there, and to prepare and make all things necessary for the siege. In the meane time there arriued fifteene shippes of VVarre sent by Scerdilaide, saying, that for the present hee could not furnish and make ready any more, by reason of some mutinies and dissentions which had lately happened in Sclauonia. There also arriued succours and supplies from the Epirotes, Acarnaniens, and Messeniens, as he had ordained: For the Messeniens maintained the rest of the VVarre freely, after the taking of the Citty of Phigalee. VVhen as the King had prepared and made things necessary for the siege, and the En∣gines of Battery were appointed in conuenient places, hee approaches them to the Towne incouraging and giuing heart to his men: By whose meanes after they had mined, they presently opened a Quarter of the VVall, the which was vnderpropt with great peeces of Timber, so great is the experience & knowledge of the Macedonians in such affaires.
Then Philip approaching neerer vnto the Wall, hee beganne to sum∣mon the besieged to yeilde. But vpon their refusall, they suddainely set fire on that part of the Wall, and ouer-threw it. This beeing done hee sent the Souldiers which carried Targets to make the point,Leonce Tray∣our to Philip. being vnder the Charge of Leonce, commanding them to assaile it and enter that way. Leonce remembring his Conspiracy, and finding an opportunity to put it in execution, perswaded three young men of his followers, which marcht before all his Troupes to the assault of the Towne, that they should hinder the taking thereof, winning the Captaines of their acquaintance, and Charging very faintly as if they were affraide. By this meanes they were shamefully repuls'd and beaten off from the as∣sault hauing many Wounded and soare hurt: Although they might ea∣sily haue had the Victory, and haue come off with a great deale of ho∣nour. The King seeing the feare of the Captaines, and the multi∣tude that were Wounded, raised the siege. And from that time hee assembled his Friends and Allies, holding a Councell of that which hee had to doe for the future. In the meane time Lycurgus entred into Messenia with an Army: And Dorimache with halfe the Etliens, fals into Thessaly:Embassadours sent to Philip from the Mes∣seniens and A∣carnaniens. Wherefore Embassadours come vnto the King from the Acarnaniens and Messeni∣ens. He of the Acarnaniens intreated him to make a Descent into the Etoliens Country, to the end hee might draw Dorimache from his En∣terprize, and that he would spoile and consume all the Enemies Coun∣tries. He of the Messeniens demaunded Succours, shewing that it was but a dayes iourney from Cephalenia vnto Messena, a Northerly Winde blowing: And therefore Gorgon sayd that the Voyage would be suddaine and of great profite and gaine. Leonce remembring his Conspiracy, helde for Gorgon, seeing plainely that by this meanes, Philip should spend all the Spring in doing nothing: For the Voyage from thence to Messena was easie, but the returne impossible; for the Winds blew still Northerly. Wherefore it was apparent that if Philip past with his Army thi∣ther, hee should consume the rest of the Spring idlely, and in the meane time the Etoliens ouer-running Thessaly and Epirus, would put all to fire and Sword. This was the reason why hee Councelled this and such like things. But Arate was of a contrary minde and opini∣on: For hee was of aduice that they should sayle into Etolia, and to make Warre first there: For hee immagined that the time was very fitting and conuenient to spoyle and ruine the Prouince, for that the Etoliens were gone to the Warre with Dorimache. The King fol∣lowed no more the Councell of Leonce in any thing, both for that the affaires succeeded ill in the last siege, as for that hee was resolued to imbrace that of Arate, considering the long experience and pra∣ctise he had of his Wisedome▪ Wherefore hee wrote vnto Eperate Chiefe of the Acheins that in holding the Legions suddainely ready, hee should succour and ayde the Messeniens. And in the meane time he parts from Cephalenia, and two dayes after arriues in the middle of
the night with his Army by Sea at Leucade: And from thence holding his course a long the Sea of Ambracia, the which as wee haue for∣merly sayd, parting from that of Sycily, extends it selfe into Etolia. And when hee was come vnto the Marshes, hee stayed there a little before day, and causeh his men to feede and refresh their weary bo∣dies, commanding them to be ready without any Baggage. Then he called his guides and inquires of the places and Townes, and of all things else that were necessary. At the same time Aristophantes arriued with a good Troupe of A∣carnaniens, hauing a great desire to reuenge the great and many out∣rages, which the Etoliens had done them in former times. Where∣fore receiuing the Macedonians willingly, they drewe to Armes, not they onely which were bound by the Law, but euen many olde men. The Epirotes had no lesse desire to doe the like for many reasons: But they could not assemble in time for the great extent of the Prouince, and the suddaine comming of Philip, Dorimache, as wee haue for∣merly sayd, had halfe the Etoliens with him, and left the rest in se∣uerall parts of the Countrey to be ready, if any new accident should happen. The King parting after noone from the Fenns, and hauing left suffi∣cient force to guard the Baggage, when hee had marcht about three score Furlong, he plated his Campe. Where after hee had stayed some certaine space, and had caused his Souldiers to feede, and re∣fresh themselues being formerly wearied, he continued his course: So as marching all night,The Riuer of Acheloe. he arriued before day at the Riuer of Acheloe, betwixt Conope and Strate, seeking to surprize There by a way which they did not regard. Leonce and Megalee fore-saw for two reasons that the King would preuaile in his enterprize, and that the Etoliens would haue the worst. The one was, that the Macedonians descent was sud∣daine, and much more speedy then they could immagiue: The other, that the Etoliens fearing not that Philip passing by those rough and difficult Countries, would be vnprouided. Wherefore considering these things, and mindfull of their Conspiracy, they aduised Philip that in seating of his Campe neere to the Riuer of Acheloe, he should refresh his Army for the last nights labour: Hoping that by this meanes the Etoliens should haue time to seeke for succours, from their friends and Allies. But Arate holding the time very precious to effect the Kings Reso∣lution, and that Leonce and Megalee like Traytors sought how to stop and preuent his passage, hee intreates Philip not to loose so faire an op∣portunity. Following whose aduise, the King beginning to bee dis∣contented with Leonce and Megalee, hee proceeded in his iourney: And passing the Riuer of Acheloe hee marcht directly vnto Therme with his whole Army, putting all to fire and Sword: On the left hand hee, left the Townes of Strate, Agrinia, and Testia: And vppon the right hand he left Conope, Lysimachia, Tryconia, and Philea. Beeing come to the Towne of Methape, which lyes betwixt Tryconia and the Fenns, about threescore furlongs distant from Therme, the Etoliens fled.
Wherefore hee tooke it, and put into it a Garrison of fiue hundred men,Methape taken by Philip. to the end he might make vse of it for a Retreate, aswell in his passage as in his returne by those streights: For the Countrey especi∣ally about the Fennes is Mountainous, difficult, and inuironed with thicke Forrests. By this meanes the way is very troublesome, and in a manner in∣accessible. Then he put the Voluntaries in the foreward, and after them the Sclanonians:The order which Philip held to passe the streights of Therme. Then followed the Targeteers and the Legina∣ries, and in this manner hee marcht thorough the streights, hauing the Candy in the Reare, and the Thraciens on the right Wing for a support. In regard of the left side, the Fennes did fortifie them a∣bout thirty Furlongs in length or rather more. When hee had speedi∣ly past the streights, and taken the Burrough of Pamphia, and had put a Garrison into it, he proceeded towards Therme, which is not onely difficult and inaccessible, but hath also deep Vallies round about it: so as in some places the way is dangerous and narrow, with an As∣sent about thirty furlongs high. The which hauing soone past, for that the Macedonians had carried themselues like braue men,Therme spoyled by the Macedo∣nians. hee came in the dead of the night vnto Therme, a very rich and likewise a faire Towne: Where planting his Campe, hee abandoned the Coun∣trey and the Houses of Therme to the spoile of the Souldiers, the which were furnished not onely with Corne, and all other manner of muni∣tion, but with the richest mooueables of the Etolieus: For euery man carried thither the richest stuffe hee had, for that yearely they kept Faires and Feasts there, and they made their Election: And withall they held this place for the safest and most surest of all the rest, where∣unto no man durst approach; being such by Nature, as it seemed to be the Fort of all Etolia. Wherefore the Houses (considering their long peace) were full of all Wealth, not onely those that were neere vnto the Temple, but in all other places. They rested this night within the Towne, being in∣richt with spoiles. The next day they made choyse of the best, and set fire of the rest. They also tooke the best Armes, which hung vp in their Cloysters or Galleries, and changed some, setting fire of the rest, being aboue fifteene thousand. You must vnderstand that hi∣therto they mannaged the Warre iustly, and according to its Lawes. But I know not what to say of that which followes: For they ruined all the Cloysters and stately Houses, and ouer-threw all the ornaments which had beene made with great care and Charge, calling to minde that which the Etoliens had done, at the Temple of Iupiter Dodonee. They not onely consumed the building by fire, but they ruined all the Walles: And withall they ouer-threw and beate in peeces aboue two thousand Images, yet they would not touch those which had the fi∣gure or inscription of one God. They had grauen vppon the Walles▪ when as the dexterity of Same, the sonne of Chrisogone (who had beene nurst with the same milke that the King) beganne to shew it selfe, This vulgar Verse:
Thou scest the God, which will terrifie him with his Dart. The King and his Friends thought they had done well, and that by meanes they had reuenged with the like recompence the execration which the Etoliens had made vnto God. But for my owne part, I am of another opinion; and euery man may iudge whither I haue rea∣son, calling vnto minde the example of Kings of the same Line, and not of other Races.The prudence of Antigonus to¦wards the La∣cedemonians: When as Antigonus had chased away Cleome∣nes King of the Lacedemonians and was Lord of Sparta, hee forbare to vse any outrage or cruelty to the Lacedemonians, and carried him∣selfe not onely like a moderate and temperate man, but was also gra∣cious vnto his Enemies: And returned into his Countrey leauing the Lacedemonians in their full liberty, doing them many fauours, both in generall and perticular. So as they not onely tearmed him at that time their Benefactor, but likewise after his Death they called him their Sauiour: So as hee not onely purchased Prayse and immor∣tall glory with the Lacedemonians, but likewise withall other Nations, Moreouer Philip who first inlarged the Realme of Macedony, and made the name of his Race great, hee did not winne the Athenians (after that hee had Vanquished them in Cheronia) so much by Armes, as by his milde course of liuing, and the sweetnesse and gentlenesse of his Nature. It is true, that hee Vanquished those that came against him to Bat∣taile: and had wonne the Athenians and their Citty: Not by a continu∣ance of his Choller and indignation against the Vanquished, but in fighting with his Enemies vntill occasion were offered to shew his mild∣nesse and Vertue:The urtesie of Philip the fa∣ther of Alexan∣der to the Athe∣nians▪ For hee sent vnto the Athenians (who had done him many wrongs) their Prisoners free, and caused such as had beene slaine in the Battaile to bee interred, soliciting the Athenians afterwards, to carry away the bones vnto the Sepulchers of their Auncestors. And afterwards sending backe the sayd bones, and many slaues freed, being lightly attired with Antipater, hee decided a great businesse by his industry: So as the vntamed hearts of the Athenians, being Van∣quished by his magnanimity, they were alwaies after obedient vnto him, and ready to satisfie his desires. What did Alexander,Alexander the Great. whose Choller was so great against the Thebanes, as hee made all the Citti∣zens slaues: and razed their Citty vnto the ground, reducing some of their Princes into seruitude, sending others into Banishment, and taking all their Wealth? Yet his rage and fury did not so farre exceede, as to force and violate the Temples of the immortall Gods, vsing all possible diligence, to keepe his men from committing any disorder and villany. And when hee past into Asia, to reuenge the outrages which the Persians had done vnto the Grecians, hee punished the men which had committed them, according to their deserts: but hee tou∣ched not the Temples: Although the Persians had most wronged the Grecians therein. This Philip should haue considered to the end hee should not bee so
much esteemed,The blame of Philip. the Heire of the afore-sayd Kings in their Soueraign∣ty, as in life and Conuersation. Hee did what possibly hee could in his life time, to shewe himselfe to bee of the blood of Alexander and Philip: But hee did not care to imitate them, nor to doe as they had done. Wherefore leading another course of life, hee also left another opinion of him with all Nations. For as hee laboured to yeeld the like vnto the Etoliens for their outrages, and to purge euill by euill, he thought not to offend. Calling to minde the outrages which Scope and Dorimache had done vnto the Temple of Iupiter Dedonee, hee did not perceiue that he committed the like errour, straying wonderfully from reason.The Lawes of Warre. It is true that the Lawes of Warre, permit to vse cruelty a∣gainst enemies, and to ruine and spoile their Castles, and Gardens, Townes, and Burroughes, Shippes, Fruites, and such like: To the end that their forces may be weakned, and his owne fortified and aug∣mented. But it is the Act of a furious and mad man, to ruine those things that are neither any way profitable or commodious vnto him∣selfe, nor hurtfull vnto his enemy: As Temples, Cloisters, Images, and such like. It is not sitting that a good and vertuous man, should persecute his Enemy to his totall ruine. It sufficeth onely that the faultes of Delin∣quents may be purged and Corrected; and not to ruine with the vniust those things which haue not offended, nor to seeke to destroy and pull downe with the Enemy that which hath committed no outrage.The practise of a Tyrant. It is the practise of a cruell Tyrant, to Raigne in doing euill, forcing his people thorough feare, and liuing in mutuall hatred with his Sub∣iects.The Duty of a King. But the duty of a King is to doe good vnto all men, gouerning his people without feare, with bounty and Clemency: And liuing with his Citizens in mutuall loue and friendshippe. But wee shall see more plainely the great errour which Philip committed, if wee shall truely consider the opinion which the Etoliens might haue had of him, if hee had not ruined the Cloisters and Images, nor carried away the Ornaments of the Temple. I conceiue that beeing culpable of the things, which had beene committed at the Temple of Iupiter Dedo∣nee, they might haue seene plainely that Philip could haue done the like, and yet it had beene cruelty, the which notwithstanding in shewe hee had done with reason: And that hee would not imitate and follow their Wickednesse in regard of his Bounty and Magnanimity, they would vndoubtedly haue condemned themselues for their faultes, in commending and approouing Philip with great admiration, for that like a magnanimous King, hee had carried a respect vnto the Gods, and executed his Choller vpon them. There is no doubt,To vanquish an enemy by mild∣nesse. but it is better to vanquish an Enemy by mild∣nesse and Clemency, then by force and might: For by Armes necessi∣ty forceth men to obedience; but mildnesse drawes them to it willing∣ly. By the one faults are corrected with losse: And by the other of∣fenders amend and reforme themselues without damage. Moreouer in the one the Souldiers attribute vnto themselues the greatest part of the glory, which is a great matter: But in curtesie, gentlenesse, and
mildnesse, all the Victory is giuen vnto the Commander. So as happily considering his age, they will not attribute to Philip the greatest part of those things which he had done, but to those that were in the Warre with him, of which number were Arate and Demetrius of Phare. The which would be easie to say vnto him, although he had not beene there present, aud that this outrage done vnto the Gods, had beene by the aduice of one of them. It is true, that this was done contrary to the course of Arates life, during the which hee neuer did any thing rash∣ly, nor without consideration: whereas Demetrius did alwayes the con∣trary. There are likewise particular presumptions thereof, whereof we will speake when it shall be fit. Philip then (returning to out discourse) parts from Therme, laden with all spoiles: and returnes the same way he came, causing the Bag∣gage to goe before, with those that were best armed: and placing the Acarnaniens in Rearward with the Mercenaries, he made haste to passe the streights. He feared that the Enemies relying vpon the aduantage of the place, might charge him in the Reare. The which was present∣ly put in practise, for that the Etoliens hauing drawne together three thousand men, neuer approaching neere vnto Philip, whilest hee held the high Countrey, made their Ambushes in scattred places vnder the command of Alexander. But when the Rearward began to march, they entred into Therme, charging them vpon the Taile.The Etoliens charge Philips Rearward. When as the al∣larum was giuen, the Etoliens relying much vpon the aduantage of places, pursued them with great courage. But Philip hauing wisely prouided for the future, had left the Sclauonians in Ambush vnder a certaine Hill, with many others that were armed with Targets. Who seeing the pursuite of the Etoliens, they marcht against him with great fury, and presently slew sixe or seauen score, and tooke as many: the rest saued themselues by infamous and shamefull flight. The Acarnanians and Mercenaries, after they had gotten the victo∣ry,Paphia burri. they presently set fire on Paphia: and when they had past the streights with great speed, they found the Macedonians. Phillip sea∣ted his Campe neere vnto Methape, staying for his men.Methape razed by Philip. And parting from thence after he had razed it, he comes to a Towne called Atres. Then continuing his way for three dayes together, hee wasted the whole Countrey: The day following he planted his Campe neere vnto Conope, where he stayed the next day. After which hee march't at the breake of day towards Strate, where hee past the Riuer of Acheloe, and lodged within a Bowes shoote of the Towne, drawing the Inhabitants often to skirmish. For he had beene aduertised, that there were three thousand Etolien foote within it, and about foure hundred Horse, with fiue hundred Candiots. When as no man durst come forth, hee raised his Campe againe, and at the first tooke his way towards the Fenns, to recouer his ships. But when as the Reare of his Army began to passe the Towne,The Etoliens made a sally out of Strate. a number of Etolien Horse-men make a sally and charge them. They were presently followed by a Troupe of Candiots, and many Etoliens came to succour their Horse-men, the Acarnaniens being in danger, turned head against the Enemy, and the Combate began
betwixt them. The Victory was long in suspence: Finally, Philip sent the Sclanonians to succour the Mercenaries. Wherefore the Etoliens being vanquished, fled of all sides. Those which the King had sent, pursued the greatest part of them to the Gates and walls of the Towne, whereof there were a hundred slaine in the chase: the rest durst no more shew themselues in Field. By this meanes the Kings Army reti∣red without danger to their ships. After which Philip planted his Campe, and gaue thankes vnto the Gods for the good fortune which he had obtained according to his de∣sire: And making a Banquet, he inuited all the Captaines. It seemed true, that he had past by dangerous places, into the which no man be∣fore him durst lead an Army. But he not onely past them, but did what he would, and returned without losse or danger. Moreouer, Mega∣lee and Leonce (discontented at the Kings good fortune hauing sworne to Appelles to hinder all his enterprizes: which they could not effect, for that all things succeeded happily to Philip) were present at this Supper sad and pensiue: so as they discouered easily vnto the King, and to the other assistants what their hearts were. But when the Tables were ta∣ken away, and they were well inflamed with their free drinking, they returned to their Tents, seeking for Arate. Whom when they met vpon the way,Megalee and Leonce doe out∣rage to Arate. they vsed many iniurious speeches against him, and began to assault him with stones. But for that much people came of either side to succour them, there grew a great mutiny in the Campe. Philip hearing the Trumpet, sent men to inquire, and to pacifie this tumult. To whom Arate declaring the businesse as it had past, and referring himselfe to the testimony of those that were present, hee re∣turned presently vnto his Tent. Leonce retired secretly out of the presse. Philip causeth Megalee and Crinon to be called, with whom he was much offended. And when as they answered him proudly, that they would neuer cease vntill they had beene reuenged of Arate:Megalee and Crinon condem∣ned by the King in 12000. Crownes. The King incen∣sed therewith, condemned them presently in twelue thousand Crownes, and to bee committed to Prison. Three dayes after he calls for Arate, and intreates him not to care, promising him to giue order for all things when as opportunity shall serue. Leonce aduertised of the imprison∣ment of Megalee, came with force to the Kings Tent: immagining that Philip (considering his youth) would alter his sentence for feare. Be∣ing come before the King, he demanded what man was so hardy to lay hand on Megalee, and who had committed him to Prison. But when as the King answered boldly, that hee had done it, Leonce went away amazed, and in a manner sighing. Philip setting sayle with his Fleete, came presently to Leucade: where after he had appointed men to diuide the spoile, he called all his friends to iudge Megalee. There Arate laied before them the outrages of Le∣once, the great wrongs he suffred in the time of Antigonus, the Con∣spiracy he made with Appelles, and the hinderance he gaue at Palea: To all which things he produced witnesses. Whereunto when Mega∣lee nor Crinon could not answere any thing,The condem∣nation of Ma∣galee and Cri∣non. they were condemned by all the assembly. Whereupon Crinon remained a Prisoner: But
Megalee was deliuered vpon Leonces caution. This was the estate of Appelles and his Confederates: whose Fortune was not such as they ex∣pected: For hoping to tertifie Arate, and to doe what they would with the King, and by this meanes to preuaile in their wills, all things suc∣ceeded contrary. In the meane time Licurgus retires out of the Messeniens Countrey, hauing done nothing worthy of memory. Afterwards parting from Lacedemon with an Army,Licurgus takes the Towne of Elea. he tooke the Towne of Elea, and besieged the Fort, whereinto the Cittizens were retired: where after hee had stayed there some time, and seeing his labour lost, he returned againe to Sparta. And when as the Esienses ouer ran the Countrey of the Di∣menses, some Horse men which were in Ambush, and come to succour them, put them easily to flight, and slew a good number of Gaules, ta∣king Prisoners those of the Townes of Polymede of Egia, Agisipolis and Diode of Dime. Dorimache was gone in the beginning with an Army onely of Etoliens, thinking that he might safely ouer-run Thessaly, and by this meanes draw Philip to raise his Siege from Palea. But being ad∣uertised of the preparation of Chrysogones and Petrea to come and ight with him, he durst not enter into the Plaine, but alwayes kept the top of the Mountaines with his Army. And when he had newes of the com∣ming of the Macedonians into , e laues Thessaly presently to goe and succour his Countrey: where being aduertised of the Kings retreat, not knowing what to doe, and disappointed in all his enterprizes, he remained sad and discontented. The King at his departure from Lencade with his Fleete, hauing spoi∣led and wasted the Sea-coasts, landed at Corinthe with his Army,Philip comes to Corinthe. lea∣uing his ships at Leche. Then he sent Letters to all the allied Townes of Morea, to aduertise them of the day when they should come in Armes to Tegee. Which things being thus ordered, without making any long stay at Corinthe, he parted with his Army: and passing by the Countrey of Argos, three dayes after his departure, he came to Tegee: whereas after he had receiued the Acheins which were there assembled, he pro∣ceeded in his course, passing secretly by the Mountaines, he laboured to enter the Countrey of Sparta, before the Lacedemonians should be ad∣uertised. Where hauing marched foure dayes by the Desarts of the Mountaines, he came to those which were right against the City: Then leauing Menelaie on the right hand, he drew to Amycle. The Lacede∣monians seeing the Army passe by their Citty,Menelaie. they wondred at this strange accident,Amycle. and being terrified with this suddaine feare, they knew not what to doe: For they were amazed at the valiant exploits which they sayd Philip had lately done at Therme, and throughout all Etolia. And there was a certaine bruite amongst them, that Licrgus was sent to succour the Etoliens. As for Philips suddaine descent into the Countrey of Sparta, no man had euer thought of it, and the ra∣ther for that his age seemed worthy of some contempt. Wherefore matters succeeding contrary to all hope,The great di∣ligence of Philip. the world had reason to feare: for Philip mannaging the Warre with greater courage and policy then his age did beare, he terrified his Enemies. And namely (as we haue
sayd) he parted from Etolia, and pssing the Gulfe of Ambracia in one night, he came to Leucade, where staying two dayes, and parting the third earely in the morning, he arriued two dayes after at Corinthe, ha∣uing spoiled the Sea coasts of Etolia, and from thence continuing his course, he came within nine dayes to the Mountaines which are right against Sparta, neere vnto Menelaie: so as they could hardly beleeue it when they saw him. The Lacedemonians then terrified with the great∣nesse and newnesse of this accident, knew not what Counceli to take, nor to whom to haue recourse. The day following Philip campes neere vnto Amycle. It is a place in the Spartains Countrey,The scituation of Amycle. The Temple of Apollo. abounding with all sorts of Trees and wealth, twenty Furlongs from Lacedemon: Where the Temple of Apollo stands, being the most excellent of all the rest of the Prouince, as well for Art as wealth, being seated in that part of the Towne which locks towards the Sea. Three dayes after when he had spoiled the whole Country, he went to the Castle of Pyrhus, where he stayed two dayes, and wa∣sting the whole Countrey, he put all to fire and sword, and planted his Campe neere vnto Carnia. From whence he suddainly marcht to As∣sina, from whence (after he had attempted in vaine to take it by affault) he raised the Sige, and wasted all the rest of the Countrey, marching directly to Tenare: From thence ning his way▪ hee drawes to the Lacedemonians Hauen,The Port of Gythia. which they call Gythia: where there is a safe Port, about thirty Furlongs from the Citty. The leauing it on the right hand, he planted his Campe neere to Elea: which is (if we con∣sider it well) the greatest and best Countrey of the Spartains: The which he abandoned to the Souldiers, who put it to fire and sword. Hee also spoiled the Acriens and Lenques, and the whole Countrey of the Boies. The Messeniens hauing receiued Letters from Philip, were no lesse diligent then the other Allies, who leuied men presently within their Townes, and sent the most able vnto the King, to the number of two thousand Foote and two hundred Horse. But the length of the way was the cause they came not to Tegee before the Kings departure. And therefore doubting in the beginning what they should doe, fearing likewise that it would seeme, they had willingly made this delay for the suspition they had of them in the beginning, they resolued to enter the Spartains Countrey, to the end they might ioyne speedily with the King.The Castle of Olympes. Being come vnto the Castle of Olympes, which is seated neere vnto the Mountaines of the Argiues and Lacedemonians, and had set themselues downe foolishly and without consideration: for they did not fortifie themselues neither with Ditches nor Pallisadoes, neither did they choose a conuenient place: But relying on the good-will of the Inhabitants, they lodged simply neere vnto the Walls. Licurgus ad∣uertised of their comming, takes the Mercenaries, and part of the Lace∣demonians, and goes directly to the Enemy. Where ariuing at the breake of day, he marcheth in Battaile against the Messeniens: who perceiuing him, abandoned all,The Messeniens surprized by Licurgus. and fled by heapes into this Castle. Licurgus recouered the greatest part of their Horses and Baggage, but
he tooke not a man: he onely slew eight Horse-men. The Messeniens after this defeate returned by the Argiues Countrey. Lycurgus proud of this good fortune, being returned to Sparta, vseth all speed to leuie men, and to prepare all things necessary for the Warre, labouring that Philip might not returne by the Spartains Countrey without a Battaile or danger. The King parts with his Army from Elia, spoiling all as he passeth,Philip parts from Elia spoi∣ling all as hee passeth. and brought all backe on the fourth day to Amycle. Licur¦gus hauing resolued with his Friends and Captaines to giue Battaile to the Macedonians, goes out of the Citty, and recouers the places about Menelaie with about two thousand Foote, commanding them of the Citty to be watchfull, and when they should see a signe, they should speedily make sallies by diuers places, taking their way towards Eurota, which is a Riuer neere vnto the Citty. These were the actions of Lieur∣gus and the Lacedemonians at that time. But to the end that what wee say, may not seeme obscure by the ig∣norance of places, wee must declare the nature and scituation: The which we will indeauour to doe throughout our whole worke, alwaies ioyning places knowne to the vnknowne: For the difference of Coun∣tryes doe many times deceiue in Warre, as well by Sea as Land. Our desire is, that all men should know not onely the things, but how they were done. And therefore the description of places is necessary in all things, but especially in Warre: neither may we blame the vse of Fes, Seas, and Ilands for signes: and sometimes of Temples, Mountaines, Townes, and certaine Countries: nor finally the difference of circum∣stances: For these are things common to all men. It is also the meanes to aduertise the Reader of things vnknowne, as we haue sayd. The sci∣tuation of places whereof we speake is this. Although that Lacedemon seemes to stand in a plaine, yet it hath here and there rough and hilly places: Neere vnto which towards the East, passeth this Riuer which they call Erota,The Riuer of Erota. the which for the most part of the yeere is not to be waded thorough, by reason of its great depth. The Mountaines where∣in Menelaie stands, are on the other side of the Riuer towards the Citty, which looke towards the Winters East: the which are tough and diffi∣cult and wonderfull high: And bend ouer the Plaine which lies betwixt the Riuer and the Citty, by the which it takes its course along the foote of the Mountaines. The King was of necessity to passe that way, hauing the Citty on the left hand, and the Lacedemonians ready and in Armes: And on the right hand the Riuer, and those which were in the Moun∣taines with Licurgus. Matters standing in this estate, the Lacedemonians bethought them∣selues of a stratagem, by the which in breaking of a Damme, they should drowne all the Plaine betwixt the Citty and the foot of the Mountains, so as neither Horse nor Foote should be able to passe. By this meanes they saw the King should bee forced to lead his Army by the foote of the Mountaines: the which he could not doe without great danger: for that he should be forced to extend his Army in length, and not v∣nited and close, and to march a slow pace. Philip seeing this, assembles his Friends, and was of opinion, that he must first chase away Licurgus
from the places which hee held. Wherefore he takes in his company the Mercenaries, the Targeteers, and the Sclauonians, and began to march directly towards the Mountaines to passe the Riuer. Licurgus vnderstanding of the Kings resolution, put his men in Battaile, and per∣swades them to doe their duties in fighting, and withall hee makes a signe to them of the Citty, as he had promised. Which done, the Soul∣diers presently sally forth, putting the Horse-men on the right wing. When Philip came neere vnto Licurgus, he sent the Mercenaries to giue the first charge, of whom the Lacedemonians had the better at the first, by reason of the aduantage of the place and the manner of their Armes. But when as he had sent the Targeteers with the Sclauonians to succour the Mercenaries, there was so great an alteration, as the Mercenaries seemed to haue the victory in their hands:The light of the Lacedemo∣nians. And the Lacedemonians ama∣zed at the fury of them that were well armed, fled presently, as despai∣ring of their safety. There died about a hundred men: and some few more taken: the rest recouered the Citty. Licurgus taking his way by inaccessible woods, arriued the night fol∣lowing at the Citty. When as Philip had put a sufficient strength of Scla∣uonians into the Mountaines, he returned with them that were lightly armed, and the Targeteers to his Army. At the same time Arate bringing back the Army from Amycle, was not far from the City▪ with whom the King (passing the Riuer) ioyned, and appointed them that were well ar∣med to make head against the Horse-men at the foot of the Mountaine. When as the Lacedemonian Horse-men had charged the Macedonians, and the targeteers had fought valiantly, and withal the King had perfor∣med his duty well, they were in the end repuls'd shamefully to the gates of the City. Afterwards the King past Eurota safely, and was forced to settle his Campe in the night, at his comming forth of the streights, in a place which was very strong by nature. Finally, the King had an hu∣mour to ouer-run the Countrey neere to Lacedemon. In the beginning of the said streights vpon the approaches from Teges by the firme Land to Lacedemon, there is a place about two Furlongs distant from the Cit∣ty, vnder the which the Riuer hath its course: the which imbraceth the Citty and the side of the Riuer, with a steepe and inaccessible Moun∣taine. The foote of this Mountaine is a slimy and watery Plaine, as well for the entry as the going forth of an Army: so as whosoeuer plants his Campe there, in seazing vpon the Hill, seemes to campe safely, and to be in a sure place, in regard of the Towne which is opposite, hauing vnder its power the entry and issue of the streights. Philip hauing sea∣ted his Campe there, he causeth the Baggage to march the next day, and drawes his Army into the Plaine, in view of the Towne. Where after he had stayed some time, hee wheeles about like a Bowe, and takes his way towards Tegea. And when hee came into the Countrey where that famous Battaile was fought betwixt Antigonus and Cleome∣nes, he planted his Campe there. Three dayes after when the places were well viewed, and the Sa∣crifices performed in two Mountaines, whereof the one is called Olym∣pe, and the other Eua, he went on his way, and came to Tegea, where
he stayed some time to diuide the spoile: Then suddainly hee returned to Corinthe with his Army. Thither came Embassadours from Rhodes and Chios to the King,Embassadours from Rhodes to Chios. to mediate a peace betwixt him and the Etoli∣ens. To whom the King giuing a gracious reception, he told them that he had long, and at that present was ready to imbrace a peace if the Etoliens held it fit, and that they should goe vnto them, and consider of the meanes therof. From thence he went to Leche, and prepared himselfe to imbarke, desiring to decide some pressing affaires at Phocis. At the same time Leonce, Megalee, and Ptolomy thinking yet to ter∣rifie the King, and by that meanes to repaire their errours, calls the Targeteers, and those whom the Macedonians terme, the Kings Troupe: whom they informe that they are dayly in great danger with∣out any recompence, or any share in the spoile, according to the anci∣ent custome approued by all men. By meanes whereof they perswade these young men to assaile and spoile the Lodgings of the Kings princi∣pall Minions, and that falling vpon the Kings owne Lodging, they should ouerthrow the Gates and couering. The which when they had done,A mutiny a∣gainst philip and his men. there grew a great mutiny in the Towne. Philip hearing the noise, makes haste to returne from the Port: And drawing the Mace∣donians together, he pacifieth them partly with words, and blaming them for the things which they had done. And when as the fury increa∣sed, and that some were of opinion to chase out of the Towne those that had beene the cause of the mutiny, others saying that this fury of the Commons ought to bee pacified without any greater punishment, the King dissembled his conceite for the present: And being as it were perswaded by them, hee returned to the Hauen, after hee had giuen them many admonitions, knowing well the heads of this villany: But hee thought good to deferre it to a more conuenient time. Leonce and his Faction despairing,Leonce and his Faction retired to Appelles. for that none of their enterprizes succeeded, retired to Appelles, and caused him to come from Calis, giuing him to vnderstand that they could not doe any thing without him, for that the King crost them in all things. Appalles had carried himselfe in Cal∣cis with greater liberty then was fit: for he gaue them to vnderstand that the King was young, vnder his Guard and without any power, terming himselfe Lord, and sole Gouernour of all things. Wherefore all the Princes of Macedony and Thessaly adrest themselues to him in all affaires. Within a short time likewise all the Citties of Grece had forgotten the King in their elections, honours, and offices: Onely Appelles mannaged all affaires. The King being long before aduertised thereof, was much discontented and incensed: whereunto Arate spurd him on continually, although he dissembled his conceite so well, as no man could discouer it. Appelles ignorant of the Kings resolution, and thinking to obtaine a∣ny thing when he should present himselfe vnto him, came from Calcis to Corinthe. When he came neere the Towne, Leonce, Ptolomy, and Me∣galee Chiefe of the Targeteers, and other Souldiers that were best ar∣med, gaue him a great reception, perswading the youth to goe and meere him. He came then to the Kings lodging in pompe, being attended on by the Captaines and Souldiers. When as he sought (as he was wont) to
enter suddainly, a certaine Vsher told him, that he must haue patience, for that the King was busie for the present. Appelles wondring at this new manner of proceeding, remained pensiue for a time, after which he departed discontented, and without iudgement: all the rest likewise abandoned him, so as hee returned alone to his lodging, hauing no o∣ther Company but his owne Family. O how suddainly are men ad∣uanced to great honours,The misery of Courtiers. and in as short time reduced to greater mise∣ries: especially such as frequent Princes Courts. They are like vnto Lots, which they vsually giue in publique Councells. For as those which a little before were were giuen in Copper, are suddainly turned into Gold, according to the will of those that dispose of them: So they which follow the Courts of Princes, are according to the Kings will and pleasure, happy one day, and miserable the next. When Megalee knew that he had sought the assistance of Appelles in vaine, he trembled for feare, and intended to flye. After that day Appelles was called to Ban∣quets and other honours that were done: but he neuer entred into the priuy Councell, nor assisted at the ordinary resolutions which were ta∣ken for affaires. Soone after the King returned to Phocis, leading Appelles with him: Whereas hauing speedily effected his will, he returned againe to Elatia. During this,The flight of Megalee. Megalee flies to Athens, leauing Leonce caution for him for twelue thousand Crownes. And when as the Chiefe of the Atheniens would not receiue him, he returned to Thebes. The King being parted from the Countrey which lies about Circe, hee sayled to the Port of Sicyonia with the Targeteers and his Guard. From whence comming suddainly to the Towne, he preferred the lodging of Arate before the other Princes, making his continuall abode with him, com∣manding Appelles to sayle to Corinthe. When as newes came in the meane time of the flight of Megalee, hee sent Taurion with the Tar∣geteers whom Leonce had vnder his charge to Triphalia, as if hee had beene forced thereunto by some great affaires. After whose departure, hee causeth Leonce to be apprehended.The taking of Leonce. The Targeteers aduertised hereof, sent an Embassie to the King to intreate him that if Leonce had beene taken for any other thing then for the caution, that the iudge∣ment might not be giuen before their returne: Otherwise they should thinke themselues contemned, and in disgrace with the King. The King prickt forward by the importunity of the Souldiers, he put Leonce to death sooner then he had resolued. During the which, the Embassadours of Rhodes and Chios returned from Etolia, hauing agreed vpon a Moneths truce: and saying that the Etoliens were ready to treate a peace with the Knig, appointing more∣ouer a day when he should meete with them neere vnto Rhie: Being con∣fident that they would doe whatsoeuer he pleased to haue a peace. The The King accepting the truce, sent Letters to the Allies, willing them to send Embassadours to Patres, to conferre with him on the conditions of the peace. Then hee parts from Leche, and arriues two dayes af∣ter at Patres. At the same time they bring vnto him Letters from Phocis, which Megalee himselfe had written vnto the Etoliens:
by the which he solicits them to maintaine the Warre couragiously, for that the King could not long continue it for want of victuals and o∣ther munition. Moreouer, they contained many scandalous and oppro∣brious speeches against the King. The which being read, the King con∣ceiuing that Appelles had beene the cause and the beginning of these practises,Appelles taken Prisoner. causeth him to be taken and brought to Corinthe, with his Sonne and Concubine: And hee sent Alexander to Thebes, giuing him charge to bring Megalee,Megalee kills himselfe. to the end his caution might be dischar∣ged. But when as Alexander thought to execute his charge, Mega∣lee preuented him, and slew himselfe. In a manner at the same time, Appelles, his Sonne, and his Concubine were put to death,The death of Appelles and his Sonne. recei∣uing the worthy punishment of their wicked liues, and namely for the outrage done by them to Arate. Although the Etoliens desired peace, being discontented with the long Warre, and seeing their affaires to succeed otherwise then they expected: for that conceiuing they had to deale with a Child (consi∣dering that the King had neither age nor experience) they found him by his deeds to bee a man excellent in Councell and Execution, and themselues to bee Children, as well in their particular as publique af∣faires: Yet aduertised of the mutiny of the Targeteers, and of the death of Appelles, from whom they expected some great alteration in the Kings Court, they came not to Rhie at the day appointed. Philip hol∣ding this a good occasion to entertaine the Warre, solicites the Em∣bassadours of the Allies which were there assembled, not vnto peace (for the which they had beene called) but to Warre. Then parting from thence with his Fleete,Philip sailes to Corinthe. hee came to Corinthe, and sent all the Macedonians to winter in their houses. Parting from Corinthe, hee sailed by the Euripe to Demetriade: there hee put Ptolomy to death, (who onely remained of the Conspiracy of Appelles and Leonce) by the iudgement of the Macedonians. At the same time Hannibal had past the Alpes, and was in Italy, and had planted his Campe neere to the Riuer of Poe, not farre from that of the Romans. Antiochus after hee had conquered many places in Syrria, had brought backe his Army to winter. Licurgus King of the Lacedemonians fearing the Magistrates,The flight of Licurgus into Etolia. had fled into Etolia: for the Magistrates hearing a false report, that hee would attempt some reuolte, came in the Night to his house with a Troupe of Youth: whereof being formerly aduertised, he fled with his seruants. When as Philip in the depth of Winter had retired into Macedony, and that Eperate Chiefe of the Acheis was made a scorne to the Youth of the Towne, and to the Mercenaries, and was not obeyed, nor made any preparation for the defence of the Countrey, Pyrrhee (whom the Etoliens had sent to the Elienses for their Captaine, accompanied with thirteene hundred Etoliens, and a thousand Foote, as well Soul∣diers as Burgesses of the Elienses, and with two hundred Horse, being in all about three thousand men) aduertised thereof, spoiled not one∣ly the Countries of the Dimenses and Pharenses, but also of Patres: Finally,The Mountain Panachaique. he pitched his Campe neere vnto the Mountaine Panachaique.
which lookes towards Patres, and wasted all the neighbour Region. The Townes thus vexed, being no was succour'd, they payed the Taxe and charge vnwillingly: The Souldiers would not be drawne to succour them, for that their pay was delayed. By this mutuall trouble the A∣cheins affaires were in bad case: And the Mercenaries retired by little and little: the which happened by the negligence of the Commander. And when the affaires of Acheia stood in this estate, and that the time of the Election was come,Old Arate made Chiefe of the Acheins. Eperate left the gouernment, and the Acheins in the Spring made choise of old Arate. Thus past the Affaires in Europe. But seeing that in the distinction of times, and the order of actions, we haue found a conuenient place for this Subiect, let vs passe to the Warres of Asia vnder the same Olympiade: Relating first (as we haue promised in the beginning of our worke) the Warre of Syrria, which was betwixt Antiochus and Ptolomy. And for that I know well that this Warre was not ended at such time as I left to treate of the Actions of Greece,The Auhous good intention and being resolued to follow this perfection and distribution, to the end the Readers may not be deceiued in the true knowledge of eue∣ry time: I hope to leaue a sufficient instruction for those which desire to know it, in setting downe at what time in this present Olympiade, and of the deeds of the Grecians, the beginning and ending of other acti∣ons happened: Moreouer, wee esteeme nothing better nor more ho∣nourable in this Olympiade, then not to confound things, to the end the discourse of the History may be plaine and easie: And that distin∣guishing matters by order as much as may be possible, vntill that com∣ming to other Olympiades, wee may yeeld to euery yeere its actions according to order. And for that we haue not resolued to write them all, nor the actions of all places, and that wee haue vndertaken with greater affection to write Histories then our predecessours haue done; it is fitting wee should be carefull to expresse them in order, and that the generall worke of the History may with its parts be plaine and ap∣parent. Wherefore we will now write the Reignes of Antichus and Ptolomy, reducing things from farre, and pursuing our discourse from a beginning which may bee notorious, and which squares with that which wee haue to say. For those ancients which haue sayd, that the beginning is a moiety of the whole, they haue vndoubtedly taught vs, that in all things wee should vse great diligence,An order re∣quired in all things. that the beginnings may be well ordered. And although some thinke they haue vsed a high Stile, yet in my opinion they doe not seeme to speake with truth. Without doubt you may boldly say, that the beginning is not onely a moiety of the whole, but hath also a regard to the end. Tell mee, how canst thou make a good beginning, if thou hast not first comprehended in thy vnderstanding the end of thy Enterprize? And if thou know∣est not in what part, to what purpose, and the cause why thou wilt make it? For how can a History haue order, if at the beginning or entrance thou doest not deliuer plainely, from whence, and how, or wherefore thou art come vnto the relation which thou doest
presently make of actions? Wherefore they which will haue things heard and vnderstood fully, thinke that the beginnings doe not onely serue for the one halfe, but also for the end: wherein they im∣ploy themselues with great care and industry: the which I will careful∣ly indeauour to doe. Although that I am certaine that many of the an∣cient Historiographers haue bin confident to haue done the like, when as they pretended to write all generally, and to haue written a longer History then their predecessours: of whom I will forbeare to speake much, or to name them: Among the which I excuse Ephorus, the first and onely man which hath attempted to write a generall History. But I will vse no longer discourse, nor name any of the rest: But I will say that some Historiographers of our time, comprehending the Warre be∣twixt the Romans and Carthaginians, in three or foure small Pages, brag publiquely that they haue written all. It is certaine that for as much as there hath beene many and great exploits performed in Spaine, Affricke, Stoily and Italy, and that the Warre of Hnnibal hath beene the grea∣test and longest, except that of Sicily. We must also vnderstand, that the excellency of this warre hath beene the cause that wee haue all cast our eyes vpon it: and the rather for that wee were in doubt of the end. This is a Warre which euery man (be hee neuer so dull and simple) knowes. Yet some of those which haue handled the History, wri∣ting onely superficially the actions of some times, yet they imagine they haue comprehended the deeds of the Grecians and Barbarians. Whereof the cause is, for that it is an easie thing to promise many great things by mouth, but it is not easie to bring a great enterprize to an end. And therefore this other is common, and (as a man may say) in the hands of all men, so as they haue courage: But the last is rare, and few men attaine vnto it. Finally, the arrogancy of some, which glorifie themselues too much, and commend their Writings, hath caused mee to make this digression. But now I returne vnto my enterprize. When Ptolomy, surnamed Philopater, had seized vpon the Empire of Egypt, after the death of his Father,Ptolomy King of Egypt. and had made away his Brother with his adherents, (thinking there was no more cause of feare in his Family, for the afore said crime:) and that for strangers, Fortune had in good time assured all things, considering the death of Antigonus and Seleucus: to whose Realmes Antiochus and Philip had succeeded, who were scarce eighteene yeeres old) he abandoned himselfe to plea∣sures, whose example the whole Countrey followed. For this cause his owne people made no esteeme of him. And not onely his subiects, but also the rest which mannaged the affaires both within and without E∣gypt. The Lords of the lower Syrria, and of Cypres, haue made Warre against the Kings of Syria, as well by Sea as Land. They also which hold the chiefe Cities, places, and Ports which are along the Sea-coasts, from Pamphilia vnto Hellespont, and the Country of Lysimachia, confined with the Principalities of Asia and the Ilands. And as for Thracia and Mace∣dony, the Princes of Enos and Maronia, and of Townes that were more remote, had alwayes an eye ouer them. Wherefore imploying
their forces, to assaile forreine Princes, farre from their Realmes, they were not troubled for the Empire of Egypt. Their chiefe care then was for the Warres of forreine Countries. In regard of this King of whom wee speake, there were many in a short time, who for his in∣famous loues, and ordinary excesse in drinking, had an eye vpon him and his Realme.The enterprize of Cleomenes vpon Ptolomy. Amongst the which Cleomenes of Lacedemon was the first. He made no alteration whilest that the other King liued, who was surnamed Benefactor: as if he were perswaded, that during his life he should want no meanes to reconquer his Realme. But when as after his death, the affaires required his presence, An∣tigonus being also dead: And that the Acheins with the Macedoni∣ans made Warre against the Lacedemonians, which they maintaine ac∣cording vnto that which hee had aduised them in the beginning, being allied to the Etoliens: Then hee was forced to thinke of his departure from Alexandria. Wherefore hee first solicited the King to send them backe with an Army and sufficient munition. And when as the King would not giue eare vnto it, he intreated him at the least to suf∣fer him to depart with his family, for the time was now come, when as great opportunities were offred to recouer his Fathers Realme. The King neither considering the present, nor fore-seeing the future, for the causes aboue specified, like an ouer-weening man, and without iudge∣ment, neuer made any esteeme of Cleomenes. But Sosibius (who chiefe∣ly gouerned all the affaires of the Kingdome at that present) holding a Councell with his Friends, was not of aduice to suffer Cleomenes to goe with an Army at Sea, and munition, disdaining forreine affaires, and holding this charge lost, considering the death of Antigonus: fearing likewise that this death being so fresh, the way might be made easie to stirre vp some Warre: And there being no man found to resist Cleome∣nes, he would soone make himselfe Lord of all the Citties in Greece. Finally, they feared he would become their Enemy, considering the pre∣sent: in regard of the Kings manner of life, which was well knowne vnto them. With this disaduantage, that Sosibius saw the Prouinces of the Realme to lie one farre from another, and to haue great opportunities of reuolte.An Army neere vnto Ephesus. For there was neere vnto Samos a good number of Vessels, and great Troupes of Souldiers neere vnto Ephesus. Wherefore he did not hold it fit to send backe Cleomenes with an Army for the afore-sayd rea∣sons. But when they considered that it would not be profitable for their Common-wealth, to let goe so great a personage, who afterwards might proue their open Enemy, there was no preuention but to retaine him by force. The which notwithstanding the rest disliked, conceiuing that there would be great danger to keepe the Lyon and Sheepe in one fold. Sosi∣bius was of the same opinion for that or the like cause. At such time as they resolued to take Mega and Beronice,Mega. Beronice. and that they feared to bring their enterprize to a good end, in regard of the fiercenesse of Beronice, they were forced to drawe together all those which followed the Court, and to make them great promises if they pre∣uailed. Then Sosibius knowing that Cleomenes wanted the Kings fuccours to recouer his fathers Realme, and that he had found him by experience
to be wise and politicke in great affaires, he discouered his whole secrets vnto him, propounding vnto him great hopes. Cleomenes seeing him pensiue, and fearing the strangers and Mercenaries, perswaded him not to care: promising him that the Souldiers should not trouble him, and that moreouer they should giue him great assistance to bring his en∣terprize to an end. And when as the other stood in admiration, doest thou not see sayd Cleomenes, that there are about three thousand men of Morea, and a thousand Candyots, all which will bring vs where we please? Hauing these, whom else doest thou feare? What? The Companions of the Warre of Syrria and Caria? And when as Sosi∣bius liked of his words, hee entred more boldly into the Action. And afterwards considering of the Kings soolery and negligence, hee often called to minde this Speech, and had alwayes before his eyes the Courage of Cleomenes, and the affection the Souldiers bare him. Where∣fore considering this, at the same time hee gaue the King and his other familiars to vnderstand, that hee must seaze vpon him, and keepe him close and priuate. For the working and effecting whereof, hee vsed this meanes. There was one Nicagorus a Messenien, a friend to the father of Ar∣chidamus, King of the Lacedemonians, betwixt whom there had for∣merly beene some friendship. But at such time as Archidamus was cha∣sed from Sparta for feare of Cleomenes, and fled to Messena, hee not onely gaue him a good reception into his House with his friends at his first comming, but hee alwayes liued with him afterwards during his flight, so as there grew a great and strict familiarity betwixt them. When as after these things Cleomenes made shewe of some hope of re∣conciliation with Archidamus, Nicagorus beganne to treate of the Conditions of peace. VVhen the accord had beene made, and that Nicagorus had taken the faith of Cleomenes, Archidamus returned to Sparta, assuring himselfe of the conuentions of Nicagorus, whom Cleomenes meeting vpon the way slew,Archidamus layne by Cleo∣menes. suffering Nicagorus and his com∣pany to passe away. In regard of Nicagorus, he carried the counte∣nance of a very thankfull man, for that he had saued his life: But hee was vexed in his Soule, and incensed for the deede, for that hee see∣med to haue giuen the occasion. This Nicagorus had failed vnto Alexandria some little time before with Horses: whereas going out of the ship, hee met with Cleomenes, Panthee, and Hippite, walking vpon the strande: whom Cleomenes perceiuing, saluted curteously, demaunding what businesse had brought him thither: To whom he answered, that he had brought Horses. I had rather sayd Cleomenes, thou hadst brought Concubines and Bawds: for these are the things wherein the King at this day takes his chiefe de∣light. Then Nicagores held his peace smiling. VVhen as within few dayes after he discoursed by chance with Sosibius by reason of the Hor∣ses, he related vnto him that which Cleomenes had arrogantly spoken of the King. And seeing Sosibius to heare him willingly,Nicagorus  seth Cleomenes. he acquain∣ted him with the cause of the pleene he bare him. VVhen as Sosibi∣us knew him to be wonderfully incensed against Cleomenes, hee did
him great curtesies for the present, and promised him great fauours hereafter: Finally hee wrought so, that imbarquing he left Letters concerning Cleomenes, which a seruant of his brought after his depar∣ture, as sent from him. The which Nicagorus performing, the ser∣uant vsed speed to go vnto the King, assuring him that Nicagorus had giuen him the Letters to carry to Sosibius. The Tenour whereof was, That if Cleomenes were not soone dispatcht with an Army at Sea and munition, he would raise some troubles within the Realme. Sosibius imbracing this occasion,Cleomenes taken Prisoner, and put in Guard. gaue the King and his Councell to vnder∣stand, that this must not be heard with a deafe eare, and that he must seaze vpon Cleomenes and giue him a Guard. The which being put in execution, they gaue him a spacious House, where hee liued with Guards, differing therein from other Prisoners, for that hee had a lar∣ger Prison. Cleomenes considering this, and hauing little hope for the future, re∣solued to hazard all, and yet without hope to effect any thing, and be∣ing in extreame despaire, but desiring to make an honourable Death, and not to suffer any thing that might seeme vnfitting for the greatnesse of his Courage. I immagine likewise that hee had an humour, and had propounded to himselfe that, which commonly great Spirits doe in these Tearmes: That in dishonour I doe not basely fall, Courage my heart, let's brauely venture all. When as hee had obserued the Voyage which the King made to the Towne of Canope,The bold enter∣prize of Cleo∣menes. hee caused it to be bruited among his Guards, that hee should bee soone set at liberty. Wherefore he made a Banquet to his people, and sent offering and Garlands of Flowers to the Guards. And moreouer store of Wine. Whilest they made good cheere, and were all drunke, hee goes out of the House with his Friends and Ser∣uants, their Swords in their hands in the open day, the which the Guard neuer perceiued. And when as marching in this manner, they met with Ptolomy in the Market place,Ptolomy layne by Cleomenes. they ouer-threw him from his Chariot and slew him: Whereat all those that did accompany him were amazed at the greatnesse of the fact. Finally they beganne to cry Liberty vnto the people. But when as no man stirred, considering the greatnesse of the Crime, they turned head and assailed the Fortresse, as if the Gate had beene ouer-throwne by the Treason of the Souldiers, and that they should presently take it. But for that the Guards (fore∣seeing the danger,) had Rampred vp the Gate: in the end they slew themselues being frustrated of their hope, and dyed an honourable Death, worthy of a Spartaine Courage. Behold the end of Cleome∣nes a man of great Eloquence in speaking, and of great Resolution in Warre: Who it seemes wanted nothing that did sauour of a King but a Realme. After Cleomenes, Theodote borne in Etolia, and Gouernour of base Syrria, soone after resolued to haue intelligence with Antiochus, and
to deliuer him the Townes of his gouernment: For that hee partly contemned the King for his negligence and idlenesse, and partly the Courtiers, growing distrustfull, for that a little before hee had pro∣pounded a good aduice vnto the King,Thēodote. aswell for other things as to resist Antigonus, seeking to make Warre against Syrria: Wherein hee was not onely distastfull, but they caused him to come to Alexan∣dria, where he was in danger of his life. Antiochus accepting this offer gladly, the matter came to effect. But to the end we may with∣all declare this Race, seeking out the Empire of Antiochus, let vs make our entry summarily from those times, to come vnto the Warre whereof we meane to Treate. You must vnderstand that Antiochus the younger was Sonne vnto Seleucus surnamed Callinice. Who after the death of his Father,Antiochus So to Seleucus. when the Realme fell to Seleucus his elder Brother, liued in the beginning priuately in his House, in the high Countrey of the Realme: But his Brother being slaine in Treason (as wee haue sayd) after hee had past Mount Tauris with an Army, he tooke the Empire and Raigned, gi∣uing the gouernement of all the Prouince, which lyes on this side Tauris, to Acheus and Molon: And to his brother Alexander, the high Countries of his Realme: So as Molon should haue Media, and his bro∣ther Persida. These contemning the King for his Age (for he was scarce fifteene yeares old) and hoping to draw Acheus to their Conspiracy, fearing moreouer the cruelty and Treachery of Hermes, who then had the Gouernment of the whole Realme, resolued to abandon the King, and to change the Estate of the Prouinces which they helde. Hermes was borne in Caria, to whom Seleucus the Kings brother had giuen the gouernment of the Realme, relying in him from the time they past Mount Tauris. Wherefore being aduanced to this supreame Au∣thority, he enuled all those which had any power in Court, being out∣ragious and cruell by Nature, condemning innocents at his pleasure: and fauouring wicked men and Lyers. Finally, he was cruell and rough in his iudgements. But among other things he watcht an opportunity to kill Epigene, who was Lieute∣nant Generall of Seleucus his Army: For that he found him a man of great Eloquence and great execution, hauing fauour and Authority in the Army. And although he plotted this in his minde continually, yet hee kept it secret, seeking some occasion to effect his enterprize. Fi∣nally when as the Councell was assembled to conferre vpon Melos Re∣bellion, and that the King had commaunded euery man to deliuer opinion, and that Epigene beginning first had sayd, that this businesse was not to be held of small importance, and that it was necessary the King should approach the Countrey, holding himselfe ready when time should require, and that by this meanes Molon would giue ouer his enterprize, the King being neere with a great Army, or if hee did persist in that which hee had begunne, the people would deliuer all the Traytors into the Kings hands.The Speech of Hermes a∣gainst Epigene. Then Hermes enraged, sayd vnto him Epigene hauing long concealed thy Treason, thy disloyalty hath in the end beene discouered in this Councell: Labouring to deliue the Kings
person into the hands of Traytors. Hauing spoken thus, and in some sort shewed his slander, hee left Epigee. Finally shewing a counte∣nance rather of importune indignation, then of any manifest hatred, hee persisted in his opinion not to leade an Army against Molon, fearing the danger: For that the Souldiers were not inved to Warre, and that they should vse all diligence to make Warre against Ptolomy, hol∣ding that sure by reason of the Kings negligence and idlenesse. By this meanes when hee had stopt the mouthes of all that were in the Assem∣bly for feare, he sent Xenon, Theodote, and Hermioly with an Army against Molon: Giuing King Antiochus to vnderstand, that hee should presently vndertake the Warre of Syrria: Thinking by this meanes, that if the King were roundly beset with Warre, hee should neuer be punished for the offences which hee had formerly committed: Neither should hee loose his Authority for the necessity and continuall dangers wherein the King should be daily. Wherefore in the end hee brought a counterfeite Letter, as sent from Acheus to the King. The Tenour whereof was, that Ptolomy had solicited him to enter into Warre, to get the Principallity, and that hee would furnish him with money and munition, if he would take the Crowne vpon him, and that it was apparent to all the World that hee pretended to be a King: The which in trueth hee seemed to be, but he did not yet enioy the name of a King, nor weare a Crowne, for the enuy which Fortune procured him. Antiochus giuing credite to these Letters, resolued to make a descent into Syrria: But whilest hee stayed in Sleucia, and was carefull to bring his enterprize vnto a good end; Diognet Chiefe of the Army at Sea, arriued from Cappadocia, which is eere vnto the Euxine Sea, bringing with him Laodicea, the Daughter of Methrides, who was promised to Antiohus. This is that Methridates, who bragg'd that hee was descended from one of the seauen Wise men of Persia. She was receiued with royall pompe,Antiochus mar∣ries Ldicea. and Antiochus married her presently: From thence he went to Antio∣chus, leauing the Queene Regent of the Realme: and applied himselfe wholy to rayse his Army. At that time Mln seeing the people ready to doe what hee pleased,Moln goes to field with an Army. aswell for the hope of the gaine which hee propounded vnto them, as for that their Commaunders were terrified by the Kings false and coun∣terfeite Letters: Hauing also his brother Alexander for a Companion in this Warre: After that hee had gotten all the neighbour Townes by the corruption of their Gouernours, hee goes to field with a great Army, and plants himselfe neere vnto the Campe of the Kings Lieu∣tenants. At whose comming Xenon, and Theodote being terrified, they retired to the next Townes. Molon beeing Lord of all the plaine of Appolonia, and running where he pleased, the whole Prouince brought him great store of Victuals and munition. Hee was before terrible in regard of his great power: Neyther had he any will to loose the occa∣sion, for that that all the Kings Races for Horses were in Media, with infinite store of Wheate and Cattle. In regard of the force, height and Wealth of that Region, wee cannot speake sufficient. Media lyes
about the midst of a Asia: It excels in greatnesse and height all the o∣ther Regions about it. It is very powerfull in people,The Scituation of Media. being discoue∣red towards the East, by the Desart Countries, which lye betwixt Persida and Parasia. It ioynes and commands the Ports of the Caspien Sea: So doth it in the Mountaines called Tapyreins, which are not farre from the Hyrcanien Sea. But as for the Southerne Regions, it lookes to Messopotamia, and Appolonia, ioyning vnto Persida, which lyes before Mount Sagre, which hath a passage of a hundred Furlongs long: The which hauing many inclosures, is diuided by Vallies and certaine Plaines, with the Cossees, Corbrenes, Carchins, with diuers other Barbarous Nations inhabite, being excellent in matters of War. Finally it ioynes to the Satrapiens vpon the West, who differ not much from those which inhabite Pontus Euxinus. And as for the part to∣wards the North, it hath the Elimees, Ariaraces, then the Caddusi∣ens and Mantianes. Finally, it is scituated aboue the Countries which neere vnto the Blacke Sea ioyne to Pontus. It is separated from Nusia by a multitude of Mountaines vpon the West: and yet there is a playne well furnished with Townes and Burroughes. When as Molon was Lord of this Region, hauing a kinde of a Realme, and was terrible euen before this Rebellion, in regard of the great power of the Countrey, he shewed himselfe then more intolle∣rable towards the Asiens: For that at his arriuall the Kings Lieutenants had abandoned their Campe, and that matters did not succeede in the beginning according to their hopes. Wherefore in passing Tygris, Mo∣lon indeauoured to besiege Seleucia. But when as Zeux had stopt the Passage, by staying all the Boates, hee retyred: The Army being at Ctesiphon, hee made prouision of all things necessary to passe the win∣ter. The King aduertised of Molons Army, and of the flight of his Lieutenants, resolued to lead his Army against him, leauing Ptolomy. But Hermes remembring his enterprize, sent Xenoete an Achaian, with an Army against Molon, saying that Lieutenants must fight with Rebels, and the King with Kings in person. Keeping the King thus in awe by reason of his Age, hee went to Apamia: where hee drew together an Army, and from thence marcht suddainly to Laodicea. From whence the King parting with all his Troupes, and hauing past a Desart, hee came into a place which the Inhabitants of the Countrey called Marsia,Liban. seated betwixt the two Promontories of Liban and Antiliban,Antiliban. which restrayne it, and in the narrowest streight is miry and moorish: where also grow the Arromaticall Canes. Moreouer there ioynes to the one side of the sayd streights a Towne,The Towne of Brches which they call Broches, and on the other that of Gerre: Betwixt the which there is a rough and difficult way. The King marching for some dayes by these streights, came in the end to Gerre: Whereas when he saw that Theodote of Etolia had taken it, and Broches, and that hee had sortified all that part of the streights, which were neere vnto the Fens, with Ditches, and Pallisadoes, and men for the defence thereof, hee laboured at the first to assayle them. But when it seemed he lost more then hee got, by reason of the disaduantage of the place, and that
Theodote made a shew to be of Ptolomies party, hee gaue ouer the en∣terprize. And when he had newes of the retreate of Xenoete, and of the attempt of Molon, he resolued to part from thence, and to giue or∣der for his owne affaires. Xenoete being (as wee haue sayd) sent Generall against Molon, hee had a greater power then was immagined, and vsed his friends with great arrogancy, and his enemies with too much cruelty. When hee tooke his way to Seleucia with his Army, calling vnto him Diogene Gouernour of the Countrey of Susian, and Pythias of the red Sea, hee marcht against the enemies, and planted his Campe neere vnto theirs, the Riuer of Tygris being betwixt them. During the which there were many came swimming from Molons Campe, aduertising him that the greatest part of his Army would yeild vnto him, if he past the Riuer, for that they hated him, and loued and affected the King. Xenoete perswaded by their words, prepares himselfe to passe Tygris; and ma∣king shew that hee would make his passage at a certaine place, where as the Water makes an Iland, hee made no shewe of any preparation. Whereupon whilest that Molon made no account of his enterprize, hee prepared Boates speedily, and taking the best of his Horse-men, and the Chiefe of all the Foot-men of his Army he left Zeuxis and Pythi∣as for the Guard of the Campe; and past his Army safely in the night by Boate fourescore furlongs beneath Molons Campe: During the which he seated his Campe in a safe place, which was inuironed by the Riuer for the greatest part, and the rest assured by Fens and Moores adioyning. When as Molon was aduertised hereof, hee sent his Horse-men be∣fore to hinder their passage, or to defeate them that were past. Who approaching neere to Xenoete, they annoyed themselues more (for that they knew not the places) then they did the enemy: For entring into those Moorish Fens, they could doe no seruice, and many perished. Xenoete hoping that if hee approached neere vnto Molon, hee should draw many of his men vnto him, marcht a slow pace a long the riuer side, setting downe neere vnto the enemy. At what time Molon lea∣uing his Baggage in the Campe, retired by night, doing it eyther by policy or for some distrust hee had of his men:The Retreate of Molon. and takes his way to∣wards Media. Xenoete thinking the enemy had beene fled, terrified with his comming, and ill assured of his Souldiers, gaines first the e∣nemies Campe, and cals vnto him all his Horse-men, and the rest which he had left with Zeuxis. Then calling them all together, hee perswades them to be of good hope for the future, considering the flight and despaire of Molon. This propose ended, hee commaunded them to go to their Repast, and to be ready in morning to pursue their enemies: But all the souldiers hearts puffed vp with the present successe, and stuffed with all sorts of Booty, betooke themselues wholy to gormundizing and drunkennes, and in the same sort of sloathfulnesse and negligence, that by custome begets such things, passed the night. Now as Molon had gayned an aduantagious place, and that he had refreshed his men also, he aduan∣ced
against the enemies, and finding them ouer-come and zed on by sleepe and Wine, he assaulted their Campe with extreame fury, euen in the breake of day. Xenoete astonisht with so great and vnlookt for a businesse, could by no meanes awake his people for their drunkennesse, but they were killed by the enemies resisting by small Companies; and so the greatest part were defeated within the Campe drowned in sleepe, the rest throwing themselues into the Riuer, striuing to passe it by swimming: but the most of them perished for all that in the end.Xenoete his Ar∣my defeated and spoyled. It was a pittifull thing to see men so affrighted, for all without any regard or consideration throw∣ing themselues into the mercy of the Waues, and to passe therein, and driue afore them the Carriages and Baggage, as if they thought by the ayde of the Water, they could gaine or saue their Campe, but it came to passe that in one selfe same time, Sumpter horses, Armes, and dead bodies were borne by the Riuer, as if also a Vanquisher, a thing both fearefull to relate, and also horrible to behold. After that Molon had thus suddainly gayned the Campe of the ene∣mies, and had passed the Riuer without danger, because there was none to hinder his passage, and that Zeuxis had taken flight, as it were, before the enemies approached, hee tooke also the Fort which was there on the Riuer. After this good fortune, hee came into Seleucia with his Army: the which hee tooke suddainly, in respect that those who were with Zxis were astonished at his comming, hauing abando∣ned the Towne with Diomedon Gouernour of Seleucia: And after ha∣uing ranne ouer all the Prouince, hee brought vnder his obedience all the Townes of the high Country without finding resistance: and from thence hauing Conquered the Empire of all the Countrey of Babylon, and all the Countrey about the Red Sea, hee arriued vnto Susa, taking the Towne vpon his first arriuall, and after he had giuen many assaults to the Fortresse because Diogene was there retyred, and that hee could not force, he desisted from his enterprize and raysed the siege, hee returned into Seleucia with his Army: and there, after he ha Garrison'd his men of Warre for some time, and had encouraged them vnto the Warres, hee with a great heart vndertooke to lead them out of the Countrey, and to Conquer in a small time all the Prouince that i from Tygris vnto the Towne of Europe and Mesopotamia, euen vnto Dura. Antioch hauing (as wee haue heretofore sayd) these newes, were in fantasie to leaue the Warre in Syrria, and to prouide for this other Countrey with an extreame diligence: they Assembled therefore those of their Counsell, and as they had commaunded that euery one should freely giue his aduice touching the Warre of Molon, and that Epigone should be made fit, saying that long sithence things should haue beene considered and lookt vnto, because the enemies should not haue their courages so great to vndertake such things, because of their good suc∣cesse: To whom neuerthelesse they ought ow to giue order with all their endeauour and study, for some speedy course to preue all future danger.
Then Hermes incensed againe, began to vse proud and iniurious spee∣ches without reason: Hee inuented false slanders against Epigene, be∣seeching the King not to leaue the Warre of Syrria so inconsiderate∣ly. Finally he grew into such a rage, as hee offended many and dis∣contented Antiochus. They could hardly pracifie his fury, although the King vsed what meanes hee could to reconcile them. In the end when the aduice of Epigene seemed the best vnto the assistants, it was resolued in Councell that the Army should march against Molon, and that there they should make the Warre. Hermes seeming presently to haue altered his aduice, sayd that all the World must obserue that which the Councell had decreed, and perfor∣med his duty to make prouision of all necessary things for the mana∣ging of Warre. When the Troupes were assembled at Apamia, and that there was a munity and a great discord growne amongst the com∣mon Souldies:A mutiny in Antiochus his Campe. Hermes finding the King amazed and much troubled, hee assured him to pacifie the rage and discontent of the Souldiers, and to diuide and share the Corne quietly among them, if hee would promise him neuer to carry Epigene with him in any exploits of Warre: For that they could not performe any thing of importance in an Army, being at so much difference and so incensed one against another. And although the King disliked this, and was very much discontented at his motion, for that hee knew by experience that Epigone was a man of Councell, and actiue in Affaires of Warre, yet to preuent the present, he sent him suddainly away: doubting that being circumuented by the promises of Hermes, hee should not be master of himselfe. Which beeing done, all the rest of the Kings Councell grew into great feare. The Troupes also receiuing what Corne they desired, changed their affection, and followed Hermes, except the Cyrrastres: Who beeing sixe thousand men, mutined and abandoned the Kings seruice: Who afterwards did him many affronts in his Warre at seuerall times. Yet in the end they were defeated by a certaine Captaine of the Kings par∣ty, and the greatest part of them slaine: the rest yeilded afterwards vn∣to the King. Hermes hauing made the Kings friends his owne by feare, and the Souldiers by his bounty,The practise of Molon against pigene. hee marcht with him and his Army. Hee layed a plot agianst Epigene, with the helpe and consent of Alexis, who at that time was Captaine of Apamia; and writing letters, as if they had bin sent from Molon to Epigene, hee corrupted one of Alexis seruants with great promises: who went to Epigene, to thrust these Letters se∣cretly among his other Writings. Which when he had done, Alexis came suddainly to Epigene, demanding of him, if he had receiued any Letters from Molon: and when hee affirmed no, the other was confi∣dent that he would finde some. Wherefore entring into the House to search, he found the Letters, and taking this occasion slew him. These things happening thus, the King thought that hee was iustly slaine. And although the rest of the Court and of his friends were much grie∣ued at this suddaine disaster, yet they dissembled their sorrow for feare.
When as Antiochus was come vnto Euphrates, he marcht with his army vnto Antiochia, and stayed at Michdionia about the midst of Decmber, desiring to passe the oughnesse of the Winter there: where staying a∣bout forty dayes, hee went vnto Liba, where hee called a Councell. And when as they consulted of the way which they should hold to find Molon, and from whence and how they might recouer Victuals, (for at that time hee made his abode in Babylon) Hermes was of opinion that they should keepe their way vppon this side the Riuer of Tygris, and along the Bankes; doubting and not a little fearing the Riuers of Luque and Capre. Zeuxis was of another opinion; but hee durst not speake nor declare his minde plainely, remembring still the death of Epigene. But when as the ignorance of Hermes seemed apparent to all the assi∣stants, hee with some difficulty deliuered his aduice, that they must passe Tygris, aswell for many other difficulties which are on this side, as for that they must of necessity, after they had past certaine places in marching sixe daies iourney by a Desart Country, came vnto a Region which they call Diorex, where the passage was not safe, for that the ene∣my had seized thereon: And that moreouer the returne would be dan∣gerous, especially for want of victuals. If the King likewise did passe Tygris, all the people of Appolonia, transported with ioy would come vnto him, who at this day obeyed Molon, not for any affection, but through necessity and feare: And withall they should haue abundance of victuals, by reason of the fertility of the Countrey; and the passage of Media would be shut vp for Molon, so as of necessity he should be forced to come and fight: Or if hee fled, his Troupes would soone yeild vnto the King. When the aduice of Zeuxis had beene allowed in Councell, they presently past the whole Army with the baggage in three places. And marching from thence vnto Dre, they raised the siege, (for one of Molons Captaines had some few dayes before besie∣ged it) and afterwards continuing on their way, and hauing past the Mountaines which they of the Countrey call Orie, in eight daies they came into Apolonia. At the same time Molon hauing newes of the Kings comming, and not holding himselfe assured of the Ssians and Babilonians, beeing lately made subiect vnto him and by surprize, fearing moreouer that the passage of Media was stopt, hee afterwards resolued to passe by the Riuer Tygris speedily with his whole Army, making haste to gaine the Woodes which bend towards the playnes of Apolonia, for that he had great confidence in his Slingers, whom they call Cyrtles. When hee approached neere these places, from the which the King parting with his Army from Apolonia was not farre, it happened that the fore∣runners of eyther side, lightly armed, met vppon a Hill, where they skirmished. But vpon the approach of both Armies, they began to re∣tire, and the two Campes lodged within forty furlongs one of another. When night came, Molon considering that a battaile by day with the King would bee dangerous for him, not relying much vppon his men,
he resolued to assaile Antiochus at mid-night. Wherefore hee made choise of the ablest men of his whole Army, and takes his way by vnknowne places, resoluing to charge the enemy from the higher part: But being aduertised vppon the way, that ten of his Souldiers had stollen away in the night, and retired vnto Antiochus, hee gaue ouer his enterprize. So as taking another way, hee returned to the Campe at the breake of day, the which was the chiefe cause of great trouble in his Army: For they awaking with this suddaine and short returne of their Companions, they were so terrified and amazed, as they were in a manner ready to flie and abandon their Campe. Molon when the trueth was knowne and well perceiued, pacified this terrour and amazement what hee could, in so short a space, although it in some part increased still. The King being ready to fight, drawes his Army to fielde at the breake of day,Antiochus puts his Army in Battaile. and on the right Wing hee sets the Launces, vnder the Commaund of Ardis, a man of great experience in the Warre. To whom hee gaue for a supply the Candyots his Allies, and after them the Gaules and Rhigosages: who were followed by the Souldiers of Greece, and finally by a great battalion of Foote-men. In regard of the left Wing, he gaue it to the Allies, which were all on horse-backe. Hee likewise set the Elephants in Front betwixt the two Wings, beeing ten in number. In regard of the supplies of Horse and Foote distribu∣ted on eyther Wing, hee giues them charge to wheele about, and to compasse in the enemy, as soone as the Battaile should beginne to charge. After all this hee encourageth the Souldiers, telling them in few words what was necessary for the present: And he giues to Hermes and Zeuxis the leading of the left Wing, and takes the right vnto himselfe. On the other side Molon drawes his Army to Field with great difficul∣ty; and puts it but ill in Battaile, by reason of the disorder which had happened in the night. Yet hee diuided his Horse-men in two wings, thinking the enemy had done the like, placing the Targetteers and the Gaules with others that were of most apt courage, great experi∣ence and best Armed in the middest of the Horse-men:The order of Molons battaile. putting the Archers and Slingers vppon the two Wings, without the Troupe of Horse-men, and in Front were placed all the Carriages and Bill-men. He gaue the leading of the left Wing vnto his brother Neolaus, and him selfe takes the right. This done, the two Armies marcht: Molons right Wing was loyall and faithfull vnto him, charging Zeuxi with great Courage and fury. But when as the left Wing drew somewhat neere vnto the King, it re∣tired to the enemy. This happening, Molons Troupes fainted sud∣dainely: And the Kings Army grew more sto and couragious. But when as Molon saw and well perceiued himselfe thus betrayed, and in∣uironed by the enemy, thinking and immagining of the Torments which hee must indure,The death of Molon. if hee fell aliue into their hands, hee slew himselfe. The like the rest did which had beene Traytors vnto the King, who recouering their Houses by flight, slew themselues.
When as Neolaus had escaped from the Battaile, and was retired vn∣to Alexander Brother to Molon in Persis, hee slew the mother of Mo∣lon and his Children: After whose death he slew himselfe, perswa∣ding Alexander to doe the like. When as the King had spoiled the enemies Campe, hee commaunded that the body of Molon should be hanged vpon a Crosse,Molon Crusc∣fled. in the most eminent place of Media, the which was suddainly performed by them which had the Charge: who after they had carried it to Callonite, crucified it neere vnto the Towne of Zagre. When he had giuen great admonitions to Molons Army, and pardo∣ned them, he sent men to Conduct them into Media, and to giue order for the affaires of that Prouince. As for himselfe, he retired to Seleucia. Hermes continuing still in his resolution, condemned the Seleucenses in sixe hundred thousand Crownes for that they had reuolted, banishing the Diganes: and put many to death in Prison by the Sword. But the King pacifying his rage, intreated the Burgesses curteously, and drew from them for a punishment of their reuolte, onely fourescore and ten thousand Crownes. These things thus pacified, hee made Diogene his Lieutenant Generall in Media, and Apolodorus in the Prouince of Suss; and sent the Chancellour Tychon Lieutenant of his Army, into the se∣uerall Countries of the Red Sea, there to lye in Garrison vpon any sud∣daine occasion which should happen. This was the end of Molons re∣uolte, and of the Warre which followed. The King glorious of this good fortune, and desirous to terrifie the Barbarous Princes his Neighbours, to the end they should not presume hereafter to succour his Rebels with men and Victuals, marches against them with his Army:Antiochus goes against Arta∣bazanes. And first against Artabazenes, who was more powerfull then any of the other Princes, and neerer to his Citties. At the same time Hermes feared to enter into the high Country for the emi∣nent danger, and desired (as he had from the beginning) to lead the Army against Ptolomy. But when as certaine newes came of the birth of the Kings sonne,Antiochus hath a Sone. hee found this Voyage profitable for him, if Antiochus should chance to be slaine by the Barbariains: For that being left Tutour vnto the sonne, hee should bee Lord of the whole Realme. All being thus resolued, they past Mount Zagre, and ouer∣ranne the Prouince of Artabazanes, which ioynes to Media, being se∣perated from it by a Mountaine, and on some parts comes to the Pon∣tique Sea on that side of the Countrey which is about Phasi: ioyning also to the Hyrcanien Sea. Moreouer it abounds in all things necessary for the Warre. It hapned that the Persians kept this Principality, when in the time of King Alexander, they made no account or esteeme of it. Artabazens being amazed at the Kings comming,Artabazaes makes an ac∣cord with Anti∣och. and broken with Age, thought good to yeilde vnto Fortune, and to agree with the King, vpon such conditions as he pleased. When the accord was made, Apolophanes the Physitian, whom the King loued much, seeing Hermes abuse his Authority too arrogantly, was very carefull for the King, and in great feare for those which were about him.
Wherefore after he had expected the opportunity of time, he comes to Antiochus, and intreates him to preuent the presumption and impu∣dency of Hermes, and not to suffer it any longer, least hee fall into his brothers inconuenience:Apolphanes aduice to An∣tiochus. for it was not farre off. Finally, that he should speedily prouide for his safety, and for that of his friends. Antiochus liked well of his Counsell, for that he hated and feared Hermes. The King thanked him, for that hee had not feared to speake vnto him of things which concerned his safety. Apolophans also seeing that hee had not beene deceiued in the opinion which hee had conceiued of the King, grew afterwards more bold and hardy. For the rest, Antiochus Counselled him to be aduised for his owne good, and his friends, not onely by words, but also by effect: And as he sayd, he was ready to do all they aduised to that end: He made shew that the King had a great disease in his eyes, and must indure the paine some daies: vntill that time he had gotten leasure to make ready their enterprize. They vsed al∣so power to go and aduise with their friends touching this Affaire, vnder the shaddow of visitation: During which time, they made ready the most apt for the execution, and were willingly obeyed for the hate they bare to Hermes, and were ready to execute the Massacre. The Physitians likewise put themselues forward, that it was behoouefull that Antiochus should goe take the Ayre in the morning to refresh himselfe. Hermes came to the King in the meane time, as hath beene sayd, to∣gether with the Allies which were participant of the enterprize, the rest remayned in the Campe, as if they knew nothing of the Voyage. The others drawing then Antigonus out of the Campe, they led him into some by place, where at his onely signe they killed Hermes. Behold now how he dyed, of whom alwayes the punishment was neuer suffi∣cient for his wickednesse. The King returned to his Lodging, deliue∣red from a great distresse and feare, with a prayse reaching to the Hea∣uens by all the Prouince, of his Counsell and of his workes, especially when they heard newes of the death of Hermes. In the same time, the Women of Apam killed his Wife, and the Children, his. After that Antiochus was arriued in his lodging, hee sent his Army to wier in the Garrisons, and a Embassadour to Acheus, and first complay∣ning of that, that he had taken the Crowne, and likewise urst accept the name of King: And that on the other side, hee durst openly declare himselfe to hold the party of Ptolo. Now we must vnderstand, that in the time the King led the Warre to Artabazenes, Acheus thinking that hee should dye in the Country there, or if he dyed not, that hee should without any hindrance draw the Warre into Syrria, before his returne. Seeing and well perciuing the longnesse of the way, and the Conquering of the Kingdome, suddainly by the ayde of Cyrrastes, that not long since had abandoned the King, and parted from Lydia with a great Army. And as he was arriued in Laodicea, which is in Phrigia; he seazed on the Crowne, taking also the ambition to be called King, and to write to the Townes to doe so, being earnestly solicited by a Fugitiue, called
Synires. And as he then continued his voyage, and was not farre from Lycaonia, the Men of Warre began to mutiny against him, being sor∣ry that they led an Army against the first King: Wherefore Acheus seeing their fancies, turned him from the way he had begun, as if hee would make them vnderstand, that he drew not in the beginning to Syr∣ria; but turned his way to Pisidique, pillaging all the Countrey, and distributing to the Men of War a mauailous ooty; so he gained them, and returned to his house: The King then well aduertised of all these things,  (as we haue sayd) an Embassadour to Acheus, making ready in the meane while all that seemed to bee necessary, to bring the Warre vpon Ptolomy. And after that all the Army was neere to Apa∣mia, in the beginning of the Spring, he called his Friends to Councell, requiring of euery one their aduice what they thought fit to be done for the Warre.Apolophanes ad∣ui to ni∣ochus. When as many had counselled him diuers things concer∣ning the places ad preparaton, and to make an Army by Sea, Apo∣lophanes (of whom wee haue spoken) being borne in Seleucia, stood vp and ouerthrew all the Opinions which had beene formerly giuen, saying, that it was a solly to drawe the Warre into base Syrria, and to suffer olomy to hold Sencia, for that it was the sourse and cause of their Principality: That besides the disgrace hee should doe vnto his Reign, (considering that the force of the Kings of Egypt had alwaies kept it) it had moreouer great commodities for the mannaging of the Warre. For whilest the Enemies shall hold it, it would be very pre∣iudiciall to all his Enterprizes. For there must be no lesse care vsed to defend himselfe from this City, then to assaile the Enemy. And if hee held it, he should not onely be able to preserue his owne with safety, but also to vndertake some good action both by Sea and Land, for the great opportunity of the place. The whole Assembly allowed of Apolophes aduice, and resolued to take the Citty first, for then Slucia was held by the Kings of E∣gypt, from the time that Ptlomy reigned, who was surnamed the Bne∣factor.Ptolomy the Bnefactor. Hee conquered it at such time, that for the ruine of Beronic, and the rage he had concelued in his het, hee made a descent into base Syrria with an Army. Antiochus after Apolophanes aduice was approued, hee commanded Diogone Generall of the Army at Sea, to fayle speedily to Seleuci. And in the meane time parting from Apa∣mia with his Army, he lodgeth within fiue Furlongs of Hippodrome. Hee likewise sends away Theore Hermioly with a sufficient Army for Syrria, to the end he might gaine the streights, and prouide for the af∣faires of that Prouince. This is the scituation of Seleucia, and the places about it;The scituation of Seeuci. that as the Citty is seated vpon the Sea-shoare, betwixt Cilcia and Phenicia, so it hath vnder i a wonderful great Mountaine, which they call Coryphes, whose side towards the West, is washed with the Sea, which is betwixt Cipres and Phenia, and the other which lookes to the East, ioynes to the Regions of the Antiochiens and Seleucenes. Seleucia scituated on the South, and seperated by a deepe and inaccessible Valley, which extends to the Sea, being enuironed with great Rockes and Caues: And
on that side which lookes to the Sea, it hath steps and Suburbs inclosed with walls. The Citty also is fortified with a good wall, and beautified with Temples, and faire buildings. It hath but one approach towards the sea, the which is difficult, and made by hand: for they must ascend vnto it by Ladders. The riuer of Ornte enters into the Sea neere vnto it, taking its sourse and beginning at Liban and Antiliban, and passeth by Antiochia: whereas running continually, it carries away by its swift course all the filth of the people. Finally, it enters into the Sea neere vnto Seleucia. Antiochus in the beginning sent to the Gouernours of the Citty, of∣fring them money with great hopes, if without fighting they would deliuer it vnto him.Antiochus cor∣rupts the Cap∣taines of Se∣leuoia. But when he could not winne them, he corrupts some of the inferiour Captaines: with whom hauing agreed, he puts his men in Battaile, as if he meant to assaile the Towne with his Army at Sea, and at Land on that side which lookes towards Epirus. Diui∣ding then his Army in three, after that hee had inflamed the hearts of the Souldiers, promising them great rewards, hee appointed Zeuxi with his Company to bee at the Gate which goes to Antiochia, and he gaue to Hermogenes the places by which they goe to Dioscoria, and giues charge to Ard and Diogene to assaile the Suburbs and Arsenall: for it had beene so agreed with the Traytors,Seleucia assaul∣ted. that as soone as the Suburbs were taken, they should deliuer him the Citty. When as the King had giuen the igne for an assault, they all did their indeauours. But among the rest they which were with Ard and Diogene, carried themselues valiantly: For they could not assault no scale the other places. But in regard of the Arsenall and Suburbs, they might assault and scale them. Wherefore whilest that the Army at Sea fell vpon the Arsenall, and Ardis Troupes vpon the Suburbs, scaling the Walls, and that they of the Towne could not succour them, for that they were enuironed on all sides by the Enemy, it fell out that the Suburbe was suddainly ta∣ken. Which done, the petty Captaines corrupted by the King, ran to Leonce, who at that time was Gouernour of the Citty, perswading him to send to Antiochus before the City were forced. And although that Leonce were ignorant of the Treason, he sent presently to Antio∣chus, (being troubled with the amazement of his people) to yeeld them the Citty vpon condition to haue the liues of all the Inhabitants saued. The King accepting the condition, promised to saue the liues of all Free-men, which were about sixe thousand: But when hee was entred, he not onely pardoned the Burgesses, but also called home the banished men of Seleucia, and restored vnto them the gouernment of their publique affaires, and all their goods, and put a good Garri∣son into the Hauen and Port. Whilest Antiochus stayed at Seleucia, hee receiued Letters from Theodote, by the which he solicited him to goe speedily into base Syr∣ria. The King was long in suspence what councell he should take, and was pensiue and troubled with the course he should take in this action▪ you must vnderstand, that Theodote borne in Etolia, had done great ser∣uices for the Realme of Ptolomy, (whereof wee haue formerly made
mention) and many times put his life in danger. At such time as Anti∣ochus made Warre against Molon, hee tooke in person (disdaining the King, and distrusting his Courtiers) Ptolemais and Tyrus by Paneteole, and suddainly called in Antiochus. The King hauing taken Acheus to heart, and laying aside all other affaires, he returnes with his Army the same way he came. When he was come to a place which the Coun∣trey people call Marsia, hee camped neere the streights which are a∣bout Gerre, which is not farre from the Fens, lying in the midst of that Countrey. There being aduertised that Nicholas Lieutenant Generall to Ptolomy, held Ptolomais besieged, in the which Theodote was, hee left those that were best armed, and gaue charge to besiege the Towne of Broches, lying vpon the Fenns,The Towne of Broces besie∣ged. making haste to goe and raise the Siege. Nicholas aduertised by his Spies of the Kings comming, retired, and sent Lagore of Candy, and Dorimene of Etolia, to gaine the streights which are neere vnto Beryta: Where the King planted his Campe, after that he had fought with them, and put them to flight. And when hee had drawne together the rest of his Army in the same place, he makes an Oration to his Souldiers, and marcheth away with great courage. There Theodote and Paneteole met with him with their Friends, to whom he gaue a good and gracious reception,Tyrus and pt∣lmais taken. and he tooke Tyrus and Ptolemais with all their preparation of Warre. There were in these Townes forty ships, whereof twenty were for the Warre, well armed and furnished with all things necessary, all which were Quinqueremes or Quadriremes: the rest were Triremes, Biremes, and of one banke. All which hee gaue to Diogene, Captaine of the Sea-army. When as newes came vnto him of the secret flight of Ptolomy to Caire, and that his whole Army assembled together at Damiette, and that they sought to cut off the waters from him, hee gaue ouer his enterprize to assail Datte: and ouer-running the Countrey, hee laboured to winne the Townes partly by force, partly by loue. Whereof some being desti∣tute of Garrisons, and fearing the Kings power, yeelded suddainly to the Enemy: Others relying vpon their strength of their scituation, maintained his assaults. As for Ptolomy being so apparently betraide, hee did not indeauour by reason of his weaknesse, to giue that speedy order to his affaires that was sitting, so little accompt he had made of that which concernes the preparations of Warre. Wherefore Agathocles and Sosibius (who at that time gouerned all the aaires of the Kingdome) bethought them∣selues (as much as possibly they might) of that which was most neces∣sary. They resolued to prepare for the Warre, sending in the meane time an Embassie to intreate Antiochus,The policy of Agathocles and Sosibius. by way of dissembling, to de∣bate Ptolomy's right: who as not daring to make Warre, and hauing ad∣uertised and perswaded his Friends, was retired into base Syrria. When as Agathocles and Sosibius had thus resolued, and giuen order according to their power, they speedily sent Embassadours to Antiochus, and likewise to the Rhodiens, Constantinopolitains, Cizicins, and Eoliens, to perswade them to send Embassies to Antiochus to mediate a peace.
When as these had sent to both the Kings, they gaue them great meanes to prouide in the meane time things necessary for the Warre, for Pto∣tomy receiuing the Embassadours gratiously, with those of Antiochus, in the meane time he drew together the Mercenary Souldiers to Alex∣andria, which lay dispersed in other Townes, and sent others to leuie men without the Prouince, making prouision of victuals. Finally, he was carefull day and night to prepare for the Warre. For the which he sent continually men to Alexandria,An Army rai∣sed by Ptoomy. to giue order there should not be any thing wanting that was necessary. Hee had also giuen charge to Echecrate of Thessaly, and to Phoxid of Mil, to make prouision of Armes, and to choose men, and to muster them: The like he did to Eurilochus Magnes, and to Socrates of Beocia: with whom also was Cn∣pias Alorite. For hee held them for men of iudgement in such affaires: For that he esteemed them of great experience in the Warre, hauing serued long vnder Demetrius and Antigon. These drew many souldiers together, prouiding wisely, and like honest men for all things. First they deliuered Armes to the Companions ac∣cording to their fashion and age, distributing to euery one those which hee could best mannage, and disliking those which they had formerly vsed. Then they instructed them in particular for the future, and trai∣ned them continually, not by words onely, but accustoming them to Combats made for pleasure. After that they drew them together, and by remonstrances and perswasions put courage into them for the War to come. Wherein Andromachus Aspondin, and Polycrates the Argiue, who were lately come from Arges, were very powerfull. These were men accustomed to the Warre, and much esteemed by reason of their Countrey, and the excellency of their liues: especially Polycrates, for the antiquity of his race, and the glory of his Father Muasias. These in∣structing the Bands publiquely and in priuate, gaue courage to the Soul∣diers for the future War.The distributi¦on of Ptolomes Army to his Captaines. Moreouer, euery one had his particular charge in the Army according to their experience. Euriloch Magnes had the command of three thousand men, which the Kings call the furious Troupe. Socrates of Beocia, was Chiefe of two thousand armed with Targets. Phoxide the Achaian, and Ptolomy of Thras, and with them Andromachus Aspondin, led the great Battaillion, and the Mercenaries: So as Adromachus and Ptolomy were Captaines of the great Battaillion, and Phoxide of the Mercenaries. The Phalange or great Battaillion con∣tained about fiue and twenty thousand men. The Mercenaries were eight thousand. Polycrates had trained and instructed the Gentlemen of the Kings house, being seuen hundred Horse, ouer whom hee was Captaine, and likewise of those which were come for Lybia, and had beene leuied in the Prouince. All which made the number of three thousand men. In regard of the Grecian Cauallery, and those which were in pay, Echecrates of Thessaly, a man of seruice, instructed them carefully, to the number of two thousand▪ being as diligent as any other to haue a care of the Souldiers. Copy had the command of all the Candiots, being three thousand in number: Among the which there was a thousand
Souldiers newly leuied, of which he gaue the charge to Philon of Gno∣sie. There were moreouer three thousand Affricans, armed after the the Macedonian manner, ouer whom Ammonin Barcee was Captaine. There were also about two thousand Egyptians vnder the command of Sosibius Finally, foure thousand Thraces and Gaules, which had long serued in the Warre: and two thousand newly leuied, whereof De of Thrace had the charge. This was Ptolomes Army at that same time. When as Antiochus had besieged the Towne of Dure, and saw that hee could not preuaile, as well for its fortification, as for the defence of Nicholas: in the beginning of Winter hee concluded a truce with Pto∣lomes Embassadour, and promised him willingly and freely, to goe out of the Prouince, and to doe him all the pleasure hee could, al∣though he had another intent: for hee made haste to leade his Army to winter in Seleucia, for that Acheus made shew to bee of his side, al∣though in truth he held Ptolomes party. After the truce concluded, Antiochus sent presently an Embassadour,An Embassie sent from Anti∣ochus to Ptolo∣my. giuing him charge to ad∣uertise him speedily of Ptolomes intention, and that hee should come vnto him to Seleucia. Then leauing sufficient Garrison in necessary places, and the charge of all to Theodote, hee led his Army to Se∣leucia: from whence he sent them to winter in Garrisons, and from that time hee began to neglect all care in exercising his Souldiers, thinking hee should haue no more occasion of fighting: For that hee held many places in base Syrria and Phenicea, hoping that the rest would be soone reduced to his obedience: considering that Ptolomy durst not come to fight. His Embassadours thought no lesse, for that Sosibius had giuen them faire and courteous words at Caire: And not a∣ny one of those which had beene sent to Antiochus, knew the prepara∣tion of Warre which was made in Alexandria: so as Sosibius dismis∣sing the Embassadours, was continually carefull of the Warre. It is true, that Antiochus vsed great care to make his iust quarrell knowne to the Embassadours, when they should enter into discourse. Finally, being come to Selecia, and falling into priuate speech of the peace, according vnto that which Sosibius had giuen them in charge, the King did not hold the outrage which he had done by open Warre,Reasons of the warre propoun∣ded by Antio∣chus. in seazing vpon the places of base Syrria to bee vniust or vnreasonable: and that he had done nothing but by a iust title. For he sayd, that An∣tigonus with one eye, and Seleucus, who first had conquered those pla∣ces, were the true and lawfull Lords. Wherefore the Realme of base Syrria belonged vnto him, as it were by right of inheritance, and not to Ptolomy: For that Ptolomy had fought against Antigonus, not for his owne right, but to conquer those Countries for Seleucus. Moreouer, he pro∣pounded the mutuall accord betwixt the Kings, for at such time as Anti∣gonus was defeated, when as Cassander, Lysimachus and Seleucus would diuide the Realme betwixt them, they adiudged all Syrria to Seleucus. This was all that Antiochus alledged.Th answer of Ptolomes Em∣bassadours to Antiochus. Contrariwise Ptolomes Embassa∣dours laboured to produce their reasons, making this present outrage far greater then it had bin: saying that the accord had bin broken as wel by
the treason of Theodote, as by the descent which Antiochus had made with an Army into Syrria. Moreouer, they pretended Ptolomes posses∣sion, saying, that he had made Warre with Seleucus against Antigonus, to the end he might conquer all the Empire of Asia for Seleucus, and make Syrria and Phenicea his owne. These difficulties with diuers o∣thers, were many times debated betwixt them: but they could not con∣clude any thing, although matters were solicited by their common Friends: for that the party of Acheus bred a great controuersie and debate betwixt them: For that Ptolomy sought to com∣prehend him in the accord, and Antiochus would not heare him spoken of: holding it a strange thing, that Ptolomy should presume to make mention of those who through Treason abandoned their King. Finally, the Embassadours departed without any effect. In the Spring Antiochus vseth all diligence to leuie men,A leuie of Ar∣mies by Antio∣chus and Ptolo∣my. with an intent to assaile Syrria both by Sea and Land, and to make subiect all the other Countries of that Prouince. But Ptolomy did no lesse to re∣enforce the Army of Nicholas: so as hee sent him store of victuals out of the Countries neere vnto Gaza, furnishing him moreouer with Soul∣diers both by Sea and Land, with other things necessary. By meanes whereof Nicholas resuming courage, went boldly to Field with the helpe of Perigene, Commander of the Army at Sea, being sent by Ptolomy with thirty ships of Warre, and about foure hundred Merchants Vessels. This Nicholas was borne in Etolia, as able and re∣solute a Souldier as any that serued Ptolomy: who after he had former∣ly gotten with a part of his Army, the streights which lie neere vnto Pla∣tane, and marching with the rest to Porphirrion, he shut vp the pas∣sage of the Prouince from the King with the helpe of the Sea-army.Embassdours from the Arca∣dins to Antio∣chus. Antiochus being come to Marache, and Embassadours arriuing from the Arcadians, to conferre of the conditions of their Alliance, he not onely receiued them courteously, but freed the discord which had beene long betwixt them, in reconciling the Arcadians which dwelt in the Iland, with those that liued in Epirus. This done hee comes to Berite, entring into the rouince by a place which the Countrey-men call, the Face of God: in passing hee tooke the Towne of Botre, setting fire vpon Triere and Calame. From thence he sent Nicarche and Theo∣dote before, giuing them charge to gaine the streights which are neere vnto the Riuer of Dyce: And with the rest of his Army he plants him∣selfe neere vnto the Riuer of Damure, from whence Diogene Chiefe of the Army at Sea, was not farre. Then againe he takes those that were lightly armed, whom hee had sent before with Nicarche and Theodote, and goes to discouer the streights which Nicholas had formerly taken: so as after hee had well viewed the places, hee returned to his Campe. Where the next day hee left those that were best armed, vnder the charge of Nicarche, and marched with the rest against the Enemy. And for that Mount Liban doth much restraine those places towards the Sea-shoare, the way must of necessity be narrow, difficult, and almost inaccessible: leauing a streight and short passage towards the Sea. Whereas Nicholas hauing
then built his Fort, hee did hope he should be well able to repulse An∣tiochus: For that he had put him selfe into it with a good number of Souldiers: and had also fortified it with Engines and other defences. The King diuided his Army into three Troupes,Antiochus his Army diuided into three. whereof hee gaue the leading of the one to Theodote, giuing him charge to fall vpon the Enemies which defended the way of the Mountaine. Hee gaue ano∣ther to Menedemus, whom hee commanded to striue to get vp th Mountaine: And the third he placed on the Sea-shoare, vnder the lea∣ding of Diocles. Hee put himselfe among the Baggage to see all, and to succour where neede should require. At the same time Diogenet and Perigene began to fight at Sea, approaching as neere to Land as possibly they could: so as they might see the Combats by Land and Sea with one view.A Combat at Sea and Land. The Trumpets sounding to the charge, the fight was long equall at Sea: so as the Victory inclined to neither side: for that the two Armies were equall in number of men and preparation of Warre. In regard of the fight at Land, Nicholas had the better in the beginning, for that hee had the aduantage of the place. But when as they which were with Theodote, came vpon them from the top of the Mountaine, and charged them with great fury, Nicholas and his men fled shamefully. There were two thousand slaine in the chase: the rest saued themselues in Sydon. And although that Perigene in shew had good hope of the ight at Sea, yet seeing the defeate of the Army at Land, he retired. An∣tiochus drew his men together, and went and planted his Campe neare vnto Sydon: yet hee did not hold it fit to attempt the taking thereof at that time, as well for the abundance of munition and victuals that were in it, as for the multitude of men, as well Inhabitants, as such as were re∣tired into it after the Battaile. Wherefore he dislodged, and went to Phi∣lotere, sending word to Diogenet, Chiefe of the Army at Sea, to sayle to Tyre. You must vnderstand, that Philotere is seated neare vnto a Fenne, into the which the Riuer which they call Iordan, passeth: then takes its course by the Countrey of that Towne which is called Scithes. After the suddaine taking of these two Townes, he enters into great hope for the future, for that their Fields were sufficient to furnish his Army with all kind of victuals, and other munitions for the war. There he placed suf∣ficient Garrisons, and passing the Mountaines, he came to the Towe of Atabyre, scituated vpon the Mountaine of Mastodia, which hath fifteene Furlongs in ascent. There laying an Ambush neare the Towne, he began to draw the Inhabitants forth to fight, who following his men who see∣med to retire, were in a manner all slaine, they turning head: And for that the Ambush charged them in the Reare, he pursued the rest, and tooke them and their Towne. At the same time Cere being one of Ptolomes Commander, left it. By the meanes whereof Antiochus gained many o∣ther Captaines. For soone after Hippolochus of Thessaly came to yeeld himselfe to him with three hundred horse. And when he had put a Gar∣rison into Atabyre, he proceeded in his iourney,Diuers Townes taken by Anti∣ocus. pursuing his enterprize, and in passing the Country, tooke Pelle, Came, & Gepre. In the meane time the people of of Arabia agreeing together, followed his party. Autiochus growing into greater hope, & drawing victuals from them, went farther
into the Country: and presently tooke Gallate with the Garrison of the Abillatins, of whom Nicie a Kinsman and Allie to Nemne, was Com∣mander. And although that Gadare, which at that time seemed im∣pregnable for its scituation, held out, yet hee tooke it suddainly in be∣sieging it, and setting vp his Engines. And hauing newes afterwards that a good number of Enemies were drawne together into Rabatamas∣sane a Towne of Arabia, and spoyled all the Arabians Countrey which held his party, he went suddainly thither with his Army, and planted his Campe neere vnto the Mountaines among the which the Towne is scituated. And when vpon a view he had discouered that it was not to be forced but in two places, he set vp his Engines, and other things ne∣cessary to force a Towne, whereof he gaue the charge to Nicarchus and Theodote: and in the meane time attends his other affaires. These men carefull of the Battery, striued with emulation who should first ouerthrow the Wall, whereupon a great part fell sooner then they could imagine. This done, they fought continually day and night, striuing to lose no time. And although the Siege continued long, yet they could not preuaile, in regard of the multitude of men which defended it: vntill that a Prisoner shewed them a little Riuer, where the besieged fetch their water, the which they stopt vp with Pallisadoes stones, and such like things. Then being out of hope of water, they yeel∣ded to the Enemies.Rbatamassana yeelded to An∣tiochu. By this meanes the King hauing it in his hands, he gaue it in guard to Nicarchus with a sufficient strength: and he sent Hip∣polichus and Ceree (who as we haue sayd, had abandoned Ptolomy) in∣to the Countrey of Samaria, with fiue thousand Foote: giuing them charge to continue there for the defence thereof, and to preserue all the people which were vnder his obedience. From thence he parts with his whole Army, and comes to Ptolomais to passe the Winter there. When the Pednelissenses had beene the same Summer besieged by the Selgenses,The Pednelissen∣ses besieged. and were in great danger; they sent to demand succours from Aceus. When he had heard them willingly, and promised to doe it, they endured the Siege with great courage, growing more resolute by the hope of succours. Finally, Acheus sent Grsyere with sixe thou∣sand Foot, and fiue hundred Horse: giuing him charge to vse all diligence to succour the Pednelassenses. The Selgenses aduertised by the Spies of his comming, recouered the streights which are about a place which they call, Eschelle, with the greatest part of their Army, and stop vp all the pas∣sages. Garsyere entring by force into Myliade, and planting his Campe neare nto a Towne called Candois, he vsed this stratagem, seeing that he could not passe, for that the Selgenses kept all the passages. He began to raise his Campe, and to retire, making shew that it was impossible for him to succour the Pednelissenses: for that the streights of the Coun∣try were held by the Enemy. The Selgenses thinking they had beene gone, as men despairing to be able to succour them,The policy of Garsyere. retired, some to the Campe, the rest returned to the Citty to recouer Victuals. But Garsyere comes suddainiy backe to the streights, whereas finding them abandoned, he set men to guard them vnder the command of Captaine Phayle: and from thence hee
comes with his forces to Perge, whereas staying some time, hee sent Embassadours to Pamphilia, and the other Townes, to acquaint them with the insolency of the Selgenses, and to solicite them to enter into league with Aches, and to succour the Pednelissenses. The Sc∣genses at the same time sent a Captaine with an Army, hoping to chase Phayle from the streights. But for that matters succeeded otherwise then they expected, and lost many of their men in fighting, they gaue ouer their Enterprize: yet for all this they did not raise their Siege, but were more attentiue then before, to set vp their Engines. In the meane time the Ettenenses which inhabite the Mountaines a∣boue Syde, sent eight thousand men armed to Garsyere: and the As∣pendiens foure thousand. The Sydetes made no shew to send any suc∣cours: for that they were Friends to Antiochus, and hated the Aspendi∣ens. Garsyere came to ednelisse, accompanied with the Troupes of the Allies, thinking at his comming to raise the Siege. But when he saw that the Selgenses were nothing amazed, he set himselfe downe neere vnto them. The Pednelissenses were so opprest with want of Victuals, as they could no longer endure the hunger, wherefore Garsyere seeing it necessary to vse diligence, prepared two thousand men, euery one la∣den with a Mine of Wheat, and sent them by night to the Towne.A Me is a∣bout two of our , weighing an hundred and ten pounds. The Selgenses aduertised hereof, charged them presently, and slew the grea∣test part of them, and tooke all the Wheate. Wherewith they grew so glorious, as they not onely besieged the Towne, but they attempted the Enemies Campe. It is the custome of the Selgenses to bee alwaies bold and audatious. Wherefore in leauing sufficient forces in their Campe, they suddainly assailed the Enemy in diuers place. And when the Ala∣rum grew hot, so as the Campe was forced in some places, Garsyere a∣mazed at this great and suddaine accident, and hauing no great hope, hee caused the Horse-men to goe forth by a certaine place which was not guarded: whom the Selgenses (thinking they had fled for feare of being defeated) did not pursue, nor made any accompt of them. These Horse-men turning a little about, charged the Enemy suddainly in the Reare, fighting with great fury. Then Garsyeres Foot-men, who seemed to wauer, turned head, being re-united, and fell vpon the Enemy▪ By this meanes the Selgenses being thus enuironed, in the end fled. The Pednelissenses taking courage hereat, made a sally,The Victory of Garsyere a∣gainst the Sel∣genses. and beate them out of the Campe which had the guard. In the chase Garsyere made a great laughter: for there were aboue ten thousand men slaine: of those which remained, the Allies retired to their houses, and the Selgenses to their Countrey, taking their way by the Mountaines. The next day Garsyere parts with his Army, and makes haste to passe the Mountaines, and to approach the Towne, before that the Selgenses (being amazed with this fresh flight) should prouide for any thing. Who being full of heauinesse and feare, as well for the little hope they had of succours from their Allies, considering the losse they had made with them▪ & amazed with this fresh misfortune, were in great doubt of safe∣ty, either for themselues or their Countrey.Logbase sent Embassadour by the Selgen∣ses. Wherefore they assembled the Counsell, to resolue to send one of their Cittizens called Logbase,
in Embassie: who had had great Friendship and familiarity with Antio∣chus, which died in Thrace: And moreouer he had bred vp Laodicea the wife of Acheus, and his owne Daughter, whom they had giuen him in her infancy to instruct. They sent him therefore as their Embassadour, thinking him sufficient for that businesse. But being come to Garsyere, he was so farre from doing that which hee had in charge, and which the duty of a good Cittizen required, that contrariwise he solicited him to write to Acheus, that he promised to deliuer him the Towne. Garsyere giuing a willing are vpon hope of taking it, sent men to Ache∣us to solicite him, and to let him vnderstand how matters had past. Finally hee makes a truce with the Selgenses,A truce made with the Sel∣genses. delaying still to make an absolute accord with him, vnder colour that he would consider better thereon, to the end that in the meane time hee might expect Acheus, and giue Logbase opportunity to finish the Enterprize. But whilest they in the meane time confrred together,Communica∣tion with an E∣y is dange∣ous. the Souldiers by a kind of familiarity, went freely into the Towne to fetch Victuals, which is many times the cause of a great Defeate. So as in my opinion there is not any Creature amongst all the rest, more simple then man, or that hath lesse sense and iudgement: whom notwithstanding the greatest part of the World hold for the wisest. But how many Armies? How many Forts? How many and what Citties haue fallen into the Enemies hands thereby? And although these be things which daily happen, and that all the world sees, yet wee shew our selues (I know not how) new and Apprentizes. This happens, for that wee doe not consider the for∣tunes which haue happened to our Ancestors in former times: and that we busie ourselues with toile and charge, to make prouision of Corne, Siluer, Fotifications, and Armes. Moreouer, wee make no esteeme of that which is of great profit in great dangers, but disdaine it, al∣though it be in our power to learne it in the time of peace, by the Histo∣ries and Commentaries of former actions, and as it were to practise them. But to the end we may returne to the discourse from whence we parted, Acheus came at the day appointed. The Slgenses going to meet him, had great hope and confidence in his bounty. In the meane time Logbase hauing drawne into his house a good num∣ber of those which came into the Citty for Victuals, hee began to perswade the Cittizens, not to lose any time: and that considering the good-will which Acheus bare them, they should thinke of their af∣faires, and that in assembling the people, they should consider of the conditions of peace. These things being propounded, they present∣ly assembled, to conferre of their present affaires, calling those which were deputed for the guard of the Citty. Logbase making a signe vnto the Enemy, as he had promised; suddainly armes all those which were in his house, doing the like himselfe with his Children, to vndergoe the danger. On the other side Acheus came to the Towne with halfe the ar∣my. Garsyere marcht with the rest to Csbedia. This is a Temple of Iu∣piter▪ so well scituated aboue the Towne, as it seemes like a Fort. When as by chance some one saw the Enemy approach, hee ran suddainly to acquaint the Assembly, whereupon there was so great
an amazement among the peole, as leauing the Company, some ran to Cesbedia, others to the places where they were set in Guard, and the Commons ran to the house of Logbase:Loghbae and his Children slain. where discouering the trea∣son, some in fury got to the house-top, others forced the Gate, and slew Logbase, his Children, and all the partners of the Conspiracy. This done, they proclamed liberty to al Bondmen by the sound of the Trum∣pet, and encouraged one another to succour and defend the Citty, run∣ning to all places necessary. When Garsyere saw Cesbedia seazed on by the Burgesses, he changed his resolution, and Acheus seeking to force the Gates, the Segenses made a sally, killing seauen hundred of his men, and repuls'd the rest from the Towne. This done, Acheus and Garsyere returned to their Campe with shame and disgrace. The Selgenses after∣wards fearing the sedition of the Towne, and the presence of the Ene∣my, they sent their most ancient Cittizens to demand a peace.A peace con∣cluded betwixt  and the Segenses. Who being come to Acheus, they agreed vpon these conditions: that Acheus and the Selgenses should liue in peace, and that they should pay vnto him presently two hundred and forty thousand Crownes. That they should estore the Prisoners of the Pednelissenses, and that at a certaine time pre∣fixt, they should pay moreouer nine score thousand. Thus the Selgen∣ses (who by the Treason of Logbase were in danger of their Country and Liberties) defended themselues valiantly and with great courage: and neither lost their Liberties, nor that honour which they deriued from the Lacedemonians. When as Acheus had reduced vnder his obedience the Meliades, and the greatest part of Pamphilia, and had brought his Army to Sardis, hee made Warre against Attaus. All the Inhabitants on this side Tauris, feared him wonderfully. At the same time when he made War against the Selgenses. Attalus accompanied with the Egsges, Galates, ouer-ran Eolia, and the neighbour Townes, who for feare had yeelded to Ache∣us. Whereof the greatest part submitted themselues willingly vnder his obedience: the rest were forced. Cyme, Smirne, and Phocea, were the first that yeelded vnto him. Afterwards the Egenses and Lemnites fea∣ring a Siege, yeelded in like manner. There came likewise Embassadours from Thia and Colophon, submitting themselues and their Townes vnto him. Which being receiued according to the ancient accord, and hosta∣ges taken, he made great accompt of the Smirniens, for that they had kept their faith best. Afterwards continuing his course, he past the Riuer of Lyce, and went first to the Mysiens, and then to the Carsees, whom he terrified: The like he did to the Guards of the double walls, and tooke them and their Garrisons, For that Themistocles (whom Acheus had left there for Gouernour) deliuered them vnto him. And parting present∣ly, ruining the Countrey of Apia, he past the Mountaine of Pelecas, and planted himselfe neere vnto a great Riuer: where the Moone falling into an Eclipse, and the Galates discontented with the tediousnes of the way, hauing a traine of women and children in their Wagons, obseruing the Eclipse▪ protested that they would passe no farther. And although that King Attalus drew no seruice from them, yet fearing that if he left them, as it were in disdaine, they would retire to Acheus, and that thereby hee
should purchase an ill fame, as if through ingratitude he had abandoned those who with great affection had followed him into Asia, he intreated them to endure a little toile of the way, and that he would soone bring them to a good place, where they should rest: And withall hee would doe for them whatsoeuer they should desire according to his power, and as reason should require. Attalus therefore gaue Hellespont to the E∣gosages for their abode: and after he had intreated the Lampsacenes, the Alexandrians, and Ilienses courteously, for that they had kept their faith, he went to Prgmo with his Army. In the beginning of the Spring,The Army of Ptolomy. when Antiochus and Ptolomy had made their preparations for the Warre, they made haste to draw their Armies to Field. Ptolomy parts from Alexandria with aboue three score and ten thousand Foote, and fiue thousand Horse, with three score and thirteene Elephants. Antiochus hauing newes of their comming, hee suddainly drawes his men together. His Army consisted of fiue thou∣sand Dains, Carmaniens,The Army of Antiochus. and Ciliciens lightly armed, vnder the leading of Bittace a Macedonian: and of twenty thousand men after the Mace∣donian manner, whereof the greatest part were Argyraspides, who were leuied throughout the Realme, vnder the command of Theodote of Etolia, who committed the Treason. The number of the great Bat∣taillion was about twenty thousand, of whom Nicarchus and Theodo∣te surnamed Hemiolia, had the leading. Moreouer there were two thou∣sand Agreens and Persians, Archers and Slingers: with whom were a thousand Thracians, ouer whom Menedemus Alabandeus was Captaine. Moreouer, fiue thousand Medians, Cissiens, Cadyssiens, and Carmains: which Accius the Sonne of Aspasian of Media had vnder his charge. In regard of the Arabians, and their neighbours, they were vnder the command of Zabdibel, to the number of ten thousand men or more. On the other side Hippulochus of Thessaly, had the leading of fiue thou∣sand Grecians Mercenaries: and Eurilochus of fifteene hundred Candy∣ots. Zelysgorgyne had a thousand Candyots newly leuied, to the which were ioyned fiue hundred Lydiens with Slings. Lysimachus the Gaule, had a thousand Cardaces. Finally, the whole Cauallery amounted to sixe thousand Horse, of which Antipater the Kings Nephew, had the charge of foure thousand, and Themison of the rest. By this meanes Antiochus his Army consisted of three score and two thousand Foote, sixe thousand Horse, and a hundred and two Elephants. Ptolomy ta∣king his way by Damietta, hee made that Towne subiect vnto him at his entrance: From whence after a plentifull distribution of Corne among the Souldiers, hee parted, and passeth Cassia and Bathra, com∣ming by the desert Countries. Being come to Gaza, and hauing as∣sembled his Army, he marcht slowly in the Countrey: planting him∣selfe on the fift day, within fifty Furlongs of Raphia, which is a Towne scituated behind Rhinococure, and first of those of Syrria which looks towards Egypt. At the same time Antiochus armed with his Army, and passing that Towne by night, he planted his Army within ten furlongs of his Enemy. In the beginning they kept themselues distant so far one from another.
But some few daies after, Antiochus desiring to get some place of ad∣uantage, and to giue courage to his men, hee lodged neerer vnto the enemy, so as there were but fiue Furlongs betwixt the two Campes: So as going to forrage and to Water, there were many encounters: on the other side, sometimes the Foote-men, and sometimes the Horse-men skirmished betwixt the two Campes, trying the Fortune of the Warre.The hardy at∣tempt of Theo∣dote. At the same time Theodote shewed the great courage of a true Etolen: For being by long experience acquainted with the Kings man∣ner of liuing, hee entred at the breake of day into the enemies Camp, and could not be discouered by his Countenance, for that it was yet darke: Neither did hee differ much from them in his Apparrell, for that they vsed diuers fashions of habits. Hauing formerly obserued the place where the Kings Tent was planted, for that they had fought often neere vnto the Campe, hee went directly to it. When hee had past vnknowne, and was come secretly to the Tent, in the which the King did vsually eate and drinke: Where casting his lookes carefully a∣bout him, he saw him not, (for he was lodged in a place retired behind it) so as hee wounded two that were lodged there,Andrew the Kings hysitia slae. and killing Andrew the Kings Phisition, hee retired without danger to his Campe, bring∣ing his enterprize to an end by his hardy courage: But deceiued in his fore-sight, for that hee had not well obserued the place where as Pto∣lomy did vsually lye. When the Kings had continued in Campe fiue daies together, one before the other, they resolued in the end to giue Battaile. Ptolomy beginning to draw his Army out of his Fort, Antiochus suddainely did the like: And they planted their two chiefe Battalions in Front one against the other,The order of Ptolomes Army in Battaile. armed after the Macedonian manner. Behold the order which Ptolomy held for the two Wings: Polycrates was in the right Wing, with the Horse-men that were vnder his charge: Betwixt the which and the great Battalion, were the Candyots placed neere vn∣to the Horse-men. After which was the Kings battalion, and subse∣quently those that were armed with Targets, whereof Socrates had the Commaund: And finally the Lybians armed after the Macedonian manner. Vppon the right Wing was Echecrates of Thessaly, hauing with him his Troupe of Horses After which were appointed the Ga∣lates and Thracians; and then Phoxide with the Mercenaries of Greece; being followed by the great Battalion of the Egyptians. Hee had also placed forty Elephants on the left Wing, with the which Ptolomy were before the right Wing, neere vnto the horse-men that were hired. Antiochus on the other side, placed on the right Wing (with the which hee was resolued to fight in Battaile against Ptolomy) threescore Ele∣phants:The order of Antiochus his Battail▪ Of which his companion Philip had the Charge. After these hee orders two thousand Horse vnder the leading of Antipater, and sets the Candyots in Front, neere vnto the Horse-men: Then hee ap∣points the Mercenaries of Greec, and after then were fiue thousand men, who armed after the Macedonian manner, had Byttice for their Captaine. As for the left Wing, hee placed two thousand horses in Front, vnder the Commaund of Temison: Neere vnto which hee sets
the Cardaces and Lydien Horse-men, and after them three Thousand men lightly armed, vnder the charge of Menedemus: in whose Reare were the Cissiens, Mediens, and Carmaniens: And after them the A∣rabians were ioyned to the great Battalion. Finally, hee sets before the left Wing the rest of the Elephants, giuing them for their Guide one Myisce a Houshold seruant to the King. The two Armies being thus in battaile, the Kings beganne to en∣courage their Troupes, being accompanied with their Captaines and friends, commending the valour of the Souldiers both in generall and particular: And hauing great hope of their Battalions, they propoun∣ded great benefits which would redowne by the Victory. Ptolomy had with him his sister Arsinoe, with Andromachus and Soibius, who en∣couraged the Souldiers: And Theodote and Nicarchus were with An∣tiochus, for that of either side they were the Commaunders of the two great Battalions. They were both of one humour to make Speeches vnto their men, and yet neither of them had done any thing worthy of fame or praise to be propounded, for that they were newly come vnto their Principallities. Wherefore they laboured to encourage their Troupes, in reducing to their memory the glory and prowesse of their Ancestors: And propounding moreouer a hope of themselues for the future, they intreated and solicited the Captaines to fight, and to vndergoe the danger resolutely and with courage. These were the speeches or such like, which they vsed in person, or by their In∣terpreters. This done, the two Kings marcht one against the other, a slow pace. Ptolomy was in the left Wing,A Battaile betwixt Ptolomy and Antiochus. and Antiochus in the right with his royal Battalion. Then the Trumpets sounded to Battaile, whereof the first Charge was made by the Elephants. Few of Ptolomes held good a∣gainst those of the Enemy, whose Souldiers fought valliantly, casting of Darts, Pertwisans, and plummets of lead, wounding one another. But the Elephants made a stronger Warre;The Combate of the Ele∣phants. beating their Heads furi∣ously together: For such is the manner of their fight, assailing one a∣nother with their teeth, and standing firme they repulse one another with great Violence: But if they once turne their sides they wound with their Teeth, as Buls do with their Hornes. But the greatest part of Ptolomes feared the Combate:The Elephants of Lybia feare them of India. the which doth vsually happen to the Elephants of Lybia: For they cannot indure the sent, not heare the crye of those of India. So as fearing (as it seemes) their greatnesse and force, they flye them, as it happened at that time, for that flying suddainly they brake the rankes of their owne men, and made a great slaughter in Ptolomes great Battallion. The which Antiochus perceiuing, hee presently chargeth Polycrates Horse-men with the Elephants. The Grecians about his great Battalli∣on fell vpon Ptolomes Targetteers. Wherefore when the Elephants had broken them, his left Wing beganne to turne head. When Eche∣crates Commaunder of the right Wing, (expecting still the Combate of the sayd Wings) saw the Dust rise in the Ayre, and that his Ele∣phants durst not charge the Enemies, he sends to Phoxide Captaine of
the Mercenaries to charge those which he had in Front: The which he did likewise, marching a slow pace with the Horse-men and the E∣lephants. There the Combate was long and furious: yet Echecrates being freed from the danger of the Elephants, and making a great slaughter of the Horse-men, and withall Phoxide pressing the Ara∣bians and Medes. In the end Antiochus his left wing was put to flight. By this meanes Antiochus right wing vanquished, and the left fled. The two great Battalions stood firme and vntoucht, being in doubt of the end. And when as Ptolomy in the meane time had recouered his great Troupe by his speedy running, and was in the middest of them, hee amazed his Enemies, and gaue great courage vnto his owne Captaines and Souldiers. In the meane time King Antiochus being young and of small experi∣ence in the Warre, seeing himselfe Victorious of the one side, thought the like of the rest, and pursued the Chase of the Enemy with great eagernesse. But when as one of his old Souldiers cald him backe, and shewed him the Dust which a great Troupe had raisde in his Fort, hee then knew what it meant: and turning head he laboured to recouer his Campe. But when hee found that all his Army was in Rout,Ptolomes Victo∣ry against Antiochus. then wanting good Counsell he fled to Raphia, immagining that it was not his fault hee had not obtained a glorious and Triumphant Victory, and that the basenesse and sloath of his men had beene the cause of his de∣feate. Ptolomy hauing the Victory by the meanes of his chiefe Batta∣lion, and hauing lost many of his Horse-men and Souldiers of the right Wing, hee returned to his Campe, and refresht his Army. The next day, he caused his men to be sought out among the Dead, and buried. From thence (after they had stript the Enemies that were slaine) hee marcht with his Army to Raphia. And although that Antiochus (ga∣thering together his men that fled) had a desire to keepe his Campe, and to leaue the Towne, yet he was forced to goe to Raphia: For that the greatest part of his Souldiers were retired thither. The next day earely in the morning, he parts with that small Army, which he had remaining after so great a defeate, and went to Gaza: Where planting his Campe, he sent men to demaund the dead bodies, and to interre them. Antiochus lost aboue ten Thousand foote, and three hundred Horse. There were about foure thousand foote-men taken aliue. In regard of the Elephants, there were three slaine vpon the fielde, and two wounded which dyed afterwards: most of the rest were taken. This was the ende of that famous battaile, where as two powerfull and might Kings fought for the Empire of Syrria, neere vnto Raphia. When as Antiochus had buried the dead, hee returned into his Countrey with his Army. As for Ptolomy, hee presently recouered Raphia, with the other Citties, so as the people contended who should preuent his neighbour, in yeilding first vnto the King. In such euents euery man striues to apply himselfe vnto the time. It is true, that the people of that Countrey are borne and inclined to imbrace the faour
of the present time. But for asmuch as the people had a special deuotion to the Kings of Alexandria, what they then did was held iust and rea∣sonable. The people of base Syrria haue alwaies affected this royall House. And therefore they honoured Ptolomy, with Flowers, Sa∣crifices, Altars, and such like things. When as Antiochus was come to the Citty,Antiochus sends Embassadours to Ptolomy. which is called by his owne name, he presently sent his Nephew Antipater with Theodote Hermioly in Embassi to Ptolomy, to demaund a peace of him: For without doubt hee feared his forces, neither did hee much relie vpon his owne souldiers, considering the losse which hee had lately made. Hee likewise doubted that Acheus might mooue Warre against him, considering the opportunity of the time and occasion. As for Ptolomy, hee thought not of all this: But beeing ioyfull of so great a Fortune, which hee expected not, holding himselfe happy to enioy all Syrria, hee refused not the conditions of peace. So as being lull'd a sleepe with this base kinde of life, which hee had alwaies vsed, his heart was much inclined thereunto. When the Embassa∣dours presented themselues vnto him, he granted them a peace for a yearl, after that hee vsed some proud speeches against Antiochus. To whom he sent Sosibius with them to confirme the Accord.An Accord made betwixt Ptolomy and Antiochus. And after hee had stayed about some three moneths in Syrria and Phnicea, and had giuen order for the Citties, leauing the charge of all those places to Andromachus Aspendius, he returned with his sister and Friends to Alexandria. On the other side Antiochus (after hee had confirmed the Accord with Sosibius, and pacified all things to his liking) beganne to make preparation for Warre against Aches, according to his first Re∣solution and determination. This was the estate of Asia at that same present. At the same time the Rhodiens taking their occasion from an Earth∣quake, which a little before had befalne them,An Earthquake at Rhodes. in the which the great Collossus, with a great part of the Pipes and Arsenals were ruined, they carried themselues so discreetly and wisely, as this ruine did not seeme preiudiciall vnto them, but very profitable. Ignorance and simplicity differs so much from Prudence and Industry, not only in a priuate life, but also in publique Affaires, that ease and plenty seeme to procure losse and preiudice to the one, and aduersities excuse the faults and errours of the other. The Rhodiens made these things great and ruinous, and labouring to sent Embassadours to all places, they did so mooue the Citties and likewise Kings, as they not onely drew great gifts from them, but they had them in such sort, as they which gaue them held themselues beholding vnto them.Presnts made to the Rhodiens by many Cities. Hieron and Gelon did not onely giue them fiue and forty Thousand Crownes, to repaire the place ordayned for all Exercises (one part to be payed presently and the rest soone after:) but they also gaue them Caldons of siluer, with their Treuets, and pots for water. Moreo∣uer sixe thousand Crownes to performe the Sacrifices: And others sixe thousand to relieue the Burgesses: So as the whole present amounted to threescore thousand Crownes. Moreouer all that sail'd to Rhodes
were free from Tribute. They gaue them likewise fifty Slings or Warlike Engines: Finally they aduanced Images in the most eminent places of Rhodes, as if they were beholding vnto them; where the people of Rhodes were Crowned with that of Sarragosse.Ptolomy hipre sent to the Rho∣diens. Ptolomy promised them nine score thousand Crownes: A million of Artabes of Wheate, which is a measure of Media: Timber to make sixe Quinqueremes, and ten Triremes, and about forty thousand Fathomes of Rope, and three thousand Masts and Sailes, and to repaire the Collossus nine score thou∣sand Crownes, a hundred Architects, three hundred and fifty worke∣men, and for their Victuals seauen Thousand and foure hundred Crownes by the yeare. Twelue thousand Artabes of Wheate, for those which should make the Combats in their Games and Sacrifices: And twenty Thousand Artabes for the victualling of ten Triremes. Of which things he deliuered the greatest part of them presently, with the third part of the money. Moreouer Antigonus gaue them Timber from eight vnto fifteene Fa∣thome,The ist of A∣tionus to the Rhodiens. with fiue thousand plankes aboue twelue foote long, and two hundred three score and ten thousand weight of Iron, foure score and ten thousand pound weight of Rossine, and a thousand bushels of pitch: And withall hee promised them three score thousand Crownes ouer∣plus. Chrysea (who was a woman) gaue them a hundred Thousand Bushels of Wheate,Chryseas git. with two hundred three score and ten Thousand pound weight of Lead.Seleucus his prsent. Seleucus father to Antiochus, sent them ten Quinqueremes Armed and furnished, and that they which fail'd to Rhodes should be free: Hee gaue them likewise two hundred Bushels of Corne with Timber and Pitch, and ten thousand Fathomes of Cord made with haire, and sixe hundred thousand Crownes. Prustas and Mithridates did the like: So did all the Princes of Asia, as Lysannius, Olympiquus, Lymnius and others. Finally wee cannot number the Townes which gaue presents to the Rhodiens, euery one according to their power. And if any man will obserue the time and the beginning, when as this Citty was first Inhabited, he will wonder much, that in so short a time it is so much augmented both in priuate and Publique. But when we consider the Commodity of the place, and the great fe∣licity which doth grow from Forreiners, and their plentifull reuenew; there is no more any cause of admiration: Being certaine that this get∣ting of Wealth is made with reason and iudgement. We haue thought it fit to relate these things. First, for the loue of the Rhodiens, to the end that their industry and care for the Affaires of their Common-wealth might bee knowne to all the World, for in truth they are worthy of commendation and loue. Secondly, for the auarice of our Kings at this day, and the wretchednesse of people and Townes: Who when they haue giuen two or three thousand Crownes, immagine they haue made a great stately Present, and looke for such thankes and honours as were giuen to the Ancient Kings of Greece▪ Or let the Townes remember the great bounty of the ancient presents, least they loose those great honours in making such petty gits, and let them striue to preserue their dig∣nity:
To the end that the people and inhabitants of Greece may differ from other men. When in the beginning of Summer, Agote being then Chiefe of the Etoliens, and the time of Epirates Gouernement ouer the Acheins being expired, (in my opinion this is the passage, where we last turn'd from the Warre of the Allies) Lycurgus the Lacedemonian returned from Etolia:Lycurgus cal∣led home▪ For the Magistrates called him home as soone as they found the accusation, for the which he was banished to be false. Hee was then sent to Pyrrhie the Etolian, who at that time was Captaine of the Eliences, against the Messeniens. Arate found the trained men of Acheia ill disciplined, and the Townes carelesse of the duties of War: For that Epirate, who before him had the Gouernment, had (as wee haue sayd) carried himselfe idly and carelesly in all things. But when he had acquainted the Acheins therewith, and receiued their order, he applied himselfe wholy to the preparation of the Warre.Arate prepares for the Warre. Their De∣cree was, that they should not leuy lesse then eight thousand Aduen∣turers, and fiue hundred Horse: They should also make three thou∣sand Foote Acheins, and three hundred Horse: Among the which the Megalopolitains should march, armed with Targets of Copper, to the number of fiue hundred foote and fifty Horse, and as many Argiues. It was also ordered that they should prepare three Shippes in the Gulfe of Argos, and as many neere vnto Patres and Dyme. Arate was then carefull to leuy men, and to make ready the Army. Lycurgus and Pyrrhie after they had appointed a day for their departure, tooke their way to Messene: Whereof the Chiefe of the Acheins being aduerti∣sed, hee came to Megalopolis with the Aduenturers, and some of those of the Election, to succour the Messeniens. Lycurgus on the other side entring the Messeniens Countrey,Calames taken in Treason by Lycurgus. tooke the Towne of Calames by Treason: And from thence going on his course, hee made hast to ioyne with the Etoliens. When as Pyrrhie came to Elis ill accompanied, to assaile the Messeniens, he turned head presently, being repuls'd by the Cyparisseins. Wherefore Lycurgus tooke his way to Sparta, hauing done nothing worthy of memory, for that hee could not ioyne with Pyrrhie, neyther was hee strong enough to mannage the Warre alone. Arate seeing the Enemies frustrated of their hope, and thereby fore-seeing the future, hee commaunded Taurion to prepare fifty Horse, and fiue hundred foote, and that the Messeni∣ens should send as many, meaning with this force to defend the Mega∣lopolitains, Tegeates, and Argiues, from the incursions of their Ene∣mies: For that those Countries lye more in danger of the Lacedemoni∣ans during the Warre, ioyning vpon the Spartains Countrey. Finally, he resolued to Guard Acheia, with the Acheins and Mercenaries, from the danger of the Elyences and Etoliens. This done, hee pacified the Discord, which was growne among the Megalopolitains, according vn∣to that which the Acheins had ordered. For you must vnderstand that the Megalopolitains, beeing a little before chased out of their owne Countrey by Cleomenes, had neede of many things which were wanting: And although they still maintained
their authority,A Mutiny a∣mong the Me∣galopolitains. yet they had neither victuals nor necessary expences, ei∣ther for the publique or priuate: So as all was full of mutiny, rage, and malice. The which doth vsuall fall out in Common-weales, and among priuate persons, when as victuals faile. First they were in debate among themselues concerning the walls of the City, some being of opinion that that they should not make the inclosure greater, then their power would then beare, and keepe it with so small a number of men, considering it had bin the cause of their former danger, for that it was greater and more spacious then the power of the Inhabitants was able to defend. Moreo∣uer, they were of aduice, that such as had Lands, should contribute the third part, to the end they might people the City: Others said, that they must not giue a lesse circuite to the City, nor contribute the third part of their possession: But their chiefest contention was concerning the Laws written by Pritanides, an excellent man among the Peripatetiques, whom Antigonus had giuen them for a Law-giuer. The City being in these combustions, Arate pacified them, and quencht the quarrels which were inflamed among the Megalopolitains, as well publique as priuate. Finally they haue grauen the Articles agreed vpon on a Pillar seated in the Oma∣rie, at the Altar of Vesta. After the reconciliation of the Megalopolitains, Arate parting from thence, retired presently to an Assembly of the A∣cheins, leauing the Aduenturers with Selcuous of Phare. The Elienses incensed against Pirrhie, as if he had not discharged his duty, they called Euripides from Etolia to be their Captaine. Who con∣sidering that the Acheins held their Diet, tooke sixe hundred Horse, and two thousand Foote, and went suddainly to Field, where he spoild the whole Countrey vnto Egia: And when he had taken a great booty, he made haste to returne to Leonce. Lyce hearing this, went to meete them, and encountred them suddainly: when they came to fight, hee slew foure hundred, and tooke two hundred Prisoners:Lyce defeate Euripides. Among the which were found Phissias, Antanor, Glearcus, Euanorides, Aristogites, Nicasippus, and Aspasias, men of note: and withall he had all their Armes and Baggage. At the same time the Captaine of the Sea-army for the Acheins came to Molicria, and parting thence suddainly, he turned his way to Calcea:chalcea spoild by the Achei Fleete. where when as the Townes-men came out against him, he tooke two Gallies armed, and furnished with all things necessary, with many other smaller vessels. Moreouer, he tooke great spoiles both by Sea and Land, and drew victuals from thence, with other munition: wherewith hee made the Souldiers more hardy and resolute for the future. On the o∣ther side the Cities were in better hope, for that they were not forced to furnish victuals for the Souldiers. In the meane time Scerdilaide hol∣ding himselfe wrong'd by the King, for that he had not giuen him his full pay, as he had articulated with Philip, sent fifteene Vessels vnder a counterfeite shew of carrying Merchandizes, the which at their first ar∣riuall to Leucade, were kindely entertained, as Friends in regard of the League with the King. And when they could doe no worse, they tooe Agatin and Cassander of Corinthe,Agatin and Cassander taken by Scordilaide▪ who as Friends were entred into the same Port with foure ships: Being thus taken with their Vessels, they sent
them presently to Scerdilaide. This done, they weighed Anchor from Leucade, bending their course towards Maleu, spoiling all the Merchants. In the beginning of Summer, when the Souldiers of Tarion were negli∣gent in the guard of the said Cities, Arate hauing with him the choise of the Army, came into the Country of Argos to get victuals. On the other side Euripides going to Field with a good number of Etoliens, wasted the Country of the Tritenses. Lyceus and Demodochus particular Cap∣taines of the Acheins, aduertised of the descent of the Etoliens, drew to∣gether the Dimenses, Patrenses, and Pharenses, with the Aduenturers, and ouer-ran the Country of the Etoliens. Being come to a place which they call Phixia, they sent their Foot-men that were lightly armed, with their Horse-men to ouer-run the Champaigne Country, and log'd their men that were best armed in Ambush thereabouts. When the Elienses came to charge them without order to succour their people, passing the Am∣bush, Lyceus Company fell vpon them:A defeate of the Elienses by Lyceus. whose fury they being vnable to resist, fled, so as there were about two hundred slaine, and foure score ta∣ken Prisoners with all the Booty. At the same time the Commander of the Acheins Sea-army, hauing sailed often to Calidon and Naupacte, spoiled the whole Countrey, and chased the Enemy twice. He also tooke Cleonice of Naupacte, who for that he was a friend to the Acheins, had no harme: but within few daies after was freed without ransome. At the same time Agete Chiefe of the Etoliens, assembled a Troupe of them, putting the Country of the Acar∣nanians to fire and sword, and spoiled the Country of Epirus. This done, he returnes home, giuing leaue to the Souldiers to retire to their houses. Afterwards the Acarnanians made a descent into the Country of Strate: where being repuls'd by the Enemy, they made a shamefull retreate, yet without any losse; for that the Stratenses durst not pursue them, fearing an Ambush. At the same time there was a Treason practised in the Country of the Phanotenses after this manner. Alexander Gouernour of Phosis for Philip, laide a plot for the Etoliens by a certaine man called Iason, to whom he had giuen the gouernment of the Phanotenses. He was sent to Agete Chiefe of the Etoliens, promising to deliuer the For∣tresse of Phanotenses vnto him: whereupon they agree and sweare to∣gether. When the day appointed was come, Agete comes in the Night with the Etoliens: when he had laid his Troupe in Ambush, he made choise of a hundred men,The Etoliens circumuented by a Stratagem. whom he sent to the Fort. Iason hauing Alexander ready with him, with a sufficient number of Souldies, receiues the companions into the Fortresse, according to the accord: whom Alexander charged with his Company, and tooke all the Etoliens. But when day was come, Agete assured of the fact, carried backe his Army into his Country, ha∣uing worthily deserued this deceipt, for that he had many times practi∣sed the like.Bylazon taken. At the same time Philip tooke Bylazon, which is a great Towne in Peonia, and in a good scituation for the entry from Dardania into Macedony. By this meanes he freed them from all feare of the Dardanians, who could not make any incursions into Macedony, the entry being stopt
by the taking of the said Towne: whereas placing a good Garrison, he sent Chrysagonus with great speed into high Macedony, to make anew le∣uie of men. As for himselfe he tooke some men and went into Beocia, and Amphaxate, and came to Edesa: where expecting Chrysogonus with the Macedonians, he parted presently after with the whole Army, and came to Larissa on the sixt day: And pursuing his course from thence all night, he arriued at Melitea, the which he indeauoured to take by Scalado, and if the Ladders had not beene something too short, without doubt he had preuailed in his Enterprize: wherein the Commanders are chiefely to be blamed. For when some of them make haste rashly and inconsiderate∣ly to take Townes,The indiscreti∣on of Cōman∣ders blamed. without any fore-sight or consideration of the walls, vallies and such like, by the which they attempt the taking by an assault, who will not blame them? And although they haue duely considered of all things, yet who will not taxe them to giue the charge to the first man they meet, to prepare ladders, & such like instruments, as a thing of small consequence? Finally, in such actions they must doe that which is neces∣sary, or else fall into danger. For the losse doth often follow the despaire, and in many kinds: First the ablest men are in danger of the attempt, e∣specially vpon the retreate, when they begin to disdaine them Whereof there are many examples. And you shall find in such attempts many fru∣strated, some defeated, others to haue bin in extreame danger: And they they which haue saued themselues, haue bin subiect for the future to dis∣trust and hatred: and some haue serued for an example, to all others to be vigilant, giuing not only to such as were present at the danger, but also to them that heare of it, some kind of admonishment to be careful of them∣selues. Wherefore they must neuer make vse of such aduice rashly: In re∣gard of the meanes to vse it wel, it is secure if they follow reason. We must now returne to our discourse, and speake thereon hereafter, when occasion shall be offred, and that it is not possible to faile in such enterprizes. Philip preuented in his enterprizes, plants his Campe neare vnto the Riuer of Empe, and sent his men to Larissa, and other Townes, whom he had leuied in the winter for the Siege: For all his designe was to take Thebes. It is a Towne scituated neare to the Sea,The scituation of Thebes. ans about 300. Furlongs from Larissa. It confines fitly with Magnesia and Thessaly: To the one side called Demetriade: And to Thessaly on that part where the Pharsaliens and Pherenses dwell. This City doth much annoy the Phar∣saliens and Demetriens: For that the Etoliens held it at that time: The like they did to them of Larissa: for the Etoliens made many incursions into the Country which the Inhabitants call Namirice. Wherefore Philip considering that such things ought not to be neglected, and left behind, he sought all meanes to take it. Wherefore he prouided a hundred slings and fiue and twenty great Cros-bowes, and approached the City of Thebes with his Army, the which he diuided into three Troups, and be∣sieged it on three sides: whereof he placed the one neere vnto Scopia,Thebes besieged by Philip. the other at Heliotropia, and the third neare vnto the Mountaine which lookes into the City: Fortifying the spaces in the Field with Ditches and double Pallisadoes. Moreouer he built Towers of wood in euery space of two Acres of ground with sufficient guards.
Then he drawes together all the preparation for the War, and begins to plant his Engins of Battery against the Fort. Yet the three first dayes he could not make his approaches to set vp his Engines, so great was the courage and resolution of those which fought vpon the walls. But after that by the combat, and by the multitude of Darts, part of the Burgesses were slain, and others wounded, and that the besieged ceased for a time, the Macedonians began to mine: where working continually, although the ground were bad, they approached vnto the wall on the ninth day. From that time they were continually imployed in battering the Cit∣ty: so as the Slings and great Cros-bowes euer ceased day nor night: And within three daies they made a breach of foure score Fathomes in the wall. And when the supporters made vnto the wall, were not able to beare the burthen, they fell, and brought the wall downe with them, be∣fore the Macedonians had set them on fire. This being done, when as their courages encreased, and that they made shew to enter,Thebes yeelded to Philip. and begin an assault, the Thebins being amazed, yeelded themselues and their Citty. When as Philip had by this meanes assured the Countries of Magnesia and Thessaly, he tooke the best of the Etoliens goods, and thrust the an∣cient Inhabitants out of the towne, re-peopling it with Macedonians, and changing its name of Thebes, he called it Philiopolis. Whilest that Philip stayed in this City, there came Embassadours from Chios, Rhodes, Con∣stantinople, and from King Ptolomy. Whom when he had answered,Embassadours come to Philip. as he had formerly done, (that he had beene alwaies willing to hearken to a peace) he sent them away, giuing them charge to vnderstand the will of the Etoliens. For his part he made no reckoning of peace, being resolued to continue his attempts. Wherefore being aduertised, that the Vessels of Scerdilaide spoild all the Coast of Malea, and that hee intreated the Merchants as Enemies, and that moreouer he had taken (breaking the ac∣cord) some ships at Leucade, he armes twelue Vessels couered, and eight open, and sailes by the Euripus, hauing likewise thirty Merchants Ves∣sels, hoping to take the Sclauonians: neither did he neglect the Etolien War, for that he was not yet aduertised of the actions which had past in Italy. For at such time as Philip held Thebes besieged, the Romans had beene vanquished by Hannibal in Tuscany: But the newes were not yet come into Greece. When Philip had taken the Sclauonian Vessels, and for this cause had sailed into Cenchrea, he caused the ships that were couered to run along the Coasts of Malea towards Egia and Patres, and stayes the rest of the Vessels in the Port of Leche. Then he makes haste to goe to the Nemeen Game, and arriued at Argos. Being at the sight, he had letters from Ma∣cedony to aduertise him that the Romans had bin vanquished by Hannibal with a wonderfull defeate, and that they were masters of their Campe. He presently shews it only to Demetrius, charging him to keepe it secret. Who taking his occasion thereby, began to intreate the King that in dis∣patching the Etolien War speedily, he would attend that of the Sclauoni∣ans, for that al Greece then obeyed him: The which they would do here∣after: For that the Acheins affected him, and the Etoliens feared his for∣ces, considering the losses they had made during this War: and that as
for Italy, the voyage which he should make, would be a beginning to conquer the Monarchy, the which did more iustly belong to him then to any other, and that moreouer the opportunity was great for the pre∣sent, considering the great defeate of the Romans which Hanibal had made. Demetrius vsing these meanes, perswaded the King, who was but young, and of a high spirit, and too desirous of rule. Afterwards Philip called his Councell, and began to aduise touching a peace with the Etoliens. To the which Arate would willingly haue assisted: the King presently sent Cleomice from Naupacte to the Etoliens, not expecting the Embassadours, to propound publiquely the Conditi∣ons of a Peace: For he found Arate after the taking of Thebes, attending the Diet of the Acheins. In the meane time he tooke ships at Corinthe, with the Bands of Foot men, and came to Egia, and from thence to Las∣sion, whereafter he had taken a Tower in the Peripes, hee made shew to enter into the Elienses Countrey: to the end they should not thinke that he much affected a peace. And when as Cleomice had returned twice or thrice, and that the Etoliens intreated the King to goe vnto them, he willingly yeelded thereunto. Then sending Letters speedily to all the Townes of the Allies, the great fire of the Warre being now quencht, he aduertised them to send Embassadours to compound and make a peace with the Etoliens. And in the interim he transports his Ar∣my, and planted his Campe neare vnto Panormus, which is a Port of Mo∣rea right against Naupacte, expecting the Embassadours of the Allies. Whilest they assembled, he went to Zacynthe, and pacified the differen∣ces of that Island, then suddainly he returned to the same place. When the Embassadours were met, he sent Arate and Taurion with some others to the Etoliens, who being come vnto them (for they were assembled at Neupacte) they had some conference: where vnderstanding the desire they had of peace, they returned speedily to Philip, and aduertised him thereof. The Etoliens desiring it wonderfully, sent an Embassie with them vnto the King, intreating him to come vnto them with his Army, to the end their differences might be the better and sooner decided. Philip wone by their intreaties, sailed with his forces to a place twenty furlongs from Naupacte. There landing with his men, after he had forti∣fied his Campe and ships with Ditches and Pallisadoes, hee stayed the comming of the Etoliens. Who came vnto the King without Armes: And making a stand two Furlongs from his Campe, they presently sent men to conferre of the differences which they had at that time. The King sent first vnto them all those which were there present for the alli∣ed Cities,A peace be∣twixt Philip and the Eloliens giuing them charge to conclude a peace with them, vpon con∣dition, that hereafter euery man should keepe that which he presently held. And when they had so concluded, they afterwards sent many Mes∣sages for the particular actions of either side. Of which things we haue willingly omitted the greatest part, for that there is nothing seemes wor∣thy of memory yet I haue thought good to relate in few words the re∣monstrances which Agelaus of Naupacte made to the King & the Allies. When he was allowed to speake,The Speech of Agelaus. and that all men were attentiue to heare him: It is needfull (saith he) the Grecians should haue no Warre
among themselues, and they should giue thankes vnto the Gods, if all with one accord (like vnto those which passe the Riuers holding hands) may be able to repulse the attempts of the Barbarians, and defend them∣selues and their Citties: and if this cannot be continually entertained, yet at the least they should at this day apply themselues vnto it, for that Greece was neuer in great danger: saying that he considered the great Armies, and the great Warre which would soone follow: making no doubt▪ that if the Carthaginians did vanquish the Romans in Italy, or the Romans them, neither the one nor the other would content them∣selues with the Empire of Sicily or Italy: But the Victors would pre∣sently extend themselues farther then were fit, and would passe towards the East. Wherefore they must all prouide for it, and especially Philip. The which he can no otherwise doe, but in quenching this present War, and cease to torment the Citties of Greece: And that contrariwise he haue a care of all, as of one Body, and study for the safety thereof in generall as his owne, and subiect vnto him. Doing which all the Grecians will loue him, and sight with him like good men in his future Warres: And finally the Barbarians fearing the loyalty of the Grecians towards him, will not attempt any thing against his Empire. The which if hee had a desire to enlarge, he must attempt against the Westerne Countries, and consider in what estare the affaires of Italy now stand, and that more∣ouer the time was come, when he might easily hope for the Empire of all the world. To effect the which he should be the lesse troubled, for that the Romans had beene defeated by Hannibal at the Lake of Perousa. Finally, he perswades the King to exchange the Warre and Discords of Greece into Peace and Concord, and that he should striue with all his power to keepe himselfe at liberty for the future, that he might be able to make Peace and Warre when he pleased. Moreouer, he sayd, that if he suffred this Cloud which they saw arising towards the West, of a cruell and mortall Warre once to approach neere the Countries of Greece, he feared much that these Quarrels and Contentions which were amongst them, would be found so farre out of their power, as they would not be able to pray vnto the Gods to haue meanes to make War or Peace at their pleasure. When as Agelaus had ended his Speech, he inflamed the hearts of the Allies to peace, and especially Philip: for that moued by the words of Demetrius, he had fixt his minde vpon it. Wherefore they all with one accord made a peace with the Etoliens. The which being confir∣med, they retired all into their Countries. These things were done in the third yeare of the hundred and fortieth Olympiade: I meane that Bat∣taile which the Romans gaue in Tuscany, with the warre of Antiochus in Syrria, and the peace made betwixt the Etoliens, Philip and the Acheins. Behold the time wherein the Warres of Greece, Italy, and Asia were first intermixt. For after that day neither Philip, nor the other Princes of Greece attempted any thing either for Warre or Peace, but had their eyes wholly fixed vpon Italy. Soone after the Ilands of Asia did the like, and all they which were either Enemies vnto
Philip, or any way opposite vnto Attalus, retyred not to Antiochus, nor vnto Ptolomy, nor to the Southerne or Easterne parts, but all vn∣to the West. Some solicited the Carthaginians, other did the like to the Romans by continuall Embassies. The Romans likewise fearing the po∣wer and courage of Phillip, sent Embassadours into Greece. And as we haue according to our first resolution, plainly set down, as I conceiue, when and how, and for what causes the Affaires of Greece are intermixt with the Italians and Lybians, as it were in one body: we must now pur∣sue the Actions of Greece, vntil we come to the time when as the Romans were vanquished and defeated neere vnto Cannes by the Carthaginians: For there wee haue left the actions of Italy, and haue written in this Booke and the precedent, the proceeding of the same time in Greece and Asia. The Warre being ended,Tymoxines Chiefe of the Acheins. when the Acheins had made choice of Ty∣moxines for their head and Gouernour, resuming their ancient kind of liuing, they gaue order by little and little for their Common-wealth: The like did the other Cities of Morea: So as they laboured their lands and restored their Games and Sacrifices to the Gods. All which things were in a manner forgotten by reason of the continuall warre. It is cer∣taine that as they of Morea among all other men are inclined to a milde and curteous kind of life, the which in precedent times they did not enioy: Being as Euripides saith, alwaies tormented by their neighbours, and without rest. Yet it seemeth reasonable for, for all they which tend to a Principallity, and haue their liberty in recommendation, haue con∣tinuall quarrels amongst them, they tending to a superintendency. The Athenians freed from the feare of the Macedonians, seemed to liue in great Liberty: but following the besenesse of their Commaunders Eu∣riclides and Micion, they payed Tribute in a manner to all Kings, and namely to Ptolomy, who soone after that time made Warre against the Egyptians.The Athenians abandon Pto∣lomy. For as hee had beene assisted in the Warre against Antio∣chus, they presently abandoned him: For that growne proud with the Battaile giuen neere vnto Raphia, they would no more obey the King, seeking only a Commaunder, as if they had beene able of themselues to mannage the Warre: the which was soone after done. Antiochus during Winter had leuied a great Army,Antiochus pas∣seth Mount Tauris. and the Summer following past Mount Tauris: where making a League with King Atta∣lus, he renewed the Warre against Acheus. And although the Etoliens found the peace good in the beginning, for that the Warre had taken a better end then they expected: Hauing chosen Agelaus of Naupacte for their Chiefe Commaunded, by whose meanes the peace had ensu∣ed: yet after some time they blamed him much,The Etoliens blame Agelaut for making of the peace. complayning that by his meanes they had lost the great profits they had drawne from Forreine parts: For that he had made a peace, not onely with some Prouinces, but generally with all Greece. But Agelaus bearing their blame with patience abated their fury: And so they were forced con∣trary to their nature to pacifie their Choler. Scerdilaide vnder colour of money due vnto him,The Exploits of Scerdilaide. had spoild all those he met, and (as we haue sayd) had taken shippes of Leucade, and had
rifled a Towne in Pelagonia, which they call Pissea, with diuers other Citties of Dassarete, as Antipatria, Chrissndion, and Gertonte: Ha∣uing moreouer gained a good part of Macedony, aswell by perswasi∣ons, as by force. Philip after the peace concluded, hauing imbarqued himselfe and his Army to saile thither, and to encounter Scerdilaide, he tooke land being wholy bent to recouer the sayd Townes. Finally, when he had fully resolued to make Warre against Scerdilaide, holding it necessary to Conquer Sclanouia,Demetrius his aduice to Philip. as well for other Enterprizes, as chiefly for his passage into Italy. The which is an aduice, whereof Demetrius labou∣red to make him susceptible, saying that he had seene Philip do so in a Dreame. He did not presse this for any loue he bare him, but for the hatred he had to the Romans: Thinking by this meanes to recouer the Country about Pharos, from whence he had beene expell'd. Phi∣lip recouered all the sayd Townes, approaching neere them with his Army: For in Dassarate, hee tooke Creone and Geronte, and neere vnto the Fennes of Lychnide, Enchelane, Cerece, Sation, and Boies: and Bantia in the Prouince of the Calicenins: and towards the Pissantins, and Orgysse. This done, he sent his Army to Winter. It was the same Winter when as Hannibal had spoiled the best Countries of Italy, and past his Winter in Dania, and the Romans making their Election, crea∣ted Gaius Terrentius, and Lucius Emilius Consuls. Whilest that Philip spent the Winter, he drew together a hundred Vessels, (which neuer King of Macedony had done before him) thinking it necessary to make prouision: Not so much for the Combate at Sea, (for that he did not hold himselfe equall in forces to answere the Ro∣mans) as to passe his Army into Italy. Summer being come, and the Macedonians in-vred to the Oare, hee parts with his Army. At the same time likewise Antiochus past Mount Tanris. Philip then passing by the Euripus and Malea,Philips enter∣prize against Sclauonia. came vnto the Countries which are about Ce∣phalenia and Leucade. Where planting his Campe, he fortified it with Ditches and Pallisadoes, for hee feared much the Sea Army of the Romans. But when he was aduertised by his Spies, that it was neere vnto Lylibeum, his Courage increased, and hee proceeded in his Enterprize, taking his course directly to Apolonia. When as hee was neere those Countries which are about the Riuer of Loia, which pas∣seth neere to Apolonia, he fell into the same feare which doth many times befall Armies at Land: For some of his Vessels which followed in the Reare, and had sailed towards an Iland called Sason, lying at the mouth of the Ionian gulfe, came by night to Philip, telling him that they had spoken with some of the Sycillian Sea, who aduertised them, that they had left the Roman Quinqueremes about Rhegium, ben∣ding their course to Apolonia and Scerdilaide.Philip leaues his Enterprize for feare. Philip immagining that the Army was not farre off, was amazed: And weighing Anchor re∣tired with great feare and disorder, hee came the next day to Cephale∣nia, sailing continually by night: Where assuring himselfe he stayed some time, making shew that his returne was for some pressing affaires in Morea.
It hapned that this was a false Allarum: For you must vnderstand that Scerdilaide aduertised of the great multitude of Vessels which Phi∣lip had drawne together in Winter, and fearing his comming by Sea, had obtained succours from the Romans by his Embassadours:Succours sent by the Romans to Scerdilaide. So as they sent him ten ships out of their Fleete which was at Lilybeum, the which passing neere vnto Rhegium were discouered. If the King had not beene amazed without reason, he might well haue vanquisht them, and performed his Enterprize against Sclauonia: And the rather for that the Romans had receiued a wonderfull losse neere vnto Cannes against Hannibal, where they were in a manner quite ruined. But being then terrified without cause, he made a safe flight into Macedony, and re∣mained infamous. At the same time Prusias did an Act worthy of memory: For when as the Gaules whom Attalus had drawne out of Europe into Asia for the Warre of Acheus, had abandoned him for the causes aboue mentio∣ned, they spoil'd all the Townes of Hellespont with too much auarice and cruelty. And when in the end they had besieged the Townes of the Elienses, then they of Alexandria neere vnto Troade, performed an Act worthy of memory: for sending Themiste against them with foure thousand men, they not onely rais'd the siege of the Elienses, but chast all the Gaules from Troade, aswell cutting off their Victuals, as disap∣pointing their dessignes. The Gaules hauing taken the Towne of Arisbe in the Country of the Abideniens, sought to surprize all their Neigh∣bours. Against whom Prusias was sent with an Army,Prusias defeat the Gaules. and giuing them Battaile he defeated them, killing women and Children, without any regard of Age or Sexe, and abandoned the spoile of their Campe to his Souldiers. By this meanes Hellesponte was freed from great feare, leauing for the future a good example to Barbarians, not to passe so easily out of Europe into Asia. These things were done at that time in Greece and Asia. In regard of Italy, many Townes yeilded to the Carthaginians, after the defeat of the Romans at the Battaile of Cannes. Finally, we will make an end here of the Histories of that time, seeing we haue suffici∣ently shewed in what Estate Asia and Greece were in the hundred and fortieth Olympiade. And hauing briefly related them in the following Booke, we will turne our Discourse to the Gouernment of the Romans, as we had resolued in the beginning. The end of the Fifth Booke of Polybius.
THE SIXT BOOKE OF the History of POLYBIVS. Concerning the diuers Formes of Gouernment. THe Declaration hath beene easie, by the which the Actions past are related, and the iudgement giuen of the future, touching the frequent increase of the Grecians Com∣mon-weales, and how againe they haue many times felt a totall alteration. Wee may without any trouble deliuer things knowne, and easily coniecture of the fu∣ture by the precedent. In regard of the Romans, it is difficult to iudge of the pre∣sent, for the variety of their Gouernment: Or to fore-tell the future, for the ignorance of the Actions, which (as proper to that Nation) haue beene in old time decided in publique and in priuate. VVherfore if any one will exactly know the diuersities, he had need of an excel∣lent iudgement and consideration of Actions. It is true, that they which by instruction would make vs know things, propound three kinds of Gouernment: Calling the first a Royalty, the second Aristocracia, and the third Democracia.A diuision of Gouernment. Yet in my opinion wee may with reason doubt of these things, whither they propound them vnto vs soly, or better then the other: For it seemes they are ignorant of eyther. It
is apparent that, that Gouernment should be held the best, which is composed of all the afore-sayd properties; whereof wee haue made proofe not only by reasons, but also in effect: For that Lycurgus hath first established the Lacedemonians Common-wealth in that manner. Neither must we thinke that these Gouernments are alone: For wee haue seene some Monarchiall and Tyrrannous, who although they dif∣fer much from a Royall, yet they seeme to haue something common with them: the which our Monarches imagine, vsurping with all their power the name of King. Moreouer the Olygarchicall Common-weales, which haue beene in great number, seeme to haue some cor∣respondency with the Aristocraticall; although they differ much. The like we must iudge of a Democracy. And to prooue it true, it will be apparent hereby. We must not hold a Monarchy for a Raigne: but onely that which is voluntary,A true Mo∣narchy. and gouerned more by a Common consent then by feare and violence. Neither must we hold euery Olygarchy for Aristocra∣cy; but that only which according to the Election is mannaged by the wifest and best men,A true Aristo∣cracy. neither must that be allowed for a Democracy, where as all the Commons haue power to do what they wil and please but where as the auncient custome and vse is to honour the Gods, to do good vnto their Parents, to reuerence old men, and to obey the Lawes. Then they will call a Common-weale Democraticall,A Democracy. when as the Commons shall accept of that which many allow of. Wherefore we must say that there are sixe kinds of Gouernments: We haue already spoken of three Common to all the World: The other three are neere vnto them,Sixe kinds of Gouernments. that is to say a Monarchy, Olygarchy, and Ochlocracy. The first whereof is a Monarchy, rising naturally without any esta∣blishment. From whence doth grow a Royall Gouernment,A Monarchical Gouernment of one alone by feare. by order and good direction. But when the Royall changeth into its neighbour vices, as into Tyranny, then by the abollishing thereof an Aristocracy takes its being: the which naturally changeth into Olygarchia. And when the Commons reuenge with fury the Gouernours iniustice, then growes a Democracia. For the outrages and iniquities whereof, in time it prooues an Ochlocracia. A man may vnderstand that these things plainly which I haue sayd, are true,Ochlocracia is a Gouernment of the mutiny of the people. if he knowes the beginning and the change of euery Gouern∣ment according to the course of Nature. For whosoeuer shall consi∣der either of them a part, and how they grow, may also iudge of their increase, force, and alteration; and when and how the one ends in the other. I haue beene of opinion that this kinde of Disputation and Ex∣position agreed well with the Roman Gouernment: For that by a cer∣taine course of Nature, it hath taken from the beginning its institution and increase. Peraduenture these alterations and changes of Gouerne∣ment from the one to the other, are more exactly handled by Plato, and some other Phylosophers. But for that they are disputed by them in many and diuers manners, it happens that few men vnderstand them, Wherefore wee will indeauour to comprehend them, and set them downe by certaine Articles, so as (according to our opinion) they may
be of consequence for the profite of the History, and all mens vnder∣standing. And if there be found for the present some defect in regard of the generall and Vniuersall declaration, the reasons which shalbe hereafter deliuered in perticular, will repaire it. What Principles then shall I assigne for gouernment? From whence shall I say they take their first growth and being? When mortallity fell vpon mankind by inundation of Waters,The beginning of gouerne∣ments. or by pestifferous Calamities, or by barren∣nesse of the Land, or by other such like causes (as we haue vnderstood hath beene, and in reason may often be hereafter) all Institutions and Artes were then lost: And when againe the multitude of men hath by succession of time taken increase, as it were from some remain∣der of seede; and that in regard of the weaknesse of their Natures they gathered together, euen as of Custome (as it is reasonable) other crea∣tures doe according to their kinds, it is then necessary that he obtaine the Principallity and Empire which is of greatest force of body, and of most vnderstanding. The which wee see happen in other kindes of bruite Beasts, (which we must hold for a most certaine worke of nature) among the which wee see the strongest and of most spirit march before, as Buls, Stags, Cockes, and such like. It is therefore likely that a principallity is of that kind, and that the course of mens liues is so gouerned, assembling together after the man∣ner of Beasts, and following those which are the most strong and po∣werfull, to whom force is the end of their Principallity,Principallity or Monarchy. which wee may with reason call Monarchy. But when as with Time there grows from these Assemblies a Company and Custome,A Royalty. then a Royalty takes her Birth: And then Men beginne to thinke of Honesty and Iustice, and of their contraries: Such is the manner of the beginning and fountaine of the sayd Gouernments. As all men haue a desire of a mutuall and naturall Coniunction, and that from thence proceedes the generation of Children, it is manifest that when any one of those which hath beene bred and brought vp, doth not acknowledge nor yeild the like to those which haue bred them, but contrariwise presume to do them outrage in word or deede, then they which are present are offended: as knowing their care, trouble, and paines which haue ingendred them, and with what diligence they haue bred vp their Children. For as Mankinde is more excellent then all other Creatures, to whom is giuen vnderstanding and Reason, it is not fit to passe ouer the said disorder, after the manner of other Creatures: And that contrariwise the assi∣stants ought to obserue and reprehend such an Action; foreseeing the fu∣ture, and making their account that the like may happen vnto them∣selues. Moreouer, if at any time hee which hath receiued comfort and aide from any one in his Aduersity, doth not acknowledge his Benefactor, but seekes to preiudice him in any sort, it is manifest that they which shall see it, will be grieued and discontented: So as their Neighbour shall mooue them to pitty, thinking of themselues as of their Neigh∣bour. Wherefore then doth rise a certaine thought of Vertue, and a consideration of the duty which euery man must obserue, which is the
beginning and end of Iustice. In like manner if any one amongst the rest takes reuenge vppon the most furious Beasts, withstanding their force, it is reasonable that such a one, should purchase among the people an acknowledgment of affection and Commaund: And he that should doe the contrary should both wrong his honour and good reputation. Whence againe the consideration of infamy and honesty, and of their difference takes it birth: Whereof the one merrits (as commodious and profitable) to be loued and followed, and the other to bee shunn'd and auoided. When as any one hauing the principallity and the great∣est power, vseth the afore-sayd things by the aduice of many, and that hee seemed to impart them to the Subiects, according vnto euery mans merite: Then fearing no more any violence, and hauing a good opinion of him, they submit themselues voluntary vnto his obedience, and defend his Gouernment: And if hee prooues in all respects worthy of honour, with one accord they take reuenge and fight against those which are Enemies to his power. By this meanes by little and little, he makes himselfe King of a Mo∣narch, when as reason succeedes in the Empire, in steed of rage and force. This is the first Contemplation for men, according vnto nature of Honesty and Iustice, and of their contraries; it is the true begin∣ning and fountaine of a Royalty. They doe not onely maintaine their Principallity and gouernment, but many times leaue it to their poste∣rity, hoping that their Children bred vp vnder such men will be of the same will and disposition. But if it happens at any time that the poste∣rity of former Kings displeaseth them, then they make an Election of Princes and Kings, without any respect of corporall forces, ayming onely at the differences of iudgement and reason, making tryall of the diuersity of both by the workes themselues. Wherefore leauing the ancient custome, they which haue once seazed vpon the Crowne, and haue gotten this power, they fortifie certaine places with walls, and possesse the Countrey as well for the safety, as to supply their Subiects necessities abundantly. Whilest that Kings were carefull of these things, they were free from slaunder and enuy: For that they differed not much from others in their Apparrell or Diet, ob∣seruing a course of life conformable to others, with a conuersation and familiarity common to many. But when as they (who by succession and a prerogatiue of race, are come vnto the gouernment) haue alrea∣dy the preparations which serue for safety, and those which are more then necessary for foode: then following their appetites, by reason of the great abundance of all things, they thinke it fitting for Princes to bee more richly attired then their Subiects, and to be intreated more deicately with diuersity of meates, and to conuerse without contra∣diction with other women then their owne. Hence springs enuy and scandall with hatred and implacable rage: Finally the royalty changeth into Tyranny. The beginning of this ruine, and the conspiracy which is made against Princes,Tyranny. growes not from the wicked, but is practised by the best and most resolute men, who cannot endure such outrages and insolen∣cies
of Princes. And withall the Commons hauing found a head to make resistance, ioyne with him for the afore-said causes against their Prince: and then the former of a Royalty and a Monarchy is wholly ruined, so as by consequence an Aristocracia must take its beginning and sourse.Aristocracia. Then the people as it were by a thankefull acknowledgment, ordaine these suppressors of Tyrants to be their Heads and Comman∣ders, and they submit themselues vnto them. When as they haue with good zeale imbraced the charge of this gouernment, they haue nothing in so great recommendation, as that which concernes the publique good: prouiding with great care and diligence for any thing that may touch the peoples profit, as well priuate as publique. But when the Children enioy the same power from their Fathers, and haue not ex∣perience of aduersities, nor of the equality and politique liberty, being withall bred vp from their youth in the authority and prerogatiue of their Fathers, they change an Aristocracy into Olygarchia, some aban∣doning themselues to a vitious and insatiable desire of couerousnesse and getting:Olygarchia. Others to drunkennesse, and by consequence to excesse in Ban∣quets: some to Adulteries, and forcing of Boyes: Finally, hauing done vnto the people that which wee haue formerly spoken of, it is rea∣son they should conceiue the like ruine in the end that did befall the Tyrants. Beleeue me, if any one obserues the enuy and hatred which the Cit∣tizens beare them, or dare say or doe any thing against the chiefe Com∣manders, he shall presently haue all the people ready to giue him aide and assistance in his Enterprize. And when they haue murthered those, they dare not choose a new King, fearing the iniustice of the former, neither dare they trust their Common-weale in the gouernment of ma∣ny, the memory being yet so fresh of the basenesse of the precedent: so as their onely hope resting in themselues, they retire, changing the Olygarchicall gouernment into a Democracia, and taking vpon them∣seluesDemocracia, the care and charge of the Common-weale. It is true that in the meane time some of those haue escaped, which had tasted of the preheminence and power: who taking delight and pleasure in the present estate of the Common-weale, make great esteeme of equality and liberty. But when as young men succeed, and that the Democracia is deli∣uered to posterity, (they striue in making little accompt of equality and liberty) to be greater then the rest: whereinto they chiefly fall which haue great wealth. When as they affect command, and cannot attaine vnto it of themselues, they begin to dispose of their riches, and to corrupt the Commons with that baite. A great number being corrup∣ted by their bounty, by reason of a silly Couetousnesse of presents, then a Democracia is ruined and changed into violence, and a seditious e∣state of policy. For the Commons hauing beene accustomed to liue by the goods of their Neighbours, make a mutiny, taking a resolute and audacious man to be their Head, who for his pouerty cannot in reason aspire to the honours of the Common-weale, and then they assemble together, and fall to murthers and ruines, and to spoile and
diuide the Land amongst them, vntill their fury being pacified, they finde againe a new Lord and Monarch. Behold the reuolution of Gouernments, and the prouidence of Nature, according vnto which the estate of the Common-Wealth, changeth and re-changeth, and makes the same returne. Which things if any one knowes not plaine∣ly, hee will be ignorant of the time in fore-telling the future Estate of the Common. But he will erre often, for that a Gouernement in∣creaseth and decreaseth where into it is so transferr'd, if without great iudgement he giues his aduice. We will likewise come to the know∣ledge of the Institution, increase, and vigour, and likewise of the fu∣ture change of things in the Roman Common-Wealth, according to this knowledge. And if it happen that any other Gouernment hath (as wee haue al∣ready sayd) from its beginning this Institution and increase, by the course of Nature it wilbe changed into its contrary: The which may be well obserued by that which followes. Wee will deliuer in few words the Nemothesia of Lycurgus, which shall not be impertinent to our Discourse. Wherefore when he had considered all decent things, and how they are necessarily perfect by a certaine Nature, he hath al∣so obserued how euery forme of Gouernment is variable, which is e∣stablished simply according vnto a power, so as suddainly it degenerates into its neighbour Vice, and consequently by Nature. For as rust con∣sumes Iron, and wormes Wood, being naturall vnto them, so as although they can preserue themselues from all exteriour outrages, yet they are corrupted by these, as borne with them: So as according to Nature there is a certaine mallice growing and adhering vnto euery Common∣wealth: As to a Royalty there is a Monarchy:Chirocracia a Gouernment by the mutny o the people. To an Aristocracy an O∣lygarchia; and to a Democracia, a Chirocracia: So as it must needes follow, that in succession of time all the fore-sayd change by the said meanes. Lycurgus hauing fore-seene these things, hath ordained a Common∣wealth, which was neither simple, nor vnder the absolute power of one man: vniting all the Vertues and properties of the most commend∣able Gouernments, to the end that nothing in it should take a greater increase then was needfull; nor degenerate into the neerest vice: And that their forces by a mutuall restraint should not bend or decline to any part, nor any thing therein ruined: Finally, that the Com∣mon-weale should remaine of an equall weight for euer, according to reason and equallity, and that by this meanes Loyalty should be restrai∣ned from Arrogancy, by the feare of the people, for that a iust por∣tion of the Common-weale was allotted vnto them. And againe, the Commons durst not disdaine the Kings, for the respect of the most aged: Who being chosen by the Grauest, addicted themselues continually to equity: So as the weakest party was maintained in its Customes, and was strong and to be feared by the Succour and aide of the Sena∣tors. The Common-weale being thus established, he hath preserued the liberty of the Lacedemonians longer then hath come to our know∣ledge. When he had fore-seene the Fountaine and sourse of all of them;
and what did vsually happen, he established the sayd Common-wealth with out danger. In regard of the Romans, they haue done the like in the Institution of their Common-wealth,The Romans. not by one reason, but as choosing that which seemed best vnto them, being made wise by the euent of things, by many Combats and alterations: And by this meanes they haue at∣tained vnto the same ende which Lycurgus prescribed: setling a better forme of a Common-wealth then wee haue in Greece. Finally, hee that will iudge of Writers with reason, doeth not iudge of matters as they are omitted, but according to those which are mentioned. And if he finds any thing false, he must conceiue that omission hath beene by ignorance: but if all which they haue spoken be true, let him then grant that what they haue omitted, hath beene done for some cause, and not through ignorance. These three parts, (whereof wee haue formerly spoken,) rul'd in that Common-wealth. They were all established and ordered so e∣qually, and proportionably by them, as no man, no not the inhabitants themselues, could euer say whether this Common-weale were Aristo∣craticall, Democraticall, or Monarchicall. The which hath not hap∣ned without reason: For if wee obserue the power of the Consuls, it appeareth plainly to bee Monarchicall and Royall: and if that of the Snators, it seemes to bee Aristocraticall: But if wee duly consider the popular power which consists in many, it is apparently Demo∣craticall. In like manner, no man can say by what part the forme of the Common-Wealth was then guided and gouerned, except in some things. The Consuls being present at Rome, haue the Gouernement of all the publique Affaires,The Office of the Consuls. before they draw the Army to fielde. To whom all the other Princes obey and are subiect, (except the Tribunes of the people) appointing Lieutenants in the Senate, from whom they demaund aduice in pressing Affaires: moreouer they haue the Charge and power to make Edicts. Finally, they haue the care of all that which concernes the publique Affaires, which the Commons are to decide. It is their duty to call the people together, and to pronounce their Edicts, and to iudge of the plurality of Voices. Finally, they haue the power and Authority to prepare for Warre, and generally of all the Gouernement which is vnder the Heauens, to conclude, they haue in a manner a most stately and Royall authority. It is law∣full for them to dispose of their Allies in what they shall thinke fitting for matters of Warre. To appoint and ordaine Captaines of Thou∣sands, to leuy an Army, and to choose the most able and sufficient. It is also in their power to punish all their Subiects wheresoeuer they re∣maine: and to dispose of the publique Treasure as they shall think good, being to that end followed by the Questor: who presently obeyes their Commaundment: So as he which shall consider this part of the Com∣mon-weale, hee will say with reason that it is Monarchicall and most Royall. Finally, if it happen that any of things which wee haue spoken, or
shall speake, shall change presently or hereafter, they may not in any sort derogate from our opinion. Next after, the Senate hath the o∣uer-sight of the publique Treasure: For they may dispose of the Re∣uenewes and Expences.The duty of the Senate. It is not in the power of the Questors to im∣ploy mony, no not in perticular Affaires, without their order, but for the Consuls. Finally, the greatest and heauiest expence, as that which many times the Questors are accustomed to imploy, at the returne of the Quinquinall, or space of fiue yeares for the repairing of publique Buildings, the Senate decrees: And whatsoeuer is allowed the Cen∣sors, depends thereon. Of all offences committed throughout Italy which deserue a publique punishment, as Treason, Conspiracy, Poy∣soning, and Murthers by secret practises, the punishment belongs vnto the Senate. And moreouer if any priuate person, or any Citty hath neede of thankes or blame, or of succours and assistants, the Senate hath the whole charge. Finally, if they bee to send an Embassie into any part out of Italy; to reconcile some, or to admonish them, be it to Com∣maund any thing, or to declare Warre, the Senate hath the power. In like manner when as Embassadours come to Rome, the Senate giues or∣der for their entertainment, and what answere shalbe made. Finally, the Commons haue no hand in all that which wee haue sayd: So as whatsoeuer thou shalt see done in the absence of the Consull, will seeme to bee an Aristocraticall gouernment: The which many Greci∣ans and Kings imagine, for that in a manner all their affaires are vnder the Authority of the Senate, without any contradiction whatsoeuer. For this cause some one will demaund with reason, what portion of the Common-weale remaines to the people? Seeing that the Senate hath the Gouernment of things, which wee haue deliuered in perticular, and that it disposeth (which is much more) of the Reuenewes and pub∣lique expences: And that moreouer the Consuls making Warre with∣out the Citty, haue a Royall power ouer the preparations, and all o∣ther affaires which are in the Campe. And yet there is a part reserued for the people, the which is of greater esteeme.The authority of the people. For they haue the authority of honours and punishments: wherein is contained the po∣wer and gouernment, and finally the generall life of men. Beleeue me, there is nothing that concernes the Subiects, that can be ordered by reason, by such as haue not the knowledge of this difference, or hauing it doe abuse it. What reason were there that the Wicked should be equall in Honour with the Good? The people therefore iudge and many times diuersly, when as the iniustice which they are to punish is of great consequence, and namely in those which haue had great and Honourable charges. They alone condemne to death: Wherein there are some actions past worthy of praise and memory: For vsually they suffer those that are accused of a Capitall or hay∣nous crime, to retire in the sight of all the World, although there remaine an opinion in some which confirmes the iudgement and Sen∣tence, by the which a free and Voluntary Banishment is taken quite away.
Fugitiues are in safety in the Townes of Naples,Towns for the retreat of such as are volunta∣rily Banished. Preneste, Tiuoly, and in other Confederates. Finally, the people giue Principalities to the most sufficient: which in a Common-wealth is a goodly reward of honesty. They haue also Authority to confirme the Lawes: and Peace and Warre lies in their will: Iudging of the Succours, Reconcilliation, and Accords of their Allies. Finally, the people confirme these things in approouing or disannulling them: So as now some may iustly say, that the greatest part of the Common-weale is in the peoples hands, and that it is Democraticall. We haue deliuered how the diuers formes of Common-weales,The mutuall knitting toge∣ther of three Common-weales. are diuided among them: Wee must now shew how they may assist and giue comfort one vnto another. When the Consull hath receiued his power, and drawne an Army to Field, hee seemes a King, yet hee hath neede of the people and Senate, to bring his resolutions to an end, without the which hee cannot possibly finish his Affaires. It is cer∣tayne that hee hath neede to furnish and prouide Victualls, pay, and munition for the Armies. But it is not possible to furnish him with Corne, Apparrell, nor pay, without the will of the Senate: So as the at∣tempts of the Consulls are of necessity made fruitlesse, if the Senate doth willingly faile him or hinder him. By this meanes it is in the resolution of the Senate to make the En∣terprizes of the Commaunders effectuall or not. It is also in their po∣wer to send another Commaunder when the yeare is past, or continue his Authority that doth enioy it. Moreouer the Senate may make his Exploits seeme great and admirable, and augment and increase his Actions, in like manner they may blemish and disgrace them. In re∣gard of that which they call Triumphes, by the which a certaine visible shewe of their Actions is brought by the Consulls to the view of the people, they dare not attempt them, as it is fitting, neyther (to speake plainly) bring them to an end, vnlesse the Senate allow of them, and furnish the charge. The consent of the people is wonderfull necessary, be they neuer so farre off, for it rests in them, (as were haue formerly sayd) to confirme or disannull all Accords and Leagues. But behold another case: For after their Gouernement is ended, they are forced to yeild and submit their actions vnto the iudgement of the Common people, so as they ought not to bee carelesse of the loue and good li∣king of the Senate and vulgar sort. Although the power of the Senate be very great, yet they must of force haue respect vnto the multitude of publique affaires, and drawe them to their ends and intentions: Neyther can they put generall and great doubts in Execution, nor punish crimes committed against the Common-weale, if what the Court ordaynes bee not confirmed by the Common people. Matters which concerne the Senate it selfe, are of the same condition. For if any one propounds a Law, by the which it doeth in any sort abridge the Authority and power of the Se∣nate, or ouer-throwes their Prerogatiue and Honour, or pursues them in their liues, all these things are to bee done by the power of the people.
It is likewise certaine that the Senate cannot execute any of their re∣solutions, not hold a Councell, nor assemble themselues, if any one Tribune of the Commons opposeth. The Tribunes must alwaies doe according to the opinion of the people, and obserue their will. In re∣gard of these things the Senate feares the people, and obserues them: In like manner the people are bound vnto the Senate, and forced to winne them: For as there are many Farmes which the Censors dispose of throughout all Italy, for the great multitude of publique repairati∣ons, and many places of Riuers, Pooles, Gardens, and Mines, and fi∣nally all other things of that nature, which are vnder the Roman Empire: they are all mannaged by the people, hiring all the Rents and profits which grow thereby. Some take their Leases from the Censors, to whom others associate themselues, others become suerties for the Farmers: and some bring the Inuentory of the goods into the Treasury. Of all which things the Senate hath the knowledge For it rests in them to prolong the Terme, and to graunt some abatement, if there hath beene any losse: Finally, to remit the whole Debt, if there hath happened any impossibility. There are infinite cases wherein the Senate may helpe, or hurt, but those much, which hire the publique Rents, whereof the Senate hath the charge. They also name the Iudges in most of their Conuentions as well publique as priuate, as farre as the greatnesse of the cause shall re∣quire. Wherefore relying vpon their wisdome, and fearing the vncer∣tainty of their aaffaires, they carefully obserue the instances and oppo∣sitions of the Senates aduice. They doe not willingly oppose against the attempts of the Consuls: For that all in generall (wheresoeuer the Roman, mpire doth extend) are vnder their Command, as well in pri∣uate as in publique. As therefore the power of either of these is such, as they may mutually bring profit or preiudice, yet they are so fitly v∣nited against all crosses and disasters, as we cannot finde a better forme of a Common-wealth. For when as any common terrour shall present it selfe, and that they are forced to succor one another the forces of this Commonwealth are so great, as there is not any thing wanting, neither doth any man faile, in his Charge, but all tend ioyntly to bring to a good end that which hath beene resolued: and that whatsoeuer hath beene ordained, may not be delayed beyond the opportunity of time. Finally, all imploy themselues as well in publique as in priuate to finish the Enterprize. Wherefore they haue this peculiar vnto them, that their force is vnre∣sistable, and they accomplish whatsoeuer they resolue. Againe, if (freed from the publique feare of Strangers) they abandon themselues o prosperity and abundance of wealth, which they enioy by meanes of their good fortunes, then vsually they grow insolent and proud, al∣lured by flatteries, and giuen to delights and idlenesse. Then may they easily see how the Common-wealth studies to helpe it selfe: For when as any one of the parts will be Mistresse, and rule more then is fitting, it manifest, that neither of them being newly erected, according to our discourse, the Enterprize of either of them may be mutually restrained
and hindred, so as none of them can fly off, nor aduance it selfe, ei∣ther of them continue in their charge, as well by an oppositit on to their Enterprize, as through a present feare of punishment. A Parcell of the Sixt Booke touching the Order of the Roman Armies. WHen the Romans haue chosen the Consuls, they appoint the Tribunes of the Souldiers: that is to say, fourteene of those which haue followed the Warres fiue yeares, and ten others which haue continued ten yeares. Among the which there are foure on Horse-backe, and sixe on Foote: who must of necessity goe vntill they come to the Age of sixe and forty yeares: ex∣cept such whose estate doth not amount to a∣boue seauen pounds sterling: For those they leaue and reserue them for the Sea. But if the affaires be vrgent and pressing, the Foote-men are bound to serue twenty yeares. In regard of the Citty-magistrate, no man can execute it before he hath serued ten yeares. When the Consuls ordaine a leuie, they make Proclamation by the Trumper, on what day all the the Romans of sufficient age to beare Armes, to meete; the which they doe yearely. When the prefixed day is come, and that all the able men are come into the Citty, and assem∣bled before the Capitole, the youngest Tribunes diuide themselues in∣to foure parts, as the People and Consuls haue ordained: For that they make the generall and first diuision of their Bands into foure Legions. Then the foure first chosen are appointed to the first Legion, the three following to the second, the foure subsequent to the third, and the three last to the fourth. They ordaine the two first of the most ancient to the first Legion, the three next to them of the second, the two fol∣lowing to the third, and to the fourth the three last of the most anci∣ent. When the diuision of the Tribunes hath beene thus made, so as all the Legions haue their Captaines equally, they cast lots vpon euery Race, being set apart one from another, right against either Legion: And they call their Company, most commonly fallen by lot: out of
which they choose foure Young men of like constitution.The manner of the Tribunes in the choise of the Legion After which the Tribunes of the first Legion make the first choice: Then the second, the third, and the fourth last of all. And againe, vpon the presen∣ting of other foure, they of the second choose first, and so the rest in order: They of the first begin the last. Then of the foure which are presented after these, the Tribunes of the third Legion choose the first, and they of the second are the last. By this meanes making alwaies this election by porrion, and as it were by a kind of circulation, it fals out that to euery Legion the men are equally diuided. When they haue chosen this number, (the which they doe to the end that euery Legion may consist sometimes of foure thousand two hundred Foote, sometimes of fiue thousand if the danger seemes great) and that the diuision is thus made, they were wont to muster their Hors-men after the Leginaries. At this day they are the first, by an election of the richest made by the Censor, of which they appoint three hun∣dred to euery Legion. The leuie being thus made, euery Tribune drawes together his Legion, and in choosing one of the most sufficient, they take an Oath from him to obey his Captaines faithfully, and to execute their Commandments: Then the rest sweare particularly in passing, testifying by asigne, that they are ready to doe all things as their first man had done. At the same instant the Consull aduertiseth the Gouernours of Townes allied in Italy, from whom they thinke good to draw succours, acquainting them with the number of men, the day and the place when they should meete which should be leuied. Who after they haue made their leuie accordingly, they send them hauing taken an Oath, and gi∣uen them a Commander and a Treasurer. But when the Tribunes at Rome haue taken the Oath of the Souldiers, they send them backe, ap∣pointing a day and a place to euery Legion when they ought to come without Armes.The diulsion of Souldiers in e∣uery Legion. When they are drawne together on the day appoin∣ted, they make choice of the youngest amongst them, and weakest in their estates, to carry Iauelings or Darts: Then such as are more aduanced in yeares, they carry Armes which they call forked Darts or Iauelings: And they which are strong of Body and more aged, are made principals: But the Triarij are chosen out of the most anci∣ent. So many differences of Names and Ages are among the Romans, and likewise of Armes in euery Legion. They diuide them in such sort, as the Triarij are the most ancient, to the number of sixe hundred: The principals twelue hundred, to whom the forked Iauelings are equall: The rest which are younger, are light Iauelings. If the Legion con∣sists of a great number, they diuide it proportionably, except the Tri∣arij, whose number is alwaies the same. They youngest are bound to carry a Sword,The forme of a Buckler. a light Iaueling, and a Buckler. This Buckler is firme as well for its art, as for the greatnesse, sufficient to defend the body. It is round, hauing three foote in Diame∣ter. The Souldiers haue moreouer a light Head peece, whereon doth hang a Wolues skin, or some such thing, which serues for a couering and marke, to the end that euery one may be knowne by his Captaine
being in fight,The light Iaue∣ling. doing his duty or not. The light Iaueling is most com∣monly three foote long, of the bignesse of a mans finger, with an Iron head a good spanne long, and is so slender and sharpe, that vpon the first cast it must of necessity bend, and so is made vnprofitable to cast againe: Otherwise they will serue the one as well as the other. Then they command those which are more aged, whom they call forked Iauelings to be armed. The Romans Armes are first a Target two foote and a halfe broad,The forme of a Target. and bending vpon the superficies, and foure foote in length: The greatest hath foure fingers more, and is made of two boards glued together with Oxe-glew: And is couered with a Calues skinne, or that of a Goate, or some such like Beast. All the circumference hath a hoope of Iron, the better to beare off the blowes of a Sword, and that leauing it on the ground, it may not weare. In the midst there is a Bosse of Iron, which beares off all blowes, and the violence of Stones; of long Pertwisans, and of all manner of Darts be they neuer so violent. The Sword which they call Spanish,The Spanish Sword. and hath two edges with a very sharpe point, hangs commodiously with the Target vpon his thigh. It chargeth home for that it is strong and stiffe. Moreouer, they haue two spits, a head-peece of Brasse, and greaues for the defence of their leggs, amongst the which spits, some are great, others slender: The strongest which are long and round, haue three inches in Diameter: Those which are square, haue the sides equall: The slendrest are like vnto the lesser for∣ked Darts, which they carry with the said Armes: The staffe whereof doth not much exceede the length of foure foote and a halfe: and they arme them with a head of Iron, equall in length to the staffe, the which they ioyne so close with so many ligatures and crosse-nailes, as they neuer dissolue vntill the Iron breake: although at the neather end it be a finger and a halfe thicke, where it ioynes vnto the staffe, so carefull they are in setting them together. Besides all these things, they are adorned with a Crowne of feathers, with three red or blacke feathers standing right vp almost a foote and a halfe, the which set vpon the top of the head, together with his other Armes, make a man seeme twice as big, and by this meanes of a good∣ly appearance, and terrible to the Enemy. Others taking a peece of Brasse a span broad, which they lay vpon their stomackes, which they terme the guard of their hearts, are compleatly armed. But they which are held to haue aboue a hundred and fifty pounds sterling in their e∣states, take for the defence of their body, with their other Armes, shirts of maile. The Principals haue the same kind of Armes, and in like man∣ner the Triarij, but in stead of spits, they carry forked Iauelings. They choose the heads of Bands our of all these sorts, except the youngest) to the number of ten, of the most ablest men: Besides the which they make another Election of ten others, whom they call head of Ordo∣nance. Among the which the first chosen is admitted to Councell.The manner of choosing the heads of Bands. These againe choose as many Lieurents, These things done, they diuide with the Captaines euery age into ten parts, except the light Iauelings: appointing to euery Band two Captaines and two Lieutenants of those
which haue beene chosen. In regard of the light Iauelings or Darts which remaine, they distribute them equally throughout all the Bands: which Bands they haue called Orders, Troupes, and Ensignes: and their Captaines Centurions and Heads of Bands. These choose out of euery Troupe two strong and resolute men to carry the Ensignes. They make two Captaines to euery Troupe, and with reason: For as it is cer∣taine what either of them can doe or suffer, and that the actions of War haue no excuse, they will neuer haue the Troupe remaine without a Commander or Gouernour. If they be both present, the first chosen leads the right wing of the Troupe, and the second those which are vpon the left wing of the Ensigne. If one miscarries, he that is present gouernes all. Finally, they desire not so much valour nor disdaine of death in their Commanders,Gouernment, Constancy, and good Coun∣sell required in a Captaine. as gouernment, constancy, and good coun∣sell: and not to ingage themselues first in the fight, nor to begin it: But being vanquished and prest, they should stand firme, and rather dye then to abandon their place. They haue also diuided their Cauallery into ten Troupes, drawing from euery one of them three Captaines: who likewise made choise of three Lieutenants, of which the first is Chiefe of the Troupe, and the rest hold the ranke of Dizeniers or Commanders of ten, and so they are called. The second holds the place of the first in his absence. The Armes of the Horse-men are at this day very like to those of the Grecians. Formerly they had no Guyrasses, being in danger by reason of their Linnen breeches,The Roman Cauallery ar∣med after the Greeke manner with the which they were more actiue to mount on Horsebacke lightly, but they found themselues in great dan∣ger in fight, being in a manner naked. Moreouer, their forked Iauelings were vnprofitable for two respects: For first they made them slender and fit to dart, so as they could not take their aime, and many times they were broken before the point could sticke, for that they were con∣tinually shaken with the trotting of the Horses: and withall they were of no vse but to thrust forward, being vnarmed at the other end. In truth they were of no seruice after they were broken. They had also Targets made of the hydes of Oxen, like vnto puft vp akes, which they vsually make at Sacrifices: The which they could not well vse in fight, for that they were not firme, but swel'd with raine. By this meanes they grew vnprofitable, Wherefore as the vse did not seeme good, they presently changed, imbracing the fashion of the Grecians Armes, in the which the thrust with a Iaueling is suddaine and certaine, neither is it without effect, for that it shakes not, but is firme. Moreo∣uer, in turning the point behind, the vse is firme and violent: Their Tar∣get is the like, for both in defending and assailing it, it is firme, strong, and profitable.The docility of the Romans. The which when they had seene, they presently fol∣lowed it: for the Romans are as apt as any others to imbrace the best course of life. When the Tribunes haue made their diuision, and the orders concerning Armes, they send them backe to their houses. The day comming whereon they haue sworne to come to the place appoin∣ted by the Consull, (for that euery one doth assigne it apart vnto his Le∣gion, considering that most commonly they ordaine to euery one a∣part,
hath one certaine length ioyning to the way, being 100. foot long. They study often to make the depth equall, except vnto the Allies. But if their Army be greater, they adde both to the length and depth. And as the lodgings of the Hors-men answere to the middle of the Tribunes Tents, there is a certaine way made crossing the afore said streight line, and the void place before the Tribunes. The passages are like vnto streets. For as of either side the troupes are lodg'd all along, but after the Hors-men of the said two Legions, they lodg'd the Triarij in the same forme, ioyning troups to euery Ensigne, so as the figures touch one another, hauuing their aspect to the other side contrary to the Horse-men, reducing the depth to halfe the length in euery forme: For that they are most commonly but halfe so many in number as the other troupes. Wherefore as the number of men is often found vnequall, it happens that the parts are al∣waies made equall in length, for that they differ in depth. Then they lodge the Principals 50. foot distant, and opposite to the Triarij. These being turned against the said spaces, the two streets are compleate, taking their beginning from the same streight line, with such approaches as the Horse-men haue, that is to say, of 100. foot distance, which is before the Tribunes, and ending on the contrary side: The which formerly we haue propounded to be opposite to all the forme of the Campe. After the Principals they lodge the forked Iauelings behind in an opposite aspect, the figures being ioyned. And as by the first diuision all the parties haue ten Ensignes, so the streets are alike and equall behind, as well in length as in separation, vpon the sides opposite to the Rampire and Pallisadoe▪ where turning the last Ensignes, they campe Then after the forked Iaue∣lings leauing a space of eight fathome and two foot, against them they lodge the Horse-men of the Allies, taking their beginning at the same streight line, & ending on the same side. The number of the Allies Foot-men is equall to the Roman Legions, only excepted extraordinaries, but the Hors-men are double in number, from whom a third part is drawne for extraordinaries. The Commanders of Bands take the first lodgings in euery quarter: placing on euery side the sixt Band after the fift, they retire eight fathome and two foote, the like they doe with the Bands of Foot-men: so as there is another passage made through the Legions, and crosse the streets: the which is a way equally distant from the Tribunes Tents, which they call the fift, for that it is drawne after the fifty fiue Bands. The place which remaines behinde the Tribunes Tents, and which of either side ioynes to the Consults Pauillions, serues partly for the Market-place, and partly for the Questor and his munition. In regard of the two last Pauillions, of either side of the Tribunes, some choise Horse-men and other voluntaries following the Campe for the loue of the Consull are lodged there, towards the sides crossing the Rampiers, some looking towards the Questors munition, and some to the Market-place, with an order bending towards the Tents of the extraordinaries. It often falls out that these men are not onely lodg'd neare the Con∣sull, but they also doe their duties about him and the Questor, when the Army marcheth, and in their other affaires. To these are ioyned Foot men looking to the Rampire, who doe the like seruice: after which they leaue a space of 16. Fathome and 4. foote
broad, equally distant from the Tribunes Tents, besides the Market place, the Pretorium & the Questory, extending throughout all the parts of the Rampire: At the vpper end whereof the extraordinary. Hors-men of the Allies Campe, looking towards the Praetor and Questor. In the midst of their Pauillions, there is left a way to the Praetors place, of 8. fa∣thome and 2. foot, drawing to the further end of the Campe. After these are lodged the extraordinary Foote-men of the Allies, turning their backs to them, and looking towards the Rampire and the further end of the whole Campe. In regard of the void place remaining of either side of the crossing flanks, it is for strangers & new commers. Matters being thus disposed, the whole forme of the Campe remaines square with equall sides. As for particular figures as well of separation of streets, as of other ordinances, they are much like a Towne. They cast vp the Rampire 33. fathome and 2. foot from the Tents: for that this voide space profiteth them much. For it is cōmodious for the clensing of the Campe, so as e∣uery man goes forth, into that place by the street which is nearest to him without crossing  another. There they also keepe their Cattell safely in the night, & the ooty which they haue taken from the Enemy. And it is of great benefit, for if the Enemy assailes them by night, neither Fire nor Darts can touch them, or very little, and without any offence, consi∣dering the great distance and the Tents about them. It is then easie for a man to iudge how spacious this Campe is, whether they giue it a multi∣tude of Foot and Horse, or they make the Legion of foure or fiue thou∣sand men, with the length, depth, and great number of quarters: adding thereunto the spaces of waies with all other things. If at any time the number of the Allies be great, whether that they followed the Campe from the beginning, or came afterwards vpon some occasion, they fill vp the places which are about the Pretorium, with such as are new come, & they draw the market-place and the Questory into one, for the necessity of the time. Also if the number of those which are come to Field with the Army be great, they adde on either side of the Roman Legions a streete towards the crossing Flanks. And if all the foure Legions & both the Consuls be ioyned in one Campe, we must conceiue that they are two Armies, equally camped and ioyned backe to back, the lodgings of their extraordinaries touching one another, the figure being somewhat long, and twice as spacious, with a circumference halfe as big againe. The Consuls being in one Campe, they doe alwaies thus: But if they be sepa∣rated, they obserue the first order? In regard of the Market-place, the Pretorium and Questory, they place them in the midst of the two Ar∣mies. But when they are encampt, the Tribunes assemble, taking a parti∣cular Oath of all men, be they free or bond, who sweare not to steale any thing in the Campe, and if they finde any thing to bring it to them. Then they dispose of the Ensignes, and depute out of the two Legions two of the Principals and of the forked Iauelings, for the guard of the place which is before them. For thither the greatest part of the Romans repaire daily: and therefore they haue the charge it should bee kept cleane. Euery Tribune chooses three out of the other two and twenty Ensignes which remaine. According to the said diuision, there are so ma∣ny Ensignes of Principals and forked Iauelings in euery Legion. There
are sixe Tribunes which gouerne in their turnes, and particularly three Ensignes, the which set vp the Tent in the place appointed for him that hath the gouernment, pauing the place which is about it. Moreouer they haue charge to fortifie if it be needfull, for the guard of the Baggage. They also appoint two Watches,The order of two Watches. either of them consisting of foure men whereof some are before the Tent, and others behind neare vnto the Horses. As euery Tribune hath three Ensignes, and aboue a hundred men in either of them, except the Triarij and light Iauelings (which are not bound to that seruice) the charge is found light: for that the Watch falls to euery Ensigne but the fourth day. Finally, as for these duties, the ne∣cessary Command, with the honour and obedience is due vnto the Tri∣bunes. The Ensignes of the Triarij are freed from the Tribunes charge, but they serue daily among the Troupes of Horse men, as they are lod∣ged neare them: and they haue a care of the Horses, lest they should in∣tangle and hurt themselues, and so be made vnseruiceable: or being vnti∣ed fight together, whereby an Alarum might grow in the Campe▪ Moreouer, one out of euery Ensigne keepes a guard daily before the Consull, whereby he is in safety from Treason, being the most honou∣rable Magistrate. The Allies haue the charge of either side of the Ditch and Pallisadoe, where euery one of their Troupe is nearest, and the Ro∣mans of the other two, and euery Legion hath one. And as euery flanke is distributed by the Ensignes, the Captaines of the Bands are present at the particular guard, but in generall two of the Tribunes had the ouer∣sight, who in like manner had the charge of the rest of the Legion. For For their diuision being made by two, they gouerne by their turnes two Moneths in sixe, and they (to whom the lot is fallen) haue the prehemi∣uence of all the affaires. The same manner of gouernment is obserued among the Commanders of the Allies. The Horse-men and Captains of Bands, come at Sun-rising to the Tribunes Tents, and the Tribunes to the Consull, to whom he giues order for pressing affaires: They likewise to the horse-men and Captains, who command the Troupe in time con∣uenient. As for the watch word by Night, they giue it safely thus: A man is chosen both of the Horse and Foot of the tenth Ensigne, which camps behind vpon the extremity of the streets,The Romans manner in gi∣uing the word. who is not bound to watch, but comes only euery day at the Suns setting to the Tribunes Pa∣uillion, and when he hath receiued the word, (which is written downe) he returnes, and being come vnto his Ensigne, hee deliuers it with the word vnto the Commander of the next Ensigne in the presence of wit∣nesses. The like he doth vnto the next, and so consequently of all the rest vntill it come vnto the first Ensignes which are lodged neare vnto the Tribunes. They must bring backe this Paper to the Tribunes before night: and if all those which haue bin deliuered be returned, they know that the word hath bin giuen to all in generall, hauing past through them all. If there be any fault, the Tribune enquires presently of the cause, and knows by the inscription from what quarter the Paper came, and when the errour is discouered, they presently condemne him to a certaine Fine. Moreouer, they appoint their guards after this manner: An En∣signe watches about the Consuls Tent: the like doe the Deputies of e∣uery Ensigne about the Tribunes and the Troupes of Horse men. Thus
they of euery Band dispose of themselues, and the Consuls of the other guards. There are most commonly three guards, one about the Questor, and two tohers about the Lieutenants and Councellors. But the light Iauelings remaine without the Campe, making a guard by day about the Pallisadoe, for it is their charge: Of which there are ten appointed for the guard of euery Gate. The Lieutenant of euery Ensigne brings in the Euening vnto the Tri∣bune those that are appointed for the first watch: to either of which the Tribune giues little Talleys, hauing Characters: After the receipt wher∣of they retire to the places assigned them. Concerning the suruey of the Watch,To whom the suruey of the watch belongs. they trust Horse-men; for the chiefe Captaine of the Band must giue order to one of his Lieutenants to carry this Commandment to e∣uery Legion: That is to say, to foure young men of his Band before din∣ner, that the charge belongs to them, to visite the Watch the Night fol∣lowing. This being done, the like command must be giuen to the Cap∣taine of the next Band, that it belongs to his charge to make the Round the day following. This being heard, the day following he doth the like to othres, and so consequently of the rest: Finally, they which haue bin chosen by the Lieutenants of the first Band, to whom the Watch is fal∣len, repaire vnto the Tribunes, and take in writing what portion, and how many Watches they are to visite, which done, they remaine in the guard neare vnto the first Ensigne of the Triarij, of the which the Captaine of the Band hath the charge, to the end the Trumpet may sound in fit time for the Watch. The time being come, he that hath the charge to make the Round, doth it to the first Watch. He not onely visiteth the places neare the Pallisadoe and streets, but altogether going about the Ensignes and Troups: and if he finds the Watch of the first guard waking, he takes their Talley: But if he finds any one sleeping, or the place abandoned, he departs, taking witnesse of them that are neare. The like also they doe which afterwards goe the Round. The charge to cause him to sound to the Watch, belongs to the Captains of Bands of the first Ensignes of the Triarij of euery Legion, who serue as visiters for the guard. Either of which in the morning brings the Paper to the Tribune, and if they haue brought all they returne. If any one brings lesse then the number of the guards, they search by the Character where the fault was committed. This being knowne, they call the Captaine of the Band, who brings those whom they had appointed for the Watch. These debate it with the Visiter: And if the fault be in the Watch, the Visiter deliuers it presently with the testimony of those that were neare:The manner how they pu∣nish such as faile in the Watch. For he is bound to doe it: But if he hath err'd himselfe, the blame is laid vpon him, and they make his processe presently before the Tribune, in the presence of the assembly: if hee be condemn'd, they whip him. This is their punishment: The Tribune when he hath scarce touch the condemned with the rod all the Souldiers of the Campe fall vpon them with rods, and kill them for the most part, and if any escape, yet they are not pre∣serued: for how were it possible, seeing that the returne into their Coun∣trey is forbidden, neither haue they Friends or Kinsmen that dare re∣ceiue them into their houses. Wherefore they which fall into this Ca∣lamity, perish totally. To the like punishmen are also subiect the Lieute∣nant
and Captaine of the Band, if they haue failed in their Command, the one as Vissiter, and the other as Captaine of the Band, who must shew himselfe in time conuenient, wherefore as the punishment is seuere and irremissible, the watch neuer commits any fault. The Souldiers must obey the Tribunes, and they the Consuls. It is true the Tribunes haue power to condemne in a Fine, to absolue and to whip. The Cap∣taines haue the like priuiledge ouer the Allies. If any one hath stollen a∣ny thing in the Campe, he is whipt: so is a false witnesse, or any one that is apprehended abusing the flower of the youth. Moreouer, if any one hath bin thrice reprehended for one and the same crime, they punish him afterwards grieuously as a depraued person. They hold these crimes in∣famous and base in a Souldier, as if any one hath bragg'd falsely to the Tribune of his prowesse to winne honour: Or if any appointed to the guard of a place, abandon it cowardly, or leaues any of his Armes for feare in fight. Wherefore some hauing apparent death before them in the place where they are set, as being enuironed by a great Troupe, will neuer abandon the station where they haue bin once appointed, fearing the punishment due to their offence. Some in the like dangers losing by chance their Bucklers and Swords, or some other Armes, thrust them∣selues among their Enemies, hoping to recouer that which they haue lost by force: or enduring some vnfortunate accident, to flie a manifest infa∣my and reproach of their Companions. If these things happen to many, and that some Ensignes haue by a generall consent abandoned their place, they held it not fit to whip them, nor to kill them all, but they haue another expedient which is profitable and terrible: for after they haue drawne the Army together, the Tribunes bring them into the midst of it, accusing them with big words. Finally, he drawes forth by lot fiue or eight, sometimes twenty, hauing regard vnto the Troupe, so as there be the tenth part of the delinquents, whom they whip as hath bin said, with∣out any remission. Moreouer, he commands the rest to lodge without the Rampiers and Pallisadoes of the Campe, deliuering them Barley for Wheat. By the apparent danger and feare of the lot equally incident to them all, seeing the euent is vncertaine, with the example of the Muniti∣on which they giue them of Barley, concernes them all, and serues for a terrour and restraint from offences. Moreouer, they encourage young men to vndergoe danger: For when necessity requires it, and that any one of them hath performed an act of valour, the Consull assembles the Army, where they are presented which haue done any memorable act: There he commends euery man in particular, laying open what they haue valiantly performed,The manner of recompencing the Souldiers valour. or any other thing that hath bin worthy of memory, during the whole course of their liues: Finally, he giues a gau∣lish Dart to him that hath wounded the Enemy: To a Foot-man which hath ouerthrowne a Horse-man and stript him, a vessell of Gold: To a Horse-man the Furniture of a Horse. In former time they had none but the gaulish Dart: which are gifts which they receiue, which in skirmishes and such like actions haue done valiantly and couragiously, where without any necessity they enter voluntarily, and fight man to man in single Combate, not hee which in Battaile or the
taking of a Towne hath wounded or stript an Enemy. It is true they giue a Crowne of Gold to those which haue first ascended the wall: The Consull in like manner makes shew of such as haue defended and preser∣ued any Cittizens or Allies, and makes them honourable by gift. More∣ouer the Tribunes compell those which haue beene preserued, if they doe it not willingly, to crowne their preseruer, to whom they beare a re∣uerence and respect during their liues, as to their Fathers, to whom they yeeld the like duty. By these inticements they not onely encourage the assistants to fight, and by their example to vndergoe danger: but like∣wise the Inhabitants which remaine in the City. For they which haue obtained these gifts, besides the glory and esteeme of the Souldiers, the fame flying to their family, they haue solemne pomps made for them, being returned into their Countrey with great honour and dig∣nity, for that they to whom the Captaines haue done such honours, are onely worthy to be so magnified and esteemed. They also set vp in the most apparent places of their Citty the spoiles, as markes and testimonies of their virtue. As they are thus curious and diligent in the Campe, for honours and punishment, it is reasonable and fitting the euents of War should proue prosperous and honourable. The Foote-men haue by the day fourteene Deneers, the Captaines of Bands two Sous and foure,The pay or en∣tertainment of Foote and Horse. the Horse-men haue three Sous and sixe, a Foote-man hath monethly almost foure Bushels of Wheate, a Horse-man hath by the moneth three Septiers and a Mine of Barley and a Sep∣tier of Wheate. As for the Allies, the Foote-men haue the same, the Horse-man hath eight Bushels of Wheate,A Septier is two Mines, and a Mine two London bushels. and two Septiers and a Mine of Barley, which are things done in fauour to the Allies. The Questor deducts a certaine portion of the Romans pay, for the Wheate, Apparrell, or Armes, if any of them haue neede. They march in Battaile after this manner, when the first warning is giuen, they packe vp their Tents and Baggage. The which no man may take downe, or set vp, before those of the Tribunes and Consuls be ordred. At the second sound of the Trumpet,The order of the Campe in marching. they lay the Baggage vpon the Sumpters. But at the third the first must march, and all the Campe must moue: whereas sometimes the extraordinaries march first, being followed by the right wing of the Allies, with their Baggage in the Reare. After these march the first Ro∣man Legion, with their stuffe after them. Then followes the second with their carriages, following the Army close. It is true, the left wing of the Allies makes the Reareward when the Army marcheth. Sometimes the Horse men follow in the Reare, euery one to his Quarter: where they are vpon the wings of the Baggage, to assist them for their safeties. But if there be any doubt of the Reare∣ward, all march in one order, except the extraordinaries of the Allies, who are brought to the front of the Reareward, and euery other day the same Legion & wings make the point. Then againe they follow behind, to the end that all may be partakers of Forrage and water, changing their order daily, to the end euery one may be first in his turne. They ob∣serue another kind of march in dangerous times, and in a plaine Cham∣paigne. They make three Battalions in equall distance, consisting of
forked Iauelings, Principals and Triarij's, putting before the Baggage of those Ensignes which march first. After the first those that are se∣cond: and then doth march the Baggage of the third, and they order their Baggage and Ensignes by this proportion alternatiuely. March∣ing in this order, if there happens any great affaires, they cause the En∣signes to march thorough the Baggage, sometimes presenting their Tar∣gets, sometimes their Iauelings to the Enemy. And in one instant and the same march, the Souldiers put themselues in order of Battaile, vnlesse it be when as your forked Iauelings fetch a compasse: For then the Bag∣gage with their attendants, stealing behinde the Souldiers, recouers some place of safety. But when in marching they are neare to plant their Campe, the Tri∣bunes and they which are vsually appointed to that charge, goe before: who after they haue viewed the place fit for the Campe, they first marke out the place for the Consuls Tent, (as hath beene said) and vpon what aspect and flanke of the square thus markt out, the Legions should bee lodgd. Then they measure out a plot for the Pretorium: after which a streight line, whereupon are ioyned the Tribunes Pauillions: Then a line equally distant, after which are lodgd the Legions. In like manner they measure on the other side of the Pretorium, the places whereof we haue lately spoken in particular. This is soone done, for that the measures are easie, the spaces being certaine and ordinary) they set downe a marke, and first of all that where the Consuls Pauillion must stand: Then the se∣cond on the side which is chosen: The third to the line in the midst, to the which the Tribunes set their Tents: The fourth where the Legions are lodgd. Of which these last are red, and the Consuls white. As for the other side, there they sometimes fasten forked Darts, or other markes of diuers colours. This done, they consequently make the streets: At euery one they fasten a forked Dart, to the end that all things might be knowne more commodiously to them that approach to the Army, and to the view of the Campe, by a coniecture and consideration of the Prae∣tors marke. Wherefore euery man knowing plainely in what streete and in what part his Tent is, for that they alwaies hold one place in the Campe. It falls out in like manner as when an Army enters into its owne Citty, which is well knowne. Euery man from the Gate turning, marcheth pre∣sently and comes to his owne lodging without wandring, for that all in generall and particular know in what quarter of the City their dwellings are. It happens likewise in the Romans Campe, wherein they seeme (fol∣lowing this custome) to take a contrary course to the Grecians in regard thereof. The Grecians make great accompt of the strength of a Campe, and seeke it principally, flying partly the labour of ditching, imagining that fortifications made by hand, are not so effectuall and good as those of nature, wherefore they are forced in Camping, wholly to change their formes according to the scituation on of places: so as all mens lodgings are vncertaine. In regard of the Romans, they desire rather to endure the labour of rampring, and to doe all other things necessary for their ease, and to haue the knowledge of euery one in the Campe. These are the
generall parts of the contemplation of an Army, and the scituation of a Campe. A Parcell of the Sixt Booke of Potentates, and which is the most excellent. ALL Historiographers in a manner haue in their writings made great e∣steeme of the Excellency of these kinde of Common-weales, as the Lacedemonians, Candiots, Mantini∣ens, and Carthaginians: Some like∣wise haue mentioned the Athenians and Thebeins. For my part, I differ from the rest: in regard of the A∣thenians and Thebeins. I doe not hold it needfull to vse many words of them; for that they haue had no great increase, nor any firme forces, neither are they fallen into any mo∣derate alteration: But as they seemed to be in vigour and force by a cer∣taine new temporall Fortune, so they haue felt a contrary change. The Thebeins haue purchased an esteeme of virtue among the Grecians by the fault of the Lacedemonians,The Thebeins. and the hatred of those which were of their League, adding thereunto the excellency of one or two in re∣gard of the afore-sayd things. That the virtue of Gouernours, and not the estate of the Common weale hath beene the cause of the Thebeins felicity, the suddaine following Fortune hath made manifest. Their power hath beene augmented and confirmed, and againe ruined during the liues of Epaminundas and Pelopidas. Wherefore we must conceiue that these Men and not the Common-weale, haue beene the cause that the Citty of Thebes hath purchased so much honour whilest it was in esteeme. We must likewise for the same reason iudge the like of the Athenians: the which hath many times,The Athenians. especially by the virtue of Themistocles, made it selfe glorious, but hath presently tryed a contrary change by the disorder of its nature.
It hath alwaies happened to the Athenians, like vnto ships vnfurni∣shed of Pilots. For when the Company resolue to agree, and to obey the Gouernour of the ship, either for feare of Enemies, or for the dan∣ger of a storme, they performe their duties cheerefully. But when through arrogancy they begin to disdaine their Gouernours, and to mu∣tine, for that the same things doe not please all men: so as some haue a will to faile, others to force the Pilot to goe to harbour, and that some lay hold of the Oares, and call vpon him to set saile: this causeth an in∣famous spectacle to those which behold it, by reason of the mutuall dis∣cord and mutiny. The humour of those which are Companions in the Nauigation, hath no stay: wherefore flying many times the great depth of the Sea, and great stormes which doe vsually arise, they saile along the shore. The like hath often happened to the Athenians. For as they haue some times repell'd by the virtue of their people and Commanders, great and greiuous calamities, yet they haue err'd won∣derfully by their great rashnesse and indiscretion, hauing a prosperous gale and all things successefull. Wherefore it is not needfull to hold a∣ny longer discourse, neither of it nor of the Thebeins: where the Com∣mons attempt all things according to their owne humours, the first be∣ing brutish and rude, and this other accustomed to violence and fury. Comming then to that of the Candyotts, it is fit to know two things, why the most learned among the ancient writers, as Ephorus, Xenophon, Callisthenes, and Plato, say first that it is like and the same with that of the Lacedemonians, and secondly that it is commendable: For neither of them seemes true in my opinion: The which may bee conceiued by that which followeth, shewing first that it differs; they say that the Lacedemonians haue this proper; that it is not lawfull for one man to haue more land then another, being necessary for euery Burgesse to haue an equall portion of lands in the Cittie. Secondly that hee is to bee amerced as a wicked man, that hath greater possessions then the rest: By this meanes ambition is wholly or in part rooted out of this Com∣mon-weale. Thirdly, their Kings enioy the Crowne for euer: and they only for life, whom they call ancients: By whom and with whom all the affaires of the Common-weale are mannaged.The Lacede∣monian Com∣mon-weale. In regard of the Can∣diots, all the things are gouerned by contrary meanes. For the Lawes allow them to possesse what Lands they can get: by this meanes Excel∣lency is in esteeme amongst them,The Common weale of Candy so as the possession of Lands is not onely held necessary, but also most honest. Finally, the desire of infamous and auaritious gaine is so powerfull a∣mongst them, that among all mortall men onely the Candiots find no kind of gaine worthy of blame: Although that in that which concernes their principality, they haue an Annall and Democraticall gouernment: so as we are in doubt, and wonder often, how Writers haue deliuered them vnto vs to be familiar and as it were Germaines, seeing they haue so contrary a Nature: Neither haue they without doting ordained so many differences, not lightly, but with a great shew of words: saying that onely Licurgus among the Ancients, had aim'd at firme and solid things: And that as there are two meanes for the preseruation of euery
Common-weale, which are force against the Enemy, and mutuall con∣cord and agreement among themselues: that in chasing auatice, hee had withall taken away all ciuill discord and mutinie: and that by this meanes the Lacedemonians being freed from these mischiefes, haue better then any other Grecians gouerned their Common-weale, and with grea∣ter vnion. And although the Candyotts bee of this aduice parralelling themselues, Yet they thinke it concernes them nothing, liuing in many publique mutinies, murthers and ciuill warre by their naturall auarice, presuming to say that these two Gouernments are alike. Ephorus spea∣king of these two Common-weales, vseth the like speech, except their names: If any one doth not obserue the propper names, who can dis∣cerne whereof hee speakes. These are the causes for the which in my opinion they differ. Wee will now shew the reasons for the which the Candyotts Com∣mon-wealth, doth not seeme commendable nor worthy to be immita∣ted. I conceiue that of euery Common-wealth their are two Principles, for the which their estate and power is desired or detested: Which are their manner of liuing and their Lawes.Two principles of euery Com∣mon-weale. That is to bee desired and the best, by the which the life of men in priuate is made religious and ho∣nest, and the common course of liuing in the City gracious and iust. Fi∣nally that is to be detested and auoyded, where they doe the contrary. And as we iudge confidently that the men of a Common-wealth apply themselues to virtue, when we see their course of life, and the lawes to sauour of honesty in some of them: So we may with reason say, that a Common-weale is altogether depraued, aswell by the lawes, as by their course of liuing, when we see any giuen to couetousnesse, and the publike Arts vniust. Moreouer you shall not finde any liues in priuate more cunning and crafty, nor enterprizes more vniust then among the Candiotts, except some few. Whereof we approue it by this comparison, the reason why we hold their Common-wealth not to be like the Lacedemonians, nor to be chosen, or worthy to be followed. I say moreouer that Platoes Com∣mon-weale is not to be preferr'd. Although that some of our Philoso∣phers make great esteeme.Platoes Com∣mon-weale is to be reiected. As we doe not receiue among handicrafts∣men, nor wrestlers, those which haue not excercised their bodies, nor beene accustomed to wrestling, So we may not receiue this: So as com∣pared with the former, we may not bring it in compedition, before wee see some effects. I will for the present onely propound this: If wee must esteeme and parralell it to the Common-weales of Lacedemon, Rome, and Carthage, it were euen as if a man should propound an Image, to be compared with men that are liuing and animated. For although he de∣serues commendation of his Art, yet the comparison of things which be dead, with the liuing, seeme to the eye poore and obscure. Leauing them therefore, let vs returne to the Lacedemonian Common-weale. Licurgus without doubt, seemes to haue made the law, and well proui∣ded that the Burgesses might agree together, for the preseruation of Lacedemon, and the maintenance of their liberty: So as his considerati∣on seemes more diuine then humane. An equality of possessions, with a
simple and common course of liuing, should cause a modest life in pri∣uate, and make a City quiet and peaceable. Finally, exercise in labour, and to indure all toyle, was to make men strong and valiant. Being cer∣taine that these two which are magnanimity and temperance, concur∣ring together in a priuate person or a City, malice can hardly creepe in amongst them, or be drawne from their neighbours. By these meanes the Common-wealth being setled, it hath procured safety to all the Country of Lacedemon, and a very durable liberty. But as for that which concernes the conquest, and principallity ouer their neighbours, and finally the enterprize of a warre, it seemes he neuer thought of it: but onely that they should bring in a certaine friendship or resolution, by the which the common course of liuing of the City, should rest con∣tented with their moderate estate, euen as their liues in priuate were mo∣dest, and contented with their choise. And although hee had instituted in such sort, as they were freed from ambition, and were very wise as∣well in priuate as in the common course of their liuing in the City: yet he hath left them towards the other Grecians more then ambitious, and of an insatiable desire to raigne, with an extreame auarice: So as it is partly notorious, that first in a manner among the Grecians, greedily de∣siring the countries of their neighbours, they made warre against the Messeniens, to draw them into subiection: It is also partly manifest, that they had obstinately sworne amongst themselues, not to raise the siege, before they had forc't the City of the Messeniens. It is also notorious that for the great desire they had to rule ouer the Grecians, they had a∣gaine submitted themselues to the yoake of those whom they had van∣quished in battaile, So as they had patiently obeyed their commande∣ments. They had vanquished the Persians making a discent, in fighting for the preseruation of the Grecian liberty: to whom notwithstanding be∣ing returned and fled, they haue deliuered the Greeke Townes which were restored, according to the peace made by Antalcides: to the end that hauing money▪ they might fortifie themselues against the Grecians. At what time the establishment of their law seemed to decline: for whilst it gap't after the command of their neighbour, and finally of Morea, they helpt themselues with content, by the meanes which La∣cedemon did furnish, hauing necessary preparations speedily, and making a suddaine returne vnto their houses: But when they began to put an Army to Sea, and to march out of Morea with forces by land, it is cer∣taine that their Iron money, nor the trocking of their Anall fruits, could not supply their necessities according to the lawes of Licurgus. Their enterprize required currant money, and traffique with strangers for victuals: so as they were forced to haue recourse vnto the Percians, to impose a tribute vpon the Ilanders, and to exact money from all the Gre∣cians: knowing it impossible (according to the lawes of Licurgus) to hold the principallity of the Grecians, nor to bee able to keepe their owne Common-wealth. But why haue I wandred so farre in this dis∣course. To the end it may really appeare, that the institution of Li∣curgus lawes, is onely sufficient for euery man to preserue his owne, and
to maintaine his liberty: And we must confesse to those which respect a Common-wealth to this end, that there is nothing more to be desired, then the estate and order of the Lacedemonians. But as any one tends to greater matters, and thinkes of the command of the Empire, and Sig∣nuiy ouer many, their hope in him and his fauour towards them, to be more specious and magnificent,The Roman Cōmon-weale more excellent than the Lace∣demonian. we must then confesse, that the Lace∣demonian Common-wealth is defectiue, and that the Romans is more excellent, and of a more powerfull foundation. The which experience shews plainely. For when the Lacedemonians laboured to conquer the principality of the Grecians, they suddainly brought their owne liberty into danger: whereas the Romans after they had reduced Italy vnder their obedience, within a short time they subdued the whole world, being sufficiently supplied with abundance of all things, and prouision of munition and victuals to effect their Enterprize.The Carthagi∣nian Common∣weale. In regard of the Carthaginian, it seemes to haue beene well instituted since its beginning, according to all differences. They had Kings, and an Aristocraticall power of Sena∣tors: The Commons also had their prerogatiue in matters which be∣longed vnto them. Finally, in that which concernes their generall as∣sembly, it was like vnto that of the Romans and Lacedemonians. It is true, that in the time of Hannibals Warre, that of the Carthaginians was lesse, and that of the Romans better. In euery Common-weale and acti∣on there is a certaine naturall increase and vigour, and consequently a diminution: so as all things are perfect in their vigour. Moreouer these Common-weales were at that time different: For the greater the Car∣thaginians were in the beginning, hauing had many better fortunes then the Romans, the more they haue beene weakned. In regard of Rome, It flourished then euen in order and policy. And as the people of Car∣thage tooke great authority vpon them in Councell, so the Senate had great power among the Romans. Wherefore as in publique resoluti∣ons the Commons in the one gaue their aduice,A Comparison betwixt the Ro∣man and Car∣thaginian Com∣mon-weales. and the best men in the other: so the Romans haue beene more excellent in their publique affaires: where if they haue beene in danger of their whole estate, yet vsing good Councell, they haue in the end vanquished the Car∣thaginians. But for that which concernes a suddaine preparation to Warre, the Carthaginians are more actiue at Sea, and prepare their Fleets better: For that this practice is hereditary and ancient vnto them, and they traffique more by Sea then any other men. But as for the Foot-men, the Romans make better vse then the Carthaginians, for that they wholy addict themselues vnto it. In regard of the Carthaginians, they are care∣lesse of Foot-men: As for Horse-men they take some good order. The reason is, for that they imploy forreine forces which are Mercenaries: and the Romans their owne Nation and Burgesses. Wherefore this Common-wealth is more commendable then the other, the which commits the hope of their liberty to the prowesse of mercenary men: and the Romans to their owne virtue and the succour of the Allies. Wherefore if at any time the Romans haue made losse in their Principa∣lities,
they resist with all their forces. The Carthaginians on the other side, fighting for their Countrey and Children, cannot abate their fu∣ry, maintaining the Combate vnto the last gaspe, vntill they haue van∣quished the Enemy. Wherefore although the Romans be (as I haue said) inferiour vnto them in Sea-fights, yet they exceed them in the bounty of their Souldiers. And although that in dangers at Sea, the experience of nauall combats be of no small importance, yet the prowesse of Soul∣diers at Sea, is of great profit for the Victory. The Italians in truth are of a more excellent disposition then the Phe∣niciens or Lybans, as well in force of body as in courage: whereunto they vsually incite their Youth. I will tell you one thing which may serue for a great presumption, of the diligence of this Common-weale, ordained to breed vp such men as will endure any thing, to the end they may purchase praise, vertue, and same vnto their Countrey.The pompe of the Romans to an honourable person. If at any time a man of great fame and note, dies, they bring him with great pompe to the place which they terms for valiant men, where hee is sometimes vpon his feete, but seldome laid along. When as all the people are assembled, if there be any Sonne of his of sufficient age, he goes into the Chaire of Orations: if not, some other of his Race, who sets forth the vertue and valour oft he deceased. Hence it growes that many, not onely of his Companions in valour, but also others being admonished, and seeing visibly the deeds, haue so great compassion, as the misfortune seemes not onely proper to those which vndertake the danger, but common to the people. Finally, after they haue in∣terred him and performed likewise his obsequies, they set his Image vpon the most apparent place in the house, building about it a Chappell of Ioyners worke. The proportion of his face is carefully wrought to the life, according to the forme and lineaments. Which Images being showne in publique Sacrifices, they adorne honourably. When a man of some excellent Race is dead, they make his obsequies, and they being about him which seeme to be of the same height, stature, and proportion, they put on a garment bordered with purple, if he had beene a Consull, or Generall of an Army: or else a Roabe of Pur∣ple, if a Censor; Or of cloth of Gold, if he hath triumphed, or done a∣ny such like thing. These march in a Chariot in this order: Before the which goe the bundels of Rods and Maces, and other things accustomed to honourable persons, according to euery mans authority, with the which during his life he hath beene honoured in the Common-wealth. Being come to the place of interment, they are all set in Chaires of Iuo∣ry according to their order: so as a young man that thirsts after glory and fame, can behold nothing more beautifull. For who would not be encouraged, to see the Images of men whom they honour in regard of vertue, and as it were aliue? What other spectacle can wee finde more beautifull? Moreouer, he that makes the Funerall Oration, begins to speake of his other Kinsmen there present, and first of all the most an∣cient, relating the deeds and imployments of either of them. So as it falls out that by the Commendation of good men, many times remem∣bred by their vertue, their glory is immortall which haue performed
any honourable action: and their honour which haue serued their Countrey well, is made knowne to many, and multiplyed to posterity. Moreouer, young men are encouraged to that resolution, that they are ready to endure any thing that presents it selfe for the publique good, to the end they might purchase the renowne which accompanies good men. Many Romans for this cause haue fought man to man, to get an estimation among the people: Others haue chosen an apparent death: some to saue others in Battaile: Others to the end they might procure a safety in peace to the Common-wealth. Some also hauing the com∣mand of an Army, haue contrary to all custome and law, slaine their owne Children, hauing more regard to the good of the Countrey, then to the naturall alliance of those which were neerest vnto them. They write diuers other things of many Romans: but it shall suffice at this time to produce one for an example and proofe. They report of Horatius Cocles, that when he fought against two, right against the Bridge of Tiber before the Citty, and seeing a multitude of Enemies come to succour them, fearing left they should force the Citty, he retired to those that were at his backe, crying out vnto them that they should breake the Bridge, and in the meane time maintained the sight with great courage and resolution, receiuing many wounds, and stayed the fury of the Enemies: so as they wondred not so much at his forces, as at his resolution and courage. When by the breaking of the Bridge the Enemies enterprize was disappointed, Cocles casting him∣selfe armed into the Riuer, died according to his resolution, esteeming more the preseruation of his Countrey, and his future glory, then his present life, or that which hee had remaining to liue. It is likely that by such courses young men were inflamed with a desire to honest actions. As for that which concernes gaine, the custome and proceeding of the Romans is much more excellent then that of the Carthaginians, to whom nothing is infamous that brings profit: where there is nothing more vile and base among the Romans, then to be corrupted with gifts, and to wrest from another man contrary to duty. The more honou∣rable they esteeme a benefit gotten from a great and powerfull man, the more they blame and condemne as infamous abundance purchased by vnlawfull meanes. For proofe where of, among the Carthaginians they attaine vnto the gouernment which haue openly giuen presents: whereas among the Romans that corruption is punished with death if it be discouered. Wherefore as the rewards of vertue are contrary a∣mong them. It is apparent that the institution of these Common-wealths is vnequall in these things. Finally, it seemes that concerning the opinion of the Gods, the Roman Common-wealth followes not the best. And I imagine that all the world holds it a dishonour that this is found among their actions. I speake of their superstition. It is in truth preacht among them for so excellent, and so anchored in men, as well in priuate as publique, as they cannot adde any thing, the which in truth will seeme admirable. I am of opinion they haue done it for the cōmon sort. For if the Common-weale could haue assembled wise
men, this course happily had not beene necessary. But for that the mul∣titude is light and inconstant, and subiect to disordred affections, and to vnreasonable distempers of fury and violence, it was fit to restraine them by a disguised feare, and by this kind of strange language. Where∣fore the Ancients did not without reason invre the Common sort with the knowledge of the Gods, and with Tales of Hell, which some at this day oppose foolishly and without consideration. Wherefore in passing ouer with silence other which gouerne Com∣mon-weales, if a man lends to Grecians but sixe hundred Crownes, they cannot keepe their Faith, although he hath ten promises, and as ma∣ny Signatures, and twice as many Witnesses. In regard of the Romans, in all their Commands, they which mannage great affaires and wealth, performe their duties according to the Faith of their Oaths: whereas in other states you shall find few men carefull and sparing of the publique good, and performing the duty of an honest man: so it is a rare thing among the Romans, to finde any one accused of such a Crime.All things sub∣iect to corrup∣tion. That there is corruption and alteration in all things, it is not needefull to to speake: For the necessity of Nature will giue sufficient proofe. And as there are two menaes by the which euery Common-wealth is vsually ouerthrowne, whereof the one is exteriour, and the other of it selfe: That which is exteriour is in its consideration inconstant: But as for the order within it selfe, we haue formerly deliuered what kind the first is, what the second, and how it ends in a third Common-wealth: so as they which can appropriate the beginning of this present Subiect to the end, may also fore tell the future: the which in my opinion is manifest. For when a Common-weale hath gotten (after many and great dan∣gers auoided) an excellency and vnresistable power, it is apparent, that growing (as of custome) to abundance of wealth, the expences are more sumptuous, and men grow more quarrelsome touching Gouern∣ments and other Enterprizes. By the continuance whereof begins a change to worse, as to ambition which is a kind of ignomy: Moreo∣uer, an arrogant kind of liuing and sumptuousnesse. The people will leaue this Title of change, when as growne proude with ambition, sweetned with their good words which seeke to gaine them by couetousnesse. For then being furious, and mannaging all things with rage, they will no more obey their Princes, nor be equall to their Gouernours, but most commonly will haue all the power. This done, the Common-weale will change its name into a goodly shew of liberty and a Democracia: but in effect to a most wicked Orchlocracia. Finally, as we haue declared the establishing, increase, with the vigour and disposition of the Common-wealth, and the difference from others, and what is good or bad in it, we will here make an end of this Discourse. Resuming then the parts which cohere with the time of the Histo∣ry, from whence wee strayed, we will in few words make a briefe relati∣on of an action: to the end that not onely inspeech, but also in effect, af∣ter the manner of a good workeman, we may plainely shew the vigour and power of the Common-wealth, as it was at that time, propounding
some excellent action. When as Hannibal had won the Battaile of Cannes against the Romans,Hannibals pro¦ceeding after the Battail of Cannes. he tooke eight thousand men Prisoners, which had bin appointed for the guard of the Fort or Campe: suffring them all to send to their houses for their Ransome and safety. He sent tonne, of the most apparent to Rome, vpon their Faith to returne againe. Whenas one of them being out of the Fort, was returned, saying that he had forgotten something, and hauing taken that which he had left, he went on his way, thinking by this returne to haue kept his Faith, and to haue made his Oath voide and vnprofitable. When they were come to Rome, they intreate the Senate not to hinder the deliuery of the Priso∣ners, and that they would suffer them to pay thirteene Liuers for a man, and that they might returne safely to their Families. They sayd that Hannibal had so agreed, and that moreouer they were worthy to be preserued, for that they had not playd the Cowards in the Battaile, nor done any act vnworthy of the Roman name: But being left to guard the Campe, all the rest being slaine in Battaile, they had beene suddain∣ly enuironed and brought vnder the Enemies subiection. But when the Romans (hauing made great losses during the Warres, and being in a manner abandoned by all their Allies, so as they seemed to be in great danger for their Countrey) had heard this speech, they were not care∣lesse of their honour, to yeeld vnto their misery: neither did they dis∣daine any thing that was needfull to be done. But considering Hannibals intention, who thought by this practice to draw away their Treasure, and withal to disinhearten & discourage his enemies in battaile, shew∣ing couertly that the vanquished had yet some hope remaining and were so farre from yeelding to that which was required, as they were neither moued to pitty the Prisoners, nor made any accompt of the future faule of men: making it knowne (in refusing to redeeme their men) that the conceit and hope which Hannibal had in them was vaine. Finally, they haue enioyned their Souldiers by a law, to vnquish in fighting or to die, for that being vanquished there remained no hope of safety. After which things decreed, they sent backe the nine Embassadours, who wil∣lingly returned according to their promise, deliuering him who had thought cunningly to breake his Faith to the Enemy, bound hand and foote: so as Hannibal was not so glad of the Battaile wonne against the Romans, as sorrowfull, wondring at the constancy and magnamity of these men in their resolutions.
A PARCELL OF the Seuenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS, concerning the Accord made betwixt the Cartha∣ginians and Messeniens, with the taking of the Citty of the Sar∣dines by Antiochus. THe Citty of the Leontins is wholly scitua∣ted towards the North: In the midst whereof is a great place, where there are Pallaces built, Seates of Iustice, and a Mar∣ket place for all Commodities. Vpon eue∣ry side of the place is a Hill, with a thicke Rocke, and the plaine of these Hils vpon the top, is fill'd with houses and Temples. Finally, this Citty hath two Gates: where∣of the one is towards the South, at the end of the place aboue mentioned, going to Saragosse: and the other bends to the North, towards the Leontine Plaines and the errable Land. But vnder one of the Rocks which lookes towards the West, there flowes a Riuer which they call Lisson:The Riuer of Lisson. where there are houses built one against a∣nother, and many others vnder the Rocke, betwixt the which this Riuer passeth. Behold the accord sworne, which was made by Hannibal the Commander, Mago, Mercane, Barmocare, and all the Carthaginian Sena∣tors which were then with Hannibal,An accord made betwixt tho Carthagini∣ans, Macedoni∣ans, and Greci∣ans. and the Carthaginian Ar∣my which he had vnder his command, with Zenophanes the Son of Cle∣omachus, Embassadour for the Athenians, whom King Philip the Sonne of Demetrius sent vnto them as well for himselfe as for the Macedonians and their Allies: And that before Iupiter, Iuno and Apollo: And before the Gods of the Carthaginians, Hercules and Iolae, Mars, Triton, and Nep∣tune: And before the Gods of their Army, the Sun Moone, and Earth: And the Riuers, Gods, and Waues, and finally before all the Gods which possesse Carthage, and all those which hold Macedony and the rest of Greece, and in the presence of all other Gods which are not compre∣hended
in this Oath. Captaine Hannibal with the Senators of Car∣thage which were with him and the whole Army, haue said: according to your good pleasure and ours, wee Friends, Allies, and Brethren, shall giue order to this Accord sworne, concerning the Friendship and good intelligence, so as the Lords of Carthage, Captaine Hannibal and his men, with the other Carthaginian Princes, which liue vnder the same Lawes, and likewise the Bisartins, with all the Citties and Nations subiect to the Carthaginians, Souldiers and Allies, and all Citties and people with whom we haue any league or friendship, as wel in Italy and Spaine, as in the Countrey of Genoua, and if there be any o∣thers in this Region with whom we haue any friendship or league, shall be guarded and defended by King Philip and the Macedonians, and all other Grecians which are in league with them. In like manner King Philip and the Macedonians with the Allies of the other Grecians, shall be guarded and defended by the Carthaginians, making Warre with them, and by the Bisartins, and by all the Cities and Nations acknowledging the Empire of Carthage, with their Allies and Souldiers, and all Nations and Citties which are in Italy, Spaine, and Genoua, and all other Allies which are in other Countries of Italy. Neither the one nor the other shall haue any practices, nor plot any War by deuices, being of good affection and intelligence, without fraud or deceit, Enemies to those which shall make Warre against the Car∣thaginians, except the Townes, Citties, and Ports, with whom they haue a sworne league. We likewise shall be Enemies to those which shall make Warre against King Philip, except the Citties and Nations with whom we haue sworne friendship. Finaly, you shall maintaine our party, in gi∣uing aide and comfort according to the necessity of our affaires, in the War begun betwixt vs and the Romans, vntill that by the grace of the Gods you and we may haue a good end. And if by the helpe of the Gods you and we shall consent to to treate of friendship with the Romans tou∣ching the Warre we haue with them, we will treate it in such sort, as you shall be partakers, so as it shall be neuer lawfull for them to make Warre against you: Neither may the Romans rule ouer the Cercyreins or Apol∣liniates, or Epidamnes, or ouer Phaire, or Demale, the Parthins, and the Antintanica▪ And moreouer they shall restore to Demetrius of Phaire all his Subiects, whom they haue receiued for Burgesses. And if it hap∣pen that the Romans make Warre against vs or you, we shall succour one another as the common necessity shall require. The like also we will doe, if others make Warre against vs, except the Kings and Nations with whom we are in league. Moreouer, we will adde or diminish what we shall thinke good of this accord sworne by a common consent. During these things Philip taking the Bowels of the Sacrifices, the which according to the custome were brought vnto him, and bending himselfe a little, he presented them to Arate, demanding of him what those Sacrifices signified, and whether they would abandon that Fort or keepe it still. Then Demetrius as the most aged, said: If thou hast the iudgment of a Soothsayer, we wil leaue it suddainly, but if the vnderstan∣diug of a warlike King, we will keepe it. And not to abandon it, thou shalt
consider of another necessary occasion: For by this meanes in laying hold of the Oxes hornes, thou shalt haue it wholy in thy subiection. By the hornes he meant Isthomate, and the Acrocorinthe: and by the Oxe, Morea. Then Philip returning to Arate, art thou of this aduice? And when as Arate spake nothing, he intreated him to deliuer his opinion: who after he had considered thereon, answered, thou mayst keepe it, if thou canst prouide in such sort that the accord with the Atheniens may not be infring'd. If in taking it thou puts a Garrison, thou shalt loose all the Fort, and the Garrison it selfe (meaning his fayth) which thou hast re∣ceiued from Antigonus, in giuing the Guards to the Allies. Consider whether it be now better, that in putting me forth, thou loosest this fidelity, and that by this meanes thou setlest Garrisons ouer the Messe∣niens, and other Allies. But Philip had a great desire to breake the ac∣cord: the which his following actions made manifest. And when hee had a little before beene sharpely reprehended by yong Arate for the defeate of some men, and that the elder (hauing spoke freely and with authority) had intreated him not to giue an easie eare to such speeches as should be vsed vnto him, shame restrained him: and taking his right hand, well sayd he, let vs follow the same course. In regard of the City of the Sardins, there were continually combats and dangerous encounters. For the souldiers of eyther side studied day and night to frustrate one anothers pollicies by new inuentions: to write all which in particular would be no lesse vnprofitable then tedious. And when as the siege had continued full two yeeres, Lagoras of Candy, a man well experienced in the art of warre, hauing considered with himselfe, that many times strong Cities fall easily into the Enemies hands, by the negligence of the inhabitants, who relying vpon their fortifications made as well by nature as art, assure themselues and grow idle: And knowing likewise how they are accustomed to set guards in strong pla∣ces, which might make heads against the Enemies attemps: Seeing likewise according to his conceit the despaire of them all, that they should not be able to take the Sardins Fort by this meanes; and that want of victuals and munition, remained for their last hope to take it: The more he considers thereon, and studies by what meanes he might finde some occasion to surprize the City. And when as afterwards hee found that the courting of the place,A signe of the Sardins negli∣gence. which they call Serie (it is that which ioynes the City with the Fort) was without guard, it happened that according to his hope and opinion, he discouered the negligence of the guard by his presumption. This place was very rough and steepe, hauing a valley neere vnto it, into the which they of the City cast their dead carrion: Whither re∣forted a great number of vulture and other rauening Birds. When this man saw that these Birds after they were full gorg'd, pearch daily vpon the top of the valley, and on the wall, he knew thereby, that of necessi∣ty this courtine was abandoned, and for the most part without guard. Then approaching wisely in the night, hee sought meanes to get vp. And when he found that in a certaine place of the valley they might
ascend, he aduertised the King. Who conceiuing a good hope, per∣swaded Lagoras to continue his enterprize, promising to doe what possibly hee could. Lagoras intreats the King, to giue him for companions Theodote the Etolien, and Denis Captaine of his guard, and that hee would command them to beare him company to lay this Ambush: For they seemed to bee able men and sufficient for this enterprize. And when the King had satisfyed his demand, they agree together, and by a common consent make choyse of a night, when as part of the morning had no moone-light. After which the day before at Sunne-setting, they make choyce of fifteene strong and resolute men, to mount vp the ladders with them, and to gaine the wall, who in this hardy enterprize should be their companions. Then they chose thirty other, to lye a little distant of in Ambush: to the end that when they had recouered the wall, they should fall vpon the next gate, and striue to breake the hinges and ioynts, and the others within the barres and lockes. They also appoynt two thou∣sand men in the reare of these, who entring with them should recouer the place of the Theater: The which was made so conue∣niently, as it was opposite to the approaches of those of the Forts and those of the City. Moreouer to auoyd the suspition of the truth, in regard of the choyse of these men, he gaue order that the Etoliens should giue an assault vnto the City by a certaine valley: And there∣fore it was needfull that these should second them, according to a signe which should be giuen them. When as all things were ready, and the Moone growne darke they which were Lagoras, taking the ladders, approacht closely to the top of the valley, and hid themselues vnder the rocke. When at the breake of day they had relieued the watch which was on that side, and the King had sent (as of custome) others to second them, and had appoynted a good number for a place where they runne their horses, no man suspected any thing of the enterprize: But when as the two ladders were set vp against the wall, where Denis on the one, and Lagoras on the other mounted first vnto the top, their grew a great noyse, and alteration in the Campe. It so fell out that they which moun∣ted the ladders, could not be discouered by them of the City, nor by the rest which were in the Fort vnder Acheus, by reason of the Rocke which aduanced ouer the valley. But their courage which ascended the wall and assailed the City, was apparant to the Army. Wherefore some wondred at there incredible resolution, others foreseeing the future, and fearing, remained partly amazed, and partly ioyfull. Where∣fore the King seeing the alteration in his Campe, desiring also to diuert this fancie, as well from his owne men, as from those of the City, he led forth his Army, and besieged the two Gates, which they call Per∣sides, On the other side Acheus, seeing the Enemies alteration more then of custome, was in great doubt, being ignorant of the present cause, and could not vnderstand the practise, Yet he sent men to the Gate, which succours came somewhat late, for that they descended by straights and hollow places. Aribaze who was Captaine of the City, went
simply to the Gates, which he had seene Antiochus assaile: appoynting some to goe vnto the wall, others to make sallies by the Gate, to keepe the Enemy from approaching, and to fight with them. In the meane time Lagoras, Theodote, and Denis, with their troupe, ha∣uing recouered the walls, came to the Gate vnderneath, whereof some maintayned the charge which the Inhabitants gaue them, others brake the barres and bolt of the Gates. The like did they without which were appoynted to that Quarter. When as the gate was opened, the other two thousand entred the City, and seize vpon the place of the Thea∣ter. This done, all they which had runne to the walls, and to the Gate which they call Perside, who had beene sent by Aribaze to de∣fend it, against the Enemies assault, came running thither. After which retreate, the Gate was opened, so as some of the Kings troupe pursuing those which abandoned it, entred pell mell. When they had taken the Gate by force, some entred the City, others forced the next Gates. They that were of Aribazes band, with all the Citizens, recouered the Fort by flight, after they had made some little resistance. After this route, Legoras and Thodotes band stood firme in the place of the Theater, seruing as a Fort to all the rest. Finally the rest of the Army charging of all sides tooke the City.The Citty of the Sardins ta∣ken by assault. By this meanes, the City was wholly sackt and ruined, some killing those they encountred, others setting fire of the houses, and some gaping after spoyle for their priuate profit. And thus Antiochus van∣quished the Sardins.
A PARCELL OF the Eighth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS, concerning the Difference of a Perticular and Ge∣nerall History. NO man can iustly say, if they to whom these kindes of Calamities and disasters haue befalne, ought to be blamed or censured, or helde wor∣thy of pardon and pitty in regard thereof: For that it falls and happens to many (to whom all things haue beene done conformable and agreeable vnto reason) to bee subiect to those which transgresse with great desire, the things which are iust and reasonable before men. Yet wee may not be silent here, being necessary (hauing regard to the time and circumstance of ac∣cidents) to blame some Captaines, and to pardon others: The which will appeare plainly by this. When Archidamus King of the Lacede∣monians suspected that Cleomenes aspired to the Crowne, he fled from Lacedemon. Who soone after being againe perswaded, put himselfe into his hands. Being therefore by this meanes stript of Crowne and Life, hee hath left no excuse to posterity, of those things which he hath suffred. For what colour is there, the cause being still the same, and Cleomenes power increasing, but he should suffer the things which we haue spoken, hauing put himselfe into their hands, from whom he formerly had fled, giuing order for his safety contrary to all hope? Al∣though that Pelopidas of Thebes had beene the cause of King Alexan∣ders iniquity, and that hee knew well, that all Tyrants are capitall E∣nemies to those which defend liberty, yet he perswaded Epaminundas
to be Gouernour not only of the popular Common-weale of the The∣beins, but also of the Grecians. And as he was an Enemy to Thessaly, to the end he might ruine the Monarchy of Alexander, yet he presu∣med to go the second time in Embassie vnto him. Wherefore when he fell into the hands of his Enemies, hee was the cause of great pre∣iudice to the Thebeins, and the ruine of their glory, which vntill that time they had preserued: for the confidence he had in those, whom he should not haue trusted. The like hapned to Cheius Chiefe of the Romans, during the Warre of Sycily, for that he had indiscreetly thrust himselfe into the Enemies power. Diuers others haue suffered the like. Wherefore they are worthy of blame, who without great consideration, submit them∣selues vnto their Enemies, and not they who (asmuch as in them lies) mannaged their Affaires discreetly: for in truth no man can gouerne them well, relying vpon another. If thou dost them by certaine oc∣casions, which are conformable to reason, thou shalt be blamelesse. The most likely causes of this kind are, an Oath, Children, Wife, and for the most certaine, the fore-passed life. And if it happens that vn∣der colour of these things, thou falst into an inconuenience, the faulte shall not bee thine in suffering, but theirs who commit the wrong. Wherefore we must seeke such Arguments and assurances, as in regard thereof, he in whom you trust, may not breake the faith which hee hath giuen. But for that there are few such, the best will bee to haue a care of those which are conformable to reason: so as if wee be decel∣ued therein, wee may not loose our excuse with strangers: the which hath hapned to many of our Predecessors. It is a thing much more manifest in those times whereof wee haue made mention, and of a later date, in that which hath befaene Acheus: who fell into his Enemies hands, although hee omitted nothing that might be done for his safety, prouiding for all things as much as Hu∣mane sense could effect. Wherefore the euent hath caused commisse∣ration and pardon, in him which hath suffered with strangers, and blame and hatred to those which haue done the outrage. Moreouer, I do not find it strange to my Enterprize and first intention, to aduer∣tise the Readers of the greatnesse of these things, and of the ambiti∣ous desire of the Roman and Carthaginian Common-weales. Who will not hold it fit to be considered, how the Gouernours of such great Cities, not being ignorant of the things which had happened in Italy and Spaine, hauing moreouer of either side an equall hope of the fu∣ture, and a present danger of the Warre, haue not beene contented with this apparent discommodity, but contended for Sardinia and Sycily, imbracing the whole, not onely in hope, but with Expences and Preparations of Warre, which will mooue any man to wonder, that shall obserue it all in perticular? The Romans had two sufficient Armies in Italy with their Consuls for their preseruations: And two o∣thers in Spaine, where Gneius had the leading of that by Land, and Publius of the other by Sea. These are things which happened to the Carthaginians. Moreouer they sent an Army by Sea, to crosse the at∣tempts
of Philip in Greece: In the which Marcus Valerius commaun∣ded first, then Publius Sulpicius, with whom Appius likewise ioyned with a hundred Quinqueremes. Moreouer Marcus Claudius furni∣shed with an Army at Land, had assailed Sycily: The like Amilcar had done being sent by the Carthaginians. By the which things I am confident, (the which I haue often spoken in the beginning of this Worke) to find a certaine assurance by the ac∣cidents which consist in this, that it is not possible for those which Write perticular Histories, to be able to obserue the generall disposi∣tion of things: For how is it possible, that he which doth barely read the Exploits of Sycily and Spaine, can know or conceiue the greatnesse and continuance of Actions, nor in what sort or forme of a Common-weale, Fortune hath brought it to an end? The which is very admi∣rable to vs, for that all the Countries of the World, which are come to the knowledge of men, are subiect to one Empire and Power, the which hath not formerly beene. It is true, that it is not impossible to vnderstand in some sort by per∣ticular Histories, how the Romans haue Conquered Sycily and Spaine: But it is a difficult thing to know in what sort they haue attained to this Vniuersall power and Commaund: Nor to what vse perticular Actions haue serued to their generall Enterprize, nor with what succours, nor at what time they haue attempted it, without a full and generall Histo∣ry of the proceedings: neither will it be easie for the same causes, to consider the greatnesse of Actions, nor the power of this Common-weale. For in that the Romans haue Conquered Sycily and Spaine, and haue made Warre there both by Sea and Land, it is no wonder if one man deliuer it in perticular. But if we consider that when these things hapned, this powerfull Common-wealth had ended many others, and at the same time, and how it was effected, and with what calamities and Warre, they were afflicted in their owne Region, which perfor∣med these Exploits at that time, finally their deedes wilbe held glori∣ous and admirable; and then the knowledge of these things will square well. This Discourse shalbee directed vnto those, who by perticular Commentaries, thinke they are able to attaine vnto the knowledge of a generall History. Marcus furnished with an Army of threescore Quinqueremes, sailed to Achrandine, either of which were armed with men, carrying Bowes, Slings, and Darts to repulse those which should defend the Forts. Hee had also eight Quinqueremes furnished with Pallisadoes, aswell on the right as left side: with the which being ioyned together with two thin inclosures, they approacht vnto the Wall, by meanes of the Pallisa∣do set without the inclosure,The order of the Engines of Battery. and they call them Sambuques. The manner of ordring the same Engines was in this sort. They had with∣in the Ship a Ladder of foure foote broad, to the end that at the Des∣cent it might come to the top of the Wall: Vppon the sides thereof they made stayes, and armed them with a couering for defence, setting them crosse the inclosures, which kept the Shippes vnited together, so as they did passe much beyond the Prow or fore-part of the Shippe.
There were pullies fastned with Cords to the top of the Masts: and when as necessity required, they drew those which were at the poope or hinder part by the pulleys, with Cords tyed to the top of the ladder. The others which were at the Prowe, assured the En∣gine with stayes: and finally they approacht it to the wall, draw∣ing neare to Land by the nauigation of the ships, which was done by the meanes of two Pallisadoes which are placed without. On the top of the ladder there was a planke, which couered three superficies with Persian Targets, to the which foure Souldiers mounted, and fought against those which from the Forts sought to hinder the approach of the Sambuques. When by the ioyning of the ladder they haue gained the wall, in disarming the sides of their Targets, they mount to the Forts or Towers. The rest follow them by the Sambuques, by meanes of the transport of the ladder from Vessell to Vessell by ropes. Finally, this Engine was not vnfitly so called. For being finished and set vp, the figure of the ship and ladder reduced into one, make it like vnto a Sam∣buque. They imagined to come close vnto the Wall with this Engine. But Archimides hauing made prouision of Engines fit for all distan∣ces, troubled them at Sea much, and thrust them into despaire, an∣noying them a farre off with casting Engines which were strong and great. But if they went beyond them, he vsed lesser Engines, according to the distance, which disappointed and hindred their Enterprize and na∣uigation: vntill that Marcus being much perplexed, was forced to make his approaches couertly in the Night. When they had recouered Land, and were out of the Battery, he made another kind of Engine against those which were to fight by Sea. For hee made many holes in the Wall without, the height of a man, and of the bignesse of a mans hand, where hee appointed within casters of Darts, and of En∣gines to repulse, making by the meanes thereof the Enemies attempts in their mounting vnprofitable. By this meanes he not onely repuls'd them farre off, and preuented their attempts neare, but also slew many of them. And whereas they made vse of their Sambuques, he likewise set vp Engines, to pull them ouer the Wall: and kept them alwaies hidden vntill necessity required, setting them vpon the Walles within, to passe forth and fall vpon the sayle-yards: some of them cast Stones, or Lead of twelue hundred waight. And when as the Sambuques approach sometimes in turning, they cast from the top of the Engines with a Tower, Stones against them as necessity required. So as not onely the Sambuque hath beene broken, but also the Vessel: and all they that were within it in great dan∣ger. Againe, some Engines cast lesser Stones vpon the Enemy, comming to the assault couered with Targets, to the end they might not bee annoyed with the Darts and other Weapons, which they cast from the Wall, that they which fought in the Prowe might bee repuls'd. They likewise let downe a hand of Iron tyed to a Chayne, the which laying hold of him which gouerned the toppe, drew the Prowe within the Walles with the tayle of the Engine. And if at any time in raysing the Prowe, hee set the Shippe vppon its Poope,
hee held it firme and vnmoueable by his instrument, then by a kind of fauour he let slip the hand and the chaine by the Engine. By this meanes some fell vpon their sides, others were ouerthrowne, a great part of them (the Prow falling from the top to the bottome) were drowned with great confusion. Marcus discontented with Archi∣mides repulses, seeing likewise his men preuented in their attempts, to his preiudice and disgrace, sayd (although hee were grieued with his misfortune) in scoffing at the deeds of Archimides, that he vsed his ships as they doe pots, to draw water out of the Sea, and that be∣ing battred and beaten, they were as disloyall fallen infamously. This was the eud of the Siege at Sea. In regard of those which were with Appius, they ceased from their attempts, hauing endured the like affronts and losses. For although they were a good distance from the Wall, yet they were hurt and slaine with their casting of Stones and Darts. In truth the Art, the number and the effect of all manner of Engines, whereof King Hieron had made good prouision, was admirable, the which Archimides had forg'd and made, being the Architect and En∣gineere. And when as they approacht the City, some of them (as we haue sayd) were slaine with their Arrowes, and continually repuls'd from their appoaches: Others couered with Targets, and therefore assailing with greater force, were ouerthrowne, and slaine with Stones and the bodies of Trees: A good number likewise were slaine by the hands descending from the Engines as we haue sayd: For they cast downe men being raised vp on high with their Armes. Wherefore they of Appius Army retiring to their Campe, and holding a Councell with the Captaines, were all of one opinion, and resolued to try all manner of hope, to take Saragosse by siege: the which in the end they did. For when they had besieged this City for the space of eight Moneths, they ceased not daily to make braue and valiant enterprizes of Warre: But they ne∣uer durst attempt to take it by force. By this meanes a man with good fortune seemed to bring to an end great and admirable things, when as they are fitly ioyned together in great affaires. Finally, the Romans hauing such great Armies both by Sea and Land, attended to take the Towne speedily, if they could get an old man out of Saragosse, not daring to approach it, whilst that Ar∣chimides were present and could defend it. Wherefore conceiuing that Saragosse might be taken for want of victuals and munition, conside∣ring the great multitude which was in the City, they relyed vpon this hope: and hindred by an Army at Sea that nothing might approach, and by that at Land, that no succours might come. Moreouer, the Commanders being loath to spend the time in vaine, during the siege of Saragosse, but withall to vndertake some good thing beside the siege, they diuided their Army in such sort, as two parts should re∣maine with Appius for the siege of the City: And that Marcus with the third part should assaile the Carthaginians, who sent an Army in∣to Sicily. Finally, Philip hauing made the Messeniens his mortall Enemies,
could in nothing offend them that was worthy of fame: Although hee had assailed their Countrey to torment them, vsing great indignities to his best Friends.Philip causeth Arate to be poisoned. For soone after hee caused old Arate to bee poiso∣ned in Messene, for that hee was discontented with his course of life: The like hee did to Taurion, who had serued him in Morea. Where∣fore these his Actions were presently divulged and made knowne to strangers. His power ouer those whom hee then defeated was not new, but long before vsed, and practised by custome: neither was A∣rate ignorant of this mischiefe, the which was discouered by this meanes. And as he had concealed it from all others, yet he did not hide it from Cephalon one of his familiar Friends: But declared vnto him his infirmity, the which appeared by the bloudy spittle against the wall, saying: Behold Cephalon, the recompence wee reape by Philips Friendship. Truely, Mediocrity is so great and honest, as hee which suffers, is more ashamed of the deed, then he that hath committed it. But such rewards they reape of Friendship, that haue beene Companions in such great Actions, and done seruice to Philip. Finally, Arate after his death receiued sufficient honours,Honours done to Arate after his death. both in his Countrey and the Com∣mon weale of the Acheins, as well for the gouernment which hee had often in charge, as for the many fauours he did vnto that Nation. They decreed him Oblations and Heroyicke honours, and finally, all things which serue to perpetuate the memory: so as if the Dead haue any sense, it is likely he commends the acknowledgement done vnto him, and the communication of affliction and dangers which haue happened in his life time. As Philip had long deuised how to take Lisse, and its Fort, desiring to reduce those places vnder his obedience, hee drew thither with his Army. Hauing marcht two dayes, and past the streights, hee campt neare vnto the Riuer of Ardaxana, neare vnto the Citty. And when he had viewed the scituation of Lisse, excellently well fortified both by nature and industry, as well towards the Sea as Land: And likewise the Fort ioyning neare vnto it, the which in shew was impregnable to all the World by force, as well for its extent vpwards, as for the other fortification, he despaired to take it, yet he did not wholly despaire to take the Towne. Considering therefore that the space betwixt the Towne & the Mount of the Fort, was reasonable to besiege the Towne, he thought good to make a Skirmish there with his Archers, which was then his manner of proceeding. Suffring then the Macedovians to rest a day, whom he aduertised of things necessary, he layd an Ambush in the Night of a great part, and the ablest of his men, in certaine woody Val∣leys, and neare vnto a Mediterranian place, lying aboue the place wher∣of we haue spoken: and retaining for the day following those that were armed with Targets, and the rest of the nimblest Souldiers, hee takes his way forthwith towards the Citty, marching of either side to∣wards the Sea. When hee had past beyond it, and had made a stand there, it was apparent that hee meant to assaile the Citty in that place. As this
comming of Philip was not vnknowne, so a great number out of Scla∣uonia were come into Lisse. It is true that for the great confidence they had in the fortification of the Fortresse, they sent but a meane Garri∣son. Wherefore when the Macedonians approacht, the Inhabitants pre∣sently made a sally,A sally made by them of Lisse. relying in their multitude and the force of the place. The King ordred the Targetteers in the plaine, commanding the most actiue to recouer the hills, and to fight valiantly with the Enemy. The which they performing, the danger seemed something equall. But in the end Philips men retired, for the difficulty of the place and the multi∣tude of their Enemies. And as they retired to them that were armed with Targets, they of the City pursuing them with a kind of disdaine in∣to the Plaine, fought with the Targetteers. They likewise whi had the guard of the Fort, seeing Philip retire by little and little with his Troupes, and imagining that he was going away, came running couete∣ly, trusting in the nature of the place: Then leauing few men within the Fort, they came by vnknowne wayes into the Plaine, as if they were to take the spoiles of their flying Enemies. But in the meane time they which were in Ambush, rise suddainly and gaue a furious charge with the Targetteers vpon the Enemies. The multitude was herewith so amazed, as the Lissiens retired for their safe∣ty to the City. In regard of those which had abandoned the Fort, their returne was cut off by the Ambush. Whereby it happened that where∣as before there was no hope, now the Fort was presently taken, and with∣out danger,Lisse taken by Phlp. and Lisse the next day by the valour of the Macedonians, and by their rough and terrible assaults Philip hauing conquered the said places contrary to his hope, he made all the Neighbours thereabouts subiect vnto him, so as a great part of Sclauonia, offred to submit their Townes to his protection. It is true, there were no Forts that could endure the violence of Philip: neither any safety for those which re∣sisted, after the taking of the said Forts by assault. BolisBolis. was a man borne in Candy, who had long frequented the Court, and was aduanced to the prime dignity. Hee seemed to be very wise and resolute, with no lesse experience in the Warre. Whom when So∣sibius had gain'd, and made affectionate vnto him, he commanded him (after a long speech) to put a businesse in execution, telling him, that there was not any thing at that time, could be more pleasing vnto the King, then to finde meanes to saue Acheius. The which Bolis hauing heard, and promised to consider thereon, he retired. Two or three dayes after, when he had thought of this Discourse, hee came to Sosi∣bius, and vndertooke to effect it: saying, that he had long held the par∣ty of the Sardins, and had good knowledge of the Countrey: Adding moreouer, that Cambyle,Combyle. Captaine of the Candiots which are in pay with Antiochus, was not only a Burgesse, but also his kinsman and friend. It happened that Cambyle and the Candiots that were vnder his charge, had the guard of the backpart of the Fortresse, which was not fortifid, but it was guarded by a multitude of Cambyles Souldiers. When as Sosi∣bius found this aduice good, studying how hee might free Acheus from calamity, or whether it were better to attempt it by some other
man then Bolis, but his humour concurring with Bolis, the businesse tooke this effect. Sosibius deliuered money presently, to the end no∣thing should bee wanting for the Enterprize, promising great rewards if it succeeded well. So promising the Kings fauour, and that of A∣cheus if hee might bee preserued, hee fedde Bolis with great hopes. This man being ready to vndertake the Enterprize, without any longer expectance imbarkes: and hauing Letters of Recommendati∣on and credit, hee goes to Nicomache at Rhodes, who seemed to be affected to Acheus, as well for his Fathers loue, as for particular Friendship: And likewise to Melancome in Ephesus. These in truth were the men, of whose meanes Acheus had formerly made vse, as well comming to Ptolomy, as in other forreine and remote places Being come to Rhodes, and afterwards to Ephesus, hauing ac∣quainted them with this businesse, and finding them ready in any thing hee desired, hee sent Arian (being one of those that were vnder his charge) to Cambyle, saying that he had beene sent from Alexan∣dria, to leuy forreine Souldiers, and that he had a great desire to con∣serre with him concerning matters of importance: And therefore he desired to appoint a time and place where they might meete vnknown to the World. Arian came to Cambyle, discouering vnto him his charge: whereunto hee gaue eare, being ready to doe that where∣unto they prest him, appointing a day and place knowne to them both: whither being come in the Night, he sent backe Arian? As Bolis was a Candiot, and cunning by Nature, he studied of the re∣solution inquiring of all things. Finally, according to the agreement of Arian, he goes to Cambyle, and deliuers him the Letters: whereon they aduise and consult after the manner of Candiots.A Treason practised a∣gainst Acheus by Cambyle and Bolis. For they had no care to succour Acheus being in danger, but onely to prouide for their owne safety and commodity. And as they were both Candiots, they were soone of one opinion as followeth: That the ten Talents which Sosibi∣us had deliuered, should be equally diuided betwixt them: and then they should discouer the businesse to Antiochus, to make vse of him, and promise to deliuer Acheus into his hands, in giuing them money, and hopes worthy of their attempt. These things being thus concluded, Cambyle vndertakes that which concernes Antiochus: Bolis on the o∣ther side resolues within certaine daies to send Arian to Acheus with Letters of recommendation from Nicomache and Melancome. But con∣cerning the meanes how Arian might enter safely into the Fort and re∣turne, he giues him charge to doe his duty. If this were done, and that Acheus made answere to those things which concerne Nicomache and Melancome, Bolis held himselfe assured, that he might well deliuer him into the hands of Cambyle. After this resolution they part, eyther of them striuing to effect that which they had concluded. Cambile imbracing the first occasion, dis∣couered the businesse vnto the King. As this promise pleased Antio∣chus, which offered it selfe contrary vnto his hope, so he tooke it part∣ly ioyfully, promising great matters: partly distrusting, he considered
of either of their opinions and resolutions, But in the end giuing cre∣dite, thinking that this Enterprize came Diuinely vnto him, he often intreated Cambyle to bring it to an end. Bolis wrought in like manner with Nicomache and Melancome. Who thinking these things to be guided by God, they suddainly prepare Letters from Arian, direct∣ing them to Acheus, Written by their Common sent, as they had bbin accustomed: And in sending them they perswaded Acheus, togiue credit to those things which Bolis and Cambyle should doe. They were written in such fort, as being surprized they could not be vnderstood. Arian enters the Fort by the helpe of Cambyle, and deliuers the Letter to those that were with Acheus: and instructs him dilligently of euerything, as one who from the beginning had beene present at that which was practised. And although hee answered oftner for Sosibius and Bolis, then of Nicomache and Melancome, and likewise for Cam∣byle, so hee often maintained by his owne inuention, the Arguments which they made: And the rather being ignorant of that which had beene resolued betwixt Cambyle and Bolis. Acheus giuing credit, aswell in regard of Arians answeres, as of the Letters of Nicomache and Me∣lancome, made an answer, and sent Arian presently backe. And as this businesse was handled often of either side, in the end Acheus people sent word of themselues to Nicomache, that there was no more hope of safety remayning: And aduise him to send away Bolis with Arian at mid-night, as it were to take them. The resolution of Acheus was, that first he would flye the present danger, and then recouer Syria. Finally, he was in a wonderfull hope, that if suddainly and contra∣ry to all hope he shewed himselfe to the Inhabitants of Syria, Antiochus being yet tyed at Sardainy, he should cause a great alteration, purcha∣sing great praise, aswell with the Antiocheins, as with the inhabitants of base Syria, and Phenicca. Acheus being in this hope and conceite, expected the comming of Bolis. In regard of Melancomes peoples, after the comming of Arian, and the Letters read, they presently send away Bolis with all speede, making him great remonstrances, and putting him in great hope, if he effected his Enterprize. Bolis send∣ing Arian before, aduertised Cambyle of his comming, and came by night to the place appointed. And when they had agreed on the day, and had resolued how to bring all to an end, they entred the Campe at night. This was their resolution: If it hapned that Acheus came out of the Fort alone, or accompanied with some one with Bolis and Ari∣an, he might be taken with an Ambush as abandoned. But if he came foorth well accompanied, the businesse would prooue difficult, to those to whom they had giuen the charge. Finally, they thought to take him aliue, knowing that by this meanes they should do great plea∣sure to Antiochus. Wherefore they gaue charge vnto Arian to march before, when he should draw forth Acheus, for that he knew the tur∣nings, by the which he had often entred and comeforth. Bolis was to follow the rest behind, to the end that being come vnto the place, where the Ambush should be ready by Cambyle, he might seaze vpon Acheus and stay him, fearing that through the Allarum in the night,
he might saue himselfe through the Forrest, or being in Despaire, he might cast himselfe into some pit: and contrary to their Resolution, fall aliue into the Enemies hands. These things being thus concluded, when Bolis came to Cambyle, he was the same night brought by him to Antiochus being alone. And when the King had receiued him graciously, and had assured them of his promises, making remonstrances to either of them, not to be negligent in the businesse, they then returned to their Campe. In the morning Bolis accompanied with Arian ascend, and at night they enter the Fort. Acheus receiuing him with great affection and loue, de∣maunded many things of him dilligently. And as hee obserued aswell the countenance, as the familiar speech wherewith Bolis assured the plot, he shewed partly a ioyfull countenance, for the hope of his safe∣ty: So he partly languished, for the apprehension of the future danger. But for that he was a man of a great Spirit and great Experience, hee did not hold it fit to relye wholy vpon Bolis. And therefore he vsed this Speech vnto him: That for the present hee could not go foorth; and that hee would send three or foure of his friends with him, and that after conferrence with Melancome he would be ready. Acheus in truth did all that could be done: But hee was ignorant of the common Prouerbe: That hee must Candize with the Candyots.To Candize with the Can∣dyots. Bolis likewise had fore-seene all things which concerned this businesse. But when the night came, in the which he sayd he would send his friends, sending Arian and Bolis before out of the Fort, he comman∣ded them to attend vntill the comming of those which should goe with them. Whereunto obeying, in the meane time he conferres with his Wife.Laodicea the wife of Acheius▪ But for that he had amazed Laodicea, with a businesse not fore-seene, he stayed sometime vntill he had pacified her, and brought her to an expectance of good hope. Then making the fift, hee attired the others meanly, and himselfe puts on an old and simple Robe, shew∣ing himselfe to be a man of a base condition: and so he goes forth. He had giuen charge to one of his Friends to answere Arian continually to all that he should propound, and that he should learne of him whither they went, and should speake of the rest as of Barbarians. When they were come to Arian, he went before for the knowledge hee had of the way. In regard of Bolis he followed behind, according to the first reso∣lution, being doubtfull of that which was offered. For although hee were a Candyot, and did diue into all things neerely, yet he could not know Acheus, by reason of the darknesse of the night, nor yet whither he was there. And as the descent was rough, and for the most part vn∣easie, and in some place vnsafe and dangerous for the steepnesse, and being come vnto a certaine place, where as some helde Acheus and o∣thers receiued him, (at that time in truth they could not wholy forbeare to yeild him their accustomed reuerence) then Bolis suddainely knew which was Acheus. When hee came to the place appointed to Cam∣byle, and that Bolis had giuen them a signe by his whistle, they of the Ambush issue forth and take the rest: But Bolis seazed vpon Acheus, ha∣uing
his hands wrapt vp in his Robe, fearing that in discouering the Ambush, he should attempt to kill himselfe: for hee had a Sword rea∣dy. Being thus suddainly inuironed, he fell into the hands of his Ene∣mies,Acheus taken and brought to Antiochus. and was presently led to Antiochus with his friends. The King remaining in suspence, expecting what would become of it, hee was alone in his Tent waking accompanied onely with two or three of his guard. But when as Cambyles Company was arrived, and had layed Acheus bound vpon the ground, his Speech failed him for so strange an accident; so as he continued long without speaking: And in the end toucht with Commisseration and pitty, the teares came into his eyes: the which in my opinion hapned by a Consideration, that those things which Fortune brings, are ineuitable and vncertaine. Acheus was sonne to Andromachus, brother vnto Laodicea the Wife of Seleucus,The Race of Acheus. and he had married Laodicea daughter to King Methridate, and withall hee was Lord of all the Region on this side Mount Tauris. As hee was then held to liue in a place of his owne wonderfull strong for the Enemy, so he was now set vpon the ground bound and manna∣cled in their hands: Neither was there any man that knew of the fact, but those which had the Execution. But when the day was come, and that the friends (according to the custome) were come vnto the Tent, and saw this accident, it hapned vnto them as it had done formerly vn∣to the King. For in wondring at the businesse, they were in doubt of those things which they saw. When the Councell was assembled, they spake many things of him touching his defeate. First they decreed that his hands and feete should be cut off,The condem∣nation & death of Acheus. and then hauing taken of his Head it should be sowed to an Asses skinne, and the rest of his body hanged vpon a Crosse. Which being Executed and the Army hearing thereof, the fury and alteration was so great in the Campe, as Laodicea, who knew nothing but the departure of her Husband, looking from the Fort, coniectured of that which had happened by the trouble and alteration in the Campe. A Herald was presently sent vnto Laodicea, who aduertised her of those things which had befalne Acheus, commaunding to consider of Her estate, and to leaue the Fort. At the first they which held it made so great cries and lamentations, as they could giue no answere: Not so much for the affection they bare to Acheus, as for the accident which seemed to them all vnlooked for and not fore-seene. Finally, they were in great doubt what they should do. Antiochus after the ruine of A∣cheus, prest the besieged more violently, perswading himselfe that in the end hee should haue meanes to take it by the Souldiers themselues: the which happened accordingly. For they beeing diuided among themselues,The strong fort yeilded to An∣tiochus. they parted into Troupes, some holding for Ariobaze, o∣thers for Laodicea. After which, both parties yeilded for their mutuall distrust, and deliuered the place. To conclude, as Acheus had done what hee could in reason, (being vanquished by the wickednesse of those which assured him) lost his life, seruing for a profitable Example to posterity for two causes. First, that no man should relye simply vpon any: And next, that no man should
mistake himselfe for his good Fortune, but be prepared for all accidents, which may happen to man. And therefore in the beginning they goe forth, as it were to take some spoiles, and come by night to the Car∣thaginians Campe: Others held the close way, staying at a certaine place full of Woods.He  to the Carthagini∣nians. But Philimene and Nicon approacht the Campe: Whom the Watch led Prisoners to Hannibal, they neuer discouering of whence nor what they were: making onely a signe that they would speake with the Generall. Being then brought vnto Hannibal, they told him that they would speake with him in secret. Who giuing them Audience with great af∣fection, they excuse themselues and their Countrey, accusing the Ro∣mans in many sorts, to the end they should not seeme to be come forth about this businesse without cause. Wherefore Hannibal com∣mended them much, and entertained them curteously: Finally, hee sent them backe to returne speedily to conferre with him, ordering for the present that these men should be let go: when they were out of the Campe, and in the meane time he would consider what should be most safe. This he did to haue conference with these young men, and to inquire of their affaires:Taium be∣trayde to Han∣nibal. And to the end they should keepe their credit with the Cittizens, as if by the Captaines leaue they had made incur∣sions for spoile. When as Nicon had Executed his Charge, Hannibal was very well satisfied and ioyfull: For that he might haue meanes to effect his En∣terprize which was then difficult. Philmene on the other side affcted the businesse propounded, for that they had giuen him a safe accesse to speake, and he had found Hannibal very attentiue, promising him to giue store of Victuals to the Cittizens. Then they not onely got credite with the Tarentins, but moreouer they had a good Traine, as∣well for the accord made, as for the Victuals whereof they had suffi∣cient. Afterwards making a second incursion, and putting euery thing in Execution, they assured Hannibal: and were likewise assured by him, (that is to say,) that the Carthaginians should leaue the Tarentin in their Liberty, not oppressing them with any Subside or Tribute, nor with any other impost: Being also lawfull for them, after they had Conquered the Citty, to ruine the Romans Houses. Finally they a∣greed, that when they should come vnto the Campe, the Watch should presently take them. Which things being concluded, they had power to come and speake often with Hannibal: parting from the Citty sometimes to get spoyle, and sometimes to Hunt. These things being thus agreed vpon for the future, most of them had a care of the occasion. In regard of Phili∣mne,Philim ap∣pointed for Hunting. they appointed him for Hunting. For as he was much inclined to it, they thought he could do no other thing but to attend it. Where∣fore they gaue him this Charge, to the end he might take wild beasts, first to winne Caius Lybius Gouernour of the Citty, and afterwards those which kept the Gates, which are called Tmenides. Imbracing this Commission, he tooke some Beasts in Hunting, others were pre∣pared for him by Hannibal. For his part hee continually brought
prize, whereof he shared part to Caius and to the Guards of the gates to the end they might speedily open the Gate called Rhinopile. He en∣tred and went forth often in the night by this Gate, vnder colour of feare of the Enemy, but in the meane time hee made vse of it for his Enterprize. When Philimene had obtained this course with the Guards, so as without suspition approaching to the Wall, if he whistled, they ope∣ned vnto him the Gate Rhinopile: And withall obseruing that the Ro∣man Gouernour of the Gate, should be on a certaine day with great Company at Musea neere the Market place, they appointed that day to Hannibal. He had long before inuented this fiction, as if hee were sicke, to the end the Romans should not hold it strange, that he staied so long there; and then he feined himselfe to be more sicke. Hee had not beene in the Campe for the space of three daies vpon the approa∣ches of Tarentum. The day being come, he makes choise of a thou∣sand of the ablest and resolutest men, both Horse and Foote: to whom he giues charge to carry Victuals for foure dayes. Finally hee marcht speedily, remoouing his Campe at the breake of day. He gaue com∣maund to fourescore Numidian Horses to marcht thirty Furlongs be∣fore the Campe, and that they should run of eyther side of the Coun∣try, to the end that no man might discouer the whole Campe, but taking some of them that fled, the rest which escaped might aduertise the Citty of the Numidians courses. When as the Numidians were a∣bout twenty Furlongs off, they set downe to Supper neere vnto a cer∣taine Riuer, in a Rocke which was not easie to discouer. Then Hannibal drawing the Captaines together, he discouers his Enterprize vnto them; and perswades them, that first of all they should carry themselues like braue men: for that there were neuer such great rewards propounded vnto them: And that secondly euery man should keepe his Souldiers in obedience during the Voyage, and punish those seuerely, that should abandon their places thorough Disobedience. Fi∣nally, they should haue a care of those things which should bee Com∣maunded, and that they should not attempt any thing of their owne fancy, contrary to his Commandement. This Speech being deliuered in the presence of the Captaines, he marcht, (being yet night) meaning to come vnto the Walls about mid-night. Hee had Philimene for his Guide, to whom hee gaue Synagrie for a Companion in that same Action. VVhen as Calus Lybius with his Company were in the day time at Musea, according to the conception of the Youth, they aduertised him that the Numidians ouer-ran the Country towards the West, when as their desire of drinking increased. Yet thinking to stay them, hee called for the Captaines, giuing them charge to go forth at the breake of day with halfe the Horse-men, and repulse the Enemy which spoy∣the Countrey. This was all the conceite he had of the businesse. As for those which kept Company with Nicon and Tragisque, assembling suddainly within the Citty, they looked for the returne of Caius. And being suddainly ready, for that they had drunke in the day time, some
retiring to certaine places stayed there: Others among the Youth go to meete Caius, sporting and playing among themselues, making shewe to bring them backe which should be found at the Banquet, and more∣ouer as it were, transported by reason of the Drunkennesse of Lybius Company, as soone as they met they fell to laughter and immoderate sport of either side: then turning head they Conducted Caius vnto his House. He layd him downe to rest as a man soundly drunke, after the manner of those which drinke daily, hauing nothing in his braine that troubled him: finally, he was full of ioy and negligence. But Ni∣con and Tragisque; hauing assembled the Youth, diuided themselues into three Band: and after aduice, they seazed vpon the most commo∣dious approaches to the Market place, to the end that nothing might be vnknowne vnto them, of that which was practised, aswell with∣in the Citty as without. They also approached neere vnto Caius House, being resolued that if he should haue any suspition of the Enterprize, to kill him first: And that whatsoeuer they did they should beginne with him. As it often times happens at the returne from Banquets, when as the Tumult was suddainly past, and that the multitude was layd downe and a sleep, and by the aduancement of the night, the hope of the Enterprize remai∣ned entire, then altogether attend the Execution. The Youth had articulated and agreed with the Carthaginians,An accord made by the youth of Taren∣tum with the Carthaginians. that Hannibal comming to the Citty, neere vnto Musacee on the East, and to the Gates which they call Temenides, he should make a fire vpon a little Hill, the which some call the Hill of Hyacinthe, and others of Apollo Hyacinthe. And that when Tragisques Company should see it, they should answere him by the like signe of fire: This done, Hannibal should quench the fire which hee had made without the Citty, and then approach with a slow pace. These things thus concluded, the Youth of the Citty hauing past the inhabited part, they came to the Monuments of the Deceased. The Easterne part of the Citty of Tarentum, was full of Monuments: For that all the dead are buried within the Walls of the Citty, according to a certaine old Oracle. They say that God gaue the Tarentins to vn∣derstand by an Oracle, that it would be best for them when they had most Inhabitants. For their parts they thought, that they should haue a good dwelling according vnto the Oracle, if they retained the dead within their Citty. For this cause they interre them within their wals. When as the Youth of the Citty was come to the Pithyonique Hill, they expected what would succeede. Hannibal approaching did what had beene concluded: and the Company of Nicon and Tragisque seeing the fire, they tooke courage, and kindled another fire. Againe seeing Han∣nibals fire quencht, they made hast and ran vnto the Gate, meaning to preuent Hannibals men in killing the Guards: for that the Carthagi∣nians preparing to enter marcht slowly. When they had preuailed in their Enterprize, and the Guards being surprized, some slew them, o∣thers brake the Bolts. The Gates being suddainly opened, Hannibals men came with such a measured March, as without any delay they
assailed the Citty. When they had made their entry safely and with∣out Tumult,Tarentum taken by Hannibal. thinking they had done the greatest part of their busi∣nesse, they entred the Market place boldly, on that side which ioines to the Sea. In regard of the Horse-men, they leaue no lesse then two Thousand within the Walls for their supply, as well for the accidents which might happen without, as for other expected things which do vsually chance. When they were come vnto the places neere vnto the Market, the Army made a stand. Philimene likewise being much troubled, how he might execute his Charge, staied without. For when they made the fire, they ranne not to that Gate: and they had sent him with a wilde Boare, and about a Thousand Lybians with him to the next Gate, mea∣ning to execute their Enterprize, not by one meanes only but by ma∣ny. When as Philimene was according to his Custome come vnto the Walls, the Guards suddainly were ready descending to Rhinopile. When as he called vnto them to open the Gate, for that hauing a Boare, hee was soare laden, the Guard hearing those words open speedily, ex∣pecting to haue a share of Philimenes prize, as formerly hee had done to others. Philimene being the first of this Battalion enters, accompanied by another, wearing a Numidian Habite, as if hee had beene of that Countrey: after whom followed two others, carrying Venison. When there were foure entred, they slew him which opened the Gate, run∣ning simply and without feare,They kill the poer. to handle the Boare, there entred to the number of Thirty Lybians by the little Wicket, which followed them a slow pace and secretly. This being done, some brake the Hinges, o∣thers slew the Guards at the Gate, and others called the Lybians by signes being yet without, leading them to the Market place, as it had beene ordred. Hannibal ioyfull of the adiunction of these men, for that matters succeeded according to his desire, he was attentiue to that which he had begunne. Hee therefore drawes two Thousand Gaules a part: and diuiding them into three Bands, hee appoints to eyther of them two of the Youth which had mannaged this Enterprize, with some of his Captaines, giuing them charge, that they should gaine the most commodious approaches to goe vnto the Market place. After which they should receiue the Youth of the Citty, and haue a care to preserue the Cittizens, and that they should crye out to the Tarentins, to stay in the place which was assigned them for their safety. Finally, hee Commaunds the Captaines of the Carthaginians and Celts, that they should kill all the Romans they should encounter. Diuiding them selues one from another, they dispatch that which they had in charge. The Enemies entry being knowne to the Tarentins, the Citty was full of cries and vnexpected Trouble. When as Caius was aduertised of the Enemies entry, thinking that he should not be able to preuent the danger, by reason of his drunkennesse,Caius saues himselfe. he gets suddainly out of his lodging with his family: And when hee was come to the Gate which leads vnto the Port, and that the Guard had opened the Rhinopile, he escapes that way, and imbarques with
his people in a little Cocke boate which lay in the Port, and was car∣ried to the Fort. Afterwards Philimene makes prouision of Roman Trumpets, whereof some founded neere vnto the Theater, as they had vsually done. And when the Romans ran in Armes according to their Custome to the Fortresse, the Enterpize was dispatcht to the liking of the Carthaginians. But they which being dispersed and without order entred into those places, some fell into the hands of the Carthaginians, others among Celts: Who by this same meanes slew a great number. The day approaching, the Tarentins rested in their Houses, not a∣ble to preuent this inconuenience. For they thought by reason of the founding of the Trumpets, that this combustion had beene made by the Romans; for that they made no spoile in the Citty. But when they saw some of their men slaine in the place, and some of the Gaules strip∣ping the dead bodies of the Romans, they beganne to thinke of the comming of the Carthaginians. When as Hannibal had drawne his Army into the market place, and that the Romans were retired to the Fort, the which they held before with their Garrison, he causeth a Proclamation foorth with to be made and proclaimed, that all the Ta∣rentins should come vnto the Market place without Armes. In re∣gard of the Youth, they went vp and downe the Citty crying liberty, aduising and perswading the Citizens to rest assured that the Carthagi∣nians were there for their good. But all the Tarentins which held the Romans party, being aduertised of this Action, retired to the Fort: The rest assembled without Armes at the sound of the Trumpet. To whom Hannibal spake graciously. When the Tarentins had generally conceiued by his Speech, and vnexpected hope, he sent many of them away, giuing them charge at their returne, to be carefull to Write the name of the Tarentins vp∣pon their doores: And if by fortune or chance any one did it to a Romans House, he should be punished with Death. Wherefore hee made choise of men accustomed vnto this charge, and sends them pre∣sently to spoile the Romans Houses, willing them to hold and maintaine the Tarentins lodgings for Enemies, which had not the marke of a Tarentine. Finally, hee kept the rest in battaile to succour the others. When he had drawne together great store of goods by this spoile, and that the commodities answering the conceiued hope of the Tarentins, came to good, they then returned to Armes. The day following Hannibal holding a Councell with the Tarentins, decreed to seperate the Citty from the Fort, and to fortifie it, to the end they should be no more in feare of the Romans holding the Fort. Wherefore he beganne first to fortifie the Citty with pallisadoes, right against the Wals of the Hill which is before the Fort. And knowing that the Enemies would stirre and make some attempt, hee appoin∣ted sufficient Forces: Thinking that for the future, there would bee nothing more necessary, to amaze the Romans, and to assure the Ta∣rentins. When as they beganne to set vp their impalement, and that the Romans assailed their Enemies with great confidence, courage and
resolution, Hannibal fighting with them a little, prouoked them to the Combate.A skirmish be∣twixt the Ro∣mans and Car∣thaginians. But when as many of them past beyond the Hill, he giuing courage to his men encounters the Enemy. When the Com∣bate grew hot, as much as might be in a streight place inuironed with Wals, the Romans in the end beeing roughly repuls'd gaue backe, so as many of them fell into the Numidians hands: Finally the greatest part being repuls'd, and falling into the ditches, dyed. After this, Hannibal fortified the Citty with Pallisadoes without danger, and hauing done all things to his liking hee was at quiet. He likewise forced the Enemies to remaine shut vp in their Fort, in feare not onely of themselues, but also of the Fort. In regard of the Citi∣zens, hee hath so puft vp their Courage, as they helde themselues a∣ble to resist the Romans, without the helpe of the Carthaginians. Af∣terwards Hannibal leauing some little space, from the pallisadoe to∣wards the Citty, hee made a Ditch answering the Pallisadoe and the wall of the Fort, from whence some time there were Souldiers drawn vnto the wall of the Citty. Moreouer hauing Pallisadoed this Ditch, this fortification prooued not lesse strong then a Wall. Besides the which within towards the Citty (leauing a reasonable space) hee be∣ganne a VVall from that part which they call the Sauior, vnto that which they call Deepe: So as without any Garrison, these Fortifi∣cations would bee sufficient to cause the Tarentins to dwell in safety. Leauing then a sufficient Garrison of Horse for the Guard of the Citty and wall,The Riuer of Erota. hee planted his Campe forty furlongs from the Citty, neere the Riuer which some call Gallea, others Erota, which name it hath taken from that other Riuer, passing neere vnto Lacedemon, which they likewise call Erota. The Tarentins in trueth haue many such, as well in the Country as in the Citty, for that vndoubtedly they haue taken their Collony and Race from the Lacedemonians. The wall beeing finished and ended, aswell by the diligence and industry of the Tarentins, as the helpe and assistance of the Carthaginians, Hannibal resolues to ouer-throw the Fort. And when hee had prepared and made all things ready for the siege, the Romans hauing receiued into the Fort succours by Sea, from Metaponcia, they were something refresht and comforted, and in the night assailed Hannibals Engines, ruining them all with their preparations. This made Hannibal to despaire of the siege of the Fort. And when the Citty wals were made perfect, he assembles the Ta∣rentins, and lets them vnderstand, that it was very necessary for them to be masters of the Sea,Hannibals Re∣monstrance to the Tarentins. against the discommodities of the present time. But as the mouth of the Port was in the Commaund of the Fort, it was not in their power to helpe themselues with shippes at their pleasure, or goe out of the Port: VVhere as the Romans had all necessaries brought vnto them safely. So as the Citty should neuer enioy a perfect freedome and liberty. Hannibal considering this, he let the Tarentins vnderstand, that if they which held the Fort, lost the hope of the comodity of the Sea, they would presently yeild it to them.
The which the Tarentins hearing, they allowed of his Speech, but they could not at that time effect it, vnlesse they were assisted by the Carthaginians Army: The which could not then be done. Where∣fore they could not conceiue whereto Hannibal tended, propounding these things. And when he maintained that they might well be masters of the Sea without the helpe of the Carthaginians, they wondred more, not being able to vnderstand his conception. When hee had viewed the place within the Wals, from the Port vnto the outward Sea, he was of opinion that the Ships might saile close vnto the Wall towards the South. When hee had giuen this aduice vnto the Tarentins, they not onely imbraced it suddainly, but commended Hannibal wonder∣fully. Presently after they had made Wheeles, they prepared a way for ships, which was sooner done then spoken, for that affection and the multitude of Worke-men preuailed much. By this meanes the Tarentins past their ships into the open Sea, and safely besieged those of the Fort, who receiued their succours from abroad. In regard of Hannibal, leauing the Citty he raised his Campe, and returning three dayes after, to the Pallisadoe which he had made in the be∣ginning, hee stayed to spend the rest of the Winter.
A PARCELL OF the Ninth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. BEhold the most renowned and excellent Actions, comprehended vnder the afore∣sayd Olympiade, and within the space of foure Yeares which it containes: Of which wee will endeauour to speake of in two Bookes. I am not ignorant that our Com∣mentaries haue beene somthing rough, and that they are pleasing to a certaine kinde of Auditors, and blamed by others. In truth other Historiographers, and in a manner all, or the greatest part, helping themselues with all the parts of a Hi∣story, draw many men to the reading of their Commentaries. The manner to Discourse of Genealogies causes a desire to heare: That al∣so which speakes of Collonies, Voyages, Possessions, and Races, which please a curious man of little iudgement, as that of Ephorus. And to a ciuill man, that wherein they Discourse of the Actions of Nations, Citties, and Potentates, whereunto applying our selues plainly, and disposing all our Treaty to these things, wee direct and guide our selues by a certaine kinde of Discourse, as wee haue formerly promised. It is true, wee direct most Readers to that which is not much plea∣sing and delightfull. Finally, wee haue at large deliuered the cause, why in reproouing the other parts of a History, wee will thus write the Actions. There is no hinderance that for the better expressing and declaration, wee should not briefly aduertise the Reader heereof.
But as many of these things are related in diuers manners, of Genea∣logies, Fables, and Collonies, and moreouer of Races, Alliances, and Possessions, it will be necessary for him that would Write, to speake consequently of strange things as proper, which were an infamous thing: Or if he will not, hee must labour in vaine, in promising pub∣liquely to pursue and Comment of those things, which haue bin suffi∣ciently declared, and deliuered to posterity by the ancient. For this cause, and for many others we haue left them, receiuing a relation of Actions: For that first, that as many new things offer themselues often, so it is very necessary to vse a new kinde of Dis∣course: The which happens not in the beginning of the Relation, so as we deliuer the subsequent Actions. And secondly, for that this kinde hath beene before, and is most profitable, by the which the experi∣ence of things and Policies, haue so much preuailed with vs, as they which haue a desire to know the Actions, may helpe themselues by an easie way, in all that which happens by the course of time. Where∣fore hauing no such regard to the pleasure and delight of those which shall reade and peruse our Commentaries, as to the profit of the Hea∣rers, we haue (leauing the other parts) fixed vpon this. Finally, they which shall diligently consider of our Commentaries, wilbe more cer∣taine witnesses. When as Hannibal had inclosed the Campe of Appius Claudius,Appius besieged by Hannibal. being at the siege of Capoua, at the first hee vsed skirmishes, seeking to draw the Enemy to Battaile. But when as no man presented him∣selfe, in the end he besieged them, which was an Enterprize wherein hee was frustrated aswell as of the first, although the Horse-men of the Wings assailed them in Troupes, casting Darts into their Campe, with great cries: And the foote-men charge them by Bands, labou∣ring to breake the Pallisado. Yet they could not diuert the Romans from their former resolution, repulsing those which assailed the Palli∣sadoe with great strength and Courage: And being well armed, they went not out of the Campe with their Ensignes. Hannibal bearing these things impatiently, and the rather for that the Romans could not any way bee annoyed from the Towne, studied what order he might take for the present Affaires. For my part, I thinke that the case falling out thus, seemes to haue made not onely the Carthagini∣ans to doubt, but all other men to whom the knowledge thereof hath come. Who will not wonder, hearing how the Romans haue often beene vanquished by the Carthaginians, and durst not present themselues, nor fight with them, haue not abandoned their Fort beeing in the open field? It is certaine that in times past, they had alwayes Camped onely at the bottome or foote of Mountaines against the Enemies: But now being in a faire Plaine, and in the openest place of all Italy, besieging a strong Towne, they were assailed by them of all sides, a∣gainst whom they durst not once thinke or immagine to make head, being so much disheartned. And although the Carthaginians preuailed continually fighting, yet they were no lesse annoyed by the vanquished▪
Finally, I hold this to be the cause, that they consider the Enterprize one of another: That is to say, that the Troupes of Hannibals Horse-men, purchased the Victory to the Carthaginians, and a defeate to the Romans: Wherefore the vanquished made suddaine sallies after the fight. They also lodg'd their Troupes in such a place, as the Horse-men could not annoy them. The case falling out thus neere vnto Capo∣ua, was common to them both. The Romans in trueth durst not come foorth to fight, beeing terrified with the Enemies horse. They kept themselues within their Fort, knowing well that the Cauallery vanqui∣shing them in fight, they could not annoy them. The Carthaginians likewise could not with reason stay long with so great a number of Horses: For that the Romans had for that ause wasted the whole Countrey: Neither could they giue order to haue Hay and Barley brought on Horse-backe so great a way vnto their Ca∣uallery and Sumpters: Neither durst the Carthaginians besiege the E∣nemy without Horse, being fortified with Ditches and Pallisadoes: A∣gainst the which in fighting without Winges vppon an equall danger, they should hazard an vncertaine Fortune. They feared likewise that the Roman Subiects, would ioyne with them and succour them, and that cutting of their necessary Victualls, they would draw him into great distresse. Hannibal considering these things, hauing opinion that they could not raise the siege directly,A wise Consi∣deration of Hannibal. he takes another aduice. Finally, he makes his reckoning, that if in stealing away suddainly, he should shew him∣selfe about Rome, he might do something that might be profitable for the Carthaginians affaires, the inhabitants beeing amazed with such a new accident: Or if that did not succeede, hee should force Appius Army to raise the sege to succour and supply their Countrey, or else foorth-with diuide themselues, so as they which should succour the Country, and they which remained at the siege would be easie to van∣quish. Considering these things, hee sent a certaine Lybian messenger to Capoua, perswading him to retire to the Romans, and so into the Citty, prouiding wisely by this meanes, that his Letters might bee safely carried. He feared much, that the Capouans seeing his depar∣ture would yeilde, following the Romans party, as destitute of hope. For this cause hee acquaints them with his intention by Letters, for the which he sends the Lybian, after the departure of his Army, to the end that knowing his resolution and dislodging, they should main∣taine the siege couragiously. When as they which besieged Capoua, had intreated the people of Rome for assistance, that Hannibal held them besieged, they were all in great doubt and feare, for that the present Affaires required a finall end, and therefore they sought by frequent Embassies and attempts to assist that party concerning the Generall. The Capouans on the other side (after they had receiued the Letters by the Lybian, and knowne the Carthaginians aduice) hold good against the Enemy, resoluing to aduenture and trie their Fortune. Wherefore Hannibal hauing fedde his Army the fifth day after his comming, and leauing fires burning,
he rais'd his Campe, so as he was not discouered by the Enemy. Taking then the difficult way by the Saunitide, discouering & gaining by his Ca∣uallery the nearest places to his way, he past the Riuer of Annion secret∣ly, whilest that the Inhabitants of Rome were in suspence for Capoua and that Warre: Approaching in such sort, as he planted his Campe within forty Furlongs of Rome.Hannibal with∣in 40. furlongs of Rome. And as he assailed it by this meanes, it hap∣pened that they of the City were troubled and dismayed with feare, for that this accident came suddainly and contrary to their hope, and that Hannibal had not formerly besieged the City so neare. They had also a conceit, that he approaching so neare the City, their Army besieging Capoua, must of necessity be defeated.The amaze∣ment of the Ro∣mans. The men flye to the Walles, and out of the City to places of aduantage. The Women on the other side make professions about the Temples, washing the pauement with their haire.The superstiti∣on of the Ro∣man Dames. It was a thing they were accustomed to doe, if at any time the Countrey were in great danger. When as Hannibal was thus incampt, thinking to assaile the City the day following, there happened an admirable and casuall accident, wor∣king for the preseruation of the Romans. Caius and Publius had taken an Oath of the Souldiers which had beene leuied, to come to Rome the the same day in Armes. They also made another Leuie: so as at a cer∣taine time a great number of men of Warre transported themselues sud∣dainly to Rome. With the which the Captaines made a bold sally: and planting their Campe before the City, they restrained Hannibals fu∣ry. The Carthaginians in truth at the first made such an attempt, as they despaired not to take the City by assault. But seeing the Enemies to hold a Campe, and aduertised by a Prisoner of that which had hap∣pened, they desisted from their Enterprize to take the Towne, falling to spoile the Countrey,The Carthagini∣ans waste the Countrey a∣bout Rome. and to fire their houses: so as at the first they brought a wonderfull booty vnto their Campe, as being come to this kind of hunting, to the which neuer Enemy thought to attaine. And when as afterwards the Consuls taking courage, had planted themselues within Eleuen Furlongs of the Enemies Campe,The Romans is Field. Hannibal lost all hope of taking the City, notwithstanding the great spoiles which hee had made; and which is more, he parts at the breake of day with his Ar∣my, keeping a good reckoning of dayes, in the which according to his aduice taken from the beginning, he was in hope that Appius aduerti∣sed of the danger of the City, would wholly raise the siege, and that he would succour Rome; or leauing some portion of the Army, and ta∣king the greatest part, he would make haste to succour his Countrey: either of which happening, his affaires would succeed well. But Pub∣lius breaking the Bridges of the said Riuer, forced him to passe his Ar∣my at a Fourde, being alwayes in the taile of him, and annoying him much. It is true, he could not defeate him for the great number of Horses, and the dexterity of the Numidians fit for all purposes: yet he retired to his Fort, hauing recouered a great part of the booty, and taken a∣bout three hundred men. Afterwards imagining that the Carthagini∣ans hastned their retreate for scare, hee pursued them in the Reare by
Skirmishes. In the beginning Hannibal made haste pursuing his de∣signe. But when as on the fift day he had beene aduertised that Appi∣us continued still at the siege of Capoua, he stayed: then suddainly re∣ceiuing those which pursued him,A defeate of the Romans by Night. he charg'd them in the Night, ma∣king a great slaughter, and chasing the rest out of their Fort. When as the day following he saw the Romans retired to a certaine Hill, strong by scituation, and rampred, he despaires to take them: Yet making his voyage by Daunia and Brette, hee assailes the neighbour places to Rhegium so suddainly, as he had in a manner taken the City: yet he sur∣prised all those that were stragling in the Fields, with a great number of the Rheginois at his comming. In my opinion we ought with reason to obserue at that time the vertue and enuy of the Romans and the Cartha∣ginians in the conduct of the Warre. For as all the World wonders at Epaminundas, Generall of the The∣beins in this, that when he was come with the Allies of the Warre to Tegee, and was aduertised that the Lacedemonians were with their league at Mantinea, assembling there to giue Battaile to the Thebeins, hee gaue order to his Troupes to feede presently: By this meanes hee cau∣seth his Army to march in the Euening,Lacedemon ta∣ken by Epami∣nundas. as it were to recouer some con∣uenient places to put them in Battaile. VVhen he had drawne many in∣to this conceite, hee parts to assaile the City of Lacedemon. VVhere entring about three houres in the Night, contrary to all hope, and fin∣ding it naked and destitute of helpe, he tooke it, and kept it on that side which was paued to the Riuer. As this disaster happened with a great alteration, and that a certaine Fugitiue flying to Mantinea, had aduerti∣sed King Agesilaus of that which happened, and that they of the league made haste to succour Lacedemon, hee was out of hope to bee able to keepe it. But when he had fed neare vnto the Riuer of Erota, and had drawne his Army together, after that he had suffered many miseries and dangers, he returnes to Mantinea, taking the same way, with hope to finde it destitue and vnfurnished of Lacedemonians and their league, as being gone to succour Lacedemon: the which succeeded accordingly. Wherefore giuing courage to the Thebeins, and marching in the Night with great labour and toile, hee arriued by noone at Manti∣nea, being destitute and void of succours. It is true that the Atheni∣ans who at that time held the party of the Lacedemonians, against the Thebeins, were come to their succours. When the foreward of the Thebeins, arriued at the Temple of Possidon, standing seuen Furlongs from the Towne, it happened as a thing fore-cast, that at the same instant the Atheniens shewed themselues vpon a Hill neare to Mantinea, who being discouered by them which remained in the Towne, they went to the VValles, taking courage to repulse the Thebeins attempts. Hi∣storiographers therefore haue reason to complaine of the said actions, saying, that the Commander had done all that was fitting for a wiser and more excellent Captaine then the Enemies were, and that Epami∣nundas was vanquished by Fortune.Epaminundas vanquished by Fortune. Some others likewise may say with reason, that the like hapned vnto Hannibal. For who will not wonder at this Commander, in obseruing that hee
endeauoured to raise the siege, in assailing the Enemy by Skirmishes: And when hee was therein frustrated in his attempts, hee assailed Rome it selfe: And when this Enterprize did not succeed, for the casuall e∣uents, hee againe endeauoured (turning head with his Army) to charge the Enemy, and to try if hee might trouble those which be∣sieged Capoua: And when in the end he preuailed not in his Enterprize, he resolued to annoy the Enemy in ruining them of Rhegium. It is true that some one will happily iudge that at this day the Romans are to bee preferred before the Lacedemonians. Who vpon the first aduertis∣ment parting together, deliuered Lacedemon, yet losing Mantinea for their parts: But the Romans preserued their Countrey without raising the siege from before Capoua, growing constantly obstinate in their Enterprize, and haue in the end assailed the Capouans resolutely. I haue propounded this Discourse not so much to praise the Romans or Cartha∣ginians, (for we haue many times shewed them to bee excellent) as well for their present Captaines, and for those which hereafter shall haue the gouernment of these two Common-weales: to the end that remembring them, and hauing these things before their eyes with a de∣sire of imitation, they may take courage, not of a desperate and dange∣rous rashnesse, but of a politique resolution, with an admirable industry and good discourse, which shall neuer be subiect to forgetfulnesse, re∣taining still in memory actions well mannaged; and Enterprizes with∣out reason. For this cause the Romans haue decreed to set a part, and to carry in∣to their Country the things we haue spoken of, not omitting any thing. If this be well done and profitable to them, or otherwise, it requires a longer discourse: And moreouer whether it hath beene in former times, or is onely necessary at this day. If considering these things, they had instructed their men, it is certaine that according to reason they had transported to their vse the things for the which they had growne great: But if leading a simple life, they flye abundance and sumptuous∣nesse, and yet they vanquish those which many times haue store of such good things, why should not their actions be turned to vice? Some one may confidently say, that they erre which haue left the Victors course of life, to follow that of the vanquished, and hauing incurred enuy, a Companion of such things: which is a case much to bee feared in Great men. Doubtlesse a man thus possest, will neuer hold them hap∣py which possesse another, and beares them enuie. Moreouer, who will take compassion of those which degenerating lose their principali∣ties? If Fortune smiles, and if a man drawes together all the wealth of another, and moreouer, inuites in some sort the dispossest to see it, he sinnes doubly. First the Spectators haue no compassion, but are ad∣monished as of their owne miseries: whereby not onely enuy but also choller inflames them against the fortunate. The remembrance of their owne calamities is as it were a stirring vp to hatred against the Au∣thours. It is true, that it may be there is some shew of reason for the drawing of Gold and Siluer. For they could not haue attained to the Empire, if they had not gotten the power taken from others.
In regard of those things which concerne not power, they might leaue them with the enuy in those places where they were before, and make their Countrey of better fame, in beautifying it with honesty and magnanimity, not with Images and figures. I hold this Discourse for those which Potentates alwaies vsurpe, to the end that in sacking Cities they may not conceiue that the miseries of other men, are the glory and beautifying of their Countrey. Finally, it is necessary that the accidents which happen in the Art of Warre, bee diligently considered of▪ It may happen they shall duly fore-see euery thing, if any one doth exe∣cute speedily that which is propounded. If any man will know that executions done openly with violence, are of lesse consequence then actions of policy and time, hee may easily iudge by the actions past. It would be no difficult thing to vnderstand by the euents, that in matters which are done by time, there are more found executed through errours then by reason; For no man doubts that many faults are committed through the ignorance and dulnesse of Commanders. Wherefore we must consider the reason of this kinde. It is not fit to hold for good seruice the accidents which without fore∣sight happen in the profession of Warre, but rather for euents and ca∣suall accidents: and wee must leaue them, for that they are not gouer∣ned by reason, whereas those should be apparent which are done with a setled resolution whereof we now speake. But for that euery action hath time, space, and a determinate place, and hath neede of secresie, and of confident resolutions: and that it doth import by whom, with whom, and by what meanes they shall execute them: it is apparent that he which shall duly consider euery one of these things apart, shall not stray from reason: if he omits any one of them, he shall be defrau∣ded of his whole resolution. Nature in truth makes one of all the parts, and euery one of them (although vulgar) sufficeth to cause a disaster of aduice if it be forgotten: Finally all the parts doe scarce suffice, al∣though they be imployed to bring any worke to a good end. Where∣fore Commanders should not omit any thing of this kinde. Silence is the chiefe of those things which we haue spoken of: to the end that through ioy if any vnexpected hope presents it selfe, or for feare and amazement,The duty of a Commaunder. they do not through familiarity or friendship, cō∣municate their enterprize to any stranger, but only to those without whom they cannot execute their resolutions: nor yet to them, but so far forth as necessity shall force them. He must be secret not onely in words but also in his affections. For it happens to many to discouer by signes, and sometime by their actions, their resolutions which the tongue hath kept silent. Secondly, it is necessary not to be ignorant of the wayes both by day and night, and the meanes to passe them as well by Sea as Land. The third point, and the most exquisite, is to know the op∣portunity of times by the circumstances, and to be able to coniecture it with iudgement. He must make no little esteeme of the manner how to execute it. For many times thereby things which seeme impossible, proue possible, and those which vsually haue beene possible, are made impossible. Finally, he must not disdaine the Accords and Articles an∣nexed,
nor the choise of things by the which, and with whom that which hath bin resolued, is brought to an end. Of these things some are considered by the exercise, others by Histories, and some by the course and reason of experience. The knowledge likewise of the waies, and whither he meanes to go, and its nature would be very fitting: and consequently by whom and against whom they make Warre, and care∣fully to consider of the businesse, and not to trust all men. It is true that they which are led and gouerned, must alwaies in such affaires giue cre∣dit to those that lead them. Moreouer, Commanders may happily learne these things and other such like from a simple Souldier: some by their owne industry, and others by History, in considering the actions experience. It is also necessary to vnderstand the Mathematiques, and the Theorique, especially of Astrology and Geometry, the Art whereof is not very necessary in this trade: yet the vse may helpe much in the alteration of things. Their chiefe necessity consists in the consi∣deration of the Day and Night. If they had beene alwaies equall, there would be no difficulty therein, and the knowledge would bee com∣mon to all. But as the afore-said things haue a difference not onely betwixt them, but also in themselues, it is most necessary to know what bee their augmentations and diminutions. How can the course and per∣fections of the Day and Night be knowne without the consideration of the said difference? No man can without their experience attaine vnto those things which concernes a competency of time, being otherwise forced to worke sooner or later then is needfull. Haste in these affaires is more defectiue then the delay of an Enterprize. Hee that exceeds the time appointed, is frustrated of his hope: But hee may repaire it in giuing good order, knowing after what time it may be done: whereas hee that preuents the opportunity of the approaching time, and being discouered, not onely failes of his Enterprize, but is in danger to be wholly defeated. Occasion is the Mistresse of all humane affaires, and especially in the Art of Warre. A Commander therfore of an Army must haue knowledge of the Sostice of Summer, and of the Equinoctials, and of the intermixt in∣creases and decreases of Dayes and Nights.The knowledg of the diuersi∣ties of Dayes necessary for Captaines. By this onely meanes hee may hold a meane in things which are to be effected, as well by Sea as Land. Moreouer, hee must know euery point of the Day and Night, to the end that hee may vnderstand the time when to plant his Campe and to raise it. It is not possible that hee shall attaine to a good end which doth not consider the beginning. It is not impossible to see the houres of the Sunne by the shaddowes whilest he makes his course, and the distances which are made by it in this world: In regard of those of the Night, it is a difficult thing, vnlesse some doe follow and obserue the Starres after the disposition of the Heauen, and the order of the twelue Signes in the Zodiacke. It is in truth easie for those which dili∣gently obserue the Celestiall Starres. For although the Nights be vn∣equall, yet in euery one of them sixe of the twelue Signes do mooue, so as it is necessary that to euery part of the Night an equall portion of the
Zodiacke be turned, and as daily it is apparent what part the Sun driues behind, which is that which it separates from the Diameter: it is neces∣sary that accordingly there should be so much consumed of the Night, that after this part it appeares eleuated from the rest of the Zodiacke. The Signes of the Zodiacke being knowne as well for their number as greatnesse, it falls out afterwards that they shew themselues such all times of the Night. But when the Nights are cloudy, we must obserue the Moone: for her greatnesse, her light appeares vniuersall in what part of the world soeuer she be. And wee must sometimes search by the times and places of the East, and sometimes of the West: for that in this part there is a knowledge, so as she followes the Diurnall differences of the East. There is also in this knowledge a manner of easie considerati∣on. There is likewise the same end almost within a figure, and all are of Sence.Homer. For this cause they iustly commend the Poet, who brings in Vlis∣ses an excellent Prince, taking coniecture of the Starres, not onely to di∣rect a Nauigation, but also to mannage Warre at Land. Wee may in truth exactly fore-see vnexpected chances, although that many times they be of great preplexity, as inundations by Raine and Riuers, Snows and violent Frosts, and finally Fogs and Clouds, with such like things. Shall we not with reason be destitute and voide of many things by our owne fault, if wee disdaine those which wee may fore see? Wee may not therefore contemne or despise any of these things, lest wee fall into such a consideration which they say hath happened vnto ma∣ny others: Concerning which wee must now speake by way of Example. Arate Chiefe of the Acheins, labouring to surprize the City of Cynethe,The errour of Arate. appointed a day to them of the Towne which had the same intelligence: who comming by Night to the Riuer which fals to Cyne∣the, he was to stay there with his Army: and they of the Towne taking their occasion about Noone, should send forth one of them secretly out at the Gate, couered with a Cloake, and should command him to stay before the Gate vpon a Dunghill: and in the meane time the rest should take the chiefe men sleeping, who were accustomed to guard the Gate about Noone. Which being done, comming out of their Ambush, they should plant their Battalion against the Gate. These things thus con∣cluded, Arate came at the time appointed, and keeping the accord, he laid his Ambush neare vnto the Riuer. But about fiue of the Clocke, a man hauing weake Sheepe of those which are accustomed to feede about the Towne, came forth of the Gate in a Cloake, as it was need∣full; who according to the reason of the time, enquired of the life of the Shepheard: And staying vpon the sayd Hill, looked where hee was▪ A∣rate thinking they had giuen him the Signe, makes haste to gaine the Towne with his men. But when the Gate was suddainly shut by the Guards that were present, for that they within had nothing ready, it happened that Arate was not onely frustrated of his purpose and in∣tention, but was the cause of extreame calamities to the Burgesses, with whom hee had intelligence. For being apprehended, they were presently chased away or slaine. What shall wee thinke to be
the cause of this accident? Doubtlesse for that this Commander had executed this agreement with more lightnesse then was fit, who being young had not an exquisite knowledge of these two accords, nor of the things annexed. The affaires of Warre haue an alteration in a mo∣ment, wauering from one side to another in the Euents. When as like∣wise Cleomenes the Lacedemonian, had resolued to take the City of Mega∣lopolis by practice, he agreed with the Guards of the Walles,The errour of Cleomenes. that hee should come in the Night with his Army to the Gate which they call Pholee, at the third renewing of the Watch. For they which held his party, had then the guard of the Wall. But when he had not fore∣seene, that the Nights were shorter at the rising of the Pleiades, hee parting from Lacedemon with his Army at Sun setting, and as hee could not come thither in time, arriuing when the Sunne was vp, he was repuls'd, making his attempts in vaine and without reason, with a great and shamefull losse of his men, and in danger to lose all: Whereas if hee had aim'd truely at the time appointed by the agree∣ment, and had brought his Army when as his Confederates had power to let him in, he had not failed in his Enterprize. In like manner Philip (as wee haue formerly sayd) hauing plotted a secret surprize of the City of the Meliteens, failed doubly.The errour of Philip. He brought not Ladders of a sufficient length, as the businesse required, neither did he obserue the time. For hauing resolued to arriue at Mid-night, when as all the World slept, hee dislodg'd before the time from Larisse with his Army, and came too soone into the Meliteens Countrey. For this cause as he could not stay, fearing to be discouered by the Citizens, nor yet steale away, he gaue an assault to the City, the Inhabitants being yet awake. So as it was not in his power to get to the top of the Walles by his Ladders, for that they were not of a iust length, nei∣ther could hee enter by the Gate, for that the Confederates which hee had in the City, could not succour him being excluded by the time. And as hee had incensed the Citizens, and made a great losse of his men, hee returned with shame and disgrace, it being a warning and caueate vnto all others, not to put any trust or confidence in him hereafter. As likewise Nicias which was Chiefe of the Athenians, might haue preserued the Army which hee had neare vnto Saragosse,The errour of Nicias. and had taken a fit occasion in the Night to lay an Ambush, to the end hee might not bee discouered by the Enemy, hee retired into a safe place: Afterwards hee remooued not his Campe through supersti∣tion, for that the Moone was Eclipsed, as if shee had fore-told some ensuing danger and misfortune. But it happened vnto all, as ell to the Army as Captaines, to fall into the hands of the Sara∣gossins, when as the Night following Nicias raised his Campe, be∣ing discouered by the Enemies. Notwithstanding hee might in such affaires haue beene made wise by such as haue had experience, that the cōmodity of time ought not to be neglected for such things, making the ignorance of the Enemy his comfort. Ignorance in truth giues a great helpe to men of experience, to bring their affaires to a good end.
Wee must then for the afore-said things haue recourse to Astrology, in regard of the measure of ladders, the manner is as followeth. If any one of the Conspirators haue giuen the height of the Wall, they may presently know of what length the ladder shall be: As if the Wall bee ten foote high in some places,What a Ladder for the Warre ought to be. the ladders must be twelue foote long. Finally, they must giue vnto the ladder good footing, according to the proportion of the staues: left burthening it too much, it breake not easily by reason of the multitude: and againe set vp straight, it will be very dangerous vnto them. If there be no meanes to take the mea∣sure, nor to approach the Wall, let them take the greatnesse of those things which are eleuated on the Plaine, by the space of all the height, which is a kinde of measure not onely possible, but also easie for those which study to learne the Mathematiques. Wherefore it is necessary for them that will aime truely in their re∣solutions of the course of Warre, to know the vse of Geometry: If not perfectly, yet at the least that they haue the knowledge of pro∣portions, and consideration of Similitudes. It is not onely necessary for this,Geometry ne∣cessary for the Warre. but also for the comprehension of Designes in the scituation of a Campe: to the end that when as wee sometimes change its gene∣rall disposition, we may obserue the same proportion of things which are there comprehended: And if sometimes we retaine the same De∣signes of Camps, we may extend the place comprehended by them, or straighten it; according to the reason of things before decreed, or set apart: the which we haue declared more exactly in our Commen∣taries for the ordring of Battailes. I doe not beleeue there is any man that will be discontented with our study, for that wee charge the pro∣fession of Warre with many things, commanding those that loue it, not to disdaine Astrology nor Geometry. For my part, I striue especi∣ally, and with great desire to command things necessary, as I doe re∣proue and blame the excesse of vaine and superfluous things, in regard of the subtilties and dreames in euery Science: So doe we those which are out of necessary vse. It is strange thing that they which practise Dancing, or playing of the Flute, take the preparatiues which concernes the accords and Musicke: And likewise Wrestling, for that this kind of Art seemes behoouefull to bring this exercise to an end: And yet they which terme themselues Souldiers, are discontented if they must allow of any other Studies: So as they which practise Mecanique Arts,The carelesnes of Souldiers for the Scien∣ces. are more carefull and studious then those which challenge an Excellency in things which are of great honour and glory: the which no man of Sence will deny. But wee haue spoken enough of this Subiect. Many coniecture the greatnesse of things by the Circuie: to whom notwithstanding it seemes incredible, that although the City of Me∣galopolis bee contained within the Circuite of fifty Furlongs, and that of Lacedemon within forty eight,The circuite of Megalopolis and Lacedemon. yet it is twice as great as that of Megalopolis. And if any one (meaning to make this doubt greater) sayth, it is possible that a City, or the Pallisadoe of a Campe, hauing the Circuite of forty Furlongs, may bee more ample and
compleate then that of a hundred, this will seeme vnto them a mad and extrauagant speech: the cause is, for that wee remember not the things which inhumane Disciplines are deliuered vnto vs by Geome∣try. This is the cause why I haue vndertaken this Discourse. For that not onely many people, but also some of those which gouerne the Common-weale, and likewise Commanders and Captaines are ama∣zed and wonder how it can be possible, that the City of Lacedemon should be greater then that of Megalopolis, seeing the circuite is lesse: and that consequently they coniecture the number of men by the cir∣cuite of the Campe. There is another such like errour which they commit in the descrip∣tion of Townes. For many conceiue, that Cities containe more houses which are crooked and hilly, then those which are in a flat Countrey. But this is not true, for that the houses are not of a good building in a declining Streete, but in a plaine Countrey, for the which it happens that the Hils yeeld: the which may appeare by that which is apparent in a Plaine. If thou doest consider the houses which are built high, and set vpon the declining of a Hill, so as they are all of an equall hight, it is apparent that their tops being leuell, the distance is equall, as well of those which are built vnder the Hils, as those which are seated on the Plaine neare vnto the foundations of the Wall. It sufficeth at this time to haue spoken to those which (desiring the preheminence ouer others, and to gouerne Common-weales) are ignorant of these things, being amazed and wonder at this relation. The City of Agragas is not onely more excellent among many other Cities, but also for the force of its Rampire,The City of Agragas. and for the grace and building. It is built eighteene Furlongs from the Sea, so as euery man may be partaker of her commodities, the Walles are excellently fortified by their scituation and the industry of man. The Wall is seated vpon a hard and inaccessible Rocke, as well by Nature as by Art. It is enuironed with Riuers. For towards the South runs a Riuer of the Townes name, and on the Westerne part to∣wards the Winter Solstice, passeth the Riuer of Hypse. The Fortresse is seated vpon the side of the Summers East. The which hath with∣out an inaccessible valley and within it one approach to the City. On the top is built the Temple of Minerua, and of Iupiter Aabarin, like as at Rhodes. For as Agragas hath beene peopled by Rhodiens, their God with good reason hath the same name, as at Rhodes. Finally the City is stately adorned with Temples and Porches. In regard of the Tem∣ple of Iupiter Olympian, it is none of the most sumptuous: But like∣wise it seemes not lesse in its height and greatnesse then any other of Grecce.
The Oration of Chlenee, Embassadour for the Etoliens to the Lacedemonians. IT is so true my Maisters of Lacedemon, that your power hath beene the beginning of Seruitude to the Grecians, the which I hold so certaine, as no man at this day will say the contrary. Wee may iudge of it in this manner. For what a multitude of Grecians are there in Thrace, whereof the Athenians and Calsidonians haue planted Collonies? What Ci∣ty hath had a greater estate and power then that of the Olynthiens? The which when as Philip had made Captiue, and ordained to serue for an Example, hee hath not onely beene Lord of all the Cities of Thrace,Philip subdued the Thessalians. but hath moreouer made subiect the Thessalians, being ter∣rified with feare. And when as afterwards hee had subdued the A∣thenians by Armes, he vsed his Fortune nobly, not so much for the good of the Athenians (for there wanted much) but to the end that by the same of his benefits towards them, he might draw others to a vo∣luntary obedience. In regard of the authority of your City, it seemed for a time to fa∣uour the other Grecians. Wherefore propounding what hee thought good, he went to Field with an Army, and in spoiling the Countrey, he hath ruined and sack't your houses, and finally your Countrey, di∣stributing part to the Argiues, part to the Tegeates, some to the Mega∣lopolitains, and the rest to the Messeniens: seeking without reason to be∣nefit others, to the end he might endammage and and annoy you. A∣lexander hath since taken vpon him the power and command. Who thinking that there was yet remaining some comfort for Greece in the City of Thebes,Alexander rui∣ned Thebes. I conceiue you all know how hee hath ruined it. But what neede is there to relate in particular the Deeds of those which haue succeeded them, and how ill they haue intreated Greece? There is no man so negligent of the actions of Warre, which doth not know how Antipater (the Grecians being vanquished neare vnto Lamiai) did most wickedly intreate the miserable Athenians and others:Antipater. To whom hee was so outragious and vniust, as hee sent Inquisiters for Fugitues, and sent to the Cities, against those which had contradicted him, or in any fort offended the honour of the Macedonians. Whereof some being violently drawne out of the Temple, and others from the Altars
themselues, haue beene miserably defeated and slaine: the other Fugitiues haue beene chased out of Greece. There was no freedome but onely in the Nation of the Etoliens. In regard of the executions done by Cassander, Demetrius, and Antigonus, Gonas, who is ignorant of them? The knowledge hath beene manifest, seeing they haue beene done without any disguising. Some of them placed Garrisons in Townes, others setled Tyrants: By which meanes there hath not beene any City free from the name of this kind of seruitude. But leauing this Discourse, I come in the end to Antigonus: to the end that none of you considering plainely my intent,Antigonus. may thinke him∣selfe beholding to the fauour of the Macedonians. Antigonus in truth hath not made Warre against you for the preseruation of the Acheins: neither for that he was offended with the Tyranny of Cleomenes, he de∣sired to set the Lacedemonians at liberty (it were too great a folly, if you were of this opinion) but for that he saw his power was not assured, if the principality of Morea were vnder your gonernment, and withall he saw the industry of Cleomenes, and that Fortune smiled vpon you, the which he feared with enuie. He came not to giue succours to Morea, but to rauish your hopes, and abate your greatnesse. Wherefore the Macedonians are not so much worthy of loue, Lording it ouer this City which they haue ruined, as to be held for Enemies and odious, seeing he hath alwaies hindred you, when you had meanes to command all Greece. In regard of the iniquity of Philip, what neede is there to vse any long discourse? His execration towards the Gods,The blame of Philip. for the outrages committed in the Temple of Thermes is plainely declared: And as for his cruelty to men, it is fully exprest by this preuarication, and the accord violated with the Messeniens. Finally, the Etoliens haue alone among the Grecians made head against Antipater in the view of all the World: so as they liued in safty which were outragi∣ously afflicted. They haue also withstood the attempt of Brennus and the Barbarians which accompanied him: And they alone being cal∣led, haue endeauoured with you to set the principality of Greece at liberty. But it is enough of this Subiect: Wee must now aduise in some sort, and take order touching this present Councell, as with them that resolue for the Warre. Wee must consider it according to the truth. I am also of opinion that as the Acheins as the weaker, should not onely forbeare to spoile your Countrey, but also giue great thankes vn∣to the Gods if they may preserue their owne: The Eliences and Messe∣niens will make Warre against them for the league they haue with vs, the like you will doe. As I vnderstand, Philip will desist from his En∣terprize, being assailed by the Etoliens at Land, and by the Romans and Attalus by Sea. It is moreouer easie to iudge of the future by the actions past. For making Warre onely against the Etoliens, hee could neuer subdue them, how then will hee support this present Watre? Take these words according to my first proposition: that it may be noto∣rious to all men, that you ought not by a rash and vnaduised Councell, but by a mature & setled deliberation rather giue succours to the Etoliens
the Macedonians. And if you haue formerly preuented, and giuen order for those, what meanes can there remaine? If you haue granted vs present succours, before you haue receiued the benefits of Antigo∣nus, wee must with reason enquire, if it be fit that in yeilding to the succeeding benefits, you should contemne the precedent which you haue enioyed. How this liberty and safety being published hath beene consumed by Antigonus, there are some which reproach it vnto you, and turne these things to euill, demaunding often whither you should follow the party of the Etoliens or Macedonians: You would enter League with vs in many things, to whom in these affaires you haue giuen your faith, and you haue it mutually from vs, hauing mannaged the former Warres with vs against the Macedonians. Who can doubt iustly of these things. It is certaine that the Affaires which you haue with Antigonus and Philip, is palliated vnder the Title of courtesie. Finally, what neede is there to declare that, which since hath beene done vnto you? Either in regard of the outrage of the Etoliens, or the bounty of the Mace∣donians, or for any other thing which hath beene auaileable vnto them? How can you being now changed, confirme the Accords and Oathes with them, (which are great Testimonies and Tyes among men) to whom formerly you had wisely resolued not to obey? When as Chlenee had Discoursed of these things, and had spoken in such sort, as hee thought no man could contradict him, hee made an end of his Speech. After whom Lucisque Embassadour for the Acarnanians, entring, con∣tained himselfe at the first, seeing many discoursing of the afore∣sayd things: But when silence was made, hee beganne in these Termes. The Oration of Lucisque Embassadour of the Acarnanians to the Lacedemonians. YOu Masters of Lacedemon, we are come hither, as sent by the Common-weale of the Acarnanians. We conceiue that this our Embassie, is common to Vs and the Mace∣donians: For that in a manner daily, they and wee are Companions in the same hope. And as in dangers wee involued together, by reason of their excellency and the greatnesse of their Vertue, to the end that by their forces wee may liue in safety: In like manner the commodity of the Acarnanians, is according to the care of the Embassadours, contained in the right of
the Macedonians. Wherefore you haue no cause to wonder, if we make a long discourse of Phillip and the Macedonians. Chlenee making an end of his Oration, addes a briefe recapitulation of the right by the which you were bound vnto them: For hee hath said, if theire bee nothing which hath beene done Since by the Etoliens, which doth hurt or dis∣content, after the Succours granted vnto them: or any courtesie done by the Macedonians, this present deliberation, is of a iust considera∣tion. If likewise they haue not committed, in producing the things which concerne Antigonus, the which formerly haue beene allowed by you, I am of opinion that you are the simplest men in the World, if you renew the Oathes and Accords. For my part, I say you are the simplest men in the World, and take the vainest resolution, if when as there hath beene nothing done according vnto his Speech, and the Grecians Affaires remaine such as they were before, when you made the League with the Etoliens. But if this cause hath a very different disposition, as I will shewe in continuing my Discourse, I thinke it will appeare plainly, that I say something which will be commodious vnto you, beeing vnknowne by Chlenee. We are come hither to that end, being perswaded that we are to speake it, to make it knowne. Wherefore it is necessary, if it may be done, that when you haue heard the calamities which hangs ouer all Greece, you should resolue on that which may be honest and fit, and to enter into League with vs in the same hope. If this cannot be done, but at this present you will rest your selues. Yet I hold it ne∣cessary, that in Discoursing in few words of this Subiect, (for that the others haue presumed to accuse the House of the Macedonians) wee should cleare the ignorance of those, which haue giuen credit to their Speeches. Chlenee hath sayd that Philip the sonne of Amintas, Conquered the Principallity of Thessaly by the ruine of the Olyntbiens. Contrariwise I am of opinion, that not onely the Thessaliens, but the rest of the Grecians haue beene preserued by Philip. Who is there among you, that knowes not that at such time as Nomarche and Philomale, going to Delphos,The blame of Nomarche, and Philomale. had vsurped the Gouernement vniustly, and rauished the Treasure of the Gods execrably, what great forces they then raysed, against the which none of the Grecians durst once open his mouth pub∣lickely. As they were wicked towards God, so they laboured for to vsurpe the Principallity of all Greece. At what time Philip imploying his forces willingly, defeated the Tyrants, and restored the things safe∣ly which belonged to the Temple: Deliuering withall vnto the Grecians anoccasion of liberty, as the effect doeth testifie to Posterity. The Grecians did not make choise of Philip to be their Commaunder, both at Sea and Land, as hauing offended the Thessaliens, as this man hath presumed to say, but as a Benefactor vnto Greece: Which dignity no man before had euer receiued. It is true, hee came to Lacedemon with an Army. This was not by his owne aduice, as you know: But be∣ing called and often prest by his Friends and Allies of Morea, whom hee obeyed vnwillingly. And when hee arriued there, consider Chlenee
how hee carried himselfe. When it was in his power to make vse of the fury of their neighbours, aswell in the spoile of the Lacedemonian Region, as in debasing the Citty; whereby hee should purchase their fauour, but he would not follow this aduice: But terrified both the one and the other, and forced them to make an end of their Quarrell, for their common good and profit. Neither did hee Constitute him∣selfe a Iudge in this Contention, but established men chosen through∣out all Greece. Is this an Act worthy of reproach and reprehension? Thou hast likewise made the same reproach to Alexander, as if hee had wrong∣fully afflicted the Thebeins: But thou hast made no mention of the pu∣nishment which hee inflicted vpon the Persians, to reuenge the com∣mon outrage done to all the Grecians: Nor how hee deliuered you from great miseries, reducing the Barbarians into seruitude, and de∣feating their Succours, with the which they ruined Greece, making Warre sometimes against the Athenians, and their Ancestors, some∣times against the Thebeins: and that in the end he made Asia subiect to the Grecians. As for his Successours, how dares he presume to speake? They haue beene themselues many times the cause of good to some, and of hurt to others, during the Calamities of their time: Against whom some happily may haue cause to remember outrages: But it be∣comes not you, from whom they neuer diuerted any good, but con∣trariwise preserued you many times from harme. Who are they which haue called Antigonus the sonne of Demetrius to subuert the Acheins? Who are they moreouer which haue made a League, and sworne it with Alexander the Epirote to ruine Acarnania, and to diuide it: Haue not you done it?Alexander the Epirote. Who hath sent such Commaunders contrary vnto the publique good, as you haue done? Who were not ashamed to infringe the liberties. How hath Tymeus sackt the Temple of Neptune in Tasmare, that of Artimedes at Luses? In regard of Phariques, he hath ruined the Tem∣ple of Iuno in Argos. And Polycrates that of Neptune in Mantinea. What hath Lattabe and Nicostrates done? Haue they not infringed the Accords of the Pambiolates with Panegyre, and practised the cruelty of Sytheans, and Gallatians, or Gaules, so as nothing hath beene done by the Successours? And when you could not excuse them, you holde it a glory that you haue broken the attempts of the Barbarians, falling vpon Delphos: Saying moreouer that for this cause the Grecians ought to giue you thankes. And if they must acknowledge this commodity from the Etoliens, what honour do not the Macedonians deserue, who imploy the greatest part of their liues continually, to maintaine the safety of the Grecians against the Barbarians? What is hee that doeth not know that the Grecians haue beene continually subiect to great dan∣gers, if the Macedonians and the bounty of their Kings had not serued them for a Rampire? VVhereof behold a great Argument: For when as the Gaules disdaining the Macedonians, had vanquished Ptolomy sir∣named Ceraune, they came presently into Greece with Brennus Army: The which had often happened, if the Macedonians had not had the
charge. And although I could holde a long Discourse of ancient deedes, yet I thinke these presents will suffice. But for that which a∣mong other things Philip hath done, hee turnes to cruelty the ruine of the Temple: But hee doth not adde their outrage and insolency, which they haue committed in the Temples and Oratories of the Gods, which are in Die and Dodone, the which hee should haue spoken first. You relate the wrongs and miseries you haue indured, and make a greater shew then is needfull, passing ouer in silence, those which you haue formerly committed in great numbers: For you know, that euery out∣rage and wrong that is done, is by all men reiected vpon those, who haue first done the wrong vniustly. As for the deedes of Antigonus, I will onely make mention, to the end his Actions may not seeme to you worthy of contempt: neither must you lightly regard a deede of great esteeme. I doe not thinke there were euer so great a benefit seene, as that which hee hath im∣parted vnto you. It seemes vnto me so excellent, as there cannot be a greater: The which may appeare by this. Antigonus made Warre a∣gainst you, then in giuing you Battaile, he vanquished you by Armes: Hee was in the end Lord of the Country and Citty, hee might by the Law of Armes haue intreated you roughly: But hee was so far from offering you any outrage, as beside other Benefits, he hath (chasing the Tyrant) restored your Lawes and proper rights. For which Fact ordaining a Testimony to the Grecians by publicke praises, you haue cal∣led him Antigonus your Benefactor and Sauiour. VVhat should you then doe? I will tell you, seeing there is hope of your good Audience: The which I will doe, and not without reason, not to charge you with re∣proaches, but for that the quallity of matters forceth mee, to speake that which is necessary in publicke. VVhat shall I then say? That in the former VVarre you should haue imbraced the League of the Ma∣cedonians, and not of the Etoliens: And that at this day you should ra∣ther revnite your selues with Philip, seeing hee calls you then with them. You answere, that in doing so, you shall breake your Accords. But tell me, if you shall commit a greater mischiefe, in leauing the Accord which you haue made in particular with the Etoliens, then in Trans∣gressing those which concerning all the Grecians, are grauen and Con∣secrated vpon a Pillar? Why doe you so superstitiously flie the dis∣daine of those, from whom you neuer receiued any benefit: And beare no respect to Philip, nor to the Macedonians: from whom you haue the power to hold this Councell? Thinke you that right and equitie, ought to bee preserued to Friends? Yet the Sanctitie is not so great to obserue the Faith reduced in Writings, as the sinne is prophane and ex∣ecrable in bearing Hatred, and making Warre against a publicke body. What the Etoliens require now of you? But we haue spoken enough of this Subiect, the which would be held by the Enuious, not to con∣cerne the present businesse. I returne therefore to the Continuation and Discourse of the cause which consists in this. If the Affaires be at this day a like, as when you made an Alliance of Warre with them,
the election of things propounded in the beginning must remaine in you. If they be altogether changed, it is fit you should consider iudi∣ciously vpon that which they require. I demand of you Cleonice and Chlenee, what allies had you when as you called these men to a Common warre. Had you all the Grecians? With whom at this day haue you communication of your hope? Or to what league doe you inuite these men? Is it not of Barbarians? Thinke you this present warre is like vnto the precedent, and not dif∣ferent? You contended then with the Acheins, and your kinsmen the Macedonians, and with Philip, for principality and glory: And now the warre is made by strangers against Greece for its seruitude, whom you thinke to draw against Philip. Are you ignorant that their for∣ces are call'd in against your selues and all Greece? Like vnto those which during a warre retire into their City a greater Garrison then their owne forces for their owne safety, make themselues subiect to their friends, as soone as they are freed from the feare of their Enemy: The Etoliens thinke the same at this day. Whilst they desire to vanquish Philip, and to humble the Macedonians, they doe not obserue how they blind themselues with a westerne fogge, the which happily may bring some darknesse to the Macedonians, and in the end be the cause of great miseries to all the Grecians. It is therefore necessary for all Greece, to prouide for the threatnings of this time, and especially for the Mace∣donians. Otherwise what cause thinke you my Masters of Lacedemon; had your Ancestours, when as Xerxes demanded by an Embassadour which he sent vnto you Water and Earth, they cast him that was sent into a Well, and cast Earth vppon him: Then taking him out againe, they gaue him charge to tell Xerxes that hee had Water and Earth in Lacedemon? Moreouer, for what reason did the Company which was slaine with Leonides, cast themselues vppon the Enemy in view of all the World? Was it not to the end they might see them vndergoe the danger, not only for their owne liberty, but also for the rest of Greece? Consider now, if it be decent and fitting for their posterity, to take Armes, and to make VVarre with the Barbarians, in allying themselues with them, against the Epirotes, Acheins, Acarnanians, Beocians, Thessa∣liens, and in a manner against all the Grecians, holding nothing infamous, so as it were profitable. VVhat must they attend that doe such vnlawfull things? As the Romans haue beene vnited to them, so the others haue en∣deauoured (hauing the said comfort and aide from the Sclauonians) to make the war by Sea, and to breake the Accord at Pyles: And haue by Land besieged the Citty of the Clitoriens, ruining that of the Cyne∣theins. It is true, they first made an Accord with Antigonus, in regard of the Acheins and Acarnanians. But at this day they are Confede∣rate with the Romans against Greece in generall. These things vnder∣stood, who doth not suspect the comming of the Romans, and detest the sottishnesse of the Etoliens, who presumed to enter into such a League? They spoile the Vines, and the Iland of Acarnania, and haue already taken the Cittie of the Tallaneins and Anticyra, which
they with the Romans haue ruined, who carry away their VViues and Children, suffring (as it seemes) the common accidents of those which fall into the hands of strangers in regard of the soile of these miserable people, the Etoliens enioy it. It were without doubt a very honest and pleasing thing that the Lacedemonians should imbrace this League, who would haue the Thebeins alone among the Grecians liue in peace, when the Persians descended: and haue resolued to make vowes vnto the Gods to vanquish the Barbarians. Your dutie and Honor, my Masters of Lacedemon, depends thereon, to the ende that hauing recourse vnto your Ancestors, and fearing the comming of the Romans, and suspecting the bad intent of the Etoli∣ens, and putting you in minde of the deedes of Antigonus, you may detest the League of the wicked, and flie the amitie of the Etoliens, al∣lying your selues by a common hope with the Acheins and Macedonians. And if some of the chiefe yeild not vnto it, at the least budge not, nei∣ther make your selues Companions of their Outrages. It is true, that affection to friends is very profitable, if it bee commodiously made: But if it be forced, and finally slow and defectiue, it hath no comfort: and therefore you must obserue, if onely in words, or else in actions they will keepe their League with you. A parcell of the Riuer of Euphrates. Evphrates takes its sourse and beginning in Armenia, running its course by Syria, drawing towards Babylon, and falls as it seemes, into the Red Sea; whereof the signe is. It looseth it selfe in hol∣low places vnder ground made in that Region, before it falls into the Sea. VVherefore it hath a different nature to other Riuers. The course of others augment as they passe by many places, and are very high in VVinter, and low in Summer. But Euphrates growes very high at the rising of the Canicular, especially in Syria, and continuing its course decreaseth. The cause is for that it is not augmented by the concur∣rence of the winter raine, but by the melting of the Snow: It decrea∣seth likewise for that it extends vpon the plaine, and is dispersed for the watring of the Land. Then the transport of Armies is slowly made, for that the shippes stay in regard of the burthen, the Riuer beeing low; and finally the swift course of the water is some hinderance vnto the Na∣uigation.
A PARCELL OF the Tenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. AS from thence vnto the Sea, and from the Citty of Rhegium vnto Ta∣rentum,The Coast of Tarentum. there be aboue two Thou∣sand Furlongs, yet the Coast of Italy hath no Ports, except those which are at Tarentum. That Coast turnes to the Sicylian Sea, and bends to∣wards Greece. It is much peopled with Barbarians: So there are very famous Grecian Citties. For the Brucians, Lucain, and some Coun∣tries of the Samnites, and more∣ouer the Calabriens, and many o∣ther nations inhabite this Country: Euen as among the Grecians, lies Rhegium, Caulone, Locres, and Croton. Moreouer the Metapontins, and Thurins, possesse this Maritine Re∣gion. And therefore they which come from Sycily and Greece, are (when as they saile vnto any of the said places) by necessity carried to the Ports of Tarentum: And are forced to Traffique with their Mer∣chandizes in that Cittie, with all the inhabitants of that Coast. Some happily may coniecture, that the Commoditie of this place, proceedes from the abundance and fertillitie of the Crotoniates. And although they haue some Summer stations of small reuenew,The Crotoniates. yet it seemes they will challenge to themselues a great fertillitie, and from no other thing but from the fruitefulnesse of the place, which is not to bee compared to the Ports and Region of the Tarentins. There is also a Commoditie
from this place to the Adriaticke Ports, at this day great, but in for∣mer times greater. All they which sailed from high Pouille vnto Si∣puntes in Front, and were carried into Italy, landed at Tarentum, and made vse of this City for their Commerce and Trafficke, as in affaires. Then the City of the Brtensins was not yet built. Wherefore Fabi∣us much esteeming this abode, was addicted vnto it, leauing all other things. All others hold him for a very fortunate man, and that ma∣ny times, and for the most part, he ended his Enterprizes without rea∣son and accidentally: holding this kinde of men to bee more, diuine and admirable, then those which attempt all things by a discourse of reason: Being ignorant withall, that by these words the actions of the one are worthy of Commendations,Vnderstanding more commen∣dable then For∣tune. and those of the other hap∣py and fortunate. Moreouer, the one is common vnto the people: But the other is proper to wise and iudicious men, whom we must hold diuine and beloued of the Gods. For my part Fabius seemes to me to haue a Nature and disposition like vnto Lycurgus, the Law-giuer of the Lacedemonians. We must not thinke that Lycurgus had beene so superstitious, as obeying Pitheas, he had established the Lacedemonian Common-wealth: Nor likewise Publius Scipio moued with Dreames and Diuinations, had purchased so great a power in the Countrey. But for that the one and the other saw many men not greatly to affect doubtfull affaires, not likewise to pre∣sume to vndertake matters that were graue and dangerous without the hope of the Gods: For this cause Lycurgus making vse of the same drawne from Pytheas in his opinion, hee made them more pleasing and certaine. Publius Scipio in like manner had made an impression in many of a conceite of him, that hee executed his Enterprizes by a certaine Diuine Councell: By this meanes he made his men more assured, and willing to attempt difficult things. That he hath brought euery thing to an end by sufficient reason and wisedome, and that for this cause all his actions haue had an end concurret to reason, will appeare manifest and plaine by the Discourse which I shall hold concerning him. It is certaine he was bountifull and generous:The disposition of Publius Sci∣pio. But as for his industry, sobriety, and vigilancy in his resolutions, no man can conceiue them, but such as haue liued with him, and haue exactly searcht the depth of his disposition: amongst the which was Lelyus, who had beene his Companion from his Infancy in all his actions and discourses vnto his Death: for that hee seemes to speake likely things, and confor∣mable to his actions. First hee reports this Noble deede of Publius, when as his Father had resolued to fight with Hannibal neare vnto the Riuer of Poe. For at that time being as it seemes but seuen∣teene yeares old, going into the Field, hee had receiued from his Father a Troupe of the best and strongest men for his defence and guard. And when he saw his Father in danger, and enuironed by the Enemy, accompanied onely with two or three Horse, hauining receiued a dange∣rous wound, he began at the first to encourage his company to succour
his Father: But when they wauered, for the great multitude of the Enemies,The courage of Publius. hee cast himselfe desperafely as it seemes, and charged them couragiously. Afterwards when the rest were forced to fight, the Enemies amazed with feare, ceas'd the Combare. Old Publius being thus preserued contrary to all hope, hee was the first who (in hearing of them all) called him his Sauiour. When by this action the fame of his prowesse and dexterity began, he afterwards ingag'd himselfe in greater dangers, whensoeuer the supreame hope of the Countrey required it by necessity: This was not with a courage relying in For∣time, but of a iudicious Captaine. Afterwards Lucius his elder Brother, aspiring to the Dignity of E∣dile, the which among the Romans was the Noblest command of the Youth, and that by custome they made choise of two Ediles among the Paricij, and that there were many at that time which aim'd at it, he was long before he durst demand it of his Brother. When the Electi∣on grew neare, and that he had made a coniecture by the humour of the multiude, that his Brother would hardly obtaine it, seeing himselfe on the other side in great fauour with the people, and might attaine vn∣to his attempt, if with their consent he vndertooke the cause, he fell in∣to this conceit. When he saw his Mother visite the Temples, and sa∣crifice vnto the Gods for his Brother, and that she entertained a great hope of the future, which she had in singular recommendation, and that his Father being then Commander of the Army in the sayd War, had sayled into Spaine, he told his Mother that hee had one dreame twice, and that it seemed vnto him that he returned being made Edile with his Brother, from the place to goe vnto their house: And that running vnto the doore, shee had saluted them with imbracings. When hee had ended this Speech, the Mother being very passionate with an effeminate affection, and answering I know not what, shee added; Oh that I might see that Day: will you saies he, that wee make a tryall? Whereunto consenting, for that she did not thinke he would dare to attempt so great a matter, considering that he was very young, shee required (as it were in sport) that he should presently prouide him a long Cloake. For they which stand for gouernment, are accustomed to be so attired. In regard of his Mother, shee had no eonfidence in his words. Publius when he had this braue Robe, went suddainly to the place, his Mother being yet asleepe. When the Multitude had receiued him with amazement,Publius Scipio and his Bro∣ther created Ediles. as well for this nouelty contrary to all hope, as for the loue and affection they had formerly borne him, and afterwards drawing to the place appointed, he was neare vnto his Brother, ma∣ny adiudg'd this gouernment not onely to Publius, but also to his Bro∣ther for the loue of him: and being both of them created Ediles in this manner, they returned to their house. When the Mother had recei∣ued the newes, she ran vnto the Gate, and with affection and loue salu∣ted them. Wherefore although that Publius disdained Dreames, yet it seemed by this action to all those which haue heard speake of it, that he had speech with the Gods, not only sleeping, but much more in the day
waking. But for that he was bountifull and pleasing in his words, and had well obserued the affection of the Commons towards him, and had accommodated the time to the people and his Mother, hee not onely perfected his Enterprize, but also seemed to haue dispatcht in by some Diuine inspirarinn. They without doubt which cannot duely consider the occasions, nor the causes and dispositions of euery thing by the vice of Nature, or ignorance and dulnesse, referre vnto the Gods and For∣tune the causes of things which are decided by industry and discreete reason. These things I speake for the Readers, to the end that falling through errour into the vulgar opinions of this man, they should not leaue good and commendable graces that were in him, that is to say, his Dextity and Industry. In regard of that which I speake of him, it will appeare manifest by his actions. Publius Scipio being then Generall of the Army in Spaine, calling his Troupes together, he aduised them not to be amazed for the aduen∣tures and disgraces past. For the Romans had neuer beene vanquished by the prowesse of the Carthaginians,Aemonstrance of Publius Sci∣pio to his Army. but by the treason of the Celtibe∣rians: And the rashnesse of the Commanders seperated one from ano∣ther, for that they trusted in them: which are things he sayd were then among the Enemies. For besides that they made Warre being farre distant one from another, they offer'd outrages to their Allies, and made them Enemies: And that for this cause some were already sent home: and the rest will speedily (when they shall be assured) come when you haue once past the Riuer, not so much for the good will they beare you, as to seeke a reuenge for the wrongs receiued by the Cartha∣ginians. But moreouer the Captaines are in dissention among them∣selues, and will not willingly ioyne together to fight with you: And being thus diuided, they would be defeated, and fall easily into their hands. Wherefore he perswaded them, that considering these things they should passe the Riuer boldly, promising to giue good order for the rest. When he had vsed this speech vnto the other Captaines, he left his colleague Marcus vpon the passage of the Riuer, accompani∣ed with three thousand Foote and fiue hundred Horse, to the end hee might succour his Companions being in the Riuer: hee himselfe past with the rest of his Army, holding his intention secret from all the World. Hee resolued things which he did not impart to many men. His resolution was to lay siege to the City of Carthage scitnate in Spaine, by the way of course: The which euery man might vnder∣stand, and that it is an excellent presumption of his esteeme, where∣of of I haue formerly spoken. For as hee was but seuen and twenty yeares old, he gaue himselfe first to things which in the iudgement of the World seemed desperate, for the great precedent dangers and misfortunes: leauing all things that were vulgar and easie: and resol∣ued and attempted those which seemed impossible vnto the Enemie, euery one of which required an exact wisedome, knowledge, and vnderstanding. In the beginning being yet at Rome, when hee had considered by himselfe, and eniquired diligently of the treason of the Celtiberians, and
of the diuision in the Armies, what might happen, and what fortune had befalne his Father, he was nothing amazed at the Carthaginians, neither did he faint as many vsually doe. But after that he vnderstood that the Allies on this side the Riuer of Ebro, continued constant in their Friendship, and that the Commanders of the Carthaginians were in discord, and opprest the Subiects, hee affected the Warre with an assured courage, hauing no confidence in Fortune, but in wise Councell. When he arriued in Spaine, he moued them all, and ha∣uing enquired of the Enemies actions, he vnderstood that the Cartha∣ginians Armies were diuided into three: and that Mago made his abode within the Pillars of Hercules, at certaine places called Conies: And that Asdrubal the Sonne of Scone, was neare the mouth of a Riuer by Portugale; the other Asdrubal in the Carpentins Countrey held a City besieged: Either of which places were many dayes iour∣ney distant from the City of the Ceneteins. Studying then whether he should resolue to giue Battaile vnto the Enemy, if it were against all their forces, he should be in danger to be defeated, as well in re∣gard of that which had befalne his Predecessors, as for that their Ar∣mies were great. If likewise he labourd to fight with the one, it was to be feared that in flying the Battaile, the other Armies would come, and by this meanes hee should be inclosed, falling into the like Disasters, whereunto his Vncle Caius and his Father Publius had beene subiect. Wherefore leauing this aduice, when he vnderstood that Carthage was a great ease vnto the Enemies, and would be a great annoyance to him in this Warre, he considere of euery thing, wintring among the Eilotes. When he was aduertised in the beginning that it had Ports which might containe all the Sea-army of Spaine: hauing likewise a Maritine scituation, spacious and commodious for the Carthaginians, for the Nauigation which comes from Lybia: and likewise for that the Treasure and Baggage for the Army, with all the hostages of Spaine, were kept there: adding thereunto the great aduantage, for that the Fort had not aboue a thousand Souldiers in Garrison, for that they neuer sus∣pected that any man would presume to besiege it, the Carthaginians be∣ing in a manner Maisters of all Spaine: and that finally the rest of the people are in great number, yet they were Artizans, Mech annickes and Fishermen, who had no great experience in the Warre: He imagi∣ned that his comming to this City would be vnexpected with amaze∣ment. He was not ignorant of the scituation of the Towne, nor of its fortification, nor likewise of the disposition of the Poole: which things he had learned from Fishermen which had frequented the place: This Poole was generally muddy, and yet wadeable for the most part: and withall the water retired daily about Sun-setting. Wherefore concluding that if he preuailed in his Enterprize, he should not one∣ly annoy the Enemy, but it would bee a great benefit for the Warre: And if his aduice and councell succeeded well, hee might preserue his Subiects as Maister of the Sea, if he might once fortifie and streng∣then his Army. The which was easie: for that the Enemies were far off.
Leauing therefore all other resolutions, hee attends this during Winter. And when he had once resolued, being of the age we haue mentio∣ned, he concealed his resolution from all the World, (except to Caius Lelyus) vntill he thought it fit to manifest it. Although that Histori∣ographers giue testimony of this resolution, yet when they come to the end of the action, they attribute this excellent worke to the Gods and to Fortune, and not to him nor his wisedome; without any pro∣bable arguments, and the testimony of those which liued with him: for that Scipio himselfe declares plainely in an Epistle which he had writ∣ten to Philip, that making vse of the aduice which wee haue mentio∣ned, he had vndertaken the Warre of Spaine, and the siege of Carthage. Moreouer, commanding Lelyus secretly touching the Army at Sea, he gaue him charge to saile aboue the City. Hee alone was priuy to his designe, as I haue sayd. Himselfe taking the Troupes of Foote-men, marcht speedily. There were in the Army at Land about fiue and twen∣ty thousand Foote, and two thousand fiue hundred Horse.The number of Scipio's Army at Land. Being come vnto the City on the seuenth Day, hee planted his Campe on the North part,Carthage besie∣ged. and fortified it without with a double Rampire and Ditches from one Sea vnto the other, without doing any thing to∣wards the City. The Nature of the place had fortification enough. To vnderstand well how this City hath beene besieged and taken, I hold it necessary in some sort to describe the neighbour Countries and its scituation.The scituation of Carthage. It is seated in Spaine about the middle of the Maritine Region, in the Gulfe which hath its aspect towards Affricke: whose depth is about twenty furlongs, and the breadth at the entrance about ten: All this Gulfe makes a kind of Port, where there lies an I and at the mouth of it, leauing on either side a little entrance. And when the Sea is troubled with any torment, then all the Gulfe is calme, but when the Westerne Winds of the Winter Solstice, beating vpon the two entrances, cause the storme: But as for other Winds it is not troubled, by reason of the firme Land which enuirons it. Be∣hinde the Gulfe there rises a Cape, whereon the City is scituated, en∣uironed with the Sea towards the East and South, and with a Lake vp∣on the West and North, so as the space which remaines from one Sea to another, by the which the City is ioyned to the firme Land, is not aboue two Furlongs. In regard of the City, one moiety of it is concaue: and towards the South it hath the approach of the full Sea: Finally, it is full of Hills, whereof two are rough and difficult: the other three are very lowe, but strong and hard to passe, whereof the highest bends towards the East, aduancing to the Sea: There the Temple of Asclepie is built. Right against the which is another of the same scituation, whereon stands a sumptuous royall Pallace, the which some say had beene built by Asdrubal affecting a Regall power. The rest of the lesser Hills haue their tops towards the North. That of the three which lookes directly towards the East, is called Phoste: to the which is ioyned that of Alete. It seemes that Pheste hath beene the in∣uentor
of Siluer mettals, and for this cause purchased diuine honours, The third is called Croue. In regard of the Lake ioyning to the Sea: it hath taken its course by the worke of man, for the benefit of Fisher-men, and others trafficking by Sea. But at the breach of the Banke by the which the Lake and Sea are diuided, they haue made a Bridge, to the end that Sumpters and Carts might bring things necessary from the Countrey. This was the scituation of those places, the Romans Campe was forti∣fied in Front, without any prouision as well by the Lake, as Sea on ei∣ther side. In regard of the space which ioynes the City to the firme Land, he did not fortifie it, for that it was in the midst of his Campe: to the end he might amaze the Citizens, and make vse of it for Skir∣mishes, and to sally forth and retire to his Campe. The Walles in the beginning had not aboue twenty Furlongs: Although that many haue giuen it forty: which is not true. Wee spake not by heare-say, but vp∣on a certaine knowledge, for that we haue seene the places: and at this day they containe no more. Scipio hauing drawne his Army together with that at Sea, began to make remonstrances vnto them, without vsing any other arguments and reasons, then simply to propound the things whereof wee haue partly spoken, and shewing them that this attempt was feazable: and in rela∣ting in particular things done by prowesse, he extenuated that of his af∣faires. Finally, he promised Crownes of Gold to those which should first ascend the Wall: and the accustomed rewards to others which should carry themselues openly like braue and valiant men. And in the meane time he affirmes that Neptune had appeared vnto him in sleepe, and had shewed him this kind of attempt to assaile the City: And con∣sequently promised, that during the assault, he would worke so apparent∣ly, as the efficacy of his Succours should be manifest to the whole Ar∣my. By his remonstrances and euident reasons, together with the pro∣mise of Crownes of Gold, and moreouer by the prouidence of God, he imprinted a vehement desire and courage in the Youth. The next day hee drew his ships into the Maritine places, furnished with diuers Engines to cast, whereof he gaue the charge to Caius Lely∣us: And taking at Land two thousand able men with those that carried Ladders, he began the assault three houres after. Mago on the other side who had the guard of the City, diuiding his Battalion of a thou∣sand men, leauing the one halfe within the Fort, and plants himselfe on the Hill which lookes towards the East: and appoints about two thou∣sand strong men, furnished with Armes which were in the City, to the Gate which drawes to the Isthmus, and the Enemies Campe: Com∣manding the rest to runne vp and downe the Walles, and to defend them with all their power. When as Publius Scipio had caused the Trumpet to found to the assault,The beginning of the fight for Carthagena. Mago caused a sally to be made by the Gate, hoping to terrifie the Enemies, and to frustrate their attempt. As they fought valiantly with those that came marching in Battaile to∣wards the Isthmus, there was a braue Combate, euery man giuing cou∣rage to his Companion. But the attempt was not equall, for that their
Succours were not alike: For that the Carthaginians came running forth but by one Gate, within the space of two Furlongs: whereas the Ro∣mans came suddainly and from many places. Scipio restrained his men neare the Campe, to drawe the Enemy farre from the City, being con∣fident that if he defeated this Battalion of Commons, he should subse∣quently defeare the rest, and that no man would dare to make a sally. It fell our that the Combate was for a time equall: for that on either side they had made choise of their ablest men to make the point.The Carthagini∣ans repuls'd. But in the end the Carthaginians being repuls'd by the force of those which came running from the Campe, turne head: so as many were slaine du∣ring the Combate and retreate. There were many likewise slaine at the Gate. After this all the people of the City were so amazed, as they which were on the Walles fled: and the Romans had like to haue entred with the Run-awayes. Moreouer, they set vp the Ladders diligently,Carthage assaul∣ted by the Ro∣mans. where∣as Scipio vndertooke the danger: the which he did wisely. He was ac∣companied with three men carrying Targets, (the which couering Scipio, hindred the fight from the top of the Wall) defended him thus couered. By this meanes striuing vpon the flankes and difficult places, he was of great vse in taking this City. When he saw what was done, being also discouered to all the Souldiers fighting, he gaue them great courage, so as no danger was auoided: and hee imployed himselfe cheerefully with the rest (as it was reasonable) in euery occasion that was offered to purpose. When the first ascended the Ladders resolute∣ly, the multitude of Defendants did not make the assault so dangerous, as the height of the Walles. For this cause they which defended it, were more assured seeing the difficult which happened. For some of the Ladders brake by reason of the multitudes which mounted on them. They also which ascended first, were so dazeled with the height of the Ladders, as if the resistance and defence had beene any thing, they must haue cast themselues downe headlong: And when as any such accident happened, striuing to get ouer the Wall, they were ouerthrowne to the ground. And although such things happened, yet they could not repulse the Romans from their assault: so as when the first were fallen, their next neighbours stept into their places. But as the day was farre spent, and the Souldiers tired with the toile of the assault, the Commander caused a retreate to be sounded. Where∣fore they of the City reioyced as if they had repuls'd the danger. But Scipio attending the time when the Tide should retire, appointed fiue hundred men for the Lake with Ladders. In regard of the Gate and Isthmus, he set fresh men: and after that he had preacht vnto them, he deliuered them more Ladders then formerly, to the end they might mount vpon the Walles more thicke.A second as∣sault giuen to Carthage by the Romans. When they had sounded to the assault, and that the Souldiers went vp the Ladders with great courage, there grew a great trouble and alteration in the City. For when they thought they had beene free, they saw the danger renewed by another assault. But when they found themselues destitute of Darts, and were heauy for the great number of those which perished, they were dis∣contented
at that which happened, yet defending themselues no lesse valiantly. Finally, the ebbing of the Sea beganne during the Com∣bate of the Ladders: The height of the Poole was much diminished, by the ebbing of the Tide, the which was great, falling by the mouth into the Sea, so as it seemed incredible to those which saw it without consideration. Scipio hauing his guides ready, commaunds those which he had ap∣pointed, to enter and to carrie themselues valianty. Hee was as fit and industrious as any man, to put courage into his Souldiers, and to make them resolute to whom he preacht. When they obeyed him, and striued thorough the mud, all the Army held that which happened to be done by some Diuine prouidence. Wherefore remembring those things which they had heard, and the prowesse of Scipio, they were so inflamed, as they drew to the Gate close and with a violent course, and seeke to breake it open with Hatchets and Axes. The others ap∣proaching the VValls through the mud, and finding the toppe nakeed of men, they set vp their Ladders not onely without danger, but they past the Wals without difficultie. The Citizens in truth were drawne to other places, neither did they thinke that the Enemy would euer assaile the Wall by the Lake. Moreouer by reason of the extreame crie and the confused noise, they could neither see nor heare any thing that was done. The Romans hauing gotten the VVall, seeke first vnder colour of making the round,Carthagena ts∣ken by assault. how they might draw the Enemies vnto them. For the effecting whereof their Armes was of great seruice. Finally, they come to the Gate, where as some going downe cut the barres, others entered from without. In regard of those which made their attempts at the Isthmus with Ladders, after they had defeated them which de∣fended the VValls, they lept ouer, and by this meanes the VVall was gotten. As for the Hill scituated towards the East, they which entred by the Gate recouered it, chasing away the Guards. VVhen as Scipio saw that there was a sufficient number entred into the City, hee sent many of them according to the Custome, against the Citizens, giuing them charge to kill all they met without taking any to mercy, and not to busie themselues with spoile vntill they had a signe giuen them. The Romans doe this to terrifie them. And therefore wee often see, that when they take Cities by force, they doe not onely kill the men, but they cut their Dogges in pieces, and dismember their other Cattle. Many such things happened in that Citie, by reason of the multitude of Prisoners. Finally Publius Scipio accompanied with a Thousand men assailes the Fort:Scipio assailes the fort. whereunto making his approaches, Mago at the first striues to defend it:Mago deliuers the fort. But when hee vnderstood the Truth of the taking of the Ci∣ty, hee sends men to parley for his safety, and by this meanes hee de∣liuers the Fort. This done, a signe being giuen, the massacre ceased, and they fell to spoile. And when as night approached, some remai∣ned in the Campe ordained for that end: And the Generall spent the night in the Fort, accompanied with a Thousand men: Appointing the
rest being retired from the Houses, by the Captaines of Thousands, to carry the booty to the Ensignes in the market place. In regard of them that were lightly armed, called from the Campe on the Hill, hee sent them to the Easterne parts. The Romans tooke Carthage in Spaine after this manner. The day following after they had carried the bag∣gage of the Carthaginian Souldiers, and the substance of the Burgesses and Artizans to the place, the Captaines of Thousands according to Custome, diuided it among their Bands. Among the Romans this order is obserued touching Cities taken.The order of the Roman in the diuision of the spoile of a Towne. Sometimes to euery day they number the men, and distributing them according to the greatnesse of the City, sometimes they diuide them by Ensignes. They neuer appoint aboue halfe the Army for this busi∣nesse. The rest remaine in Battaile for the Guard, sometimes they are without, and sometimes within the City, vnto the end they may be alwayes ready. The Army being diuided for the most part in two of Romans, and two of Allies, they which are deputed for the diuision, do euery man bring his booty vnto the Campe. This done, the Millaneers or Captaines of Thousands diuide it equally to them all: Not onely to those which remaine in Battaile, but also to the Guards of the Tents, to the sicke, and vnto all those which are or∣dained for any publicke seruice. When they are together in Campe to go vnto the War,The Souldiers Oath touching the pillage. they sweare not to commit any fraud in the pillage, and that they keepe their faith according vnto the oath which they haue taken. But wee haue spoken sufficiently heere of in Discoursing of their pollicy. Finally when an Army is thus diuided, one part attending the Booty, and the rest stand∣ing in Battaile for their Guards, yet the Romans had neuer any diffe∣rence through Couetousnesse. For when as none of them are frustra∣ted for the Hope of gaine, and that in the meane time some follow the spoile, and the others remaining in Battaile guard them, no man abandons his Ensigne: The which many times is the cause of great losse and danger to others. Many suffer losse, and are in danger in re∣gard of gaine: For it is apparent, that they which remaine in Campe, or are in Battaile, containe themselues vnwillingly: for that most com∣monly all the spoile vnder his Commaund and power which rules, if he be an absolute Monarch: And if he be a Commaunder, euery man holds that his owne, which may be hidden and purloin'd, although that all things be carefully brought together. And for that most part of men desire booty, and for this cause are in danger, hauing no meanes to obtaine an absolute Victory, it fals out that they are in dan∣ger to lose all. The which happens to many, who although they haue preuailed in their Enterprize, whether they haue cast themselues into the Enemies Campe, or haue taken a City, yet they haue not onely beene repuls'd, but moreouer had lost all, and for no other cause but that aboue mentioned. Whereefor Cōmanders ought to haue nothing in greater recommendation and care, then that where of wee speake: which is, that (as much as may be possible) this hope may remaine to the greatest part: that if such an accident happens, the diuision may be
equall to them all. Then the Captaines of Thousands gaue order o the Booty: and the Roman Commander hauing drawne together the Prisoners, (which were little lesse then a thousand) hee commands them first to separate the Citizens with their Wiues and Children, and then the handy-crafts-men. This done, hee aduiseth the Citizens to imbrace the Friendship of the Romans,Scipio's proui∣dence concer∣ning the Priso∣ners. and to remember the fauour which they receiued, and then hee sent them backe to their houses. Whereof some weeping, and others ioyfull for their vnexpected safety, they retire, hauing done their duties to the Generall. In regard of the Worke-men and Artizans, hee told them, that for the present they were publique Seruants to the City of Rome: But if e∣uery one did his duty cheerefully and willingly, he promised them li∣berty, if the Warre vndertaken against the Carthaginians had a good end. Then he gaue charge to the Questor to take the Names of these men, and that he should appoint thirty Roman Commissaries, for the whole multitude contained in a manner two thousand. He also made choise of the strongest, and the most flourishing in age and forme, to fur∣nish the Troupes: and fill'd the captiue ships with all the Marriners, exceeding the former one halfe: so as euery ship had in a manner twice as many men.The number of ships that were taken. There were eighteene captiue ships, and in the begin∣ning they had beene fiue and thirty. To whom he promised liberty if they shewed themselues friends and valiant, and that if in this Warre he should happen to vanquish the Carthaginians. When he had decla∣red himselfe in this manner, he made the Burgesses affectionate and loyall, as well to himselfe as to the Roman Common-weale: The Worke-men and Artizans are in like manner ioyfull vpon the hope of liberty. But when he had by this supply much augmented the Troupes, in the end he separates Mago and the Carthaginians. For he had two Senators and fifteene Councellors: whom hee gaue in charge to Caius Lelyus, commanding him to haue a speciall care. Moreouer, hee calls all the hostages vnto him, which were aboue three hundred. Then he makes much of the Children, willing them to reioyce, and that within few dayes they should see their Parents. In like manner he perswades the rest to be of good hope, and to write vnto their Cities and Friends, that first of all they had their liues saued, and were well intreated: And that secondly the Romans would send them all home to their houses in safe∣ty, if their Friends could imbrace their alliance. This Speech being ended, he gaue the most commodious spoiles of the Army to euery one according to his Race and age, as to Children Feathers and Bracelets, and to young men Swords. When as among the Captiues the Wife of Mandonin,The Wife of Mandonin. the Brother of Andobale, King of the Lecheteins, had cast her selfe at his feete, demanding with teares that he would haue a better re∣spect to her honesty then the Carthaginians had had, being moued with compassion, he demanded of her what necessary things she wanted. Shee was an aged woman, and carried the shew of some great Dignity. And when she held her peace, he calls for those which had the charge of the women, who presenting themselues, and affirming that the
Carthaginians had furnished the Women with all things necessary: she touching his knees againe, repeared the same words. Scipio viewing her, and thinking that they vnto whom he had then giuen the charge, shewed themselues lyers through negligence, commaunded the Wo∣men not to be discontented, and that hee would giue order to place o∣ther Commissaries, to the end nothing should be wanting that was needfull for them. Then staying a little, Captaine she said, thou mis∣takest my words, if thou doest thinke that I require thy assistance to content the bellie. Then Scipio hearing her conceite, and obseruing in her face the vi∣gour of Andobales daughters, and of many other Potentates, was for∣ced to weep; for that this Lady discouered her Calamitie in few words. Wherefore when it appeared that he vnderstood her conceit, taking her by the Hand, as he did the rest, willing them to reioyce: promising to haue them in as great recommendation, as his owne sisters and chil∣dren: and that according to his promise, hee would appoint trusty and confident men to haue the Charge ouer them. Finally, hauing deliue∣red vnto the Questors all the Wealth found in the publicke Treasure of the Carthaginians, which amounted to aboue eighteene hundred Thou∣sand Crownes: So as ioyning them vnto other twelue hundred Thou∣sand, which the Questor of Rome had, the whole summe would be aboue three millions. At the same time certaine Young men hauing taken a Virgin, passing in the flower of her age, and the beauty of her body all the rest of the Women, knowing that Scipio tooke delight in it, they came vnto him bringing this Virgin, and staying him, told him that they presented her vnto him. Publius amazed and-wondring at her beauty: if I were (sayth he) a priuate person, there is no gift could be more pleasing vn∣to me:The chast an∣swere of Scipio. But being a great Commaunder, there is nothing lesse in my affection: Letting them vnderstand (as it feemes by this answere) that in time of rest and idlenesse, the vse of such things is pleasing to young men: But when affaires do presse, it ingenders in them which vse them, great hinderances both in body and minde. Finally hee thankt the young men: And calling for the father of the Virgin, hee restored her vnto him, giuing him charge to marry her as he thought good, to some Cittizen. By this meanes hauing made shew of the Chastity and modesty of his Heart, he became very pleasing to the Subiects. These things being thus ordained, and the rest of the Prisoners deliuered to the Captaines of Thousands, hee sent Caius Lelyus to Rome to the fiue Yeares Sacrifices, with the Carthaginians and the other prisoners of note, to make knowne in their Countrey, the accidents which had happened. Many in truth which despaired of the Warre in Spaine, applied them∣selues vnto the present in diuers manners, resuming Courage againe, where as the newes was directed publickly. Scipio staying some time at Carthage, practised the Army at Sea continually: And hee taught the Captaines of Thousands this kinde of Exercise for the Foote-men. He appointed the Souldiers to runne thirty furlongs armed on the first
day: And on the second they should all furbush and cleanse their armes: And on the third they should rest:Exercises ap∣pointed by Sci∣pio for his Ar∣my both at Sen and Land. But on the fourth they should fight with Swords of Wood couered with Leather, and with plummets, teaching them to cast Darts: And on the fift to fall to their running, as in the beginning. In like manner he solicited the Artizans and Worke∣men carefully, to the end that nothing should bee wanting in the true Exercises of Armes. He also appointed part of the Commissaries to this Worke, and went vp and downe daily, soliciting euery man vnto that which was necessary. Finally, whilst the Armie at Land practised often before the Citie, the Marriners vsed their Exercises at Sea, with their turnings and retur∣nings. And they which should be in the Citie, should Furbush, Forge, and Worke: and that all should be carefully imploied to prepare Armes. There is no man but would haue held the City for a shoppe of Warre, according to the saying of Xenophon, if he had seene it then. As all things seemed good vnto him, and conueniently dispatcht for necessary vse, and that consequently hee had put a Garrison into the Citie, and rampred the Wals, he dislodgeth with his Army, as ben∣ding both by Sea and Land towards Tarragone, hauing the Hostages with him. He marcht with his Army, as in his iudgement such marches are requisite in all occasions. In the which hee must alwayes accustome the Horse-men, as to mannage a Horse, to handle a Iaue∣lin, and moreouer to bound and gallop, and to turne on the right hand or the left. Sometimes they disbanded the Commanders of ten out of the midst of the Army, and they which commaunded twenty vpon the two wings: and sometimes they drew them together, and stayed them according to the troupes of horsemen vpon the wings: or else they made an extent of two wings by an interposition, or by the pollicy of the Captaines of the reareward. In regard of their exer∣cise in a throng, hee sayed it was not necessary, as hauing one course vpon the way. They must in all alarums bee accustomed to charge the enemy, and to make their retreate, that they should alwayes approach as nimbly as they could, marching vnited and in the same order. They must more∣ouer obserue the spaces betwixt the bands, for if the horsemen vndergoing the danger breake their rankes, there was nothing so dangerous nor preiudiciall. When hee had taught them all these things, especially to the Captaines, hee enters into Citties, to inquire first if most of them obeyed the things which had beene comman∣ded them, and finally if they which had the gouerment of Citties, were sufficient to execute the constitutions with iudgement: holding nothing more necessary then the Prudence of Gouernors. These things being thus ordred, hee assembles the horsemen of Citties in a certaine place, and himselfe making certaine bounds and Curuets, hee taught them all the managing of Armes. Hee did not march in the head of the army, as Captaines vsually doe at this day, thinking the first place to belong vnto them. This without doubt takes away the cōmanders experience, and draws him into danger
It is true that he is seene by them all, but sees not any.The duty of the Comman∣der of an Ar∣my. It is necessary that the Commander of an Army shew example, not by a Military authority, but by experience of a Captaine, and his prowesse in Armes, marching sometimes with the fore-ward, and sometimes with the reare-ward, and sometimes in the Battaile: the which this man did, riding and considering them all, who being doubtfull hee taught, cor∣recting their errours in the beginning: the which seldome happened by reason of the precedent diligence. Demetrius Phalerius hath shew∣ed it, saying, that as in buildings where the houses are comprehen∣ded vnder one Roofe and ligature, it happens that the continuance is the stronger: So a whole Army is made more firme, in the which all is diligently pursued in particular, and by the Chambers. That which is done at this day, is very like to the gouernment and order of a Battaile. Light things and those which are most vsuall in an Army, many times perish wholly in it. In regard of the Role of those which disband, and are armed with aduantage, the Battalion containes them. Now the Etoliens fight like a forlorne hope: So doe they of Morea their Allies: whereas the Romans make head holding the order of a Battalion. And if the others bee repulst, and returning from the Combate perish, the Romans retire with∣out losse: and if they vanquish, which God forbid) they will make all the rest of Greece subiect. A Parcell of Media. MEdia according to the Circuite of the Countrey, is the most defencible among all the Potentates of Asia, in regard of the multitude and vallour of the men, and likewise of the Horses. It doth furnish in a manner all Asia with this kinde of Cattell: so as the Royall Races which are bred and entertained there, are of great benefit to the Medians. It is also inhabited with Greci∣an Cities, the which Alexander caused to bee built for the guard thereof, by reason of the neighbour-hood of the Barbarians: except the Erbatanes, whose City is built vpon the Northerly marches of Media. Yet it is neare the parts of Asia which confine vpon the blacke Sea and the Euxine. In the beginning the Royall City of the Medians was amongst all the rest the most excellent in riches and sumptuous buildings. It is scituated vnder the Mountaine Countries, and neighbours to Oronte without Walles, hauing onely a Fort that is well furnished and for∣tified with great Art. Vnder which is scituated the royall City of the Persians. It is a question whether we should speake of it in particular,The Royall City of the Persians. or be silent. Beleeue mee, it giues a strong argument to those whose intention and custome is to relate rare and admirable things, and to speake some adding much vnto them: which breeds a doubt in those which wisely receiue all that which is out of common fancy. This royall City hath in greatnesse and circuite almost seuen Fur∣longs, and the sumptuousnesse of euery building such, as it shewes a
great abundance of wealth in those that first founded them. For as all the Carpenters worke is of Cedar or Cipresse, yet they haue not left one cloud, but haue lin'd the Ioists, Wainscot, and Pillars with the vaults of the Galleries, with plates of Gold and Siluer: and in regard of the Vessell it was all of Siluer. Yet the greatest part was carried away at the comming of Alexander and the Macedonians: and the rest vnder the gouernment of Antigonus, and of Seleucus Nicanor, and likewise at the comming of Antiochus, when as the Temple of Enee had about it many Pillars gilt, and a great quantity of Siluer ves∣sels, and finally, there were some small number of Tiles of Gold, but many more of Siluer. Moreouer, there was a great heape of Siluer within the Royall City, coyned of the aforesaid things, to the number of about two Millions and foure hundred thousand Crownes▪ A Parcell of Antiochus, and of his Army into Hyrcania. ANtiochus hopes to come vnto those places. Arsaces like wise thinkes that he dare not passe the Desarts there confi∣ning with so great an Army, especially for the want of Water. It is true that in the said places the Water shewes it selfe vpon the superficies, and that there are many Dit∣ches hauing deepe Wells, but vnknowne to those which did not fre∣quent them. Of which they haue a Tale in the Countrey: that at such time as the Persians enioyed Asia, this Countrey had in certaine places (In the which formerly there was no Water) fiue Springs or Fountains. And therefore as Tauris hath many great Riuers, they imployed great labour and cost to fill the Ditches from farre,Many Riuers comes out of Tauris. the which succeeded: nei∣ther doe they know which vse these Waters, the Spring of these Dit∣ches, nor whence they come. When as Arsaces saw him take the way by the Desart, hee resolued to shut vp the Wells and to corrupt them. The King hauing this newes, he dispatcht some from Nicomedia with a thousand Horse, who finding Arsaces gone with his Army, leauing some Horse-men to fill vp the Ditches. To whom suddainly after their com∣ming they gaue the chase, and then returned to Antiochus. The Desarts being past,Hecatomphilon. the King arriued at a City called Hecatomphilon, scituated in the midst of Parthyene. It hath taken its name for that all the passages of the neighbour Countries ioyne there: Here he refresht his Ar∣my, and made his reckoning that if Arsaces had beene able to ioyne Battaile with him, hee would not haue retired leauing his
Countrey, nor sought other places more commodious for his Army to fight in, then those which are about Hecatomphilon. By his depar∣ture therefore it is manifest to him that will consider this action, that hee had taken another resolution. Wherefore Antiochus resolued to take his way to Hyrcania. But when he was come to Tages, and had notice of the difficulty of the places by those of the Countrey, the which hee was to passe vnto the tops of the Mountaines which bend to Hyrcania, and that the Barbarians held the most difficult places, hee resolued to take a good number of the ablest men, and to separate their Captaines, and to informe euery one of them how to performe the way, and like∣wise hee appointed Pyoners, marching with them to leuell the way for the Souldiers, Leginaries, and Baggage. This being concluded, he gaue the first Battalion to Diogenes, adding thereunto the Archers and Slingers, who from the Mountaines might cast their Darts and Stones: the which held no order of Battaile, but came alwayes in time to the place of danger, and were of great seruice in difficult pla∣ces. Hee accompanied them with about two thousand Candiots ar∣med with Targets, of which Polixenides had the charge. In the Reareward hee ordaines the armed men and the Targeteers: The Commanders whereof were Nicomedes of Chio, and Nicolas the Etolien. As these men march before, it fell out that the roughnesse and streights of the passage were found more difficult then the King had conceiued. All the length of the ascent was about three hundred Furlongs, and for the most part by the deepe Fourd of a Torrent, in∣to the which were fallen from the high Rocks Stones and Trees which made the passage inaccessible. To the which the Barbarians gaue great assistance: casting continually Trees which were cut downe, and gathered together great heapes of Stones: and seazed (keeping with∣all the length of all the Valley) on the Hills of aduantage, which might serue them for defence: so as if they had not beene frustrated, Antiochus had giuen ouer his Enterprize as destitute of his forces. For as it was necessary for the Enemies to take their way, and to ascend by that Valley, they seazed on the sayd places and fortified them. But they did not obserue that it was impossible for the Le∣ginaries to passe there with their Baggage vntill the way were made: for these could not approach or come neare the Confines of the Mountaines. They that were lightly armed and the valiant men, could not a∣scend the Leucopetres. For this cause the Ordonance changed when they were ioyned vnto the first Guard of Diogenes Troupes who ascended out of the Torrent. Suddainly the Combate began as the accident shewed: Diogenes Troupe marching slowly through the Countrey,Diogenes fights with the Barba∣rians. gaue a rough charge to the Enemy: And in throwing of Darts and Stones prest the Barbarians, annoying them much with their Slings which they cast from their Pallisadoe. Hauing chased the first, and had taken their place, they gaue charge to the Pyoners to make
the passage euen, the which was presently performed by reason of their great number. By this meanes when the Slingers, Archers, and Darters had marcht to the higher places, scattred here and there, and sometimes together, seazing on the most commodious places, and the Targeteers held the lower Countrey, marching in Battaile a flow pace along the Torrent: The Barbarians stayed not, but abandoning the place, they drew toge∣ther on the top of the Mountaines. In regard of Antiochus Troupes, it past the difficult passages safely after this manner: But slowly and with great difficulty: They could hardly eight in a Ranke recouer the top of the neare Mountaines. And when the Barbarians were there assembled, hauing an humour they should bee able to keepe the Ene∣mies from gaining the top, there fell out a braue Combate. By these reasons the Enemies were repuls'd, who revniting themselues fought against the Leginaries, and made head against them with great cou∣rage and vallour. In the Night the brauest of them turning about recouered the top, and the places lying behind. The which the Barbarians seeing, and suddainly amazed, they turned head. The King is very carefull to re∣straine the fury of his Souldiers pursuing the Enemy, causing a re∣treate to be sounded, desiring they should enter into Hyrcania vnited and in good order.The City of Tambrace. This kinde of march being ordained according to his will, hee comes to the City of Tambrace, destitute of Walles, yet hauing a royall and large Pallace: where hee campt and besieged it. Bt when as many, as well Souldiers as of the Countrey had re∣tired to the City of Syringe, (it was not farre from Tambrace, and was as it were the Capitall of Hyrcania, as well for its fortification as for its wealth) hee resolued to ruine it by force. Marching therefore with his power, and planting his Campe a∣bout it,Syringe besie∣ged by Antio∣chus. he besieged the Citie. The greatest part of his worke was to make platformes in the fashion of a Tortoise. The Ditches were triple, being about seuen Fathome and a halfe broad, and foure deepe. Vpon either banke there was a double Pallisadoe with a strong out∣wall. There were continuall Skirmishes whilest they wrought: from whence they carried from either side men slaine and hurt: for that they fought very valiantly, not onely vpon the ground, but also vn∣der it in the Mines. But by reason of the multitude of Pyoners and the Kings diligence, it happened that the Ditches were suddainly fill'd vp, and the Walles fell being shaken with the Mines. This done, the Barbarians being confounded, and much terrified and a∣mazed with feare, they kill the Grecians which were in the City, and taking their richest stuffe retire by Night. The King seeing this, sends Hyparbase with the Mercenaries: with whom the Barbarians fighting,Syringe taken by Antiochus. and in the end abandoning the Baggage, retire againe in∣to the City. But when the Targeteers prest them valiantly, not able to beare the burthen being so grieuous, they presently yeeld hauing no more hope. The Commanders of the Army being desirous to see the EnemiesA defect in the Text.
Troupes enuironed on the Hill, they command those which were in the Pallisadoe not to budge: in regard of themselues they goe to view the places, being accompanied with two Troupes of Horse, and some Foot∣men lightly armed, with thirty executioners of Iustice. Certaine Nu∣midians accustomed to Darts, comming out of the Enemies Fort to lye in Ambush, they had by chance stolne from the Hills: who hauing notice giuen them by a Spye, that some were on the top of the Hill higher then they, they prepare themselues and march crosse the Hill, and casting themselues betwixt them and their Campe, they shut them in and take them.Claudius Mar∣cellus wounded and taken. Claudius Marcellus the Consull was at the first charge wounded, and taken with some others, forcing the rest being wounded to flye into Caues and Pits. The which they of the Campe seeing, they could not relieue them in this danger. For whilest they cryed out and wondred at this accident, and that some bridled their Horses, and others arm'd themselues, the Execution was ended. The Sonne of Claudius saued himselfe with difficulty, and contrary to all hope being wounded. Finally, Claudius fell into these dangers more through simplicity then by any true iudgement of a Captaine. For my part I am forced to admonish the Reader of these kind of ad∣uentures through the whole tract of our Worke, where I see not onely ordinary Souldiers, but euen Captaines themselues to haue erred by ma∣nifest ignorance. What profit can a Prince or Commander reape, which hath not the knowledge of dangers which hee must auoide, lest the whole Army perish with him? Who knowes not that if necessity doth force them to attempt a thing, that a great part of the Troupes must perish before the Commanders feele it? The tryall must be suddainly made not by the Commander.Common ex∣cuses of igno∣rance and neg∣ligence. That which they vsually say, I did not thinke it: and who would euer haue thought that should haue hap∣pened? Seemes to be a great argument of ignorance, and of a weake iudgement in the Commander. For this cause I hold Hannibal among the good Captaines for many reasons, and which may herein be commended, who hath imployed much time in the profession of Armes, and who making vse of iudge∣ment in many and diuers occasions, hath many times by his industry frustrated the Enemies in particular encounters, and was neuer circum∣uented in such great Battailes: who as it appeares hath preserued him∣selfe with great prouidence. And that with good reason. For the Commander being safe, although all the rest perish. Fortune produceth many occasions by the which the damages receiued by those miserable accidents may be repaired: But if he perish like vnto a Pilot in a ship, there growes no profit, although that Fortune giue the Victory to the rest against the Enemy: For that the hope of all depends vpon the Commander. I speake these things against those who by a glorious pre∣sumption, or a youthfull humour, or by stupidity, or disdaine, fall into this inconsideration. One of the said things must of necessity be the cause of these misfortunes.
Of Publius Scipio and of the VVarre of the Romans against the Carthaginians. AS Publius Scipio Generall of the Romans in Spaine, being in the Region of Tarracona, had first drawne the Spani∣ards to his Friendship, and made them faithfull, for that he had restored them their hostages, he had in this action Edecon, a powerfull Prince for a voluntary assistance: who suddainly after the taking of Carthage, and his Wife and Children redu∣ced vnder the power of Publius, considering the alteration of the Spa∣niards towards him, he resolued in the beginning to be the Authour, beleeuing confidently that by this meanes he might recouer his Wife and Children, and that hee should seeme to ioyne vnto the Romans willingly, and not through necessity: The which succeeded according∣ly. For when the Army had beene newly sent to winter, he came to Tarracona accompanied with his Friends. Being admitted to the speech of Publius,A Remon∣strance of Ede∣con to Publius. he sayd, that he was won∣derfully bound vnto the Gods, that before all the Princes and Poten∣tates of the Countrey, he had retired himselfe vnto him: and that of the rest, some sent and depended on the Carthaginians, and in the meane time they sued vnto the Romans with ioyned hands: and that for his part he was come not onely to yeeld himselfe but also his Friends. Wherefore if he receiued him into his Friendship and alliance, he was confident that he should be able, not onely for the present, but also for the future to doe him great seruice. For as soone as the Spaniards should see him admitted to his Friendship, and to haue obtained his demands, they will likewise come all to recouer their Friends, and to purchase the alliance of the Romans: and that for the future they would imploy themselues with emulation in his other affaires, if their hearts were once possest with this honour and humanity. He required to haue his Wife and Children, and that being admitted into Friendship, he might returne to his house, where hauing found some good occasion, hee might shew his affection, and that of his Friends towards him and the Roman Common-weale. This Speech being ended. Edecon was silent. As Publius had long expected this, and considered of Edecons reasons, he deliuered him his Wife and Children, granting the alliance. More∣ouer
during his presence, he drawes the Spaniard by many meanes to his Deuotion, and imprinted in his followers a great hope for the fu∣ture, sending him backe to his House. When this accident was di∣vulged, all the Spaniards inhabiting within the Riuer (being former∣ly no friends to the Romans) followed their party in a manner with one accord. These things fell out to the content of Publius Scipio. After their departure hee sent backe the maritine Bands, seeing no shewe of danger at Sea. Yet he made choise of those that were most seruicea∣ble, and diuides them among the Ensignes, to the end he might make the Bands of foot-men the more compleat. Andomale and Mandonin, men at that time of great power among the Spaniards,Andomale and Mandonin. attended a fit occasion, hauing long carried a secret ha∣tred in their hearts against the Carthaginians, although they helde them for their trusty and confident friends: For that Asdrubals men (making shew to haue no great confidence in them) they had exacted a great summe of money, and their Wiues and Children for Hostages, whereof wee haue formerly spoken. When as then they immagined they had found a fit opportunity, they retire their Bands from the Car∣thaginian Campe, and in the Night recouered certaine places of great strength, where they might remaine free from all danger. This done, many other Spaniards abandoned Asdrubal, hauing beene long dis∣contented with the pride of the Carthaginians:Asdrubal aban∣doned by many Spaniards. Hauing recouered this first occasion to shew what friendship they bare them: the which many others had done. You must vnderstand that the Execution of great matters, and a Vi∣ctory gotten by force vpon the Enemy, be of great consequence, yet there is required great prudence and Wisedome, to make good vse of things decided by Armes. So as there are more that enioy Prerogatiues, then they which vse them well: The which happened to the Carthagi∣nians. For after they had defeated the Roman forces, and sláine Pub∣lius and aius Scipio, father and Vnckle of this Publius, of whom we now Treat, thinking that Spaine was then in no more danger of Warre, they intreated the Inhabitants roughly. For this cause in steed of friends and Allies, their Subiects were incensed and deadly Enemies. The which fell out iustly. They had an humour that the meanes to Con∣quer Principallities, diffred from that of preseruing them. They were ignorant that they keepe their preheminence well, which obserue the same will and humour, wherewith principallities haue beene first Conquered. It is manifest and obserued in many, that men are of that Nature, that whereas prosperity offers it selfe, they shewe themselues kinde to their Neighbours, promising hopefull things. But when they haue attai∣ned to their desires, then they deale wickedly, and raigne ouer their Subiects as ouer flaues. Wherefore not without reason the affections of Subiects, change with the alteration of their Princes: The which hapned to the Carthaginians. Asdrubal takes much aduice vpon this accident for the euent of things. The retreate of Andomale troubled him. So did the hatred and abandoning of the other Commaunders.
Finally, hee was discontented at the comming of Publius, whom hee still expected to come against him with his Army. When he saw him∣selfe abandoned by the Spaniards, and that all in one League retired to the Romans,The aduice of Asdrubal for the Warre. he tooke this aduice. He resolued that in making pre∣paration of a good Army, hee would fight with the Enemy. If tho∣rough the fauour of Fortune he had the Victory, he would then consi∣der safely and wisely of the rest, but if it should be auerse vnto him in fighting, hee would retire into Gaule with the remainders of the Bat∣taile, and from thence with a multitude of Barbarians draw into Italy, and ioyne with his brother Hannibal vnder the same hope. Asdrubal being of this aduise prepares himselfe. Publius hauing receiued Caius Lelyus, and vnderstood the decrees of the Senate, marcheth, hauing retired his Army out of the Garrisons: To whom the Spaniards come at the passage, and march with him with willing and ioyfull hearts. Andobale had before sent vnto Publius, but when he approached neere vnto this Country, he came vnto him accompanied with his friends: Where after he had spoken vnto him, hee concluded the League of friendship which he formerly had with the Carthaginians,Andobale speaks to Publius Scipio. giuing him to vnderstand what seruice and loyalty hee had obserued towards him; and finally he exposeth the outrages and iniuries which hee and his had suffered, intreating him to be the Iudge of that which he sayd: And if he seemed to accuse the Carthaginians vniustly, hee might certainly know that he would neuer keepe his faith to the Romans: If being for∣ced for the necessary respect of many iuiuries, hee had desisted from his affection, yet he had good hope that ioyning to the Romans to keep his faith firme with them. After he had vsed many such Speeches, he made an end. To whom Publius answering, sayd, that he beliued it▪ and had vn∣derstood the outrages of the Carthaginians,publiu answer to Andobale. which they had vsed to o∣ther Spaniards, and their lasciuiousnesse towards their Wiues and daughters. Of whom notwithstanding he hauing taken many, reduced rather into the estate of Captives and slaues, then Hostages, hee hath kept them with such honesty, as the Parents themselues could not haue done. And when as Andobale and his Company confest it, and ma∣king an obeisance vnto him, they saluted him as King, the assistants ob∣serued those words.Publius saluted King. Publius blushing, commands them to be of good hope, promising them they should finde curtesie and fauour with the Romans, and presently deliuers them their Daughters: and the day following makes an accord with them. The principall Articles of their Accord was,The Spaniards ioyne with the Romans. that they should follow the Roman Princes and obey them willingly. These things thus concluded, they returne vnto their Campe, and come with their Army to that of Publius, and making Warre with the Romans, they march with them against Asdrubal. The Commaun∣der of the Carthaginians staying neere to Catolgne, fast by the City of Babylis, and neere vnto the Mines of Gold and Siluer, he changed his Campe when he was aduertised of the comming of the Romans, so as he had the riuer at his backe in manner of a Rampire: and in front and
on the sides a Pallisadoe with a sufficient depth for the Fortification: there was finally a length in the Vallies sufficient to put them in battaile. And as for the side of the Hill there were vsually men. When as Pub∣lius approacht, he was ready to hazard the Combate: although hee were in doubt seeing the aduantage and force of the places, where the Enemy lay in Campe. But when he had contained himselfe two daies, and was in feare that Mago and Asdrubal the sonne of Gescon comming, he might be inuironed round, he resolued to fight and to hazard a bat∣taile: Making therefore another Army, he labours to gaine the Pal∣lisado. In regard of those that were lightly armed and the choise foot∣men, he sends them to the side of a Hill, giuing them charge to assaile, and to view the Enemies forces. And when that this was done with great Courage, the Commander of the Carthaginians attends the euent from the beginning. But when he saw his men prest, and in danger by the courage of the Romans, he drawes his Army into the field, and plants in neere the side of the Hill, relying vpon the opportunitie of the place. At the same time Publius sends his brauest men to succour those that were in danger; and stayed the rest ready: He takes the one halfe and assailes the Hill vpon the left side of the Enemy, fighting against the Carthaginians: And deliuers the rest to Lelyus, giuing him charge to assaile the Enemy on the right hand. When this was done, Asdrubal drawes his Army out of the Fort.The Carthagini∣ans assailed by the Romans. He had hitherto kept it, relying vpon the fortified places, hauing an opinion that the Enemies durst not assaile him. But for that this charge of the Romans came vnexpected, hee puts his Army into Bat∣taile later then was needfull. The Romans vndergoing the danger of the fight, whilest that the Enemies were not yet vpon the Wings, they not only assailed the Hill without danger, but in approaching slew those which crost them, whilest that the Enemies made ready their battaile: forcing those to turne which prepared themselues and made head against them. When as Asdrubal, according to his first resolution, saw his Army giue backe and shamefully repuls'd, hee had no will to fight vnto the last gaspe. Taking therefore the Treasure and the Elephants,The defeate of Asdrubal. and all those hee could draw together in the flight, he retires to the Riuer of Tagus, and to the Hills of the Perinee Mountaines, and to the Gaules inhabiting there. Scipio held it not fit to pursue the Victorie suddainly, doubting the comming of the other Commaunders: Finally, he gaue the bootie of the Fort to the Souldiers. The day following, he drawes together all the Prisoners, whereof there were ten Thousand foote, and two Thousand horse, to dispose of them.Scipio saluted King of the Spaniards. All the Spaniards of that Countrey which were allied vnto the Carthaginians, come and submit themselues to the fauour of the Romans. And when he had giuen them audience, they saluted Scipio as King. The which Edecon beganne when he did his obeisance; and after him Andobale with his friends. Scipio at that time regarded not their words but was silent: But when after the Battaile all saluted him as King, he was mooued therewith, so as hee forbad it. Drawing
all the Spaniards together, he told them that he would be truely Roy∣all, and so held; but hee would not be called a King by no man liuing. This done, hee ordained they should call him Chiefe or Commaunder. It is not without cause,The Commen∣dation of Publi∣us Cornclius Scipio. that we may iustly commend the magnanimity of this man: By the which being yet young, hauing the fauour of For∣tune such, as all the Subiects had him in so great esteeme, as they sa∣luted him by so excellent a name, yet hee was alwaies so continent, as hee would not accept of this will and humour of the Subiects. But he will wonder much more at the excellency of his magnanimitie, if hee lookes to the last daies of his life: when besides the valiant exploits which hee hath done in Spaine, hee hath ruined the Carthaginians, and made subiect vnto the Romans many good Countries in Lybia, from the Philenin Altars, to the pillars of Hercules. Hee hath also ruined Asia, and the Assirian Kings. Finally, hee hath reduced to the obedience of the Romans the best and greatest part of the World. And therefore if hee had pleased hee might well haue imbraced the opportunity to v∣surpe a royall power, in these Countries which hee hath inuaded and taken. The disdaine of such things (as Scipio hath wisely done) sur∣passeth not onely humane nature, but a diuine. This magnanimity doth so much excell other men, as no man would demaund of the Gods a greater fauour: I meane then a Crowne, the which hee hath so often refused, being deliuered vnto him by fortune, and hath had his Country in more esteeme, and his owne honour then the great command of a royall power. Hee gaue leaue to all the Spaniards, being set a part, to returne into their Country without ransom, except three hundred horse whereof hee gaue the choise to Andobale, giuing the rest to those which had not any. Finally, being now seazed on the Carthaginians Campe, hee stayed there in regard of the firtility of the Country, expecting the Carthaginian Commanders which were remaining: hee also sent forces to the topps of the Perenee Mountaines to watch Asdruball, and then when the season was come hee retired to Tarracona, to winter his Army there. Hee returnes to the History of the Grecians. AS the Etoliens lifted vp their hornes for the new hope and confi∣dence they had in the Romans, and the arriuall of Attalus, they amazed all the world, making Warre by Land as Attalus and Publius did by Sea, for this cause the Acheins intreate Phillip to suc∣cour them, for in truth they not onely feared the Etoliens, but also Machains, for that he had seaz'd vpon the Argiue Mountaines with an Army, the Beocians fearing the enemies Army at Sea, require a com∣mander and succours. The Negrepontins demanded instantly some pro∣vision against the enemy, the like did the Acarnanians, there was also an Embassadour from the Epirotes, they said likewise that Scerdilaide and Plaurate assembled their Armies, and that moreouer the Thracians, who confine vpon Macedony would indeauour to assaile it if the King should retire from thence, in regard of the Etoliens, they had seazed
vpon the straights of Thermopiles, and fortified them with Ditches, Pallisadoes, and a great Garrison, hoping they should be able to keep in Philip, and wholy to stoppe vp the passage in succouring his Allies within Pyles. These aduentures seemes worthy of Consideration,) and not with∣out reason) by the Readers, in the which is the true Experience and practise of Princes according vnto their Corporall power. For as in Hunting Beasts are mooued with their Forces and Power, when they are ingaged in an apparent danger, so it befals Princes: the which they might then discouer in Philip. Hee dismisseth all the Embassadours,Attalus against Philip by Sea. promising them to doe what possibly hee could. His whole inclinati∣on was the Warre, expecting by what meanes and against whom hee should first beginne. But when the forces of Attalus were come a∣gainst him, and had assailed the Iland of Peparethon, hee sends men to guard the Citty: And dispatcheth Polyphantes with a small Army towards Phocea and Beocia, and Menippus to Chalcis, and the other Negrepont, with a thousand Targetteers, and fiue hundred Agrians. In regard of himselfe, hee went to Scotuse, whether he Commanded the Macedonians to repaire. When he had newes that Attalus Army had taken the route of Nicea, and that the Chiefe of the Etoliens assembled at Heraclea, to conferre of the Affaires of the Warre, hee parts from Scotuse with his Army, and made hast to dissolue their Assembly. Hee arriued too late, yet hee wasted their Corne, and after that hee had spoiled the Inhabi∣tants about the Gulfe of Enee, he returned, leauing his Army at Sco∣tuse, and taking his way to the Demetriade: With his ablest men and the royall Wing, hee stayed there expecting the comming of the E∣nemy. And to the end nothing should bee vnknowne vnto him, hee sends to the Peparethiens, and Phociens, and likewise to the Negrepon∣tins, giuing them charge to make him a signe by fire of all things that should be done, vpon the Tisee which is a Mountaine in Thessaly, which in regard of the places is very commodiously scituated. But as this manner of signe by fire, is of great commodity for the Warre, and hath formerly not beene vsed, I doe not hold it good to passe it, but in this passage to make some reasonable mention. No man is ignorant that opportunity and occasion are the principall parts in all things: But much more in the profession of Warre, to bring enterprises to an end: But among those things which are vsefull,Aduertisements by fire. fires are of great efficacy. They vse them at this day, and are the cause of some opportunities, to be able to aduertise him who hath the care of that which is done, al∣though it be three or foure dayes distant, or more: To the end that by the signe of fire, they may suddainly giue succours vnto them that de∣maund it, although that in former times they haue held it of small mo∣ment, for that the most part knew not how to vse it. But the vse ought to bee ordered and setled vppon certaine and determinate agree∣ments. But whereas things which they will signifie are not resolutely set downe, they cannot make vse of these fires, as those are whereof wee will speake.
If the Army at Sea were come to Orea, or Peparethon, or Chalcis, they might signifie it to those, with whom this hath beene resolued. But if any of the Cittizens will turne their Coates, or practise a Trea∣son or Murther within the Citty, or any such thing as hath vsually hap∣ned, and yet cannot be diuined (matters which happen suddainly and vnlookt for, haue neede according to the occasion, of Counsell and aide) yet it may be signified by fire. For of those which consideration cannot preuent, they cannot make any Conclusion. Eneas seeking to correct this kinde of doubt and perplexitie,The aduise of Eneas touching signes by fire. hath in few words made the Commentaries, of the institution of the heads: And hath abun∣dantly comprehended for the vnderstanding, the summe of those things which are required; the which may easily be discouered by this speech, saying: That they which will giue notice by the aduertisement of fire of any of great and pressing businesse, must make prouision of pots of earth, whose breadth and depth must be equall, and they must haue three foote in depth, and one and a halfe in breadth: Then hee must make slender Corkes in the mouth of it; in the middest whereof hee must tie them in equall parts of three fingers distant; and in euery part a great Circumference, in the which are also painted the most vulgar and generall things which happen in the profession of Warre. As by the first, that Horse-men are suddainly entred the Countrie: In the se∣cond, that foote-men armed; in the third, that men lightly armed: And consequently in others, that foote and Horse-men, or an Army at Sea, and that there is Corne. You must in this sort paint the things which do vsually happen in Regions, according to the prouidence and time of the motions of Warre. This being done hee Commaunds to obserue dilligently the pots of the one and the other, so as the pipes may bee equall and runne e∣qually: And when the pots shalbe full of Water, they must put in the Corkes with stickes; and then let the pipes runne together. This hap∣ning it is apparent, that all being equall, the Corkes of necessity abate as the Water runnes, and the stickes hide themselues in the Vessells. When these things are equally ordered, and they are to vse them, then they must transport them to the places, where the one and the other are to obserue the fires, and then must set them on either side vpon the Vessels. Finally, in what thing soeuer that any portraite of the sticke shall fall, hee ordaines they should set vp a light which must continue vntill the Deputies answere him with the same. And when both fires are discouered, then hee must take them away and suffer the pipes to runne. But as for the falling of the Corke and the sticke, that which of the Images shall approach vnto the brinke of the pot which wee will let you see, hee orders that they shall set vp a light: and that they should stoppe the pipes, and see what image of those which are figured vpon the sticke, comes to the brinke. This may be done when as all the things which they manifest, are of either side mooued with the same dilligence. The which may bee in some sort by a light set vp by agreement to serue for an aduertise∣ment, vnlesse they be vndetermined: For it is impossible to see fu∣ture
things, or that that bee figured vpon the sticke which wee fore∣see. Finally if by Fortune any vnexpected accident happens, it is certaine that it cannot be declared by this inuention: Nor any thing of that which is figured in the sticke be determined. They cannot giue ad∣uertisement of the number of Horse-men or of foot, or of ships, nor of the quantitie of Corne. For wee cannot dispose of things, whereof the knowledge cannot be made before they be done. And by consequence how can any man resolue of succours, if he knowes not the multitude of the Enemies,Another kinds of aduertise∣ment by fire in∣uented by Cleo∣menes and De∣mocrites. and the place where they are? How can a man worke safely, or otherwise? Or how can hee plot any Enterprize, which knowes not the number of the Enemies, nor the quantity of Corne which is come vnto them from their Allies? A latter kinde hath beene inuented by Cleomenes and Democrites. In regard of that which is vulgar and of ready vse, we haue determined: the which may aduertise exactly all that which is necessary to bee knowne. The vse whereof requires dilligence, and an exact obser∣uation; and it is in this manner. You must diuide the Letters according to their order in fiue parts, euery one consisting of fiue: But in the ende there shall want one, which is no matter of Consequence. And when as they which shall make vse of lights for an aduertisement, shall pre∣pare fiue little Tables, and write vpon either of them the parties accor∣ding to their order, and then they agree together, that hee which giues the aduertisement, shall set vp the first lights and two together, which shall not bee taken away vntill the other hath answered in like manner. This serues to the end that by this light they may vnderstand, that they are discouered. These others being taken away, they must shew the first which are on the left hand, and declare by the Table the things whereunto they must haue a care. As if the first Table he lifted vp, it signifies one: if the second two; and so consequently. They must also lift vp those which are on the right hand, after the same manner, to aduertise what letters he shall write that takes the light. When they which haue agreed together vpon these matter, come vnto the place, they must first haue a Dioptre, hauing two Cauels: to the end that hee that is to lift vp the light right against it, may see the place both on the right hand and left. The Tables must bee fixed straight and by order, neere vnto the Dioptre, and the places on the right hand and the left must bee separa∣ted ten foote, and the height of a man. Moreouer they must be care∣full that the lights may be visible when they set them vp, and likewise hidden when they take them downe. These things being thus prepared on eyther side, and that they haue an intent to giue some aduertisment, as that a hundred Souldiers are retired to the Enemy, they must first vse the Dictions which by the small Letters may signifie that which we haue said;. as that a hundred (Candyots) haue abandoned vs. The letters now are lesse, and yet that is signified. This which is written in the Table will shewe it selfe thus. The first letter is thus x, the which is in the second part and second Table: they must also set vp the lights vpon the left hand, to the end that he which hath the charge, may vnder∣stand
that he must looke to the other Table. Then on the right hand he must set vp fire, to let him know that thisx is the fifth Letter on the right hand, the which hee which obserues the lights, must write in the Table. Thenp. r. p wherefore hee must lift vp two on the right hand, which signifies the second of the fourth part: For this cause hee that obserues the Lights, writes the letter▪p. r. and so consequently of the rest. By this meanes whatsoeuer happens, it may be certainly knowne, fol∣lowing this inuention. Moreouer they must haue many lights, for that there must be two to euery Letter. And if any one doth duly obserue these things, which serue to this vse, that which is required may bee done. Moreouer, they which make vse of these two inuentions, must giue order when as they will vse them, to be able to giue full and cer∣taine signes. Whosoeuer pleaseth, may easily know in many kinds how great soeuer the difference of the sayd things make shew of, and which they haue beene accustomed to obserue. For many things not onely difficult, but which seeme impossible hauing gotten the successi∣on of time and custome, become most easie. There are many and diuers examples which deserue credite; but the most excellent is that which happens in the Arte of reading. If any one instructs a man without Experience, and not accustomed to read, although hee be industrious, and that finally hee produceth an infant bred vp to it, and that a Booke being giuen him hee appoints him to read the Contents, it is manifest that the other will not belieue, that hee can know first how hee may by the looking of it read euery letter, know their powers, and how they ought to be ioyned; forth at either of the said things require much time. Wherefore when he hath not artai∣ned this Art, and sees this little Boy continue with one breath fiue or sixe lines, he would neuer easily beleeue, but that hee hath formerly read the Booke. And if moreouer he hath a good pronunciation, and obserues the points, aspirations, and pauses, he will not be perswaded and beleeue no more: Wherefore wee must not disdaine any thing that is profitable, in regard of the euident difficulty: But we must apply our selues to that which makes all good things comprehensible to men, and namely in those wherein most commonly the supreame safetie doth consist. Wee haue vndertaken to speake these things, according vnto that which we haue promised in the beginning. For wee haue said that all Specula∣tions haue so preuailed with vs, as for the most part they are metho∣dicall Sciences. Wherefore it is a very profitable portion of a well composed History.
Of Antiochus. THe Aspasiens dwell betwixt Oxus and Tanais: Of which Riuers, the one fals into the Hyrcanian Sea, and Tanais into the Lake of Meotis. They are Nauigable for their greatnesse: So it seemes wonderfull how the Tartarians passing Oxus aswell by foote as Horse-backe, come into Hyrcania. There are two opinions con∣ceiued: The one is credible, the other strange although possible. Oxus drawes his Springs from Mount Coucasus, but augmented much in Bactria by the descent of smaller Riuers, it passeth by a violent Course by the Country of Peda. There it fals into a Desart, and runs with a violent streame, thorough certaine Rockes and Pits, for the great number and vehement beating of the places lying vnder it, so as its vio∣lence ouer-flowes the Rocke in the lower Countries aboue a Furlong. By this place neere vnto the Rocke the Aspasiens, as they say, passing the Riuer both on Foot and Horse-backe, descend into Hyrcania. The other opinion hath a more propable reason, saying, that for that place hath great Ditches, into the which this Riuer fals with its force, shee makes hollow and opens the bottome by the violence of her Course: And by this meanes the Riuer takes its course vnder ground, for a small space, and then riseth againe. The Barbarians hauing experience here∣of, passe there on Horse-backe into Hyrcania. When as Antiochus was aduertised, that Euthideme was about Tagure with an Army, and that a thousand Horse kept the passage of the Riuer of Aria, hee proceedes and resolues to besiege it, hauing no more confidence in his resolution. And when he was within three daies iourney of the Riuer, he marcht the two first slowly: And on the third hauing fed his men, hee causes his Campe to march at the breake of day: Then taking the Horse-men and his strongest souldiers, with a thousand Targetteers, he makes hast in the night. Hee had vnder∣stood that the enemies Cauallery was at the guard of the Riuer in the day time, but at night they retired to a City some twenty Furlongs off. When hee had performed the rest of the way in the night (for those Countries were conuenient for Horsemen) he past the Riuer at the break of day with the greatest part of his Army. The Bactrian Horse-men being aduertised by their Scouts, crie out and fight with the Enemy vp∣on the way. The King seeing that hee was to maintaine their first Charge, giues Courage to those which had beene accustomed to accompany him in
such encounters, which were two thousand Horse: and commands the rest to cast themselues betwixt both, with their Troupes put into bat∣taile as of custome. Finally, hee fights with the Bactrian Horse which presented themselues.A skirmish of the Bactreans with Antiochus. Antiochus seemed in this danger to haue fought more valiantly then his men: so as many perished on either side. Yet the Kings men defeated the first troupe of Horse: But when the second and the third charged them, they were repuls'd turning their heads basely. But when as Etole had giuen charge to the great power of the Horse to march in Battaile, he freed the King and his Company, ter∣rifying the Bactrians who were in disorder, and put them to flight. Wherefore when they were charged by all the Etoliens, they ceased not to flie vntill hauing make a great losse they were ioyned vnto Euthi∣deme. And when as the Kings Horse-men had made a great slaugh∣ter, and taken many in the Citty, they presently retired, and planted their Campe neere the Riuer. It happened that in this same Com∣bate Menippe was wounded and dyed, loosing some of his Teeth with a blow: Finally, hee purchased a renowne of Valour. After this Combae Euthideme retired with his Army to Zariaspe a Citty of the Bactrians.
A PARCELL OF the Eleuenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. ASdrubal did not allow of any of these things. But (seeing the Enemies march in Battaile) when as matters changed not, hee caused the Spani∣ards and Gaules that were with him to fight. Setting the Elephants in Front, beeing ten in number, and after hee had ioyned the Battalions close, vnited, and in length, and had put all the Army in battaile in a short time, casting himselfe in the middest of the Ordonance neere to the Ele∣phants, hee assailes the Enemy vpon the left flancke, hauing resolued to die in that battaile. The Lybian presents himselfe with great Courage to the enemy, and in charging fights valiantly with his troupes. Claudius Nero one of the Consuls, appointed for the right side could not ioyne with the enemy, nor yet inclose them, for the vneuennesse of the ground:A Battaile be∣twixt Asdrubal and the Romans in Italy. wherein Asdrubal trusting, he had charged the enemy on the left hand. Wherefore as he was perplexed and in doubt, for that he lost time, hee learned what he had to doe. Taking therefore the Souldiers of the right wing, he goes beyond his Campe neere vnto a passage behind the Battaile and on the left hand, and giues a charge vnto the Carthaginians, neere vnto the wing where the Elephants had their station. At that time the Victory wauered. For in truth the danger was equall of both sides, considering that neither Romans, Spaniards, nor Carthaginians had any hope of safety remaining, if they were frustrated of their intention. Finally, the Elephants were of vse to both of them in the fight: For
when they were inclosed in the middest, and assailed with Darts they aswell brake the rankes of the Spaniards, as of the Romans. But when as Claudius Troupe had charged the enemy in the reare, the Combate was vnequall, for the charge giuen vnto the Spaniards both in Front and behind. So as it happened that in the beginning of the Combate, there was a great laughter made of Spaniards: So likewise there were sixe Elephants suine by the force of the men they carried: the other foure brake their rnckes: being alone and destitute of their Indians they were taken▪ And when as Asdrubal had beene formerly and vnto his ende an able man,Asdrubal bro∣ther to Hanni∣bal slaine. hee lost in fighting valiantly his life, worthy to be commended. Hee was brother to Hannibal, who vndertaking the Voyage of Italy, gaue him the Conduct of the Warres of Spaine. And afterwards be∣ing practised by many encounters against the Romans, hee hath indured many and variable Fortunes: And in this also that the Carthaginians sent Commaunders to succeede him, hee alwaies carried himselfe like a man worthy of his Father Barca, bearing vnto the ende like a man of Courage all disgraces and losses. Wee haue declared these things in re∣gard of the precedent. But now we will decide the last Combats, in that which seemes worthy of Consideration. Seeing before our eyes many Kings and Commanders which hauing great Combates concerning their whole estates, haue alwayes cast their eyes vpon the most excellent Actions, and of Consequence; and who often enquire and Discourse how they shall helpe themselues in euery good Fortune: And who moreouer care not for mischances, not consider of the meanes, nor that which they are to doe in euery action and euent: For that this other is in their hands, and this requires a great preparation. And therefore many hauing beene vanquished, carry themselues poorely by their basenesse and inconsiderations: Al∣though that the Souldiers haue many times sought valiantly, and with good direction: And haue by this meanes dishonoured their precedent actions, making the rest of their Liues infamous. It is an easie thing for him that will know how many Commaunders faile, and are fru∣strated heerein, and that there is much difference betwixt man and man. Precedent times haue affoorded many examples in these things. In regard of Asdrubal he was no lesse prouident in dangers, then for his safety, whilest he had any hope conformable to reason, to be able to do any thing worthy of his Predecessours. But when as Fortune had depriued him of all hope for the future, and had concluded him to his last end: omitting nothing for the Victory, nor that which concerned the preparation and danger, hee carried himselfe like a man of proui∣dence: And although that all was in danger, yet hee obeyed the present time, neither did he suffer any thing vnworthy of his Predecessors. Be∣hold the reason which I haue deliuered concerning those which apply themselues to the mannaging of Warre: to the ende that vndertaking dangers rashly, they draw not them into despaire which are vnder their Charge, nor by desire of an infamous life, they make their deaths disho∣norable and blame worthy.
The Romans hauing gotten the Victory by force, presently breake the Pallisadoe of the Enemy, and kill like Sacrifices many Celts sleeping in Drunkennesse vpon their Mattresses,The Celts slaine sleeping. and assemble together the rest of the Prisoners: By the which there did accrew nine score thousand Crownes to the Common-weale. There died in this Battaile as well of Carthaginians as Gaules, neare ten thousand men,The number of the dead. and about two thou∣sand Romans. Some Nobles among the Carthaginians were taken, the rest were slaine. When this Newes came to Rome, they were scarce beleeued for that they desired wonderfully to see it done, but as there came many men declaring not onely what had beene done, but euery thing in particular, then the City entred into an immoderate ioy: all the Temples were adorned, and fill'd with Sacrifices and Oblations: Finally, they grew so confident and assured, as at that time they did not thinke that Hannibal (whom they had formerly so much feared) was in Italy. An Oration to the Etoliens of the Warres of Greece. MY Masters the Etoliens, I thinke it is very manifest that King Ptolomy, the Citizens of Rhodes and Constantinople, with those of Chio and Miteline make no great accompt of your League. It is not the first nor the second time that wee haue treated with you of Peace: But euen at that time when you moued Warre, applying your selfe vnto it, and im∣bracing all occasions, wee haue not ceas'd to admonish you. Now we coniecture the ruine of your selues and the Macedonians, and for the future we are in care for your health and for all Greece. As fire thrust into a Forrest is no more in his power that hath kindled it, but consumes all that it encounters: Being moreouer gouerned by the Winds, and by the consumption of the Forrest, and that many times it sweepes a∣way suddainly the Incendiary himselfe: so the Warre being once infla∣med by some, ruines them first: Then it runnes without reason, de∣stroying all things it encounters, agitated by rashnesse, and the beastli∣nesse of those which kindle it, as it were driuen by the Winds. Where∣fore my Masters the Etoliens, seeing that the Ilanders, and the Grecians which inhabite Asia, doe often sue vnto you, that disdaining Warre, you would make choise of Peace, for that the case concernes you: re∣sume your sences, consenting with those who with reuerence admonish you. If with some good fortune you did mannage a Warre which
were profitable, commodious, and glorious (it is that vndoubtedly which they expect most therein) according to your first intention and designe of euents, they might with reason pardon you as men of great courage. This Warre is altogether infamous, full of ignominy, and cursed, is it not necessary to stay and deferre it? Aduice without doubt should be freely giuen, you will heare (if you be wise) my words patiently. It is much better for you to be preserued with a commodi∣ous reprehention, then in hearing pleasing words, to perish the first soone after: and then subsequently the rest of Greece, set your ignorance before your eyes. You say you make Warre against Philip for Greece, to the end that being preserued they should not obey his Command∣ments: But in truth you make Warre to its ruine and defeate.An accord be∣twixt the Ro∣mans and the Etoliens. It is that which your accord with the Romans declare, the which in the be∣ginning consisted in writing, but now they are seene in actions. The letters were then dishonourable vnto you, but at this day they are vi∣sible to the eye, and manifest by your workes. Finally, Philip carries the Name, and is made the colour of this Warre: although hee suffers nothing that is grieuous: But as he hath many Allies in Morea, as the Beocians, Negrepontins, Phociens, Locrines, Thessalians and Epirotes, you haue concluded against them vnder conditions, that the bodies and moueable goods should belong to the Romans, and the Cities and Countries to the Etoliens. But as you are Lords of this City, you would not endure they should offend any Free-man, nor set fire of your City, holding such actions cruell and barbarous: and yet you haue made a League, according to the which you haue deliuered the rest of Greece to Barbarians as your owne by gift, by an outrage and a most ignominious iniustice. These are the things which in the beginning you vnderstood not: But at this day you are made manifest vnto the World by the misery of the poore Oretins and Eginetes, for that Fortune hath of purpose rais'd your ig∣norance vpon a Theater. The beginning of this Warre and of the acti∣ons which happen are such. But what can wee expect more, if in the end all things succeed according to your desire: shall it not be a begin∣ning of great miseries to all the Grecians? Beleeue me, that after the Ro∣mans haue ended the Warre in Italy (the which will soone happen, Hannibal being shut vp in a Corner of Brutia) they will imploy all their forces against Greece, vnder colour to giue succours to the Etoliens a∣gainst Philip, but the truth is to make all Greece subiect: the which will soone be manifest. For whether they are resolued to carry themselues like honest and honourable persons, hauing the Victory, the thankes shall be theirs: If otherwise they shall haue the profits of the Defeates, and the power ouer them that escape. Then you will call vpon the Gods, when as none of them or any man will offer to assist you. You should then in the beginning fore-see all things: This was lawfull for you. But as many future things are out of humane prouidence, now at the least you should take a better aduice, hauing seene the euent of this Warre. I intreate you and exhort you not to enuy your owne safe∣ty and liberty, nor that of the rest of Greece.
And when by his Speech (as he conceiued) somewhat moued the opinions of many, Philips Embassadour entred: who leauing the things which might be spoken in particular, he sayd, that he had two points in charge: That if the Etoliens brake the peace, he was ready to appeale vnto the Gods, and to the Grecian Embassadours there present, that they were to be held for the Authors of those things which hereafter should fall vpon Greece, and not Philip. Glory saith he, doth much a∣maze the Enemy, but a reasonable preparation of Armes is of greater seruice for necessity. Then they should doe that which is necessry, if they transferre the diligence and care which they haue at this day for their apparrell, to the preparation of their Armes, obseruing in their ap∣parrell the ancient negligence. For by this meanes they may giue order for their priuate course of life, and preserue their Common-wealth. And therefore (saith he) it is not needfull that he which giues him∣selfe to Armes, and to the profession of Warre, should looke when he puts on his Boots, whether they be handsome, and if his strops and pantables be braue: nor whether his Cloake and Iacket be rich, when he must put on a Head-peece. Beleeue me, the danger is manifest which they must expect, which haue an exteriour shew in more recom∣mendation then things necessary. Finally, it were fit they should con∣sider, that this curiosity in habits sauoured of a woman, I meane that is not much chast: where as the charges in Armes and seuerity, restraine a good man, desiring to preserue himselfe and his Countrey. All the assistants found this Speech so good, in wondring at the ad∣uice of this remonstrance, that after they were gone out of the Court, they pointed at those that were richly clad, forcing some to leaue the place: and finally, they prepared themselues to Armes and to make Warre accordingly. Behold how one sole Oration pronounced by a man of esteeme and in season, not onely retires men from great vices, but also incites them to great Enterprizes. But if he which giues good aduice, leads a life answerable to his words, it is necessary that his councell should purchase credit: the which happened in this man. He was sober and simple in his apparrell and liuing, and in the vsage of his body. Finally, he was of a pleasing speech without enuy and rancour. He studied wonderfully to be found veritable in all his life, and therefore when he vsed any ordinary speech, the Auditors gaue him great credit. And as his life serued for an example in all things, so the Auditors had no great neede of any long Discourse. Wherefore he hath often in few words, by his credit and knowledge in things, ouerthrowne the long speeches which seemed to haue beene deliuered sufficiently by the Enemies. When the Councell was ended, euery man retired to his Countrey: And in commending as well the man as his words, they had a conceite that they could not doe amisse vnder his gouernment. Finally, Philopemen went speedily to the Cities to make preparation for the Warre. Then he trained vp a multitude assembled: and when he had not imployed eight Moneths in the preparation of these forces,Phylopemen makes Warre against Macha∣nides, Tyrant of Lacedemon. he leads his Army to Mantinea to fight with the Tyrant for the liberty of all Morea. Machanides likewise taking courage, and
thinking to preuaile ouer the Acheins at his pleasure, giues the Lacede∣monians to vnderstand the things that were then necessary, as soone as hee was aduertised of the assembly of the Tegeans at Mantinia: Then suddainly the next day at Sun-rising hee takes his way towards Mantinia, marching on the right wing with the Legionaries, and placing the Mercenaries on the right and left, going a slow pace in the beginning of his voyage: He addes moreouer Chariots carry∣ing a great abundance of instruments of Warre and Cros-bowes. At the same time Philopomen hauing diuided his Army into three, he caused the Sclauonians and Corslets to goe forth by the Gate which tends to the Temple of Neptune,The order of Philopomens Battaile. and withall the strangers and strong men: then by that which lookes to the West, the Legionaries: and the Horse-men of the City by the next. Moreouer, he seazed (with the best of his aduenturers) of a little Hill lying right against the City, the which extends vpon the way of strangers and the Temple of Nep∣tune. And ioyning the Corslets, he lodgeth them on the South, or∣dring the Sclauonians in a place neare vnto them. Then casting the Legionaries behind them in a round, he lodgeth them in the space neare the Ditch which drawes to Neptunes Temple, by the midst of the Mantinians Plaine, and ioynes vpon the Mountaines neare vnto Elis∣fasiens. He orders moreouer vpon the right wing the Acheian Hors∣men, of which Aristonete of Dymce had the leading: and vpon the hee had all the Strangers, hauing their distinct Ordonance amongst them. When the Enemies Army approacht, he comes to the Legionaries, admonishing them in few words, but with the efficacy of the present danger. But most part of his words were not heard: for the multi∣tude prest the cause so much for the affection they bare him, and the impetuosity of the people, that the Army as it were moued with a cer∣taine diuine fury, perswaded him to worke without feare. Finally, he endeauoured (if time would haue permitted him) to declare vnto them diligently,The order of Machanides Ar∣my. how this present danger concerned some in regard of infamy and a base seruitude, and others in regard of liberty alwayes memorable and glorious. Moreouer, Machanides instructs first the Battalion of the Legionaries which they call Orthie, that it should fight with the right wing of the Enemies. Then he marcheth, and after he had gain'd a meane space, makes the forme of a Snaile, and drawes his Army in length, putting his right wing in Front to the left of the A∣cheins. In regard of the Targetteers, he placeth them before the whole Army with some space. Philopomen seeing his attempt, who thought by the Targeteers to giue a Charge to the Legionary Bands which offended the Souldiers, and caused a great alarum in the Army, so as hee delayed no longer, making vse in effect of the Tarrentins at the beginning of the Combate neare to Neptunes Temple, vpon the Plaine which was commodi∣ous for Horse-men. Machanides seeing this, is forced to doe the like, and to cause the Tarrentins (which were with him) to march. Fi∣nally, they fought valiantly in the beginning. But when those that were
lightly armed, preuailed something ouer them that were weaker, it fell out in a short time that the Combate began of either side betwixt the forreine Souldiers. And when as they had ioyned together, and had fought long like braue men, the danger was equall, so as the rest of the Armies, expecting the issue of the Battaile, could not fight there, for that many times both the one and the other in fighting, exceeded their first station. Yet the Tyrants souldiers had for a time the better, considering their multitude and dexterity, with their Armes and Ex∣perience. The which did not happen without cause. For as the mul∣titude in Comminalties, is more cheerefull in Combats in Warre, then the Subiects which are Enemies to Tyrants, so strange Souldiers ta∣king pay of Monarches, excell those of Common-weales. And as some Subiects fight for liberty, and some are in danger of seruitude, some also of the Mercenaries fight for a certaine profit, others for the defence of their Liues. But a popular power puts not her liberty into the hands of Mercenaries, after they haue defeated their Enemies: Whereas a Tyrant the greater Enterprize he makes, the more souldiers he hath need off. For as he doth more outrages, so he hath more wat∣chers ouer his life. The safety then of Monarches consists in the good affection, and forces of his forreine Souldiers.The safety of Monarches. Wherefore then it hapned that the forreine Souldiers fought with such great Courage and Resolution, as the Sclauonians and Horacites being in front of them could not indure their Charge: flying all as repuls'd towards Mantinia, seauen Furlongs distant. Then that which some men held in doubt was made plaine and certaine. It is manifest that many actions in Warre breed Experi∣ence of things, so do they ignorance. It is a great matter for him that hath purchased Authority in the beginning, to extend it farther: But it is a farre greater matter to fixe vpon him whose first attempts haue not beene successefull: and to consider the indiscretion of the vn∣fortunate, and to obserue their faults. You shall oftentimes see that they which seeme to haue the better, are within a short space frustrated of all in generall: And againe, they which at the first were beaten, haue by their industry restored all: the which appeared then betwixt these two Princes. For when the bands of Souldiers which the Acheins had wauered, and that the left wing was broken, Machanides leauing his good Fortune and the Victory of those of the Wing, and to assaile the others in Front, and finally to attend the Victory, he did nothing of all this, but scattred with the Mercenaries, without order like a young man, he pursued the Chase, as if feare had not beene able to pursue those which fled vnto the Gates. The Chiefe of the Acheins imployed all his power to stay the Mercenaries with cries and perswasions, calling to the rest of their Commaunders. But when he saw them forcibly repuls'd, he was not amazed if they turned head, or despairing, abandoned the place, but he with-drew the Wing which charged and pursued them. And when the place where the danger was, was abandoned, he sent pre∣sently to the first Legionaries, that they should couer themselues with
their Targets; and in keeping order he went speedily before. Being come suddainly to the place abandoned, hee defeated the pursuers, hauing great aduantage vpon the Enemies battailion. Hee likewise perswaded the Legionaries to haue a good Courage and resolution, and not to budge, vntill hee gaue them order to march close in Battaile a∣gainst the Enemy. And as for Polybius the Megalopolitaine, hauing gathered together the remainder of the Sclauonians which had turned Head, with the armed men and the Strangers, he enioynes him to haue a great care to keepe the Battallion in good order, and to looke to those which were retired from the Chase. The Lacedemonians likewise resuming Courage and strength, for that they were esteemed the most valiant, charged the Enemies with their Iauelings without Commaund. And as in this pursuite they were come vnto the brinke of the Ditch, and had no more time to returne, for that they were in the Enemies hands, and that finally they forsooke and disdained the Ditch, for that it had many descents, and was drie and without Trees, they ranne into it without any discretion. As this occasion offers it selfe against the Enemy, Phylopomen hauing fore-seene it long before, he then Commaunded all the Legionaries to aduance with their Iaue∣lings. And when as all the Acheins with one resolution had cast themselues vpon the Enemies with horrible cries, hauing formerly broken the battalion of the Lacedemonians, descending into the Ditch, they turne Head with great Courage against the Enemy which held the higher ground. It is true, that a great part was defeated as∣well by the Acheins as their owne men. That which I haue spoken happens not by chance, but by the prouidence of the Commaunder, who had suddainly made this Ditch. Philopomen fled not from the Battaile as some had conceiued: But considering and aduising dilli∣gently like a good Commaunder of all things in particular, that if Machanides should lead his Army thither, it would happen that by ig∣norance of the Ditch, he would fall into danger with his Battalion, as it succeeded in Effect. And if considering the difficulty of the Ditch, hee should seeme to feare and turne Head, hee should then be wonderfully frustrated of his Enterprize and Designe, for that hee should haue the Victory without fight, Machanides beeing defeated by a vnfortunate disaster. It had happened to many which had vnder∣taken a Battaile, that finding themselues insufficient to ioyne with the Enemy, some in regard of the disaduantage of places, others for the multitude, and some for other causes, and by this same meanes shewing and expressing themselues in their flight to bee of little Experi∣ence, some hoping to be stronger vpon the Reare, and others that they might escape the Enemy safely. Among the which were these Commaunders. But Philopomen was not deceiued in his fore-sight: by whose en∣deauour it happened, that the Lacedemonians made a speedy flight. And when hee saw his Legions to vanquish, hee laboured to bring that vnto an ende which remained of an absolute Victory. Which
was, that Machanides should not escape, and therefore know∣ing him to be at the pursuite of the Chase, on that side of the Ditch which lay towards the City with his Mercenaries, had not beene reti∣red and with drawne, he attends his comming. But when as Macha∣nides flying after the Chase, saw his Army turne head, and hearing that all hope was lost for him, he laboured with his forreine Souldiers in turning head, to escape thorough the Enemies dispersed, and scattred in their Chase. Whereunto they likewise hauing regard, stayed with him in the beginning, feeding themselues with the same hope of safety. But when as at their comming they saw the Acheins keepe the Bridge vpon the Ditch, then all amazed they abandon him and fled, euery man looking to his owne preseruation. And when the Tyrant despai∣red of the passage of the Bridge, he went directly to the Ditch, and endeauours to finde a passage. Philopomen knowing the Tyrant by his purple Robe, and the capar∣risson of his Horse, leaues Polybius there, and giues him charge to keepe the passage carefully, not sparing any of the Mercenaries, for that most commonly they fauour and support the Tyrant of Lacedemon. In regard of himselfe, he takes Polyene, Cyparisse, and Simie, of whom he then made vse, marching against the Tyrant and his Company on the other side of the Ditch. Machanides had at that time two men with him, that is to say, Anaxidamus and a strange Souldier: When hee prest his Horse to take a certaine commodious passage of the Ditch, Phi∣lopomen doubling vpon him, gaue him a mortall wound with a Iaue∣ling, and soone after another,Machanides slaine. killing the Tyrant valiantly. The like happened to Anaxidamus by the Horse-men which marcht with him. The third man despairing of the passage,Anaxidamus slaine. escaped the danger by flight, whilest they slew the other two. After their death Simies Company stript them, and brought away the Head and Armes of the Tyrant, to make his death knowne vnto the Troupes: whereby they might with more diligence pursue the Enemies into their City: the which serued much to moue the Commons. For by this meanes they reduced the City of Tegea vnder their obedience:Tegea taken▪ after which prize they camped neare vnto the Riuer of Erota, after they had made themselues Maisters of the Champion Countrey. And as they could not chase the Ene∣my out of their Countrey for a long time, they then wasted all the La∣cedemonian Prouinces without feare, hauing lost few men in Battaile, and the Lacedemonians aboue foure thousand, besides many Prisoners, and the taking of all their Baggage and Armes.
Of Hannibal and the Carthaginians. ANd therefore who will not wonder at the gouernment,The exellency of Hannibal. ver∣tue and power of this man, in his valiant exploits of War decided in Field, hauing regard to the length of time, and knowing Hannibal as well in Battailes as encounters, as in sieges of Townes, alterations, and euents of times, and in the fulnesse of all the Enterprizes and resolutions, according to the which hee hath made Warre in Italy against the Romans for the space of seuenteene yeares, and hauing neuer broken vp his Campe, but kept it still entire as vnder a good Leader, and commanded so great a multitude either without mutiny towards him or among themselues, although he did not imploy in his Army men of one Nation, not of one Race.Diuers Nations vnder the lea∣ding of Hanni∣bal. He had vnder his command Lybians, Spaniards, Phenicians, Italians, and Grecians: among the which the Lawes nor customes, nor the Language had any thing common. But the industry of the Commander made this great multitude of different Nations obedient to the Commandments of one man, according to his desire: although the Euents were not alwayes answerable, but diuers: and that many times Fortune smiled vpon him, and was sometimes opposite. These things considered, you may safely say (in wondring at the vertue of this Commander, in that which concernes this point) that if hee had first assailed the other Countries of the World, and then the Romans, he would haue preuailed in all that he had attempted. But seeing at this day hee hath begun the Warre against those which hee should haue assailed last, hee hath made both the beginning and the ending. Asdrubal hauing drawne together the Souldiers from those places where they had wintred, prepares for his voyage, and campes neare vnto a City called Elinge,Asdrubal camps neere to E∣linge. building a Pallisadoe on the side of the Mountaine, with plaine spaces before, fit for skirmishes and encoun∣ters. Hee had three score and ten thousand Foote, foure thousand Horse, and two and thirty Elephants. Publius Scipio on the other side sends Marcus Iunius to Lochis to receiue the Bands which hee had leiued:Publius Scipio drawes his Ar∣my together. being three thousand Foote and fiue hundred Horse. In regard of the other Allies, he accompanies them, taking his way to the place appointed. When hee was come to Catalongne, and to the places which were about Becyle, and had ioyned his Army with Marcus, and
with the Troupes of Colichante, he fell into a great perplexity for the apparent dangers. For in truth he had not a sufficient Roman Army without the forces of the Allies to hazard a Battaile. It seemed an vn∣safe thing, foolish, and rash for those which put their hope in the for∣ces of their Allies to hazard a Battaile. But as he was for a time in suspence, and that the affaires concluded that he must vse the Allies, he came to fight with the Spaniards: to the end that by this meanes he might make the Enemy imagine that hee fought with his whole Army. This being resolu'd, he marches with all his Troups, being forty fiue thousand Foot, and about three thousand Horse. And when he was neare the Carthaginians, so as he might well be discouered, he camps about certaine little Hils right against the Enemy.Asdrubal char∣geth the Ro∣mans. Asdrubal think∣ing to haue found a fit time to charge the Romans in Camping, he fell vpon their Campe with the greatest part of his Horse-men, and Massanissa with the Numades, hauing a conceite to surprize Scipio suddainly. But he hauing formerly fore-seene the future, he layd an Ambush of Horse-men behinde a certaine Hill,A suddaine charge of the Romans against the Carthagini∣ans. equall in number to those of the Carthaginians: who charging by surprize, many in the beginning turning head, in regard of this vnexpected Charge of the Ro∣mans, fell from their Horses, others affronting the Enemies fought va∣liantly. But for the dexterity of the Roman Horse-men in fighting, the Carthaginians being troubled and discontented, after some little resistance gaue backe, retiring in the beginning in good order: But when the Romans pursued them, they tooke their flight vnder the Campe. This done, the Romans assure themselues the more to vn∣dergoe the danger: and the Carthaginians did the contrary. The dayes following they draw their Armies into the Plaine which lay betwixt them, and making skirmishes as well of Horse-men, as of their most valiant Foote, and trying one another they resolued to Battaile. It seemed then that Scipio had practised a double stratagem. For when he saw Asdrubal slow in ordring of his forces, and to put the Lybians in the midst, and the Elephants vpon the two wings: Then as hee was accustomed to obserue the opportunity of the time,The double po∣licy of Scipio. and to make head against the Lybians by Romans, and to mingle the Spa∣niards vpon the wings, on the day which hee resolued to fight, hee doth now the contrary, giuing by this meanes great comfort to his forces for the Victory, and weakning the Enemy. Presently at the Sunne-rising he giues all the Souldiers notice by men appointed, that all they which were to fight armed, should stand before the Pallisa∣doe. This done, when they had obeyed him cheerefully, for the hope they had conceiued for the future, he sends the Horse-men be∣fore, and the ablest Souldiers, giuing them charge to approach the Enemies Campe, and that in skirmishing couragiously they should be∣gin the Battaile. For his part, he marcheth at Sun-rising with the Foot∣men. And being come into the midst of the field, he drew his Army in Battaile after another forme then he had bin accustomed.Scipio puts his men in battaile For he put the
Spaniards in the midst, and the Romans vpon the wings. When as the Horse-men approacht the Pallisadoe, and that the rest of the Army was in sight and ready, the Carthaginians had scarce time to arme. Asdrubal being then forced to drawe the valiantest of his men to field against the Romans,Asdrubal puts his men in Bat∣taile. being yet fasting without preparation and in haste both the Foot-men and Horse-men: and to plant his Army of Foot-men not farre from the Mountaines, and the Ordonance in the Plaine as they had beene accustomed. The Romans stayed some time: but for that the day was well aduanced, and that the Combat of either side was vncertaine and equall, and that there was danger that they which should be prest, turning head, would retire vpon their Battalions, then Scipio retiring the Skirmishers by the space betwixt the Ensignes, he diuides them vpon the wings after those which had beene formerly ap∣pointed. Then he giues order to assaile the Enemy in Front, first to the Iauelings, and then with Horse-men: and being a Furlong from the Enemy, he commands the Spaniards which were in Battaile, to march in the same order, and that they should turne the Ensignes vpon the right hand, and they of the left doing the contrary. And when he began on the right side, Lacius Marcus and Marcus Iunius led three braue Troups of Horse-men on the left hand, and before were those which were lightly armed and accustomed to the Warre, with three Bands of Foot-men (the Romans call a Band of Foot-men a Cohort) to whom the Targetteers ioyned on the one side, and the Archers on the other. In this sort they marched against the Enemy, making by this meanes an attempt with effect, considering the continuall repaire of those which ioyned with them by files. As by chance these men were not farre from the Enemy, and that the Spaniards which were on the wing were farther off, as they which matched a slow pace, they make an attempt vpon the two Battalions of the Enemy, drawne in length with the Roman forces, according to that which had beene re∣solued in the beginning. The following alterations (by the meanes whereof it happened that they which followed, ioyned with the for∣mer, encountring the Enemies in a direct line, had betwixt them di∣uers orders) so as the right Battalion had on the left side the Foot-men mingled with the Horse. For the Horse-men which were on the right wing, mingling with the Iauelings of the Foot lightly armed, laboured to inclose the Enemies. The Foot-men on the other side couered themselues with their Targets. They which on the left hand were in the Troups charged with their Iauelings, and the Hors-men accompanied with the Archers with their full speed. By this motion there was a left wing made of the right wing of the Horse-men, and of the most valiant Souldiers of the two Battalions: But the Com∣mander made no great accompt, being more carefull to vanquish the en∣emy with the other Battalion: wherein he had good iudgement. We must know things as they are done, and vse a fit obseruation according to the occasion offered.
By the charge of these men the Elephants assailed by the Archers,A disorder by the Elephants. and the Horse-men with Darts and Iauelings, and tormented of all sides were wounded, making as great a spoile of their Friends as of their Enemies. For they ran vp and downe and ouer-threw men of all sides, breaking the Carthaginian Battalions. In regard of that of the Lybians which held the middle part, and was of great seruice, it stood idle vnto the end. For not able to succour those which on the wings abandoned the place, by reason of the Spaniards charge: nor re∣maining in their station, doe that which necessity required: for that the Enemies which they had in Front, did not giue them Battaile. It is true that the wings fought for a time valiantly: Considering that all was in danger. And as the heare was vehement, the Carthagi∣nians brake, seeing that the end of the Combate succeeded not accor∣ding to their desire, and that their chiefest preparation was hindred: The Romans on the other side had the aduantage both in force and cou∣rage: and in that principally, that by the prouidence of the Generall the best furnished among the Carthaginians were made vnprofitable. Wherefore Asdrubal being thus prest, retired in the beginning with a slow pace from the Battaile: Then turning in Troupe, he recouered the neighbour Mountaines. And when as the Romans pursued them neare, they posted to their Pallisadoe. If some God had not preserued them, they had suddainly lost their Fort. But for that the disposition of the Aire changed, and the raine fell continually with violence, the Romans could hardly recouer their Fort. And although that Publius Scipio had sufficient experience of the Warre,A defect in the Text. yet he neuer fell into so great a doubt and perplexity, the which happened not without reason. For as wee may fore-see and pre∣uent exteriour causes and discommodities of the Body,A good Com∣parison. as cold, heate, labour, and wounds, before they happen: and cure them when they come: being on the other side difficult to fore-see those which proceed from the Body, and are hardly cureable when they happen: we must iudge the same of policies and Armies. It is true, there is a speedy meanes and helpe to preuent the Warres and Ambushes of Strangers when they are contriued: But against those which the Enemy doth practise in the State, as seditions and mutinies, the Phisicke is diffi∣cult, and requires a great dexterity and singular industry in the gouern∣ment of affaires. But in my opinion one aduice is necessary for all Ar∣mies, Cities, and bodies politique: which is, that in that which con∣cernes the things aboue mentioned, they neuer suffer too much sloth and idlenesse: especially in time of prosperity, and the abundance of all things necessary. Scipio as a man of excellent diligence,The wisedome of Scipio. and consequently industrious and actiue to mannage great affaires, propounded a certaine course to decide the present combustions, after he had assembled the Captaines of thousands. He gaue order that they should promise vnto the Soul∣diers the restitution of the victuals and taxes: and to giue credit to his promise, they should leuie the ordinary taxes ordained in Cities diligently and openly for the reliefe of the whole Army, to the end
it might be apparent that this preparation was made for the institution of their Victuals. And that moreouer, the Milleniers should command the Commissaries of the Victuals, and admonish them to haue a care, and to take charge of the Victuals: and that conferring among them∣selues, they should make knowne, if part of them or altogether would vndertake it. He sayd, that they must consider of that which was to be done. The others thinking of the same things, had a care of the Treasure. And when as the Milleniers had made knowne the things which had beene ordayned, Scipio being aduertised, imparted vn∣to the Councell that which was to be done. They concluded that they should resolue on the day when they were to appeare: So as the people should be sent backe, and the Authors seuerely punished: who were to the number of fiue and thirty. And when the Day was come, and the Rebels there present, as well to obtaine pardon, as for their Victuals, Scipio secretly com∣mands the Captaines Milleniers, that they should goe and meete with the Rebels, and in choosing fiue of the chiefe of the Mutiny (euery man carrying himselfe courteously at their encounter) they should bring them to his Pauillion: if this could not be done, yet at the least they should conuay them to the Banquet, and to this kind of assembly. And as for the Army which was with him, he gaue them notice three dayes before, to make prouision of Victuals for a long time: as if Mar∣cus should goe to Andobale to fight: whereof the Rebels being ad∣uertized, they were the more assured. They expected to enioy a great power, if (the rest of the Army being separated) they were admitted about a Commander, when they approacht neare the City, he com∣mands the other Souldiers, that being prepared the day following, they should come forth at the breake of day. In regard of the Milleniers and Captaines, he giues them charge that after their comming forth of the City, they should stay the Souldiers in Armes at the Gate, ha∣uing first lodg'd the Baggage: and that afterwards they should diuide themselues by the Gates, and haue a care that none of the Rebels should escape. They which were appointed to receiue them, ioy∣ning to those which came vnto them, entertained the offendors cour∣teously according vnto that which had beene enioyned them. Their charge was to seaze vpon these men, at such time as they should be set at the Banquet, and to keepe them bound: So as not any of the Company being within should goe forth, but onely he that should aduertize the Commander what had beene done, Wherefore when the Milleniers had performed their Charge, the Generall seeing in the Morning following those to be assembled in the place which were arri∣ued, he causeth an Assembly to be called.Publius Scipio assembles his Army. When the aduertisement was giuen, they all came running as of custome, whether it were with a desire to see the Commander, or to heare those things which were to be spoken of the present affaires. Scipio sends to the Milleniers which were at the Gates, and commands them to bring the Souldiers that were armed, and to enuiron the whole assembly: Then marching forth, he amazeth them all at the first sight. A great number in truth
thought that he was not well disposed: But when contrary vnto their opinions they found him sound and safe, they were amazed at his pre∣sence. Finally, hee vsed this Speech vnto them, saying, that hee wondred for what cause some of them were offended, or vnder what colour they were mooued to attempt a Rebellion. There are three causes for the which men presume to fall into a mu∣tiny against their Princes and Country: VVhich are,Three causes of the peoples mutiny against Princes. when as they blame their Gouernour, and indure them vnwillingly; or when they are offended with the present Gouernment; or vpon a conception in their opinions of a greater and better hope. I demaund of you, sayth he, which of these three hath mooued you. Are you angry with me that I haue not deliuered you Victualls? It is not my fault. For you haue not wanted any Victuals vnder my Leading. It is the errour of the Romans which haue not yeilded that vnto you now, which hath beene formerly due vnto you? Should you then accuse your Country, so as you should Rebell and become its Enemy, then being present to speake vnto me, and to intreate your friends to assist you? The which in my opinion had beene much better. It is true, a pardon may bee gi∣uen vnto Mercenaries, if they abandon those from whom they receiue pay: But it is not fit to pardon such as carry Armes for themselues, their Wiues, and their Children. For it is euen like as a man should come vnto his Father, and charge him that he had villanously cozened him in matters of money, and kill him from whom hee holds his life. Haue I opprest you more with toiles and dangers then the rest, giuing them more Commodities and profites then vnto you? In trueth you dare not speake it, neither can you conuince me although you durst at∣tempt it. I cannot coniecture the cause for the which being incensed against me, you haue attempted this Rebellion. I would vnderstand the oc∣casion from your selues. I thinke there is not any man among you that can alledge or pretend any thing. You cannot, in trueth, be sad for the present. When was there euer greater abundance of all things, nor more prerogatiues of the Citty of Rome? When was there euer greater hope for Souldiers then there is at this day? Peraduenture some one of these desperate men will thinke that at this day the profits are greater in shew, and the Hope better and more firme with the Ene∣my. Which are they? Is it Andobale and Mandonin? Which of you doth not know that as they first falsified their Faith with the Carthagi∣nians comming to vs? And that now againe they declared themselues our Enemies, inviolating their oath and Faith? Were it not an honest and commendable thing, that in giuing them your Faith, you should become Enemies to your owne Country? And yet you haue no hope in them to enioy Spaine. You were not sufficient being ioyned to An∣dobale to fight with vs, neither yet alone. Whereto then did you aym? I would know it from your selues, if you haue put your confidence in the Experience and Vertue of the Captaines which now are appoin∣ted you, or in the Rods and Maces which march before them, where∣of
of there is no honesty to vse any longer Discourse. But in truth there is nothing of all this; neither can you inuent any thing against me nor your Countrey. Wherefore I will answere for Rome and my selfe, pro∣pounding those things which seeme reasonable to all men, which is this, the People and all the Commons are such as such as they are easily de∣ceiued and moued to any thing.The inconstan∣cy of the peo∣ple. Wherefore it happens to them as to the Sea. For as the Sea of it selfe is without offence, and safe to those which make vse of it: And if it be tormented with the violence of the Winds, it is such vnto Saylers as are the Winds wherewith it is beaten: The Commons in like manner are made like vnto those which gouerne them, which are their Commanders and Councellors. And therefore now I suffer all your Leaders vnpunished, promising that hereafter I will quit all reuenge: But as for those which haue beene the Authors of the Rebellion, I beare them an implacable hatred: for this cause we will punish them conueniently for the crimes which they haue committed against their Countrey and vs. And when he had vsed this Speech, the Souldiers that were in Armes and round about, made a great noise with their Swords in the Proches, and presently the Authors of the mutiny were brought in naked and bound. Finally, the multitude grew into a great amazement for the horror of the Executions which were done in their sight:A punishment of the Mutines. so as when as some were whipt, and others executed, they moued not an eye, nor any man spake a word, remaining all amazed and terrified by these accidents. The Authors of these mischiefes being whipt and slaine, and drawne through the midst of them: the rest were assured in common by the Commander and Princes, that no man hereafter should be punished by any man for the remembrance of this fact. Wherefore they came all to the Milleniers, and sweare absolutely to obey the Commandments of the Princes, and not to consent to any thing against the City of Rome. When as Scipio had corrected the Mischiefe newly growne,Scipio's Speech to his Army. hee settles his Army in its former estate. Then suddainly drawing it toge∣ther within Carthage, he made his complaints of the rashnesse and wic∣kednesse of Andobale towards them: and after he had made a long speech of his disloyalty, he incensed the hearts of many against the sayd Potentate. Finally, he put them in minde of their encounters against the Spaniards and Carthaginians, whilest they were vnder the Cartha∣ginian Commanders: Of whom (as they had beene alwayes victo∣rious) there was no cause he sayd, to be in doubt or feare, but that comming againe to fight with the Spaniards vnder Andobale, they would be defeated. Wherefore he sayd he would make no more vse of the Spaniards to fight, and that hee would vndergoe the danger with the Romans alone: to the end it may be manifest to all the world, that wee haue not chased the Carthaginians out of Spaine with the helpe of Spa∣niards: but by a Roman vertue, and that by our owne dexterity wee haue vanquished them with the Celtiberians. This Speech being ended, hee perswaded them to liue in Concord, and that they would vndertake this present danger, if euer they vnder∣tooke
any with great assurance. In regard of the meanes of the victo∣ry, he assures them that with the helpe of the Gods he will take order. The Commons conceiued so great a courage and confidence, as all of them carryed a countenance like vnto those which behold their E∣nemies, and prepare to fight. His words being ended, hee sent backe the assembly. The next day hee raiseth his Campe and marcheth: and being come on the tenth day to a Riuer, he passeth it foure dayes after:Scipio layes a baite for the Enemy. then he plants himselfe before the Enemies, hauing recouered a certaine Plaine betwixt his Campe and theirs. The day following he sent forth towards the Enemy vpon the Plaine, some Cattell which fol∣lowed the Army: and commands Caius to keepe certaine Horse-men in a readinesse, and to the Chiefe of the Milleniers, to prepare Ar∣chers and Slingers. When the Spaniards had fallen suddainly vpon the Cattell, he sent certaine Souldiers that were Archers. The Combat beginning, and the Souldiers running vnto it on either side in good numbers, there grew a great Skirmish of Foot-men neare vnto the Plaine. When a fit occasion was offred to assaile the Enemy, and that Caius had his Horse-men ready as he had commanded him, he chargeth the Foot-men, and repulseth them from the Plaine, to the places neare vnto the Mountaines, to the end they might be scattred, and slaine in great num∣bers. When this happened, the Barbarians were moued, fearing that being vanquished in skirmish before they came to the Battaile,The Spaniards put themselues in Battaile. they should seeme to haue fainted, wherefore at the Sun-rising they drew their Army in good order to Field, preparing for the Battaile. Pub∣lius Scipio was ready to giue it: But when hee saw the Spaniards de∣scend without reason into the Plaine, and not onely to put their Hors-men in order, but also their Foot, he stayed, to the end that a greater number might assemble in this order of Battaile, hauing confidence in his Cauallery, and much more in his Foot-men, for that they should come to an equall Combat, and fight hand to hand: and that the Armes and men which he had, were more excellent then the Spaniards. But for that it seemes necessity prest him, he directed his Army against those which were in Battaile against the Mountaine:The order of Scipio's Bat∣taile▪ drawing foure Cohorts out of the Campe towards those that were descended into the Plaine. Finally, Caius Lelyus led his Horse-men against the Enemy, by the Hils which come from the Campe vnto the Plaine, and chargeth the Spaniards Horse in the Reare, and in fighting stayes them, to the end they should not succour their Foot. The Enemies Foot being destitute of the helpe of their Cauallery, in whom hauing put their trust, they had descended into the Plaine, were forced and annoyed in the Com∣bate; the which likewise happened to the Horse-men. For when as (inclosed in the streight) they could not fight at ease, their defeate was greater then that of the Enemy: for that their Foot-men were on the side, and their Enemies in Front, and their Horse-men were char∣ged in the Reare. The Combat being after this manner, they which descended were in a manner all defeated: They which were ioyning
vnto the Mountaine fled. They were the most valiant and the third part of the Army: with whom Andobale escaped, recouering a certaine Fort. Scipio hauing ended the Warres of Spaine, drew to Tarracona, to carry a great triumph of ioy,A defeate of the Spaniards. and a glorious Victory to his Coun∣trey. Desiring them to be present at the Creation of Consuls, hee sayles to Rome being accompanied by Caius, deliuering the Army to Iunius and Marcus, hauing giuen order for all the affaires of Spaine. Of King Antiochus. IT was in truth Ewthydemes Magnes to whom he answered, saying that Antiochus laboured to chase him out of his Kingdome vniustly: and that he had not rebelled, to the end he might enioy the Principality of the Bactrians. And when he had vsed a long speech tending to that end, hee intreated Teleus that by his meanes he might obtaine a truce, and that he would informe Antiochus, that hee did not enuy his royall Name: For that if he did not yeeld to his accords, neither of them should liue in safety. For there was a great descent of Tartariens, which would be dangerous to either of them: and if they entred the Regi∣on, it would vndoubtedly be reduced vnder the subiection of Bar∣barians. These words being ended, hee sends Teleus to King Antio∣chus. When the King had long ruminated to what end this businesse would tend, he heard the proposition which was made by Teleus con∣cerning a truce. When Teleus was returned, going and comming often from the one to the other, Euthydemes in the end sent his Sonne Demetrius to confirme the Accord. Whom when the King had receiued gra∣ciously, and holding the Young man worthy to reigne, as well for his outward shew as for his excellent dexterity of Eloquence, hee first promiseth to giue him one of his Daughters, and to his Father the Name of King: Finally, after hee had past in writing the Pactions and Accords sworne, he raiseth his Campe, and sends Victu∣als freely to his Army. When hee had receiued the Elephants which Euthydemes had sent, hee passeth Mount Caucasus: and after that hee came into India, he renewed the League with Sophasine King of the Indies: where after he had receiued an hundred and fifty Elephants, and had againe giuen Victuals to all his Army, he marcheth with all his forces. Moreouer,
he sends Androsthenes the Cyzecenien to receiue Gaza, which by the accord was deliuered vnto him by the King. And when hee had past Arachosia, and the Riuer of Erymanthus, he arriued in Carmania by Dratigene: where he wintred, for that Winter approached. This was the end of Antiochus Voyage which he made by the high Countries, by the which he drew to his obedience not onely the Satrapes and Go∣uernours of the high Countries, but also the Marritine Cities, and the Potentates inhabiting neare vnto Tauris: Finally, he hath assu∣red his Reigne, making by his confidence and good industry all his Subiects amazed. For he seemed by this Voy∣age worthy to reigne not onely ouer the Asiatiques, but also ouer the Europians.
A PARCELL OF the Twelfth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. WHo will wholly commend the Excellency of this Region. In regard of Tymeus, thou maist with reason terme him ignorant, not onely of things concerning Lybia: but also a Child and without vnderstanding, and also subiect to a foolish ancient report, according to the which we haue heard that Lybia is all sandy, dry, and desarts. The like they sayd of Creatures: And yet it hath so great abundance of Horses, Sheepe, and Goats, as I know not where we may finde the like in the World: For that many people of Lybia make no vse of the fruits which proceede from the hands of man, but liue with Mares Milke.The manner of the Lybians li∣uing. More∣ouer who doth not know the multitude and force of Elephants, Lyons, and Panthers, and consequently the beauty of Bugles or wilde Oxen, and the greatnesse of Ostridges? whereof there are none in Europe, and yet Lybia is full of such things: whereof Tymeus being wholly ignorant, he deliuers as it were of purpose things contrary to truth. As he hath lyed in matters concerning Lybia, so hath he done the like of the Island of Cyrnon. Whereof making mention in his Second Booke,The Iland of Cyruon not well knowne by Ty∣meus. he saith, that it abounds in Goats, Sheepe, and wilde Oxen, and moreouer in Stage, Hares, and Wolues, with some other Beasts: and that the men are much giuen to Venery, and spend their whole liues therein. When as in the said Iland there is neither wilde Goate, Oxe, Hare, Wolfe, nor Stagge, nor any such kinde of Beast: Ex∣cept Foxes, Conies, and wilde Geese. It is true, that a Coney seene a farre off, seemes like vnto a Leueret: But when they hold it, it differs much, as well in sight as in taste. It breeds and liues most commonly
in the ground. For this cause all the Beasts of this Iland seeme wilde, for that the Keepers cannot follow them, in regard this Iland is woody, hilly, and steepe: But when they will draw them together, staying in commodious places, they call them by a Trumpet, and euery one runs to his owne. Finally, if sometimes they which come into the Iland, see Goats or Oxen feeding alone, and seeke to take them, they will not come at them, but flye from them as strangers: and when the Keepers discouering those which come from the ships, sounds his Trumpe, they make haste and runne vnto him: which put ignorant men in conceite, that the Beasts of this Iland are wilde, whereof Tymeus hath made dreames, writing impertinently▪ It is no great wonder, that they obey the sound of the Trumpe. For they which breed Swine in Italy, haue no Hogheards which follow them after the manner of Greece:The manner of breeding Swine in Italy. but going before them a little space, they sound their Trumpes, and the Swine follow them behinde, run∣ning after the sound. These Beasts are so accustomed euery one to his Trumpe, as it is a wonder and in a manner incredible to those that shall heare speake of it. For it happens that for the abundance of Swine, and other things necessary, the troupes are in such great numbers in Itly: especially in the ancient and among the Tyrrbeins and Gaules: so as of one breeding there are sometimes aboue a thousand. Where∣fore they send them generally according to the age by troupes in the Night: So as many being sent together, they cannot keepe them ac∣cording to their kinde, and they mingle as well going and passing, as in their returne. For this cause they haue inuented the sound of the Trumpe, to the end that when the Swine mingle, they may separate them without difficulty. When as the Hogheards march one way, and the other another, in sounding the Trumpe, the Swine part of themselues▪ euery one following his owne Trumpe with such great heate, as it is impossible to stay them, or to hinder their course. But when in Greece they mingle, hunting and running after Fruites, hee that hath the greatest number and retires soonest, carries with his owne the next, and sometimes steales hem, he that hath the charge not knowing how he hath lost them: for that the Swine stray far from their Hogheards whilest they run greedily after the Fruits of Trees, when as they begin newly to fall. But we haue spoken sufficiently. It hath often been my chance to goe to the City of the Locrines, and to deliuer them that which was necessary.The City of the Locrines. I haue made them free from the Warre of Spaine and Dolmacia: to the which by accord they were subiect by Sea to the Romans. Wherefore they haue done vs all honour and courtesie, in acknowledging to be freed from this trouble, danger, and charge. Wherefore I am more bound to praise the Locrines, then to doe the contrary. Finally, I haue not omitted to de∣liuer and write the History of the Collony, which hath giuen vs to vnderstand, that Aristotle is more veritable then that which Tymeus reports.The Collony of the Locrines ac∣cording vnto Aristotle. I am of their opinion which maintaine the renowne of this Collony to be ancient according to the saying of Aristotle,
and not of Tymeus: for the which they produce these arguments: First that all things which haue beene famous among them for their Prede∣cessors, are come from women and not from men: so as (by way of example) they are held amongst them for noble, which haue taken their name from a hundred Families. These are the Families which the Locrines made choise of, before they went to make a Collony: whereby it might happen, that by Oracles they cast Lots vpon the Virgins to send them to Troy: Whereof some went in Collony, and their posterity was to bee held Noble, and termed of the hundred Families. Againe, for that which concernes him whom they call Philephore, they haue made this report: That when as they chased the Sicilians, who then inhabited that part of Italy, the Nobles and Chiefe men then honoured the Sacrifices, and tooke many of the customes of the Coun∣trey: so as they hold nothing of their Paternall, in obseruing that from them: and in correcting they haue ordained that they should not make any of their Sonnes Philephore, but onely a Virgine, in regard of the Nobility which came from Women. There was not, neither is it said, that their hath beene any pactions or accords made betwixt the Locrines and the Grecians. In regard of the Sicilians, they had all that we haue made mention of. They say, that when they came first into Sicily, they which then held that Region where they now dwell, being amazed and receiuing them with feare, made an accord with them: which was, that they should maintaine Friendship, and enioy the Countrey in common as long as they should tread vpon the Earth, and carry a head vpon their shoulders. And when this kinde of Oath was made, they say, that the Locrines did put earth into their shooes, and secretly hid the heads of Garlicke: and hauing thus sworne, and finally cast the Earth out of their shooes, and likewise the heads of Garlicke, soone after they chast away the Sicilians out of the Countrey. This the Locrines did say. As a Rule although it hath lesse length and breadth,A defect in the Text. yet it retaines still the Name, if it hath that which is proper to a Rule: So they say, if it be not straight and hauing the property of a Rule, it must rather be called by some other name then a Rule: In like manner they hold that if the Commentaries of Historiographers which failing either in Diction or vse, or in any other of the parts which are proper vnto them, obserue the truth, they deserue the name of a History: But if that failes, they are no more worthy of that name. For my part, I confesse, that such Commentaries are to be held for true: and I am of this opinion in euery part of our Worke, when I say, that euen as when the Bones are separated from a liuing Creature, it is made vn-vsefull, so is a History: For if thou takest away the truth, the rest will bee but a vaine Narration. We haue sayd, that there were two kinds of lies, the one through ignorance,Two kinds of vntruth. the other which is deliuered wittingly. The pardon is easie for those which through ignorance stray from the truth, and they are to be hated deadly which lie willingly. As men of iudgment resoluing to reuenge their enemies, doe not first obserue what their
Neighbour deserues, but rather what they must doe: the like we must thinke concerning dotracters, not caring for that which the Enemies ought to heare, but to obserue carefully what it is fit to speake. They which measure all things according to their choller and enuy, must of necessity faile in all, and stray from reason, when they speake other∣wise then is fitting. Wherefore we doe not seeme vniustly to reproue the speeches which Tymeus hath held against Demochares. In truth, hee neither deserues pardon nor credit with any man,Tymeus repre∣hensible. for that in wronging him openly, hee straies from reason, in regard of his naturall bitternesse. Neither doe the iniuries against Agathocles please mee, although he were the most cruell man liuing. I speake of those where∣of hee makes mention in the end of his History,Agathocles cruell. saying, that Aga∣thocles had beene a publique Sodomite in his younger yeares, and aban∣doned to all infamous and vild persons: and so to other foule villanies which he addes. Moreouer, hee sayth, that after his death his Wife lamented him in this manner: Why haue not I thee, nor thou mee? In regard of the spee∣ches which he hath held of Demochares, some will not onely cry out, but wonder with reason at his excessiue Rage. That Agathocles had necessarily by Nature a great prerogatiue, it is manifest by the Dis∣course which Tymeus hath held. Hee came to Sarragosse, flying the Wheele, Smoake, and Clay, being eighteene yeares old: And when he was come for this cause, sometime after he was Lord of all Sicily: Hee also drew the Carthaginians into great extremities, and ended his life with the Name of a King, after that he had growne old in this gouern∣ment. It is not then necessary to say, that there had some things hap∣pened to Agathocles which were great and excellent, and that hee had had great power, and great forces to execute all these things: And that a Historiographer must not onely deliuer vnto posterity those things which concerne the blame, and shew the accusation, but also those which touch the praise of the man. This is the property of a History. But this Childe blinded with his owne rancor, in his relation augments through hatred his offences, omitting wholy the vertues: being igno∣rant that it is no lesse blame worthy then a lye in those which write the Histories of Actions. It happened saith he,A parcell cor∣rupted. that as two young men contended for a Ser∣uant, that he was somewhat long with a Friend: And when as the other two dayes before came out of the Countrey, in the absence of the Ma∣ster the Seruant retired speedily into the house: and that afterwards the other knowing he came thither, seazing on him, brought him into Que∣stion, saying, that the Maister of the house ought to giue Caution. For the Law of Zaleucus was,Zaleucus the Law-giuer. that he deserued a suite to whom he had made the retreate. And when as the other sayd, that according to the same Law he had also made the retreate, for that the Body was parted to come vnto the Potentate: he saith, that the Princes were in doubt vp∣on this businesse, and called Cosmopole,Cosmopole. referring themselues to him in this cause. Who interpreted this Law, saying that the retreat hath alwayes beene to him who had the last, or for a time possessed the thing debated
without contradiction. But if any one spoild another by force, and had retired it, and that subsequently he which first enioyed it, termes him∣selfe the maister, this is no true possession. And when as the Young man discontented at this sentence, sayd, that it was not the sense of the Law, Cosmopole protested, and offerd the Condition, if there were any man that would speake any thing touching the sentence or sense of the Law established by Laleuens. The which is such, that the Cap∣taines Milleniers being there appointed with Halters to hang men,A seuere sen∣tence. they consulted vpon the sense of the Law: if any one drew the sentence of the Law to a bad sense, hee was strangled in the presence of the Mil∣leniers. This Speech being propounded by Cosmopole, the Young man answered, that the Condition was vniust: for that Cosmopole had not aboue two or three yeares to liue, (for hee was about foure∣score and ten yeares old) and that he according to reason had the grea∣test part of his life remaining.A witnswer of a Young man. For which witty and pleasant Speech hee escaped the seuerity of the iudgement: and the Princes iudged according to the aduice of Cosmopole. Wee will make mention of a certaine expedition of Warre,Of the Voyage of Alexander against Darius Galsthenes which hath beene very famous, and decided in a very short time: In the re∣lation whereof Galisthenes hath ert'd in that which doth most import: I speake of that which Alexander made into Cilicia against Darius. In the which he saith that Alexander had past the streights, which they call the Ports of Cilicia; and that Darius tooke his way by the Ports which they call Menides, and drew with his Army towards Cili∣cia. And when he vnderstood by the Inhabitants, that Alexander tooke his course towards Syria, hee followed him: and when he ap∣proached vnto the streights, hee Camped neare vnto the Riuer of Pyre. Finally, that the compasse of that place was not aboue foure∣teene Furlongs from thence, and from the Sea vnto the hilly Coun∣treyes, and that the sayd Riuer falls into the Sea, trauersing the said places: First by the sides of the Mountaine ending at the Plaine, and then by the Field hauing his Banks rough and not easie to come vnto. These things supposed, he sayd, that when as Alexander turning head, came neare vnto Darius, his aduice and that of his Princes was to order his Battaile within his Campe as hee had formerly done, and to helpe himselfe with this Riuer as with a Rampire, for that it ran neare vnto his Campe. Finally, he ordred his Horse-men vp∣on the Sea-shoare, and vpon their Reare the Mercenaries: so as neare vnto the Riuer they were ioyned in one, and the Targetteers were placed in the Mountaines. It is a difficult thing to consider how hee ordred these before the Battalion:The reprehen∣sion of Calisthe∣nes. seeing that the Riuer past neare vnto the Campe, the multitude likewise being so great. They were as Calisthenes sayth, thirty thousand Horse and as many Mercenaries. It is an easie thing to know what space will containe these. For they order their Rankes according to the true vse of eight in a great Troupe of Horse, euery one requiring a space in Front, to the end they may turne easily. To eight hundred of which a Furlong sufficeth, and
ten to eight Thousand, and foure to three Thousand fiue hundred: So as this space of foureteene furlongs, is fill'd with twelue Thousand Horse. If then he hath ordred all this Troupe of Horse in Battaile, it wants not much but being tripled, the order hath beene made with∣out any space betwixt. In what place then hath he ordered the multi∣tude of Souldiers, but in the Reare of the Horse-men? But hee will say no, and that they fought with the Macedonians at their first com∣ming. Of necessitie there must be an vniting made, seeing that the order of the Horse-men held the moiety of the place towards the Sea, the other towards the Mountaines being kept by the Mercenaries. Hereby we may inferre, how close the Horse men were vnited, and what space there must be from the Riuer vnto the Campe. Then hee sayth, that when the Enemies approached, Darius being in the midst of his Armie, called vnto him the Mercenaries and their Wing. But we may doubt how this is spoken. For it is necessarie that the Horse-men and Mercenaries should be ioyned about the middest of this same place. When as Darius was in the middest of his Mercenaries, how hath he call'd them? Finally hee sayth, that the Horse-men of the right Wing fought with Alexander at his first comming: and that hee receiued them valliantly, and fought with them in front, and that the Combate of eyther side was very furious. In regard of that which was spoken by him that the Riuer was in the middest (as a little before we haue deliuered) hee hath forgotten himselfe. Finally, he writes things of Alexander like vnto these. He saith that hee past into Asia, accompanied with fortie Thousand foot, and foure Thousand fiue hundred Horse. And as he would haue ad∣uanced, there came vnto him out of Macedony other fiue Thousand foote, and eight hundred Horse: And although that for the affaires of his long absence, he had left three thousand foote, and three hun∣dred Horse, yet he had fortie two thousand remaining. These things presupposed, hee sayth that Alexander was aduertised of Darius des∣cent into Sicilia, so hee was not aboue a hundred furlongs from him, and that he had alreadie past the streights of the Countrie, and for this cause turning head he repast them againe, putting the great Batta∣lion in Front, then the Horse-men, and after all the rest of the bag∣gage of the Army. And when he came afterwards into the plaine, that all the baggage being packt vp, hee commaunded that being mingled with the Batta∣lion, they should make their rankes, containing first about two and thirtie in number, then of sixteene, and of eight neere the Enemy. These Speeches haue lesse reason then the former. For as the furlong containes in these spaces sixteene hundred men, when a rancke is of eighteene men, so as they be euery one separated a Fathome, it is manifest and doth plainly appeare that the ten will containe sixteene Thousand men, and twentie double the number. The which may easily appeare, for that when as Alexander ordred his Army by sixe∣teene men in a rancke, it was very necessary that the place should bee of twenty Furlongs, and yet all the Cauallerie remained and
ten thousand Foote. Finally, hee saith, that hee led his whole Army in Front against the Enemies, being yet forty Furlongs off. But that is so strange, as wee can hardly imagine any thing more insensible. Where shall wee finde such spaces in the Champion Countrey euen in Cilicia, that a Battaile set in order, holding twenty Furlongs in breadth, and forty in length, may march in the Front? There are so many hinde∣rances to order this forme of Battaile, as they can hardly be numbred. Moreouer, he sayings of Calisthenes giue no sufficient arguments to purchase credite. For hee sayth, that the Torrents which fall from the Mountaines, make so many and such great Moores and Fenns, as he assures vs that a great number of Persians perished there in the flight. But would Darius suddainly shew himselfe against the Enemy? Is there nothing more easie then a Battalion broken and scattred in Front? But how much more easie is it to order a Battaile in a conuenient pas∣sage, then to leade an Army directly to fight, being broken and scat∣tred in woody and crooked places? And therefore it were better to leade in Army close and vnited, and double rather then Qua∣druple. By this meanes it would not be impossible to finde the meanes to passe, and to put the Battaile in order, and with ease, if hee might by his Scouts discouer the comming of the Enemy. But Calisthenes be∣sides the rest, orders not the Horse men in Battaile, when he led the Ar∣my in Field, being in Front, ordring the Foote-men equally. It is also a strange thing when hee saith, that Alexander being neare the Ene∣my, comprehended the order of his Battalion of eight for a Ranke: So it is manifest that necessarily the length of this Battalion contained the space of about forty Furlongs. But if they haue beene (as the Po∣et said) close together, so as they haue beene ioyned one to another: Yet it would be necessary, that the place should containe Twenty Fur∣longs. And yet he saith, there were but foureteene: and that in such sort, as one part was towards the Sea, and a moiety of the Army vpon the right hand: and that moreouer all the armed men had place suf∣ficient on the side of the Mountaines, to the end they might not bee supprest by the Enemy holding the borders of the Hills. Wee know well that he makes a crooked order within: But we al∣so leaue out ten thousand Foote, which exceeds the meanes which he hath giuen: So as the length of this Battalion according to Calisthe∣nes, hath want of aboue twelue Furlongs, in the which it is necessa∣ry that thirty two thousand men, contayning a restraint of thirty in a Ranke being ioyned, haue beene there comprehended. Hee sayth, that this Battalion was ordred after the Rate of eight in a Ranke. These errours doubtlesse cannot be defended, for that which is impossible in it selfe, is not worthy of credit. As often as wee haue respect vnto the spaces due vnto euery man, and to the length of all the place, and to the number of men, the lye were no excusable. It were losse of time to repeate all his fooleries. He saith, that Alexander thirsted after a Battaile against Darius, and that Darius was of the same opinion in the beginning, and after∣wards
chang'd his resolution. Hee doth not shew how they knew one another, nor what order they obserued in their Army, nor whether Darius, past: Neither finally, how the Battalions came to the Riuer side, seeing it was crooked and hight. Without doubt wee cannot be∣leeue that Alexander committed so grosse an errour: seeing that from his Infancy hee had gotten so great experience and practise in the Art of Warre.An excuse of Alexander vp∣on Calisthenes. Wee must rather thinke that the Historiogra∣pher could not through ignorance discerne things possible from the impossible in these affaires. But wee haue spoken sufficient at this time of Ephorus and Calisthenes. First hee is of Opinion, that they must aduertise those of the Councell, that the Trumpets awakes sleepers during the Warre, and Birds in the time of Peace. Finally, hee sayth, that Hercules instituted the Olympicke Combats, and the truce and abstinence from Warre: and that by this meanes hee hath shewed a signe of his will. In regard of those against whom hee made Warre, hee annoyed them all through necessity, and for Command: but hee was neuer willing∣ly the Authour of any harme to man. Hee consequently brings in In∣piter angry with Mars, and saying, Most sure thou owest to mee the least good-will of all the Gods that haunt Olympus Hill: Thou tak'st no pleasure but to warre and fight, In brawles and quarrels is thy chiefe delight. Hee Writes likewise, that the Wisest of the Diuine Gods sayth thus, Bad Citizens who will not when they may, Stoppe ciuill strife: fall often to decay. And that Euripides is of the same Opinion with this Poet, when hee saith, Blest Peace, the best of Goddesses that be, Oh how much in my heart I honour thee. If thou deny thy presence by delay, I feare grim Death will snatch mee hence away, Haste then that I may futurely be blest With sports and renels that adorne a Feast. Hee sayth moreouer, that Warre is very like vnto a Disease, and Peace to Health.The Warre like vnto a Disease. The which doth comfort and recreate the sicke: whereas in the other the sound perish. Finally, that old men are buried by young according to the order of Nature: But in the Warre the contrary happens. And that it is strange thing, that there is no
A PARCELL OF the Thirteenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. AS the desires of such as are troubled with the Dropsie are neuer satisfied, not taken away by any exteriour humour, if the interiour disposition of the Body be not cured: So the concupiscence to haue much is ne∣uer satisfied, if the vice which lies in the heart be not by some reason corrected. There falls out some∣thing like in the Desire of fraud, which no man liuing will confesse to be royall: although that some at this day hold it necessary to man∣nage affaires by deceit for to reigne. The Acheins auolde it much. For they were estranged from de∣ceipts towards their Friends to aduance their power,The Acheins free from fraud as they would not vanquish their Enemies: holding it neither noble nor firme, if they did not vanquish by prowesse and in open fight. Wherefore they ordained among themselues, that no man should make vse of hidden Armes, think∣ing that an open Combat hand to hand was the true determining of Warre. Finally, they declared themselues vnto their Enemies, and and signified the Warre, when they are once resolued to vndergoe the danger of a Battaile; the like they did of the places where they would decide it. But at this day they say, hee is no good Commander that executes a∣ny enterprize of Warre openly. There is yet remaining in the Romans some Reliques of the ancient humour in such affaires. They signifie it
before, and they seldome vse any Ambushes, fighting readily hand to hand. Let these words be spoken against the affection which is much more ready, then is needefull, in malicious practises, policies and am∣bushes among Princes, as well in affaires of Warre as Policy. Of Philip. PHilip had instructed and commanded Heraclides to consider how he might annoy and ruine the Rhodien ships, and had sent an Embassadour to the Candiots to draw them and to incense them to make Warre a∣gainst them.Heraclides malicious. Heraclides was a man fit for malicious practises, thinking likewise that Philips Command∣ment being accepted would be gainefull, soone after when he had considered thereon,The vices of Heraclides. he sail'd against the Rhodiens. This Heraclides was borne at Tarentum, issued from a Race of Artizans, but wonderfully giuen to villanies and malice. First he prostituted his Bo∣dy publickely in his younger yeares: and as he afterwards grew subtile, he had the charge of the Register, being to the poore seuere and auda∣cious, and towards Great men a flattering Courtier. Yet hee was chast out of his Countrey, as if he had sought secretly to deliuer the Ci∣ty of Tarentum to the Romans, when he had no power in the gouern∣ment: Hee was an Architect, and by reason of some building of the Walles, he had in his hands the Keyes of a Gate which bends to the Mediterranian Coast. But when hee was retired to the Romans, and had againe written to Tarentum to Hannibal, and had sent thither, he fled to Philip being discouered, and fore-seeing what would succeed: with whom hee had so much credite and authority, as he was in a man∣ner the Author of the subuersion of a great Kingdome.The force of truth. But the nature of the greatest of the Goddesses seemes to shew the truth vnto men, and to giue them great forces: so as although shee be oppos'd by all men, and that sometimes all kind of perswasions accompanied with lies bee arm'd against her, yet shee slips I know not how of her selfe into the fantasies of men, so as sometimes she suddainly raiseth her forces: and sometimes after shee hath beene long hidden, shee comes to light and discouers vntruth. When as Nabis Tyrant of the Lacedemonians,Nabis Tyrant of the Lacede∣monians. had three yeares en∣ioyed the Principality of Lacedemon, he had not attempted any thing, neither durst he make tryall: For that lately Machanides had beene slaine by the Acheins: But hee laid the first foundations of a long and grie∣uous tyranny. He vtterly ruined some of the Lacedemonians, banish∣ing
those which were Noble or Rich, or had any honour from their Ancestors, giuing their substance and Wiues to other Noble men, and to Mercenaries. Who were Murtherers, Theeues, Robbers, and breakers of houses. Finally, this kind of men (to whom the Country was forbidden, in regard of their wickednesse and villanies) were by him carefully drawne together from all the parts of the Earth, of whom he held himselfe Prince and King. He had Lanciers for the guarde of his Body, by whom it plainely appeared that his wickednesse and power would be of long continuance. Besides the said things hee was not satisfied with the banishmens of Citizens, but moreouer he left not any place safe for Fugitiues, not any certaine refuge. He slue some vp∣on the way, sending after them, and kill'd others in their returne. Final∣ly, in Cities (where the Fugitiues did remaine) he hired houses neare vnto them by men not suspected, sending Candiots thither: who making holes in the Wall, slew them with Arrowes, or at the Windowes, the Fugitiues standing there, or else being at their Meare in their houses: so as these miserable Lacedemonians had no place of refuge, nor time assured. He hath by this meanes ruin'd many. He drest vp an Engine, if it may be so term'd: It was the Image of a Woman richly attired, the forme whereof was like vnto the Wife of Nabis, and very well painted. When he called any Citizens, meaning to exact money from them, at their first entrance he vsed courteous and milde speeches, speaking of the feare of the Acheins neare vnto the City and Region: He likewise de∣clared the multitude of Souldiers which hee entertained for their safety, and finally the charges hee was at for the Gods, and the publique good of the Citty. If by this Speech he perswaded them, then he had them ready at his deuotion; but if any one refusing would not giue care vnto him, hee added these words: peraduenture thou canst not perswade thy selfe:Apege the Wife of Nabis. Yet I thinke this Apege (which was the Name of his Wife) will doe it. After this speech, the Image was presented: and when hee rise out of his Chaire, hee imbraced it as his Wife, and approacht it neare vnto his bosome. This Image had the Elbowes and Hands full of Nailes vnder the garment, and likewise neare the Papps, and when he toucht the backe of the Image with his hand, he extended it vnto the brest, and led it by the handling of Instruments: and by this meanes hee forced the Image in a short time, to pronounce any kind of voyce. Vpon this occasion hee ruined many of those which refuse to obey him.
A PARCELL OF the Fourteenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. THe Consuls were carefull of these affaires. Publius Scipio wintred in Affricke, who being aduertised that the Carthaginians prepared an Army to Sea,Vtica besieged by Scipio. hee did the like, yet omitting nothing concerning the Siege of Bysarthe: neither did hee who∣ly despaire of Sophax or Syphax, sen∣ding often vnto him, for that their Ar∣mies were not farre distant, perswa∣ding himselfe that hee might retire him from the alliance of the Carthaginians. He despaired not but that hee was now glutted with Pedisca, for whose sake he held the Carthaginians party:Pedisca the wife of Syphax, and in like manner of the friend∣ship which he had with the Phenicians, as well for their naturall discon∣tent against the Numidians, as for their preuarication both against God and Men. Whilest hee ruminated of many things with a vari∣able hope for the future, for that hee feared a danger by Strangers, knowing that the Enemy encreased much, hee resolued in the end vpon this occasion. Some of those which hee had sent to Syphax, related vnto him, that the Carthaginians besides their Winter-tents, had their Lodgings made of Wood and Leaues, and among the Numidians, the Princes had them of Reeds, and they of the Cities there assembled of Leaues: Some being of the Ditch and Pallisadoe, and others without.
Scipio hauing a conceire, that if hee assailed their Campe by fire, it would bee a surprize vnexpected by the Enemy, and of great ef∣fect for him, inclined vnto it. In regard of Syphax, hee intended by his Embassies which hee sent vnto Scipio, to settle a Peace, so as the Carthaginians should leaue Italy, and the Romans Affricke: and that either of them should enioy that which they held: which things being formerly heard, hee had not accepted: but at that time hee aduertised the Numidian by an Embassie in few words, that the proposition made by him was not impossible. So as Syphax hauing great hope, solicited a parley often. This done, there were many and frequent Embassies. It happened that sometimes they met without Guards, and Scipio alwayes sent men of great iudgement with his Embassadours: for whom hee had prepared Military habits, which were base, poore, and seruile, to discouer and view the entries and issues of the two Campes.The Campe of Asdrubal of 30000. Foote and 3000. Horse. There were in truth two: the one of Asdrubal, contay∣ning thirty thousand Foote, and three thousand Horse: the other which was ten Furlongs off, was of Numidians, hauing ten thousand Horse, and about fifty thousand Foote. These had the approach more easie,The Campe of Syphax of 10000 Horse, and 50000. Foote. and the Lodgings more fit to burne: for that the Nu∣midians vsed no Timber nor Earth, but onely Reeds and Canes to make their Lodgings. And for that the Spring was come, Scipio hauing inquired of all the preparations of the Enemy, hee causeth his shippes to flote, and puts Engines into them as it were to besiege Bysarthe by Sea. Moreo∣uer, hee seazed vpon a Hill neare vnto the City with about two thou∣sand Foote, to the end hee might put a conceite into the Enemy, that all this was done for the Siege: Yet in truth hee made this Guard, vntill hee might haue an opportunity to execute his Enter∣prize, to the end that the Armies being out of their Camps, the Garrison of the City should not dare to sally forth, nor assaile the Pallisadoe being neare, nor besiege those which were there in the Guard. This preparation being ready, hee sent to Syphax, to demand of him if hee would conclude the Articles, and whether the Carthagini∣ans did like of them: and that hee should propound nothing more concerning the accord, giuing also charge to the Embassadours not to returne without answere vpon these Differences. Being come vnto the Numidian, their charge being heard, hee consented, for that Scipio was ready to conclude this Accord: and withall the Embassadours told him, that they would not depart before they car∣ried backe an Answere from him. But being in great feare and doubt that the Carthaginians would not giue consent, hee sent with all speede vnto Asdrubal, ad∣uertising him of that which was treated, with many perswasions to accept of the Peace. Syphax was negligent and carelesse, and suffered the Numidians which he had drawne together, to lodge with∣out the Campe.
This Scipio did in shew, but hee was carefull of the preparations. And when as the Carthaginians had aduertised Syphax to conclude the accord, reioycing thereat, he signified it presently to the Embassadors: who being returned to their Campe, acquainted Scipio with that which the King had done. These things being heard, hee presently sends backe an Embassie to Syphax, to tell him, that hee liked well of the accord, and desired a peace: but the Senate and Councell were not of that Opinion, saying, that they would pursue their Enterprize. The Embassie came to Syphax, and declared these things vnto him. Scipio had sent these Embassadours, to the end hee should not seeme to haue broken the accord, if during a parley of Peace, hee should at∣tempt any Enterprize of an Enemy: conceiuing that hauing signified this vnto the Enemy, whatsoeuer he should doe would be blamelesse. Syphax was much discontented with this newes, considering the hope hee had of a Peace: Hee goes to Asdrubal, acquainting him with that which the Romans had signified vnto him: whereupon doubting, they consulted how they should carry themselues, but they were farre from knowing the resolution and designe of the future accidents. As for standing vpon their guard, or to beleeue that any disaster or misfortune were at their Gates, they had no thought thereof. It is true, their whole intent was to draw the Enemy into the Plaine. Scipio gaue many presumptions by his preparation and sum∣mation, that hee had some Enterprize against Bysarthe, Finally, a∣bout Noone he sends for the Captaines Milleniers, whom hee held for his loyall Friends, and acquaints them with his intent, giuing them charge, that an houre after Dinner they should put the Army in Battaile before the Pallisadoe, when as all the Trumpets accor∣ding to custome had giuen the Signe.A custome of the Romans du∣ring their re∣past. The Romans haue a custome, that during the repast, all the Trumpets and Clairons sound before the Generals Tent: to the end that during that time they should set wat∣ches in conuenient places. When hee had retired his Spies which hee had sent vnto the Enemies Campe, hee conferres and examines the Reports of the Embassadours, and considers of the approaches of the Campe,Massanissa. making vse therein of the aduice and councell of Mas∣sanissa for the knowledge of the places. And when as all things were ready for the Execution,Scipio drawes to the Enemies Campe. hee marcheth with his Army directly to∣wards the Enemy, the first Watch being changed, leauing a suffici∣ent number to guard the Campe. They were threescore Fur∣longs off. And when they were come vnto them about the end of the third Watch, he deliuers halfe the Army to Caius Lelyus, with all the Nu∣midians, giuing them charge to assaile Syphax Campe, and perswa∣ding them to carry themselues like braue men, and not to attempt a∣ny thing rashly, holding for certaine that the more their sight is hin∣dred by darkenesse, the more courage and confidence they should haue to finish Nocturnall assaults. Finally, hee assailes Asdru∣bal with the rest of the Army. Yet his purpose and resolution
was not to put it into execution, before that Lelius had first set fire of the Enemies.Lelius assailes Syphax his Campe by fire. Being thus resolued, hee marcheth a flow pace. Le∣lius on the other side diuiding his Army in two, assailes the Enemies suddainly. But as the lodgings were built in such sort, as if they had of purpose beene destinated for the fire, where the first had cast the fire, and consumed all the first Tents, it fell out so as they could not succour this Disaster: Both for that the lodgings stood close to∣gether, and for the abundance of stuffe wherewith they were built. Lelius stood still in Battaile: But Massanissa knowing the Countrey, placed Souldiers vpon the passages, by the which they which fled from the fire, must retire. Not any of the Numidians vnderstood that which was done, nor Syphax himselfe, thinking this fire had beene accidentall. Wherefore they goe rashly out of their lodgings and Tents, some being yet asleepe, and others drinking: So as many were crusht in peeces by them at the sally of the Pallisadoe, and and many were burnt: In regard of those which fled the flames, they were all slaine, falling into the Enemies hands, not knowing what should befall them, nor what to doe. When at the same time the Carthaginians saw this great fire and high flames, thinking the Numidians Pallisadoe was on fire, some went presently to helpe them: all the rest ran out of the Campe without Armes, standing before their Pallisadoe amazed, they ex∣pected what the end would be.Scipio sets As∣drubals Campe on fire. When as things succeeded accor∣ding to Scipio's intent, he falls vpon those which were come out of the Campe, and pursuing others into it, hee presently sets fire on their lodgings. The like happened to the Phenicians, as well by fire as by other miseries and misfortunes, where with the Numidans were afflicted. But when as Asdrubal had discouered by the euent, that this fire of the Numidians was not accidentall, but by the policy and courage of the Enemy, hee ceased suddainly from giuing Succours, making haste to saue himselfe, for that there was little hope remaining. The fire suddainly wasted and consumed all: There were no more passages for Horses, Sumpters, and men, among the which some were halfe dead, and burnt with the fire, others were terrified and amazed, so as they which made preparation to defend themselues valiantly, were hindred, neither was there any meanes of hope, by reason of the trouble and confusion. The like happened to Syphax and to the other Commanders. But either of them escaped with some few Horses: the rest of the Troups of Men, Horses, and Sumpters, perished miserably by this fire. Some were ignominiously slaine by the Enemy after they had fled the violence of the fire, and defeated not onely without Armes, but na∣ked and without apparrell. Finally, all the place of these Campes was full of howling, horrible cries, feare, and vnvsuall noise: and more∣ouer with a violent flaming fire: Either of the which had beene suffici∣ent to amaze and terrifie humane Nature, and the rather for that these things happened contrary vnto all hope. Wherefore it is not possible
for any man liuing to imagine this accident, considering the great∣nesse: for that it hath exceeded the policy of all precedent actions. And although that Scipio hath performed many deeds of prowesse and va∣lour, yet this seemes to be the most excellent and hardy of them all. At the breake of day the Enemies being some defeated, and others fled with amazement, he gaue charge to the Commanders to pursue the Chase. The Chiefe of the Carthaginians budg'd not in the beginning, al∣though he were aduertised by many: The which he did, relying vpon the fortification of the City. But when hee saw the Mutiny of the Inhabitants among themselues,The flight of Asdrubal. hee fled, accompanied with those which had escaped with him, fearing the comming of Scipio. Hee had fiue hundred Horse, and about two thousand Foote. The Inha∣bitants being agreed, yeelded themselues to the Romans. Whom Sci∣pio pardoned, abandoning the spoile of two Neighbour Cities to the Souldiers. These things being thus decided, hee returned to his first Campe. The Carthaginians were discontented, that the hope which they had conceiued in the beginning, had succeeded so contra∣ry. They expected to haue besieged the Romans (inclosed with∣in the Fort of Bysarthe, where they had wintred) as well by Sea as Land. And when they had all their preparations ready, they were not onely destitute of their Campes, so inconsiderately deliuered to their Enemies, but it seemed they should all perish with their Coun∣trey: For this cause they were amazed with great feare and faint∣nesse of heart. And when as the affaires prest them to consider prudently of the future and eminent danger, the Senate was full of doubt, and of diuers confused thoughts: Some sayd, they must send to Hannibal, and call him out of Italy,The Carthagini∣an Senate ho  Councell. for that all their hope consisted in that Commander, and the Army which hee had: Others were of aduice they should send to Scipio to obtaine a truce, and to parley of an accord and agree∣ment: some would haue them to be of good courage, and to leuie an Army, and finally to send to Syphax. He was fled farre vnto Abbe, drawing together those which escaped from the danger: which ad∣uice was resolued. Wherefore they leuie men, and send to Asdru∣bal to that end, and likewise to Syphax, intreating him to giue them Succours, and to obserue the conuentions according to their first purpose, promising him that their Commander should presently ioyne with his Army. The Roman Generall followeth the Siege of Bysarthe the which hee did the rather, for that hee was aduertised that Syphax continued in his first resolution,Scipio attends the Siege of By∣sarthe. and that the Carthaginians leuied a new Army. For this cause hee raised his Campe and besieged Bysarthe. When hee had diuided the spoile, hee chased away the Merchants vpon good aduice. For the Souldiers carelesse of the present commodity of goods: for that the hope of profits which grew by their good for∣tune was apparent, they had intelligence with the Merchants. It seemed very fit to the King of Numidia and his Friends at
the first sight, that they should retire to their houses: But when the Celtiberians arriued neare vnto Abbe,4000. Celtiberi∣ans come to succour the Carthaginians. who being entertained, were aboue foure thousand men, the Carthaginians grew assured, and by little and little recouered their spirits, relying vpon these Troupes. Moreouer, when as Pedisca the Daughter of Asdrubal, and Wife to Syphax, (of whom we haue spoken) intreated him with all affection that he would not abandon the Carthaginians for the present: The Nu∣midian yeelded to her intreaties. The Celtiberians put no small hope into the Carthaginians. For although they were but foure thousand, yet they sayd, they were ten thousand. Finally, they promised to bee insupportable in the fight, as well for their courage as their Armes. The Carthaginians growne proud with this common bruite, were more confident to recouer their Campes. Finally, they set vp their Pallisadoe within thirty dayes neare vnto the Plaine called the Great, and there they planted their Campe, accom∣panied with the Numidians and Celtiberians, being in number thirty thousand men. When the newes came vnto the Romans Campe, Sci∣pio presently prepared to part. And when he had sent to those which held the Siege before Bysarthe, and to the others which were at Sea, informing them what they were to doe, he marched towards the Ene∣my, hauing all his Bands furnished with the most valiant men.Scipio drawes towards the Enemy. Being come on the fift Day to this great Plaine, and approaching neare the Enemy, he camped the first Day vpon a Hill, thirty Furlongs distant from them, the Day following hee descends into the Plaine, sending the Horse-men before within seuen Furlongs, and there settles his Campe againe. After two Dayes expectance, when they had skirmished of either side to come to a Battaile, either of them in the end drew to Field, and put their men in order. Scipio first of all placeth in Front his forlorne hope,The order of Battaile of the Romans Army. according to their custome: After which he appoints the Prin∣cipals, and in the third place the Triarij in the Reareward. As for the Horse-men, he orders the Italians on the right hand, and Massanissa with the Numidians on the left.The order which Syphax and Asdrubal held. Syphax and Asdrubal set the Celtiberi∣ans in the midst, against the Romans Bands, the Numidians on the left hand, and the Carthaginians on the right. Suddainly when the Com∣bat began,The beginning of the Battaile. the Numidians were repuls'd by the Roman Horse-men, and the Carthaginians (as they had often before) losing courage, were ouerthrowne by Massanissa's Company. Yet the Celtiberians fought valiantly against the Romans: for they had no hope of safety remaining for the ignorance of the places, neither yet if they were taken, con∣sidering their vniust Warre. For seeing that Scipio during the Warre of Spaine, had not offended them, it seemed against reason, and a dis∣loyalty to giue succours to the Carthaginians. But when the Wings began to giue backe, they were in a manner all slaine, being inclosed by the Principals and the Triarij. Thus the Celtiberians perished,The defeate of the Celtiberians. who were a great helpe to the Carthaginians, not onely in the fight, but al∣so in the flight, for if they had not entertained the Romans, and that the Chase had beene suddainly followed, few of the Enemies had escaped:
but as their resistance caused the stay, Syphax retired safely with his Horse-men into his Countrey, and Asdrubal to Carthage,Syphax retires in safety. with the rest which escaped. When as the Roman Generall had giuen order for the spoiles and Prisoners,The adulec of the Romans. calling a Counsell, he consulted what there was to do. Whereupon it was thought fit that Scipio should with part of the Army assaile the Townes, and Lelyus with Massinissa accompa∣nied by the Numidians and part of the Roman Army pursues Syphax,The pursuit of the Romans af∣ter Syphax. and not giue him leasure to make any new preparations. These things thus resolued they separate themselues, and some goe against Syphax with their Souldiers, and the Generall against the Cities: whereof some yeilded to the Romans for feare, and others being forced by siege. At that time the whole Region wauered and were ready to reuolt, ha∣uing beene cruelly tormented and vexed during the length of the Wars of Spaine. In regard of Carthage, as formerly there was great inconstancy, so now there was greater trouble and combustion, for that hauing heard and seene this Wound the second time, they grew desperate in them∣selues. It is true that they among the Councellours which seemed to haue greatest Courage,Diuers opini∣ons of the Car∣thaginians con∣cerning their Warre. commaunded that they should saile against those which laid siege to Bysarthe, and to make a triall if they might raise the siege, and to fight with the Enemy at Sea, as being ill furni∣shed. They required also that they should send for Hannibal, and re∣lie vpon that hope: and that there was reasonable occasions of safety by these two attempts. Some said, that the time would not allow it, and that they must fortifie and furnish the Citie for a siege: And that being of one consent, the accident would minister occasions. Some also aduise to make an Accord and League, whereby they should free them∣selues of the eminent dangers. As there were many opinions vppon this businesse, they confirme them all together. Wherefore this was their Resolution, they that were to saile into Italy, parting from the Senate should go presently to Sea: The Pylots likewise should prepare that which concernes the ships: And the rest for the safetie of the Citie, hauing a daily care for parti∣cular things. But when as the Roman Army was inricht with bootie, and that no man made any resistance, Scipio resolues to send the grea∣test part of the bootie to the first baggage: And taking the ablest and most actiue Bands to seeke to force the Enemies pallisadoe, He there∣fore (hauing a good courage) seated his Campe in view of the Cartha∣ginians. He had a conceite that by this meanes hee should amaze and terrifie them. The Carthaginians hauing in few daies giuen order for all the Equi∣page, Victualls, and munition of their Shippes, they meant to weigh Anchor, and to execute their Resolution.Tunie taken by Scipio. Scipio came to Tunis: and although that they which had fled thither kept the approa∣ches, yet he tooke it. Tunis is distant from Carthage sixe score Fur∣longs, and is to be seene in a manner by all the Citie: Moreouer it is strong aswell by Nature as by Art: The Carthaginians imbarked, and came to Bysrthe.
Scipio seeing the Enemies Army at Sea, was troubled, fearing least his should fall into some inconnenience, hauing not suspected it, ney∣ther was it ready nor prepared for that which might happen. Where∣fore turning head, he raised his Campe, seeking to giue order for his affaires. When hee perceiued his couered shippes, well prouided to carry the instruments, and conueniently to raise the siege, but ill appoynted for a Combate at Sea, and that those of the Enemies had beene du∣ring the Winter instructed and prepared; he was out of hope to make head against them, and to come to fight: Yet he prepared the couered Vessell, and inuironed them with three or foure ranckes of Merchants ships. The remainder is wanting.
A PARCELL OF the Fifteenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. SCipio was impatient, that the meanes to get Victualls was not only taken from him, but there was plenty with the Enemy: But he seemed to be much more grieued that the Carthaginians had broken their Oath and Accord, making War againe. Where∣fore hee made choise for Embassadours of Lucius Servinus, Lucius Citinus,Lucius Ser uinus Lucius Citinus, and Lucius Fa∣bius sent Em∣ssadour to Carthage. and Lucius Fabius, and sent them to speake vnto the Carthaginians vpon this late Acti∣on, and also to signifie vnto them, that the people of Rome had con∣firmed their Accords, for they had lately brought Letters vnto Scipio containing the said Articles. When the Embassadours were come to Carthage, they were first brought vnto the Senate, and afterwards to many others,A remonstrance of the Roman Embassadours to the Cartha∣ginians. where they discoursed freely of the present Affaires. First they put them in minde, how their Embassadours being arriued at Tunis, and were come into the assembly of the Councell, they had not only Sacrificed to the Gods, in bending downe to the ground, as other men are accustomed to do: But moreouer (prostrating them∣selues humbly) they had kist their feete: And when they were risen a∣gaine, had acknowledged their faulte to haue broken the Accord con∣cluded in the beginning with the Romains, and that for this cause they confest, that they were not ignorant, that they were lustly tormen∣ted and that they intreated that by the Fortune of Humanes, they might not be forced to suffer things that were not to be repaired, and that by this meanes their indiscretion and rashnesse would make the Romains bounty Commendable. The Embassadours say, that at the
repetition of these things, the Chiefe and Councellors which were then present in Counsell, were amazed and wondred, with what im∣pudence they forgot things that were then spoken, and durst in manner breake the Couenants sworne. It is in a manner manifest, that vpon the confidence they had in Hannibal and his forces, they had presumed to do these things, but inconsiderately. Finally, it was apparent to all the World, that flying the last yeare out of all Italy, and being shut vp through their faintnesse in the Countrey of Lacinium, and in a man∣ner besieged, they are fallen at this day to that as they are hardly in safety: And although that as Victors they would present themselues, and trie with vs the fortune of the Warre, who haue vanquished you in two following Battailes, yet they must not hold the future for cer∣taine: Nor yet thinke of the Victory, but rather feare to be frustrated againe. And if that hapned, to what Gods would they make their prayers and vowes? In what Language would they speake, to mooue the Victors to a Commiseration of their calamitie? Seeing that with reason all hope would be taken away, aswell with the Gods as men. These things thus propounded, the Embassadours foorth-with depart. Some of the Carthaginians were of opinion that the Accord should not be broken: The greatest part aswell of Burgesses as Senators, disli∣ked that to the Accord there were some grieuances added, and they were much discontented at the hard reprehension of the Embassadors. Moreouer they could not restore the shippes which had beene broken, nor repay the Charges. They were likewise fed with no small hope of Hannibals Victory. One part of them were of opinion to send away the Roman Embassadors without answere. The Burgesses (whose in∣tention was howsoeuer to renew the Warne) consulting among them∣selues practized in this manner. We must (said they) giue order that the Embassadors may be safely sent backe to their Campe. Wherfore they presently prepare two Gallies for their returne. But they aduer∣tize Asdrubal Chiefe of their Army at Sea,A Conspiracy of the Cartha∣ginians against the Roman Em∣bassadors. intreating him to keepe some vessells ready neere vnto the Romans Campe: to the end that when the Marriners should abandon the Embassadors, these other should board them, and cast them into the Sea. The Army at Sea had ioyned to the Romans vpon the flat neere vnto Bysarthe. When they had acquainted Asdrubal with these things they dismisse the Romans: And giue charge vnto the Marriners of the Gallies, that when they had past the Riuer of Macre, they should suffer the Romans to Saile towards the Mountaine; for from thence they might visibly discouer the Enemies Campe. When the Marriners had Conducted the Embassadours, and according to their charge had crost the Riuer, they turne head, hauing bid the Romans farewell. Lucius in trueth sus∣pected no harme, but thinking to be thus left at Sea by the Marriners through disdaine, he was much incensed. Whilest they sailed alone, the Carthaginians present themselues with three Gallies, which assaile the Roman Quinquereme, not able to annoy it nor board it, through the great resistance which they made: And that fighting in Front and
vpon the flancke, they annoyed the Souldiers with great slaughter of them: vntill being seene by those which spoiling the Maritine Country, came running from their Campe to the Sea shore, they ranne the Gal∣ley a shore. It is true, many of the Company were slaine, but the Embassadours escaped beyond all hope. These things hapning, the Warie was againe renewed with grea∣ter violence and cruelty then before. The Romans intended with great Courage to vanquish the Carthaginians, seeing the faith violated. The Carthaginians likewise fearing themselues guilty of that which they had committed, were carefull not to fall into the Enemies subiection. Their courages being such, it was apparent that this must be decided by a Battaile: For this cause not only Italy and Affricke, but also Spaine Sicily and Sardinia, were troubled and rauished in their iudgements, at∣tending the end. And when at the same time Hannibal was destitute of Horses, he sent to one Tycheus a Numidian allied to Syphas, who see∣med to haue the most valliant of all the Affricane horse, perswading him to giue him succours, and hee should be a sharer in the Action,Hannibal sends to Tycheus. knowing that if the Carthaginians vanquished, his Principallity would remaine safe and intire. But if the Romans preuailed, his life it selfe wil∣be in danger, in regard of the ambition of Massanissa. Being thus per∣swaded, hee comes vnto Hannibal with about two Thousand Horse. When as Scipio had fortified his Fleete at Sea, and left Bobias for Lieutenant, he spoiled the Cities, refusing to receiue any that offered themselues willingly, making them slaues,Athia Lieute∣nant at Sea for Scipio. and shewing the indigna∣tion which he had conceiued against the Enemies in regard of the faith broken by the Carthaginians. Finally, he sends continually to Massa∣nissa, letting him vnderstand how the Carthaginians had broken the Accords, intreating him to assemble the greatest Army that possibly he could, and to ioyne with him, according vnto their conuentions. Massanissa after the conclusion of the Accord, was gone with an Army accompanied with ten Ensignes of Romans, aswell Horse as foote, not only to recouer his owne Country, but also to seaze vpon those of Sy∣phax with the helpe of the Romans. Finally it hapned that the Embassa∣dours sent backe from Rome Landed at that time at the maritine Palli∣sado of the Romans,The Carthagi∣nian Embassa∣dours stayed by Ethias. Suddainly Bebias sends his men to Scipio, and re∣taines the Carthaginians, being sad and supposing to be in wonderfull danger. When as they were aduertized of the cruelty of the Carthaginians towards the Roman Embassadours, they helde not themselues secure from punishment. When as Scipio vnderstood what had beene done, that the Senate and people of Rome had confirmed the agreement which he had made with the Carthaginians, and that they were ready to do that which he aduised them, he was wonderfull glad. Moreo∣uer, he commands Bebias to send backe the Carthaginian Embassadours to their Houses with all fauour and curtesie: Vsing therein a good ad∣uice (in my opinion) with a wise consideration in what great esteeme his Country held their faith with Embassadors. Hee made his recko∣ning
that the punishment deserued by the Carthaginians did not me∣rit so great a respect, then that which the honour of the Romans re∣quired to be done. Wherefore refrayning his Choller and indignati∣on, conceiued for the offence of the Carthaginians, hee laboured to obserue that which they say in the Prouerbe, That wee must cleaue vnto the duties of our Elders. By this meanes he wonne the hearts of all the Carthaginians, and surmounted Hannibal and their madnesse by his Loyalty. When as the Carthaginians saw their Townes forced,The Carthagini∣ans pree Han∣nibal. they sent to Hannibal that hee should delay no longer, but present himselfe vnto the Enemy, and decide their affaires by a battaile. Hannibal hearing these things, made answere to those that came vnto him, that hee would consider thereon, and make choise of a fit time, to the end he might not seeme negligent. Some daies after hee raiseth his Campe from Adrumetum, and marching he Campes neere vnto Zama, which is a Citie fiue daies iourney from Carthage towards the West. From thence he sent three Spies,The Clemency of Scipio, vnto Hannibals spies. desirous to know where the Romans campt, and how they gouerne things which concerne the Scituation of a camp. When these Spies were brought to Scipio Generall of the Romans, he was so fare from punishing them, as others vsually doe, as contrariwise he gaue charge to a Captaine Milleniere, to shewe them plainely what soeuer was done in the Campe. Which being done, he demaunds, if the Commissary had shewed them all things carefully. The which when they had confest, he sent them backe with Victualls and Guides, commaunding them to relate carefully vnto Hannibal what they had seene. This Action causing Hannibal to wonder at the magnanimity and confidence of the man, he conceiued an humour to parly with Scipio. The which when he had resolued, he sent a Trumpet, saying that he desired to Treate with him concerning all their differences. Scipio ha∣uing heard this from the Trumpet, consented, saying, that hee would signifie vnto him the place and the howre, when and where he would parly. These things being heard by the Trumpet he returnes vnto his Campe. The day following Massanissa arriues with sixe Thousand foote,The comming of Massanissa to Scipio's Camp. and almost as many Horse: Whom when as Scipio had intertai∣ned courteonsly, and shewed him great signes of fauour, for that hee had made all those subiect which had formerly obeyed Syphax, hee foorth-with raiseth his Campe: And when hee came vnto the City of Margara, and had found a commodious place, and had appointed the warring within a Bows shot, hee planted his Campe there: And from thence he gaue notice (by certaine conuenient Messengers) vnto the Chiefe of the Carthaginians, that hee was ready to parly about their differences. The which Hannibal hearing, he presently marcheth with his camp, and approaches so neere, as he was within thirty furlongs of the Romans: Sitting downe vpon a certaine Hill, which besides the Watring, was for all other things commodious and sufficient enough: In trueth it was something farre, and therefore troublesome vnto the Souldiers.
The day following the two Commanders, accompanied with some few Horse-men goe out of their Camps,The enterview of Hannibal and Scipio. and againe they separate them∣selues from their Companies, meeting alone in an indifferent place with an Interpreter. Hannibal began first in these termes. I wish sayd hee, the Romans had neuer desired any thing out of Italy, nor the Cartha∣ginians out of the limits of Affricke: either of them no doubt haue great bounds, and as it were limitted by NatureHannibals Speech to Sci∣pio. And as wee haue made Warre, first for the difference of Sicily, then againe for Spaine: and that finally, Fortune being auerse against vs, our Countrey hath beene in danger, and wee are now in perill: The question is, whe∣ther there be any meanes to end this present difference after we haue pa∣cified the Gods. For my part I am ready, hauing made tryall how inconstant Fortune is, and how by little and little shee inclineth sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other, as if she were gouerned by Chil∣dren. I am in doubt in regard of thee, as well for thy great youth, as for that all things haue succeeded according to thy desire, as well in Affricke as in Spaine, hauing neuer yet felt the violence and fury of Fortune, so as happily thou dost giue no credit to my words al∣though they bee true. Yet consider the condition of these things, which not onely concerne our Ancestors, but euen our selues. I am that Hannibal, who after the Battaile neare vnto Cannes, being Lord in a manner of all Italy, approached neare vnto Rome, and planted my Campe within forty Furlongs, studying what I should doe with you and your Countrey. Now I come into Affricke to thee a Roman, to conferre with thee of my lafety, and of that of the Carthaginians. I pray thee consider this, and grow not proud, but courteously conferre of the present af∣faires: that is, that thou wouldst choose of good things the greatest, and of bad the least. What man of iudgement will make choice of the danger which is neare him, if hee obserue it well? For the which if thou obtainest the Victory, thou shalt much increase thy glory, and that of thy Countrey: whereas if thou beest vanquished, thou shalt vtterly lose through thine owne fault all thy pompe and magnifi∣cence, and precedent commodity. But to what end doe I vse these words? To this, that all that for the which wee haue formerly contended, may remaine to the Romans, as Sicily, Sardinia, and Spaine, and that the Carthaginians in regard thereof may neuer make Warre against them. The like also to be done of the other Ilands which lye betwixt Italy and Affricke, and let them belong to the Romans. I beleeue confidently, that these accords and agreements will hereafter bring safety to the Carthaginians, and to thee and the Romans great glory and honour. Thus much spake Hannibal. Scipio answering to these things,Scipio's answer to Hannibal. the Romans sayd, they haue not beene the Authors, but the Carthaginians, of the Warre which hath past for Sicily, nor of that of Spaine: whereof they must know that Hannibal had beene the chiefe Author, and that the Gods
are witnesses, whom I pray to impart the vertue, not to those which are the Authors of out-rages, but to those that defend themselues. Yet I consider what the Nature of Fortune is, and with all my power haue searcht into humane affaires. If before the Romans passage into Affricke, and that parting out of Italy thou hadst propounded these accords, I am of Opinion thou hadst not beene frustrated of thy hope. But now thou hast abandoned Italy against thy will, and that being in Affricke, we haue held our Campe in the open Plaine, it is mani∣fest that matters are much changed. Withall (which is a great matter) we are come hither, thy Citizens being partly vanquished, and su∣ing for a peace, we haue past in writing the accords that were sworne, in the which (besides that which thou now propoundest) these Ar∣ticles were comprehended: that the Carthaginians should haue no co∣uered vessels, that they should pay three Millions of Gold, restore the Captiues without Ransome,Articles com∣prehended, in the Accords past betwixt Scipio and the Carthaginians. and giue hostages. These were the accords which past betwixt vs: for the which wee and they came to the Senate and to our people. Wee haue protested that that these accords thus reduced to Writing seemed good vnto vs: The Cartha∣ginians intreated that they might enioy the said agreements: The Se∣nate obeyed, and the people in like manner gaue their consent thereunto. The Carthaginians after they had obtained what they had deman∣ded, haue transgressed and broken the accords. What remaines now to be done? Be thou in my place and iudge. Shall wee take the grieuances out of the conditions, to the end you may suffer no punishments for the transgression, and that you may be taught here∣after to preuaricare against your benefactors? Or else hauing obtai∣ned that which you demaund you should not be bound vnto vs? But what? When thy people now in suing had obtained their request, they presently intreated vs as Enemies, after they had conceiued some little hope of thee. If the burthens had beene too heauy, they might haue required an abatement from the people: and if they had remit∣ted any Articles of the accord, the Senate doubtlesse would haue made no long delay. But to what end tend our words? Submit your selues and your Country to our protection, or vanquish fighting. Hannibal and Scipio hauing discoursed after this manner, being of con∣trary opinions retire. The day following at Sunne-rising, they put their Armies into Bat∣taile, whereof the Carthaginians were to fight for their safety and for Affricke, and the Romans for the vniuersall Empire. What is hee who considering these things can without compassion heare the relati∣on? No man shall euer finde more warlike Armies, nor more fortu∣nate Commanders, nor more excellent Wrestlers in the Stratagems of Warre, nor greater rewards propounded vnto them by Fortune. For they which should obtaine the Victory, should not onely bee Lords of Affricke and Asia, but also of all the other parts of the World which are at this time mentioned in Histories: the which soone after succeeded, Scipio put his Army in Battaile after this manner.
First he ordred those that were lightly armed by certaine spaces:The order of Scipio's Bat∣taile. after whom he placed the Bands of the Principals, and not according to the spaces of the first Ensignes, as the Romans had beene accustomed, but distant one from another, in regard of the multitude of the Ene∣mies Elephants: and vpon the Reare hee appoints the Triarij. As for the Wings, hee gaue charge of the left to Caius Lelyus with the Italian Horse-men: and the right to Massanissa with all the Numidi∣ans that were vnder his charge. Finally, hee fill'd the spaces of the first Ensignes with forked Iauelings: to whom he commanded to be∣gin the Skirmish: and if they were repuls'd and forc'd to giue backe by the violence of the Elephants, that they which should bee separated, should retire by the straight spaces to the Reare of the Army: and they which should be enuironed, should retire to the Ensignes by the crosse spaces. These things being thus ordred,Scipio's Speech to his Army. he makes an Oration in few words to his Army, and yet proper for the euent of the affaires. He intreats them to remember their precedent Battailes, and to behaue them∣selues like braue men, worthy of the Roman Name, setting before their eyes, that hauing the Victory they should not onely be Lords of all Affricke, but moreouer they should purchase the Empire and gouernment of the rest of the World. If the fortune of the Warre succeeded otherwise, thee which dyed fighting valiantly, should haue an honourable graue, hauing died for their Countrey: where∣as they that should turne head, should liue the remainder of their daies in great ignominy and misery, for there is no place in Africke that can shelter them in theire flight, finally if they fall into the Carthaginians hands, they which haue any iudgement vnderstand well what the e∣uent will bee: and God forbid that any of you should make triall of it, when as fortune propounds vnto vs great rewards of euery side, shall wee not bee the most simple Idiotts in the world, if when of good things they present the best vnto vs, wee choose with a desire of life the worst of bad? wherefore in propounding these two, either to vanquish or dye, hee incourageth them to match against the enemy, for being in this humour, they must with a dispaire of life, alwayes vanquish their enemies in making head. Scipio inflamed the hearts of his Souldiers after this manner.The order of Hannibal his Battaile. In regard of Hannibal, hee placed his Elephants before the whole Army, being aboue foure score: and then about twelue thousand Mer∣cenaries, which were Genuois, Maiorquins, Minorquins, and Mau∣rusiens: After which hee placed the Inhabitants of Affricke and the Carthaginians. After all which hee orders those which hee had brought our of Italy, and feparates them from the rest aboue a Furlong. Hee fortified the Wings with Horse-men, ordring the Numidians on the right, and the Carthaginians on the left. Hee commanded euery Leader to encourage his Souldiers, to the end they might put their trust in him, and the Troupes which hee had brought out of Italy. Hee likewise commands the Carthaginian Captaines to acquaint their men with the miseries which would
befall their Wiues and Children, if this Battaile succeeded otherwise then they desired. The which they effected. Hannibal likewise came to them which hee had brought with him, and intreates them with a long speech to remember their mutuall and common life, for the space of seuenteene Yeares: That they should thinke of the many Battailes which they had fought with the Romans, in the which they had beene alwayes Victors, and had neuer left them any hope of Victory. But hee intreated them chiefly, that amidst the encounter they should set before their eyes the infinite prerogatiues: Namely, the Battaile which they gained, fighting against the Father of this present Roman Commander, neare vnto Trebia: Then that which was against Fla∣minius: and also towards Cannes against Emilius: the which hee sayd, were neither for the number and multitude of men, nor ac∣cording vnto their forces worthy to bee compared to the present danger. When he had vsed this Speech, hee commands them to looke vp∣on the Enemies in Battaile, telling them that they were not onely few∣er in number, but they were scarce the least part of those which then fought against them, and that they could not compare with them in forces. And as the others were before inuincible, they had fought cheerefully and stoutly, and that of these some were the Children of men, and the others the Reliques of such as had beene often defeated in Italy, and had so many times shewed them their heeles. Where∣fore he was of aduice that they should not doe any thing to the pre∣iudice of their glory and fame, nor of their Commander: But in fighting couragiously, confirme the opinion which was conceiued of them to be inuincible. Behold the Speeches or such like which they held vnto their Armies.The beginning of the Battaile by the Ele∣phants. When as all things necessary were ready for the Combat, and that the Numidian Horse-men had skirmished long: Hannibal commanded those which were mounted vpon the Elephants to charge the Enemy. But when the Trumpets and Clairons sounded, some of them be∣ing amazed, turn'd head, and went violently against the Numidians, which were come to succour the Carthaginians. Finally, the left Wing of the Carthaginians was left bare by Massanissa's Company. The rest of the Elephants fighting with the Iauelings in the midst of the Battalions, without doubt endured much, so likewise they an∣noyed the Enemies: vntill that being amazed, some going forth by the spaces were taken, as the Generall had giuen order: Others flying on the right hand, and wounded by the Horse-men, passe in the end the place of the Battaile. And when the Elephants were thus dismay∣ed, Lelyus charging the Carthaginian Horse-men, repulseth them in such sort, as they soone turned head, the Chase being pursued by him. The like did Massanissa.The strength of the Battaile. Whilest these things are in action, the two Battalions come to fight with a slow pace, and wonderfull great courage, except those which were come out of Italy, who budge not out of their place. When they came to affront one
another, the Romans crying after their Countrey manner, and making their Targets sound with their Swords, fought with their E∣nemies. The Mercenaries of the Carthaginians cast forth diuers con∣fused cries, for it was not the same sound, nor the same voyce; but di∣uers languages: for they were men drawne from diuers Countries. And when as this Battaile was fought with great courage, and man to man, for that the Combattants could not helpe themselues with their Iauelings nor Swords, the Mercenaries fought in the beginning with great courage and dexterity, and wounded many Romans. The Ro∣mans also trusting in their good order and Armes, laboured much to goe on. And when as they which were in the Reare of the Romans, gaue courage to the first in following them, and the Carthaginians not com∣ming on to succour their Souldiers, but staying behinde basely and for want of courage, the Barbarians declined. Wherefore when they saw themselues abandoned by their Companions, in retiring they fell vpon those which stood still and slew them: the which forced many Carthaginians to dye valiantly. For when they were slaine by the Mercenaries, they fought boldly as well against their owne men as against the Romans: In which combat (as they fought after a horrible manner like furious men) they made no lesse slaughter of their owne then of the Enemies. By this meanes they fell confusedly vpon the Troups that were lightly armed. The Captaines of the Principals seeing this accident, charg'd their Battalions. The greatest part of the Carthaginians and Mercenaries were slaine, aswell by them as by those that were lightly armed. In regard of such as escaped and fled, Hannibal would not suffer them to mingle with the Battalions, commanding their Captaines to rank them before, and forbidding moreouer to receiue such as approacht: wherefore they were forced to retire vpon the Wings, and without them. But for that the place betwixt the two Armies was full of bloud and dead bodies, this put the Carthaginian Generall into great difficulty, and was a great let for him to charge againe. For the in∣stability of the dead which were bloudy and falne vpon heapes, with the confusion of Armes which were fallen among the dead, they were to haue a troublesome passage which marcht in Battaile. Yet the wounded being carried backe, and a retreate being sounded by the Trumpets which followed those that were lightly armed, hee puts his men before the fight in the midst of the Enemy: In regard of the Principals and Triarij, hee giues order that being closely ioyn'd, they should march crosse the dead bodies vpon the two Wings. When they were equall with those that were lightly armed, the Battalions charged one another with great violence and courage.The great fury of the fight. It happened that for the multitude, courage, and equall Armes of either side, the Combat was long doubtfull. They that were slaine, dyed euery man in his Ranke with a braue emulation, vntill that Massa∣nissa and Lelyus returning from the chase of the Horse-men, had by
good fortune rallied their men together: with whom charging vpon the Reare of those which were with Hannibal, a great number of them were defeated in Battaile; and few of them escaped which fled: For the Horse-men were dispersed of all sides,The victory of the Romans a∣gainst the Car∣thaginians. and the Countrey was plaine and Champion. There died aboue fifteene hundred Romans, and twenty thousand Carthaginians: The Prisoners were not much lesse. This Battaile in the which they fought for the Empire, and which by the sayd Commanders was iudged the vniuersall victory to the Romans, had this end. And when as after the fight, Scipio pursuing the Carthaginians,Hannibal flies to Adrumetum. had ouerthrowne their Pallisadoe, hee returned to his Campe. Hannibal recouered Adrumetum, still running with some few Horses. Hee had done his duty in this Battaile, not omit∣ting that which was requisite for a good an expert Captaine. For first he laboured to diuert the eminent danger by a parley with Scipio.Hannibal van∣quished by for∣tune. It is the duty of a man which doth not wholy relye vpon va∣lour, but distrusting Fortune, to fore-see things which contrary to all opinions doe vsually happen in a Battaile. And afterwards comming to the Combat, he so carried himselfe, as the Battaile could not be bet∣ter ordered against the Romans by him that shall vse the like Armes, then Hannibal had then disposed it. For when the Army and order of the Romans was diuided, it fell out that all of them might fight together, or by Troups against any open attempt, by a certaine order of the Bat∣talion: for that alwayes two Ensignes were ioyned neare together when it was needfull, and that moreouer their Armes serued the Souldiers for a couering and assurance, considering the greatnesse of their Targets, and the firmnesse of their Swords to strike, so as for these reasons it see∣med a difficult thing to defeate them. Yet Hannibal gaue so good or∣der for all these things, as he shewed his industry. For he had suddain∣ly prepared this multitude of Elephants, and placed them before his Battalions, to the end they might breake the Enemies Rankes. Se∣condly, he ordred the Mercenaries in Front, after which he caused the Carthaginians to march, to the end they might ite the bodies of the Enemies, and make the vigour of their Armes vnprofitable, by reason of the number of the Dead, and that withall hee should force the Car∣thaginians, (as placed in the midst) to stand in Battaile, and to fight vntill that forced by necessity he should come to combat. In re∣gard of the valiant men, hee mingled them by spaces: fore-seeing that which doth vsually happen, to the end that remaining vndanted both in body and courage, he might make vse of their forces at need. He deserues pardon in this, that hauing omitted nothing that might serue to vanquish, yet he hath beene frustrated, seeing that before hee had beene inuincible. It happens sometimes that some actions resist the at∣tempts of good men: and sometimes it happens that a good man is pre∣uented of his desire by him that is better: the which may then be sayd to haue happened by Hannibal. It is true that when as things which exceed the common custome and manner of liuing of some,A defect of the  perish of themselues for the greatnesse of the accidents, they deserue commiseration with those that are present and
heare it: The vnvsuall nouelty of things mooue vs. But if that such an accident happens by deceite and Hypocrisie it mooues none to pitty, but to Choller and Hatred: The which then happened to the Cartha∣ginian Embassadors. Scipio beginning in few words, let them vnderstand that hee was not to shew them any courtesie or fauour, seeing they confest they had begunne the Warre against the Romans, and against the conuen∣tions had spoil'd the City of the Zachantiens,Zachantia spoi∣led by the Car∣thaginians. and first Transgressed the Accords, Oathes, and Agreements reduced to Writing: And yet the Romans haue resolued to shewe them grace, and (in regard of Fortune and humane aduentures,) to vse Clemency and Magnanimity in their present Affaires. The which should be manifest vnto them, if they consider what was offered. Finally they must not take it ill if for the present they imposed vpon them things, which they must doe, or suffer, or deliuer: But they should wonder and hold it strange, if they obtaine any mercy: Seeing that Fortune dis-fauouring them for their iniustice, had (in denying mercy and pardon) made them subiect vnto their Enemies. This Speech being ended, hee promised them Clemency and Fa∣uour: Teaching them withall what they were to indure: The which is comprehended in these Articles.The Articles of Accord, pro∣pounded by Scipio to the Carthaginians. That they should leaue vnto the Car∣thaginians the Cities which they had in Affricke before this last Warre attempted against the Romans, and the Countries which anciently they held, and finally their Cattle, Bodies, and other Wealth. Moreo∣uer it was granted them, that from that day they might liue free with∣out any let or hinderance of their Lawes and Customes. This was that which was granted them of grace. Againe they added these contrary Articles: That the Carthaginians should make restitution, of the vniust spoiles which they had committed against the Romans during the Truce: That they should restore all the Captiues and Fugitiues, which they had had during the Warre: They should deliuer all their long Vessels except ten Gallies: And in like manner the Elephants: not to attempt to make any Warre out of Affricke, nor in Affricke it selfe without the consent of the Romans: To restore vnto King Massanissa, the Houses, fields, Cities, and whatsoeuer had belonged to him or his Predecessors, within the limits that should be set downe: That they should nourish the Army for three moneths, and pay them vntill the answere were returned from Rome: And according vnto the Ac∣cord pay sixe Millions of Gold, within fifty Yeares, after the rate of sixscore thousand Crownes yearely: That they should giue in Hostage for the assurance of their faith, a hundred yong men, as the Commaun∣der should appoint, which should not be vnder the Age of foureteene Yeares, nor aboue thirty. The Roman Generall propounded these things vnto the Carthaginian Embassadors,Hanibal forceth a Citizen. who made hast to make their Report They say, that when as a certaine Senator, laboured to contradict the said Articles in the Senate, Hannibal stepping foorth drew him out of his Seate: And when as the rest were discontented, for that hee had done against the
Custome of the City: Hannibal steppes vp againe and saith, (as it is re∣ported) that if he had committed any thing against their Custome and course of liuing, he was to be pardoned: For they knew well that be∣ing a young Boy of nine yeares of age, he had gone out of the Coun∣try, and returned againe at the age of fiue and forty: For this cause he intreated them that they would not haue any regard to that, wherein he had transgrest their Custome, considering rather that if he suffered for the affaires of the Country: It was for them he had fallen into this transgression. Finally that it seemed wonderfull and strange to him, if any Carthaginian knowing what Councell had beene taken against the Romans, aswell for the publicke as priuate good, did not adore For∣tune: Seeing that now being made subiect vnto them, they had pur∣chased such grace and fauour: Whereof if any one would haue put the Country in Hope, some daies before the Romans had the Victory, hee would not haue beene able to speake for the greatnesse and excesse of the apparent miseries, Wherefore he intreated them againe, not to do any thing slowly, nor by Discourse: And that consenting all with one voice to the Arti∣cles of the peace, they should Sacrifice vnto the Gods, and pray that the people of Rome might confirme them. When it seemed that hee had giuen wise aduice, and fit for the time, it was concluded to accept the Accord prescribed, and to passe it with the Romans. Wherefore they suddainly sent away the same men in Embassie which had contra∣dicted the Articles. A Parcell of the Deedes and Posterity of Ptolomy. FInally who will not wonder, that Ptolomy had not proui∣ded to giue aide to these men during his life, seeing there were some which were ready to succour them? But when Death surpriz'd him, hee left a young Infant, to whom by right of nature, he had indeauoured, as they say, with both hands to preserue him the Crowne: Then encouraging one ano∣ther, they make hast to practise a Villany, and to murther this Infant, and to diuide his principallity among them. The which they do not after the manner of Tyrants, who pretend some colour for their in∣famy: But carry themselues afterwards so impudently and brutishly, as that which they speake of the life of Fishes is due vnto them. Of whom they say, that although they be of one kind, yet the defeate of
the smaller feeds and entertaines the life of the greater. Wherefore who will not thinke to see a great execration against the Gods, and a cruelty towards men, and likewise a great auarice of the said Kings, seeing this paction and agreement as in a glasse? What is hee who for these causes hauing accused Fortune in humane affaires, doth not like∣wise consider that shee hath since made them to suffer worthy punish∣ments, and left to posterity a good example for the amendment of their course of liuing, as hauing propounded vnto these Kings such an igno∣minious punishment? For when they had transgrest the agreements a∣mong themselues, and diuided the Infants Principality, all things did iustly proue hurtfull and opposite vnto them, which they had wicked∣ly resolued against their Kinsfolkes and Neighbours, by the bringing in of the Romans? for that the one and the other being suddainly vanqui∣shed, they were not onely forced to abate their couetousnesse of ano∣ther mans goods: but being made subiect to tributes, they were con∣strained to obey the Commandments of the Romans. Finally, For∣tune hath in a short time disposed of the Reigne of Ptolomy, making the Potentates of the others, and their successours, some of them to bee banished and miserable, involuing some in a manner in the like Disasters. Of Philip of Macedony. THe Cianeins fell in these miseries not so much through Fortune, and the iniustice, of their Neighbours, as by their owne rashnesse and the bad gouernment of their Common-weale, where most commonly the worst were in esteeme, and good men put to death for the spoiles of their Wealth, and by this meanes they are in a manner willingly fallen into these misfortunes, whereunto all men incline, I know not how apparently, yet they cannot resolue vpon any aduice, nor suddainly distrust: which some bruite Beasts doe.A good compa∣rison. For if sometimes they enter into Iealousie of Baites and Nets, if they haue seene any other perish, you shall hardly draw them to doe the like, hol∣ding the place for suspect, with a distrust of all things which haue any resemblance. In regard of men, when they heare some speake, and see others perish in like manner: Yet suddainly when any one vsing gra∣cious words, hath propounding a mutuall hope of correction, they run without any regard into the toiles, knowing certainly that neuer any man which had swallowed this kind of baite had escaped, such poli∣cies being an assured defeate to all men.
When as Philip had reduced the City vnder his obedience, he re∣ioyced as if he had brought some braue and honourable action to an end. And when hee had speedily giuen Succours to his Allies, and had ter∣rified all those which estranged themselues from him, and had clay∣med abundance of goods and bodies vnder the colour of Iustice, hee neuer thought of those things that were contrary, although they were manifest: giuing at the first Succours to the Allie, who had not beene wrong'd, and yet had broken the confederations with his Neighbours. And as finally he had confirmed the bruite of his cruelty towards his Friends, afflicting the Cities of Greece with great miseries, he had iust∣ly purchased the generall esteeme of a cruell man withall the Grecians. Thirdly, he wronged & reuiled the Embassadors of the said Cities,Embassadours wronged by Philip. who were come to free the Cianeins from that eminent danger: And being called by him, and conferring daily with him, they were present at things which he desired not. Moreouer, he incensed the Rhodiens against him: so as they could not endure to heare any mention of him. Finally, Fortune therein fa∣uours him openly. His Embassadour made an Oration vpon the The∣ater against the Rhodiens, commending the magnificence of Philip, who when he had by some meanes got possession of the City, he had done that grace vnto the people. This he did to reprehend the suspi∣cion and detraction of those which resisted him, and to manifest his resolution to the City. There came also some one from the Port vnto the Magistrate, aduertising him of the ruine of the Cianeins, and of the cruelty which Philip practised against them: So as when the Gouernour entring in the midst of the Embassadours Oration, spea∣king the said things, and declared the newes, the Rhodiens could not beleeue for the excesse of the fact. Philip hauing then preuaricated and dissembled, not so much against the Cianeins as against himselfe, began to be so transported and to stray from his duty, as hee gloried and brag'd in his actions as good, for the which hee should haue beene ashamed.The Rhodiens declared Ene∣mies to Philip. The Rhodiens from that day held Philip for an enemy, and prepared to that end. The Etoliens also conceiued a hatred against him for the same fact. When as late∣ly being reconciled, he had giuen forces to that Nation, there be∣ing then no cause of hatred nor spleene, (when as a little before the Etoliens, the Lysimacheins, Calsidoniens, and Cianeins were made Friends) hee hath in assailing first the Lysimacheins, distracted their City from the Alliance of the Etoliens: spoiling those of the Calsido∣niens, and thirdly the Cianeins, whilest that the Chiefe of the Etoli∣ens was resident in their City, hauing the superintendency of the pub∣licke affaires. Finally Prucias reioyced for that which had hapned beyond his de∣sires: But he was discontented that another should reape the reward for the taking of the Citie, and that there was fallen vnto him a desolate place naked of buildings, so as hee could not effect any thing. After he had assembled the greatest men of the Macedonians, he came to them with the King and Agathoclia, faining in the beginning that hee was
not able to speake for teares: And when he had wiped them often with his cloake, and caused them to cease, take saith he, carrying an infant, this which the dying Father hath deliuered into the armes of this Crea∣ture (shewing his sister) and hath left it vnto vs vpon our faith, do you vnderstand my masters of the Athenians? The loue of this infant is of small moment to procure his safetie, where as now the cause is in you and your hands. Tlepoleme in truth hath for a long time (as it is manifest to those which consider well of things) had greater desires then were fitting, and hath now resolued on the day and time when he will vsurpe the Towne. For this cause hee intreated that they would not belieue him, but those which being present knew sufficiently the Truth. This Speech being ended, he brings in Critolaus, who said he had seene the Altars and Sacrifices, prepared by the multitude, for the vsur∣pation of the Crowne. The which the Macedonians hearing, they were neither mooued with pittie, nor had any respect vnto that which was spoken. But in mocking and murmuring they iested among them∣selues, so as Prusias knew not how he got out of the Assembly; the which hapned in other Assemblies of the people. In the meane time many of the old Souldiers arriued by Sea, whereof some being kins∣men and other friends, they intreated them to assist them in this pre∣sent businesse, and that they should haue regard to the iniuries which had beene done them by dishonest and vnworthy men. Most of them were incensed to put the great men to death: for that they presumed that what should happen would be vnto their preiudice: Seeing that Tlepoleme tooke all things necessary that were sent to Alexandria. Fi∣nally, it was an aduancement to Agathocles to incense the Choller of many, and of Tlepoleme. They had put Danae his Mother in Law into custodie, being pull'd from the Temple of Ceres, and drawne thorough the Citty bare-hea∣ded, seeking by this meanes to shewe their hatred against Tlepome.Danae a pri∣soner. Wherefore the people being incensed spake no more in secret: For some in the night wrote their conceiued hatred in all places. Others in the open day going in Troupes, deliuered the hatred which they bare vnto the greatest. They which were with Agathocles, seeing the af∣faires, and hauing little hope in them, they thought of their retreate. But when as through their indiscretion they were ill prouided, they desisted from their Enterprize, and made a Register of the Conspi∣rators and of their Adherents in this commotion, to the end they might suddainly kill some of their Enemies, and seaze vpon others, and by this meanes vsurpe a Tyrannicall power. And as they practized these things, they accused Moeragena one of Tlepolemes guards, for that he aduertized all, and held his party in re∣gard of the familiaritie of Adee, Gouernour at that time of Bubaste, Agathocles suddainly giues charge to the Secretary Nicostrates, that he should informe dilligently of Moeragena, with all manner of torments. Moeragena being suddainly taken by Nicostrates, and led into a certaine secret place of the Hall, he answered at the first well, concerning the
accidents which had happened: But when hee confest nothing of the things which were spoken, he was stript. Some prepared the instru∣ments to Torture him, others holding Whips put off their Cloaks. At the same instant one comes running to Nicostrates, and after hee had whispered in his eare, he parts in hast. Nicostrates followes him sud∣dainly without speaking word, beating continually vpon his thigh. This was an vnhoped accident for Moeragena. For some held the Whips, but they had no Commandment to whip him, others had the instruments ready to torture his feet. When as Nicostrates was gone, they were all amazed, and looking one vpon another expected when he would returne. Soone after the assistants vanished one after one,Moeragena saues himselfe naked. and in the end Moegarena was abando∣ned. This done, he passeth the Hall contrary to all Hope, and being naked slipt into a certaine Tent of the Macedonians neere vnto the Hall. When by good fortune he had found the greatest there assembled, hee acquaints them with his disaster, and how he had escaped, as it were, by miracle. Some of them did not belieue him, others seeing him naked were forced to giue credite. Moeragena intreates them with eares, not onely to haue a care of his safety, but also of the Kings and their owne: And that their Death was manifest, if they did not make vse of the occasion, for that all the World was inflamed with Hatred, and there was not any man but was ready to put Agathocles to Death, saying that this Hatred increased Hourely, and that they must haue men to execute this Enterprize. The Macedonians hearing this Speech were incensed, and in the end obeying to Moeragena: They suddainly enter into the first Tents of the Macedonians, and then into those of the other Souldiers. They were ioyning and neere to the side of the Citie. When as many of them tooke vpon them the Charge, and that there was no need of any thing but of some one, to giue courage to them that came, and who should first execute the Enterprize, this attempt kindled like a flame. There were scarce foure houres spent, but that all men aswell Souldiers as Citizens, conspired to assaile Agathocles. There was a accident which hapned suddainly, which serued well to end this attempt. For when they had brought Letters to Agathocles, and that the Spies were retur∣ned, and the Letters sent by Tlepoleme, signified vnto the Army that he would be soone there, being likewise assured by the Spies that hee was neere, he fell into so great a transport in his iudgement, as hee neither did nor thought of any remedy against the eminent dangers, but following his accustomed course, hee went to drinke and banquet with others. And when Oenanthe was sad and sorrowfull,Oenanthe sad. shee goes vnto Ceres Temple. Where (when it was opened for a certaine Annuall Sacrifice) she prayes humbly, then she vseth Enchauntments towards the God∣desses, finally shee stayes at the Altar and rests there. Many Women were silent and obserued her heauinesse and affliction. The kinsfolkes of Polycrates, and some other Noble men comforted her, and being ignorant of the approaching misery. She on the other side crying out
with a loud voice, Come not neare me you Beasts: I know well you are ill affected towards vs, and that you require the Gods to send vs some ill Fortune: But I hope that with their good pleasure you shall taste of your owne Children. Hauing ended this Speech, shee commands the Executioner to suppresse them, and if they did not obey, to beate them. Taking this occasion they all depart, and in lifting vp their hands towards the Gods, they prayed that shee might make tryall of that which shee had wisht to the Company. But when the men had concluded the reuolte, and that in euery house the fury of the Women was added thereunto, their hatred grew double. When as the darkenesse of the Night was come, the whole City was fill'd with Mutiny, lights,A mutiny of the people. and running vp and downe. Some assembled at the Theater with cries, others encoura∣ged one another, and some ran to hide themselues in houses, and pla∣ces that were not suspected. And when the spacious places about the Hall; the place for running of Horses, and the Court about Dyonisi∣us Theater, were fill'd with a multitude of all sorts of men. Agathe∣cles hearing this, riseth vp being drunke, after that hee had emptied his gorge, and came vnto the King after hee had taken all his Kinsmen except Philon. After hee had vsed some Speech mouing to compassion, hee takes him by the hand, and leads him to the Armory of lauelings, seated betwixt the top and the wrestling place, and which bends by the way of the Theater: And after hee had opened two Doores, hee came to the third, accompanied with two or three of the Guard and his Kinsmen. These Doores were transparent and shut with double Barres. And when at that time all the Commons of the City were there assembled, so as not onely the places were full of men, but al∣so the passages and tops of houses, there grew a confused cry and how∣ling of Women and Children, with the men in this Mutiny, as well of them of Chalcedonia, as of Alexandria mingled together. A Sun-rising the cry was confused: yet the chief sound was, that they called for the King. The Macedonians rising first, seaze vpon the Ports of the Kings Treasure. But when they vnderstood in what part of the Pallace the King was, turning to the first Doores of the first Armory, they beate them downe. And when they were come vnto the second, they de∣mand the Infant with a great cry. Agathocles seeing what would befall him, intreates the Guard to intercede for him to the Mace∣donians, letting them vnderstand, that hee would relinquish the go∣uernment of the Infant, with his power and dignity, and more∣ouer all the gouernment: intreating them to bee so fauourable vnto him, as to saue his life, affoording him necessary Victuals and the like, returning vnto his ancient and former course of life, and that hee would not (nay he could not) offer offence or wrong vnto any man whatsoeuer. None of the Guards pittying him in his distresse, wold obey him, onely Aristomenes vndertooke the charge, who was after∣wards
Gouernour of the publicke affaires. He was an Acarnanian, and as he was aduanced in yeares, hauing the superintendency of the af∣faires, hee was held a good Gouernour to the King and royall Pal∣lace: And in the meane time he had respect to the prosperity of Aga∣thocles: for he was the first who calling vnto him Agathocles, hee a∣lone had a Crowne of Gold by all the assistants: the which they vsu∣ally doe onely to Kings. Finally, hee was the first that durst carry a Ring with Agathocles Image. And when hee had a Daughter by his Wife, hee called her Agathoclea. But we haue spoken sufficient∣ly of this Subiect. Hee therefore hauing taken charge of Agathocles commandment, and going forth at a Posterne, he came vnto the Macedonians. When he had vsed some little speech, and declared the Will of Agathocles, the Macedonians sought to kill him▪ and when as many put forth their hands to defend him, they enquired the Opinion of the rest, which being vnderstood, he returned to Agathocles, hauing charge to come backe with the King, or else to returne no more. The Ma∣cedonians hauing giuen this Answer, sent backe Aristomenes, and assailing the second Doore, they vnhang it. Wherefore they which were with Agathocles,Agthoclea shewes her Papps vnto the Macedonians. seeing the violence of the Macedonians, as well by their actions as by their answere, comming first to the Doore, lif∣ting vp their suppliant hands: Agathoclea likewise shewed the Papps wherewith shee sayd shee had giuen the King sucke, intreating the Macedonians with a mournefull and miserable voice, onely to saue her life. And when as by the great lamentations of her Fortune shee had preuailed nothing, in the end they draw forth the Infant with his Guards. The Macedonians presently set the King on Horse-backe, and lead him to the Theater. Assoone as hee was discouered, they stay his Horse with great clamors and ioy, and taking him downe they set him in a royall Chaire. In the meane time the Commons partly re∣ioyce, and were partly sad. They reioyced for the comming of the Infant: againe, they were sad and grieued for that they which were the Offendors, had not beene taken and punished accordingly. Wher∣fore crying continually, they required that they might bee brought and exemplarily punished by an Ignominious and reproachfull Death, as the Authors of all their miseries and troubles. But when the Day was farre spent, the Mutiny of the people could not be pacified by a∣ny meanes. Sosibius the Sonne of Sosibius, then Captaine of the Guard, hauing the principall charge of the Kings affaires, seeing that the Mutiny of the people could not bee pacified, and the Infant grew sad through the insolency and nouelty of the present affaires, and the trouble of the Commons, hee demanded of him if hee would not deliuer vnto the people those which had offended against him or his Mother. And when hee consented, hee commanded the Guards to make the Kings will knowne: And then they tooke the Infant in his Chaire, and car∣ryed him to his owne house.
But when the Kings pleasure was divulged and made knowne by the Guards, all the place was full of ioy and exclamations. They which were with Agathocles and Agathoclea, retired presently to their hou∣ses. The Guards presently forced some of them, and others were thrust on by the people, to seeke them out and kill them. Whereof the beginning was by an accident. One of the Guard, and a follower to Agathocles named Phylon, be∣ing yet full with Drinke, came forth into the place. Who when hee saw the Mutiny of the people, hee sayd vnto the assistants, that if euer Agathocles came forth againe as hee had done, they would repent it. They which heard him, some blamed him, others thrust him, and when hee offred to defend himselfe, some suddainly teare his Cloake, others slew him miserably with their Iauelings.Phylon slaine. Whilest they drag'd him about the place yet breathing, and that the Com∣mons had tasted the fury of striking, they expect hourely to haue the rest brought. Soone after Agathocles was the first, beeing bound and manna∣cled: who going on was suddainly thrust thorough by some one,Agathocles slaine. wherein hee performed the part of a Friend, and not of an Enemy. For by this meanes they preuent his worthy punishment. They brought with him Nicon and Agathoclea naked with her Sisters, and consequently all their Parentage: Finally, they drawe Oenanthe out of the Temple,Nicon and Aga∣thoclea slaine. and bring her on horse-backe naked vnto the place: When all these were deliuered vnto the Commons, some bite them, others pricke them, and some pull out their eyes and dis∣member them, vntill they were maimed. The Egyptians are wonderfull cruell in their fury.The Egyptians cruell. At the same time some Virgins which had beene bred vp with Arcinoe, hearing Sirene crying out that Philammon Trite had beene present at the mur∣ther of the Queene, they fall vppon his house, and kill him with Stones and Staues,The cruelty of Virgins. smothering his young Sonne. Finally, they drag his Wife into the place and kill her. This was the end of Aga∣thocles and Agathoclea with their Kinsfolkes. I am not ignorant what Fables and colours some Historiographers vse in these actions, to a∣maze the Readers with a copious aduancement of words, and other∣wise then the truth containes. Some referre this accident to Fortune, shewing how inconstant and ineuitable shee is: seeking to bring Causes and Similitudes of actions. It is true that in the pursuite of this Worke I had resolued to helpe my selfe with the sayd actions, for that this Agathocies had nothing ho∣nourable for his courage and prowesse in the Warre, neither any happy mannaging of affaires which ought to bee desired; Neither did hee vnderstand the cunning and policy of a Courtier, in the which Sosybis and many others being very well instructed, had vsur∣ped Kingdomes: The which notwithstanding happened vnto this man. Hee grew great by chance, for that Philopater was not able to gouerne the Realme. Hauing therefore gotten this occasion to come vnto greatnesse,
when as after his Death hee had a fit opportunity offred to maintaine his power, yet hee lost both life and goods faintly and basely, being slaine within a short time.Agathocles and Denis Sicilians. Wherefore it is not fitting, that in the relation of such things they should adde words: especially when they speake of such as Agathocles and Denis Sicilians, with some others, which had beene famous and renowned for their actions. One of them in truth came of a base extraction: But as Tymeus cauells, Agathocles being a Potter, he came in his younger yeares to Sarra∣gosse. They were eyther of them in their times Tyrants of Sarra∣gosse: of that City I say, which at that time was great in autho∣rity, and abounding in riches: And afterwards they were Kings of all Sicily, and enioyed some parts of Italy. In regard of Agathocles, hee died not in assailing Affricke, but af∣ter this manner with a desire to Reigne.The saying of Scipio. And therefore they say of Publius Scipio, who first forced Carthage, that when they de∣manded of him what men hee held ablest to vndertake an Enter∣prize, and of great discretion and courage, hee answered Aga∣thocles and Denis. Wee must in truth when the proposition is made, hold the Reader in suspence and doubt, and relate their fortune and humane accidents, in adding words in manner of Doctrine: In regard of the sayd things, I am not of Opinion it should bee done. For this cause wee reiect in this passage the Writers of Agathocles with their many words, for that those horrible Narrations and feare∣full euents, which haue nothing but a conceite worthy to hold the Reader in suspence. Finally, it is not onely vnprofitable to treate of them with a long discourse, but also their vehemency in the end brings tediousnesse and trouble. There are two ends, namely, profit and pleasure:Two ends in Histories. whereunto they must haue regard which will ruminate any thing either of hearing or sight. And for that profit belongs chiefly to the narration of an Hi∣story, it is most necessary and conuenient, that this kind of ad∣ding of words vnto fearefull accidents, should turne from these two ends. What is hee that would willingly follow vnexpected accidents, and without reason? No man reioyceth continual∣ly, eyther for the seeing or hearing of things which are out of Nature and the common sence of men: But in the beginning wee are exceeding ioyfull and glad to see some, and to heare o∣thers, to the end wee may rightly vnderstand and know after what manner that is done which seemes vnto euery one very strange and impossible. When wee once begin to know them, no man takes any delight or pleasure to stay vpon things which are strange from the course of Nature, nor will haue any desire to fall often vpon the same sub∣iect. Wherefore the Narration must drawe a desire of imitation where hee may delight. And if they adde words to some miserable accidens besides these ends, they are more fitting for a Tragedy then a History.
Peraduenture you must pardon those which doe not consider things which are common to Nature and the World: But they hold the For∣tunes of their Ancestors great and wonderfull, whereon falling by Fortune in Reading or Hearing them from others, they settle their af∣fections. Wherefore they know not, that they vse more speech of such things then is needefull, which are neither new, hauing beene spoken formerly by o∣thers, neither can they profite nor content. The remainder is wanting.
A PARCELL OF the Sixteenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS. Of the Battaile giuen at Sea betwixt Philip and King Attalus. PHilip was much troubled, seeing many things succcede vnfortunately in his siege, and withall that the Enemies were in the Hauen with a good number of couered Vessells, neither could hee well resolue what to do. And when as the present oc∣casions depriued him of all meanes of choice, in the end hee weighed Anchor, and set Saile contrary vnto the Enemies Hope. For Attalus and his Company ex∣pected that he should grow obstinate at the Siege, considering the pre∣paration which he had of Engines of Battery. Philip made all haste to saile away, imagining that hee might get before them, and make a safe retreate vnto Samos along the shore: Yet hee was deceiued in his conceite. For when as Attalus and Theophiliscus saw that hee had weighed Anchor, they suddainly resolued and set Saile, obseruing no order,Attalus char∣geth Philips Army at Sea. for that they conceiued that Philip would haue perseuered in his Enterprize. Yet they charge him making great speed with their Oares: So as Attalus fell vpon the right wing which got before, and Theophiliscus vpon the left. Philip seeing himselfe thus pestred, and suddainly surprized, hee
gaue the signe of the Battaile to them of the right wing, commanding them to turne their prowes against the Enemies, and to charge them resolutely: Then he retired to the smaller Ilands, which were in the mid-way with the lighter Vessels,The number of Philips ships and of his Ene∣mies. expecting the end of the Battaile. The number of Ships of Warre which Philip had, were fifty three co∣uer'd Vessels, with a hundred and fifty Foists and Galleyes vncouered. In regard of the Vessels remaining at Samos, hee could not arme them. Those of the Enemies were in number threescore Vessels couered, with those of Constantinople: with the which there were nine Galliots and three Galleyes. When as Attalus Ships began the fight, presently they that were neare, charge one another without command. Attalus fell vpon a Ves∣sell with eight Oares, crushing it in such sort as it tooke water: and when as they which were vpon the hatches, had defended themselues long, in the end hee sunke it. On the other side Philips Galley of ten Oares, which was the Admirall, was by chance taken by the Enemies: For when as a Galliot sayl'd against it, it bruised it much in the midst of the Bulke, ioyning vnto it behind at the poope, to the which it remain'd grapled, for that the Pylot could not stay its violence. So as when this Vessell stucke close vnto her, she was much hindred, nei∣ther could they gouerne nor turne her. In the meane time two Quin∣queremes charge her, and bruising her in two places, sinke her with the Souldiers. Among the which was Democrites, Captaine Generall at Sea for Philip. At the same instant Dionysodorus and Dynocrates bre∣thren (who were Commanders of the Army vnder Attalus) giuing a charge,Democrates Captaine Ge∣nerall to Philip, sunkt. found themselues in great danger in the fight: So as Dynocra∣tes gaue charge to a Vessel with seuen Oares, and Dionisodorus to one of eight. Dynocrates was broken aboue water, and that of the Enemy vnder the water, yet he could not free himselfe from them, although hee had often attempted it in sawing. Wherefore when as the Macedonians defended themselues valiantly, he was in danger to be taken. But for that Attalus came to succour him, charging the Enemy, and parting the two ships which were grapled, Dynocrates saued himselfe by good fortune. In regard of the Enemies, they were all slaine fighting valiantly: so as the Vessell being destitute of Souldiers, was taken by Attalus. And when as Dionisodo∣rus sayl'd with great swiftnesse to fight, hee could not ouertake any, and passing through the Enemies he had the Pallisadoe on the right side disarmed, and the Beames broken which carried the Tower. This happening he was inuested round by the Enemy with great noise and cries. All the Marriners perisht with the Ship, and Dionisodorus swum away with two others vnto a Galliot which came to succour him. In regard of the other Vessels the danger was equall: For as the number of Philips Foists was greater, so was that of Attalus in couer'd Vessels. Finally, the Combat was so carried vpon Philips right Wing, as the Victory inclined to neither. It is true that Attalus was in better hope for the future. The Rhodiens in the beginning of the party separated themselues
from the Enemies, who hauing a great aduantage by the lightnesse of their Vessels, fought against the Macedonians making the Reare-ward. And when in the beginning they fell to flight, they carried away all their defences, charging them behinde and in poope. But when as Philips Vessels began to turne head altogether, giuing aide to those which were in danger, and that the Reare of the Rhodiens were ioy∣ned to Theophiliscus: then they charged with great fury, encouraging one another with great shouts and Trumpets. And if the Macedonians had not mingled their Foists among their couered Vessels, the Battaile had beene soone decided: for they tooke from the Rhodien ships all commodity in diuers sorts: For that when as by either side the order was broke, they were all mingled. Wherefore they could not easily enlarge themselues, nor turne their Vessels, nor assist themselues with those meanes whereof they were best prouided, for that the Foists did continually charge them, sometimes falling vpon the Pllisadoe, so as they could make no vse of their Rowers, and sometimes vpon the prow and poope, to depriue them of their Pylot and Oares. And when as they fought in a direct line, they inuented a stratagem: for abating the prowes they made their charge fruitlesse, breaking the Enemies Ves∣sels vnder water: To preuent the which they could finde no remedy. It is true, this happens seldome for that all auoided the encounter, for that the Macedonians fought valiantly hand to hand, and most common∣ly in passing they razed the Pallisadoe, making it vnprofitable. Then suddainly casting about, they assailed those that were in poope: and likewise giuing charge to those which shewed themselues vpon the flankes, or which turned aside, they brake some, and tooke the Equi∣page from others: so as fighting after this manner, they had sunke di∣uers of the Enemies Vessels. There were three excellent Quinqueremes of the Rhodiens in dan∣ger: whereof the Admirall was one, in the which Theophiliscus com∣manded: Then that whereof Philostrates was Captaine, and the the third was gouerned by Antolice: in the which Nycostrates remained. It hap∣ned that shee gaue a charge to one of the Enemies Vessels, where she left her spurre, so as it sunke with the Souldiers: And Antolice's Com∣pany being inuested, for that they tooke water at the prowe, defended themselues valiantly: But Antolice being wounded fell into the Sea with his Armes and died, the rest fighting with great courage. At what time Theophiliscus comming to succour them with three Quinqueremes, he could not saue the ship being full of water After that he had broken two of the Enemies Vessels, and cast the Souldiers into the Sea, hee lost the greatest part of his men fighting resolutely, for that he was suddainly inuested by many fregats and co∣uerd Vessels. It was hardly in his power to saue his ship, being woun∣ded in three places: for that hee had aduentured himselfe too boldly: But Philostrates came to succour him, vndertaking the apparent dan∣ger with great courage. But when hee was ioyned vnto these Vessels, he rechargeth the Enemy furiously againe: where he was seene weake of body by reason of his wounds, but much more excellent and con∣stant
in courage then before. It happened that there were two Com∣bats at Sea very farre one from another: For Philips right Wing coa∣sting still along the shore, neuer abandoned the Coast of Asia, but the left Wing succouring the Reare-ward, had fought with the Rho∣diens, for that they were not farre from Chios. When as Attalus seemed to haue gloriously Vanquished Philips right Wing, and that hee approached neere vnto the Iland, where he Anchored, expecting the end and conclusion of the Battaile, he perceiued one of his Quin∣queremes in danger to be sunke by a shippe of the Enemles, and made hast to succour it with two other of his Quinqueremes. When as the E∣nemies shippes turned away to recouer Land, the more hee prest desiring to take it. The which Philip perceiuing, that Attalus stray∣ed too boldly and aduenturously from his Company, hee made hast being accompanied with foure Quinqueremes, three Gallotts, and the neerest Frigats, hoping hee should be able to take it, as it fortu∣nately happened; forcing him to get vnto the neerest shore in great distresse. Then leauing his Vessell there, hee fled on foote with the Sea men, to saue himselfe in Erythee.Erythee a town in Asia. Wherefore Philip recouered the shp and the Kings plate. They which were with Attalus in this great danger, bethought themselues of a pollicy in Warre, and set the richest of the Kings plate vpon the Hatches.The Pollicy of Attalus his Souldiers. Wherefore the first of the Macedonians approa∣ching with their Frigats, and seeing great store of plate with a purple Robe, and other rich furniture lying there, they gaue ouer the pur∣suite, and attended the spoile, so as Attalus retired vnto the Port of Erythree without any disturbance. And although that Philip were absolutely the weaker in this Battaile at Sea, yet he returned very am∣bitious and proud through Attalus mis-fortune, making great haste to come vnto his Company. Where after he had drawne and gathered together all his Vessells, he perswaded them to be of good Courage and Resolution, seeing hee had wonne the Battaile. And in trueth, such was the opinion of men, as if Attalus had beene dead in lying, seeing that Philip returned, bringing the royall Vessell prisoner. Dyonisodorus considering what was become of the King, gathe∣red the Vessels together and sounded a rereate: after which he retired safely to the Porst of Asia. At the same time the Macedonians, who fought against the Rho∣diens, hauing beene well beaten, they retired out of danger: For e∣uery ship got him away vnder colour to giue succours to those that were in danger and distresse. In regard of the Rhodiens they retired to the Port of Chios, hauing taken some of the shippes, and broken patt of their spurs.The losse of ships which Philip made▪ There was sunke in this Battaile at Sea which Philip had against Attalus, the Gallies of ten Oares, nine Oares, seauen Oares, and sixe Oares, and moreouer ten Vessells couered, three Galliots, and fiue and twenty Foists, withall the Marriners. And in that which was against the Rhodiens, ten couered Vessells, and forty Foists: and there were two Quadriremes, and seauen Foists taken with the Mar∣riners. In regard of that of Attalus, one Galliot with two Quinqueremes
were sunke, with the royall Skiffe. And of the Rhodiens two Quin∣queremes and Galleyes, but there was nothing taken. As for the losse of men, there died three score Rhodiens, and about three score and ten of Attalus men, and of the Macedonians vnder Philip, to the number of three thousand, and aboue sixe thousand Marriners: and there were taken aliue, as well Allies as Macedonians two thousand, and seuen hundred Egyptians. Such was the end of the Battaile at Sea neare vnto Chios. Philip attributed the Victory vnto himselfe for two principall cau∣ses:The causes why Philip challen∣ges the Victory to himselfe. First for that hee had forced Attalus to flye to Land, and had ta∣ken the royall Vessell: the other for that hee anchored in the place which they call Argennon, among the Enemies, wrackes, and that the next Day hee carryed himselfe as a Conquerour, gathering toge∣ther the Reliques of the fight, and drawing together the Bodies of such as might be knowne, to the end hee might confirme this Opini∣on. But the Rhodiens with Dyonisodrus made him soone after con∣fesse that it was not true, so as hee did not hold himselfe to haue had the Victory: For the next day the King being busied about these things, they set sayle against him, the one being aduertised of the o∣ther: and when (after they had put their ships in Front) no man durst present himselfe, they retired to Chios. But Philip who had neuer before at one time lost so many men, nor such, carryed his misfortune impatiently, and was in a manner desperate, although hee laboured by all meanes to hide his conceite, matters seeming vnsupportable: for besides many other occasions, the misfortunes which happened after the Battaile, had put all those that were present in feare. Beleeue mee, that after so great a slaughter of men, all the Countrey where the Combate was fought, was full of Carkases, blood, Armes, and the wrackes of Ships. And the daies following you might haue seene the shoare full of all these things eaped together. So as it was not onely displeasing vnto him, but to all the Macedonians. In regard of Theophiliscus, hauing suruiued a day, and written into the Countrey of the successe of the Combate at Sea, and had appoin∣ted Cleoneus to command the Army in his place, hee dyed of the wounds hee had receiued:The death of Theophiliscus. who had shewed himselfe a valiant man in danger, and who by the prouidence of his Councell, was worthy to haue his Name preserued in memory. For if hee had not giuen aduice to follow Philip, all the rest had neglected the opportunity of the Victory, being amazed at his courage: so as in beginning of the fight hee forced his Citizens to follow the occasions of the time. Hee likewise perswaded Attalus not to temporize, nor to waste time in the preparation of things concerning the Warre: But contrari∣wise to fight valiantly, and to vndergoe the present danger. Where∣fore the Rhodiens haue with good reason, after his death done him such honours, as the liuing and those that were present were not onely incited to fight valiantly for their Countrey, but also the posterity. What doe wee then see in this violence? No other thing but
Nature. It oftentimes falls out that many vpon a bare shew of hope, desire impossible things, vanquishing euery mans hope with their co∣uetousnesse: and when they haue once begun, they cannot diuert their fancies: for that they haue their vnderstanding blinded and deceiued with the impossibility of their attempts, and the discontent of the acci∣dents. When as Philip had in vaine giuen some assaul to a small Towne, for that it was well fortified, hee retired, after he had rui∣ned some places with the whole Countrey. Being gone from thence, he planted his Campe about Prinasse,Prinasse besie∣ged by Philip. and besieged it by myning. Where when he lost his time, for that the place was stony, he vsed this inuention: hee causeth a great noise to be made by day in the Mynes, as if he laboured to ouerthrow the Walls, causing in the night great store of earth to be brought and to be laid at the entry of the Mynes, to the end he might terrifie the Inhabitants by a view of so great a digging in the ground. It is true that at the first the Pri∣nasseins were constant and couragious: but when as Philip had signifi∣ed vnto them that their Wall was vndermined the length of the third part of a Furlong, and had demanded of them if they would deliuer the City and saue their liues, or perish with it, the foundations be∣ing burnt, then giuing credit vnto his words, they presently deli∣uered it. A Parcell of the City of the Iasseens. THe City of the Iasseens is scituated in Asia vpon the Gulfe ioyning to Neptune of Milesia,The Gulfe of Neptune. and called of the Myndiens. According to the aduice of many, it takes its name from the Cities of the Vargylietes, which are built vpon the backe part. They say that in the begin∣ning they were peopled by Argines: and that after∣wards the Milesiens predecessors being brought in, and the Children of Neleus, they built the City of Myletum,The City of Miletum built. after their defeate in the Warres of Carya. This City hath ten Furlongs in circuite. The com∣mon bruite is, and they beleeue it among the Vargylietes,The Image of Diana. that although the statue of Diana Cindiades be vncouered, yet it endures no fogs nor raine, like vnto that of Vesta among the Iasseens: the which some Histo∣riographers haue auerr'd. For my part, I know not how I contradict and blame boldly in all this treaty this aduice of Historiographers. In truth they seeme to mee wholy to fauour of their Childishnesse, who
without consideration comprehend not onely idle and sottish things, but those which are impossible. For if any one should say that some body may bee so illuminated and transparent, as he shall make no sha∣dow, this would shew a transported Iudgement, as Theopompus hath done, saying that they which enter into the Temple of Iupiter in Ar∣cadia, make no shadow. Whereunto that is conformable which is now spoken. Wherefore wee must pardon some Historiographers in all things which preserue the deuotion of the people towards the Gods, who relate monstrous things, but in that which exceeds this course, they are not to be pardoned. Peraduenture in euery thing there is a different quality to describe them, yea, sometimes impossible: where∣fore we must pardon if any one through ignorance doth stray a little from the truth: and according to my iudgement reproue all that which exceeds reason. A Parcell of Publius Scipio. PVblius Scipio being soone after returned from Affricke When as the expectation of the people was conformable to the greatnesse of his actions, it fell out that they con∣ceiued a great loue and affection towards him: The which was not without cause. For whereas they feared neuer to chase Hannibal out of Italy, nor to free themselues nor their Allies from the eminent danger: they seemed then certainly not onely to bee deliuered from all feare and misery, but also to domineere ouer their Enemies: wherefore they were confounded with ioy. When he tri∣umphed▪ being moreouer by the effects of things which were brought in, aduertised of the precedent dangers, they were toucht with an ex∣ceeding loue as well to the Gods, as to the Author of so great an alte∣ration. Syphax King of the Masaisylins was led in triumph through the Ci∣ty with the other Prisoners,Syphax King of the Masaisylins. who soone after died in Prison. These things thus perfromed, the Romans made continuall Combats for ma∣ny Dayes, and celebrated Feasts in their assemblies, hauing where∣withall to satisfie it by the liberality and bounty of Scipio. Many at∣tempt great Warres brauely, and striue with a certaine vehemency to augment a Common-wealth: But it is a rare thing to bring them to the propounded end, and to accomplish by reason and industry, if For∣tune sometime opposeth that which wants courage and speedy action. Wherefore some may with reason blame the sloth of Attalus and of
the Rhodiens, in commending the royall courage of Philip, and his constancy in his enterprize: not that his conceite is alwayes worthy of Commendation but so farre as it concernes his present Enterprize and attempt. I propound this distinction to the end no man should suspect vs of contradiction: for that (as we haue heretofore) commended and blamed Philip, so now I doe the contrary. They must vnderstand that in the beginning of this Worke I haue so made my distinction, saying that it was necessary sometimes to commend and blame the same persons,A man may be commended and blamed ac∣cording to the diuersity of his Actions. for that moments and euents of things doe many times change the hearts of men, when they incline to better or worse. It happens likewise sometimes, that men by Nature indeauour things which are reasonable, and sometimes the contrary: whereof in my Opinion the one happened now to Philip. When hee was inflamed for the prece∣dent losses, shewing more choller and rage then reason, hee accom∣modated himselfe to the present occasions, with a constant and admi∣rable courage, and hath by this course enioyed those things which fol∣lowed, in aduancing himselfe against the Rhodiens and Attalus. I thought good to deliuer this, for that some giue ouer their enterpri∣zes in leauing their first heate, like vnto bad and lazy runners: Some likewise vanquish their Enemies in this onely, that they are constant in their enterprizes. Of the Cities of Abydos and Sestes Maritine and opposite. I Hold it lost time to vse any long discourse of the commo∣dities of the Cities of Abydos and Sestes: for that matters of small moment are knowne to all, by reason of the ordi∣nary frequenting of the places: yet I doe not thinke for the present that a summary aduertisment to the Reader, would bee vnprofitable in regard of them. You must vnderstand that the things which are now to be spoken of the sayd Cities) are not so much drawne from their scituation, as from their opposition and confe∣rence. Whereas the Nauigation of the Sea, which some call by the name of Ocean, others Attlantique, is not passable, but at the streights which are at the Pillars of Hercules: Neither can they in our Sea, in the Propontis and Pontus, vnlesse it be made by the streight betwixt Aby∣dos and Sestes.Of the profit of Abydos and Sestes. As Fortune hath prepared two Gulfes with some rea∣son, it falls out that the streight of the Pillars of Hercules is broader then that of Hellesponte: For it is of three score Furlongs, and that of Abydos onely of two. The which wee may coniecture hath beene
made for a greater spaciousnesse of the exteriour Sea,A comparison of the streight of Abydos with that of Gibel∣tar. then ours. That of Abydos is more commodious then that of the Pillars of Her∣cules. For the first is inhabited on either side, and in manner of a Port, for the mutuall communication of Traffique, and hath in some place a Bridge for those which passe on foote from one firme land to another. They also salie continually on the other side. In regard of that of the Pillars of Hercules, it is little frequented, for that the people which inhabite some in Affricke, some in Europe, haue little commerce to∣gether: and this exteriour Sea is little frequented and tryed. The City of the AbydeinsThe City of the Abydeins. is environed on either side with the farthest bounds of Europe: hauing a Port from whence Sailors with what wind soeuer, may be seene. But it is not possible for any man to come vnto the City, being without this ingulfement of the Sea to the Port, by reason of the swiftnesse and vehemence of the current. Another Parcell of Philip of Macedon. YEt when as Philip had fortified one part with Pallisa∣does,The Abydeins besieged by Philp and cast a Ditch about the other, he besieged the Abydeins by Sea and Land. In regard of the meanes of their defence, it was not admirable, neither for the greatnesse of the preparation, nor for the diuersity of in∣uentions, which are declared in the same worke, by the which the besiegers and besieged doe vsually practise and surprize one another by policies: But for the good directions and vallour of the be∣sieged, it is worthy of memory, if euer any were, and which ought to come vnto posterity. In the beginning the Inhabitants of Abydos rely∣ing in themselues, maintained the attempts of Philip valiantly: and as for his Engines set vp at Sea, they brake some with casting of Stones, and they burnt others: so as the Enemies could hardly saue their Ves∣sels from this danger: In regard of those at Land, for time they made a valiant resistance, neuer despairing to obtaine the Victory against their Enemies. But when as the Fort which stood without the Wall had beene ouerthrowne by Mynes, and that the Macedonians were after∣wards come vnto the Wall which they had built within, in the end they sent Iphias and Pantacnote in Embassie, to yeeld the City vnto Philip, but vpon condition that hee should suffer the Souldiers of the Rhodiens and Attalus to depart, and their Bodies free, to saue themselues where they thought good with their Apparrell. And when as
Philip had giuen them charge to submit themselues vnto his will, or to fight it our brauely, the Embassadours retired.The course which the Aby∣deins take in de∣spaire. This being heard, the Abydeins assemble the people, and consult in despaire of their necessities. First of all they decree to giue liberty to their Slaues, to the end they might willingly become Companions in the Combat: And consequently drawe all their Wiues into Diana's Temple: and the Children with their Nurses into the Schooles, and finally their Gold and Siluer into the Market place, and the richest apparrell into the Rhodiens Galley, and that of the Cyziceneins. When they had decreed these things, and had with one accord ex∣ecuted the resolution, they make another assembly, choosing fifty of the most ancient, and men of credite, being strong and able to ex∣ecute the decree, and make them sweare in the presence of all the Ci∣tizens, that if they saw the Wall taken by the Enemy, they should then kill their Wiues and Children, and set fire of the sayd Galleyes, casting (according to their Oath) the Gold and Siluer into the Sea. Finally, they call their Prelates, who coniure them all to van∣quish their Enemies, or to dye fighting for their Countrey. This done, after they had sacrificed, they force their Prelates, and their Wiues to make execrations vpon the Sacrifices of the said things. These things thus confirmed, they did not countermine aginst the E∣nemies Mynes, resoluing that if the Wall sell, they would stand vp∣on the ruines, fighting to the death. Wherefore some one may with reason say, that the folly of the Phocenses and the ioy of the Acarna∣nians, hath beene vanquished by the courage of the Abydeins. The Phocenses seeme to haue decreed the like for their Kinsfolkes, although they were not wholly in despaire of the Victory, for they were to fight in field with the Thessalians. The Acarnanians fore-seeing the attempts of the Etoliens, resolued the same in their eminent danger, whereof wee haue formerly spoken in particular. The Abydeins being shut vp, and in a manner despe∣rate of their safety, desired rather by a common consent to try this Fortune with their Wiues and Children, then liuing to deliuer them into their Enemies hands. For which reason wee may blame For∣tune for the ruine of the Abydeins: Seeing that hauing compassion of the calamities of the former, shee hath suddainly relieued them▪ yeelding vnto the desperate hope and safety: whereas contrariwise shee hath beene incensed against the Abydeins. The men were slaine and the City taken: their Children with their Wiues fell into their Enemies hands: For after the fall of the Wall, planting them∣selues vpon the ruines, according to their Oath, they fought with such great courage, as when as Philip had sent supplies vnto the Macedonians at the assault vntill Night, hee was in the end forced to take breath, and to despaire of his attempt. The Abydeins did not onely fight with great confidence, standing vpon the dead bodies in danger, and with resolution with their Swords and Iauelings: But ha∣uing no meanes to vse them, they cast themselues with fury vpon the Ma∣cedonians, ouerthrowing some with their armes, charging others alwaies
with the stockes of their broken Iauelings: and repulsing them, thrust∣ing directly at their Faces and other naked parts.The prowesse of the Abydeins. Night being come, and the Combat ceasing, Glaucides and Theognite assembling some few of the ancient, changed (for the hope of their priuate safeties) that seuere and noble vow of the Citizens, in regard of the great number that had beene slaine at the Wall, and for that the rest were weakned with toile and wounds. Wherefore they resolued to abandon their Wiues and Children to Captiuity, and at the breake of day to send their Priests and Wiues, with their Diadems and head-bands to Philip, to the end that intreating him vpon their knees, they might deliuer him the City. At the same time King Attalus being aduertised of the Siege of the Abydeins, sailes by the Egean Sea to Tenedos. In like manner Marcus Emilius the younger a Roman, came by Sea to Abydos. For when the Romans had beene truely aduertised of the Siege of Abydos, and would expostulate with Philip according to their charge, and to vnderstand the cause why hee assailed the Kings,Marcus Emilius snt to Philip. they sent this Emilius vnto him. Who when he had audience of Philip in Abydos, he let him vnderstand that the Senate admonished him, not to make Warre against any Gre∣cians, nor to meddle with the affaires of Ptolomy: And whereas hee had done outrage to the Rhodiens and Attalus, he should make a pro∣mise to giue them satisfaction: in doing which hee should remaine in peace, but if he would not obey, he should prepare to haue Warre with the Romans. When as Philip laboured to let him vnderstand that the Rhodiens had beene the first Assailants, Marcus interrupting him said; What haue the Athenians? Cianeins, and Abydeins done? which of them hath first assailed you? The King studying what to answere to these three demands,The braue an∣swere of Philip to Marcus Emi∣lius. told him that hee pardoned his arrogancy in words, for that first he was young and without experience: Secondly, that he was the best man amongst them, as in truth he was. The Ro∣mans (sayd he) haue no reason to breake the Accords, nor to make Warre against mee: but if they did, he would defend his owne valiant∣ly and inuocate the Gods for aide. This Speech being ended, they parted one from the other. Philip hauing gotten the City of the Abeydeins, he presently tooke all the Goods which had beene carryed away by them.The cruelty of the Abydeins to themselues. When he saw the people and their fury, who slew, burnt, and strangled themselues, their Wiues, and Children, casting them into Wells, and hanging them in their houses, hee was amazed: And being discontented at that which was done, he let them know that he gaue them three dayes re∣spite that would hang or kill themselues. But the Abydeins preuen∣ting him (according to their first resolution) could not suffer any one of those to liue, which were not yet bound nor tied to this kind of ne∣cessity, holding themselues in not doing it, for Traytors towards those which had fought, and were dead for their Countrey. All the rest without delay dyed according to their Races.
Of Philopomene and the deeds of the Acheins. ANd when as Philopomene had considered the distances of of all the Cities, and that they might come to Tegee by one way, hee wrote Letters to all the Cities, and sends them to those which were farthest off, and diuides them in such sort, as euery City had not onely those which were directed vnto it,The forme of Philopomenes Letters to the Cities. but also those for other Cities lying vpon the same way. Hee hath written to the Magistrates in these termes: When you shall haue receiued these Letters, vse all diligence, that such as are able to beare Armes, may assemble in the Market place, euery man furnished with fiue Dayes victuals, and seuenteene Sous, and sixeteene Deniers in Money. And when they shall be all assembled, lead them to the next City: where being arriued, deliuer the Letters to the Magistrate, and performe the contents. In the which was contained the charge which had bin giuen to the former, only the name was al∣tred, but he place was not named whither the Voyage was intended. This course being continued, no man knew to what end nor why this preparation was made, nor whither they went out of the next Ci∣ty. All being vncertaine and receiuing one another they marcht on. But for that the Cities which were beyond, had not an equall distance from Tegee, hee did not send Letters to them all at the same time, but particularly according to their order: so as vnknowne to the Inha∣bitants, and to those which arriued, what should succeed, all the Acheins entred in Armes by all the Gates. Hee had without doubt resolued these things in his iudgement, by a Military stratagem, for for the multitude of Scouts and Spies which the Tyrant had. The which the Tyrant had. The same day that the multitude of the A∣cheins should assemble, hee sent choise men, who in the Night should passe the Selasia: and at the breake of day runne into the Countrey of Lacedemon. But if the Mercenaries by encounter did any way trouble them, he giues them charge to recouer Scotite, o∣beying Didascolonde the Candiot in all things. For hee had giuen him the charge of all this enterprize. These men went resolutely to the place appointed. And when as Philopomene had commanded the Acheins o suppe earely, hee goes with his Army out of Tegee: and making good vse of the Night in his Voyage, hee leads his Army to the place appointed neare vnto Scotite, the mid-way betwixt
Tegee and Lacedemon. The Souldiers of Pelene the day following ran speedily as it is their custome,A sally out of Pelene vpon the Acheins. and assailed the Enemy suddainly, who were aduertised of their comming by their Scouts. And when the Acheins (according to the Commandment they had receiued) retired, they pursued them at their backes confidently and with courage. But suddainly they fell into the Ambush, where some of them were slaine by the A∣cheins, and others taken.
A PARCELL OF the Seuenteenth Booke of the History of POLYBIVS: Where they treate of the Peace betwixt Phi∣lip of Macedony and the other Grecians, by the meanes of Titus a Roman. THe time appointed being come,Philips Com∣pany. Philip artiues by Sea from the Demetriade, to the Gulfe of Melia, accompanied with fiue Foists and one Galley, wherein hee sayled. He was attended on by Apo∣lodorus and Demosthenes Macedonians, his Chan∣cellours. There was also Brachylles of eocia, and Chiliades the Achein, a Fugitiue out of Morea for the causes aboue mentioned. With the which were also King Saminandre and Dionisodorus sent by Attalus. And as for the Cities and people, Aristenetes and Xenophon were for the A∣cheins: and Acesymbrotes and Nauarchus were for the Rhodiens: and for the Etoliens came Phenee Chiefe of the Army, with many other Citizens. When they were approacht the Sea neare vnto Nicea, Titus the Chiefe of the Romans, stayed at the shoare. Philip being almost at Land, stayed in his Vessell. And when as Titus perswaded him to Land, he sayd (standing vpright in his ship) that hee would not. Being like∣wise demanded by Titus what he feared, he answered, No man but the Gods:The wise an∣swere of Philip. but there were many there whom hee did not trust, namely, the Etoliens. And when the Roman Commander wondred, saying,
that the perill was equall vnto all, and that time common. Philip an∣swering sayd, that he vnderstood it not so: For an inconuenience hap∣ning to Phenee, the Etoliens had Commaunders enough for the War: But if Philip dyed, there was no King of Macedony for the present. In the beginning of his Speech he seemed importune to them all. But Tytus aduised him to speake of the Affaires for which hee was come. Philip answered him, that it belonged to him and ot vnto himselfe: For this cause hee required him to let him know what there was to be done to enioy a Peace. The Roman Commaunder told him that hee must vse plaine and o∣pen words, and aduised him to leaue all Greece, restoring the Prisoners and Fugitiues which were in his power: To yeild likewise vnto the Ro∣mans the places of Sclauonia, which he had seazed on after the Accord made in Epirus: That he should restore vnto Ptolomy, all the Cities which he had taken since the Death of Ptolomeus Philopater. When Tytus had spoken this, he held his peace: But turning to the rest, hee willed euery man to deliuer his charge▪ Dionisodorus being sent by Attalus beganne first,The Articles which Dioniso∣dorus deman∣ded of Philip. saying that he should restore the shippes taken by him in the Battaile at Sea neere vnto Chio, and likewise the Prisoners: and re-edifie the Temple of Venus, and the Asenall of the triumphes of Victories which hee had ruined. After whom Asesymbrotes Chiefe of the Army at Sea for the Rhodiens,Asesymbrotes demands for the Rhodiens. re∣quired that Philip should leaue Perea, which he had taken from them, and finally retire the Garrisons which hee had at Iasse, in the Vargylies, and in the City of the Eromeens: And moreouer restore the Perinthi∣ens to the comminalty of the Constantinopolitains, and to abandon Sestes, Abydos, and the Faiers of Asia.The demands of the Acheins and Etoliens. After the Rhodiens the A∣cheins demanded Corinth and the City of the Argiues whole and safe. After these the Etoliens required first as the Romans had done, that hee should abandon all Greece, and that afterwards hee should restore the Cities whole and entire, which formerly had beene of the same Bur∣gesse with the Etoliens. When as Phenee Chiefe of the Etoliens had spoken thus, Alexander following after, whom they call Isie, in shew a man of iudgement to mannage affaires, and of great Eloquence,Alexander against Philip. said, that Philip did not demand a peace roundly, nor made Warre valiantly, if it were to be done at any time: and that in assemblies and treaties hee watcht care∣fully, playing the part of an Enemy: and that in the Warre hee carry∣ed himselfe wickedly, and not as a good man. For when he should affront the Enemy, it is manifest that hee flies the list, and in the meane time burnes and ruines Cities: and being thus vanquished by his will, hee corrupts the rewards of the Victors: although the ancient Kings of Macedony were neuer of that minde, but quite contrary. They haue fought often Battailes in the open field, and haue seldome ruined any Cities. The which is manifest to all the World, as well by the Asian Warre of Alexander against Darius, as by the difference of the Succes∣sors, by the which they haue all made Warre against Antigonus for the Empire of Asia. And their posterity hath beene of this humour vntill
the time of yrrhus, to fight valiantly with an Enemy in open Bat∣taile: Doing all that concerned a mutuall Combate of men furnished with Armes, yet pardoning the Citties: for that the Victors of them are vanquished, and blamed by those which are subdued. It is the part of a mad man to ruine that for which the Warre is made, and then to leaue it: The which he sayd Philip did at that time, and that he had ruined more Cities in Thessaly, being of the same friendship and League in Warre; when as hee parted speedily from the streights of Epirus, then euer any of those had done which made Warre against the Thessaliens. And when he had vsed a long Speech, and deliuered other things of the same subiect. In the end hee demaunded of Philip, why Lysi∣machia being associated to the Etoliens, and hauing a Commaunder of the Warre from them, hee had chased him away, putting a garrison into the Citty? Why hee had spoiled the Cyaneins, of the Etolien Burgeoiship, being a friend to the Etoliens? Moreouer vpon what colour he detained Escheins, Thebes, Phthie, Pharsalia, and Larrisse? Hauing spoken this, Alexander held his peace. When as Philip had approached neerer to Land then before, standing vpright in his ship,Philips answer. sayd, that Alexanders Speech was Etolique: and that it was notorious to all the World, that no man ruined those which were his compani∣ons in Armes, and yet a Prince according to the occasion of times, is many times forced to do things against his will. The King vsing this Speech: Phenee hauing a bad sight, lookes oftentimes crosse vpon Philip, saying that he told Fables: and that he should eyther vanquish in fighting, or else subscribe and obey the commaundements of the Victors. And although that Philip were discontented, yet hee omitted not his kinde of speech; but turning to Phenee, a blind man sayd he, would see it. He was in truth apt to Choller, and it was it a manner bred in him, to iest at the good Fortune of other men. Then turning towards Alexander, thou demaundest of me, sayd he, for what reason I haue taken Lysimachia: To the end that thorough your negligence and base∣nesse, it might not be ruined by the Thrasiens, as then it happened, hauing retired my Souldiers for the present, being there for the de∣fence thereof, and not as thou sayst to take it. In regard of the Cya∣neins, I made no Warreagainst them: But when as Prusias assailed them in giuing him succours, I tooke the Citie with him, whereof you haue beene the cause. For when as the other Cities of Greece and my selfe had required you often by Embassies, to abrogate the Law which allowes you to take spoile vpon spoile: You answered that wee must first take Etolia from Etolia, then the sayd Law.A strange Cu∣stome of the Etoliens. And when as Tytus wondred how that could be, the King laboured to make him vnderstand it, saying that the Etoliens had a Custome not onely to assaile those and their Country, with whom they had Warre: But al∣so it is lawfull for them, if their Allies be in Quarrell, to assaile both the one and the other with their Regions, and to hold them, without any common decree. And by this meanes the Etoliens haue neither
Lawes of Friendship nor Hatred, being ready to fall vpon those which are in controuersie for any Affaires. Whereon then doe these men ground an accusation against me? I was a friend to the Etoliens, so was I allied to Prusias, and I attempted against the Cyneins to succour my Allies. But behold a case of wonderfull discretion, that they which haue made themselues Enemies to the Romans, commaund the Macedonians to depart out of Greece. Without doubt it is a very arrogant Speech. If the Romans speake it, it is tollerable, if the Etoliens, intollerable. But out of what Greece would you haue me depart? How do you limit it? Are there not many Etoliens in Greece? You shall see that the A∣graeins, Apodates, and Amphiloqueins are not of Greece, at the least you leaue them to me. And when as Tytus smiled, this sayd he, shall suffice against the Etoliens: And as for that which concernes the Rho∣diens and Attalus, we may with more iustice and equity require, that they should rather restore to vs our Prisoners and Vessells, then we to them. We haue not assailed the Rhodiens nor Attalus first, but they vs, it is without contradiction. Yet for thy sake we will restore Perea to the Rhodiens, and to Attalus his shippes and men which are liuing. In regard of the ruine of the Triumph of Victories, and of Venus Temple, we cannot repaire them: And for that which concernes the Trees and Gardens, I will send men to digge the ground, and will giue order that the Trees which are cut may grow againe. And when as Tytus smiled againe at the scoffe of Philip, Philip addressing himselfe to the Acheins, hee put them in minde at the first of the benefits and fauours they had receiued from Antigonus and himselfe. Moreouer he laid open the many Honors which the Acheins had done vnto them. Finally, he hath read the Resolution of their reuolte in following the Romans party. Vpon which occasion hee propounded many things a∣gainst the preuarication and ingratitude of the Acheins: Yet promising to restore them Argos. In regard of Corinthe hee would conferre with Tytus. After this Speech held to the rest, he sayd to Tytus▪ that hee was to speake to him and to the Romans, whether he were of opinion that he should abandon the Cities and places which he had Conquered a∣mong the Grecians, or else those which he had receiued from his Pre∣decessors. And when as Tytus held his peace, Aristenes was suddain∣ly ready to answere for the Acheins, and Phenee for the Etoliens. But when the houre was past, the Time had closed vp their mouthes. Philip required that hee might haue men giuen him to write downe all that was to do for the peace. For when he was alone, he sayd he had no man with whom conferring, he might yeild a reason of the Actions wherewith they charged him. And although that Tytus heard Philip willingly in his iest, yet being loath to be discouered by others, he gaue him a touch, saying: It is no wonder if thou beest alone Philip, when thou hast slaine all those which gaue thee Councell. The Macedonian vsing a Counterfeite smile, held his peace. Then they all gaue in Writing what they had
demanded, appointing another assembly for the day following at Nicea. To which place Titus came with his Company, where all the rest appeared, but Philip came not. And when as the day was farre spent, and that Titus expected his comming no longer, he armed at Sunne setting, accompanied with the same men, saying that he had spent the whole day in vexation and discontent, for the difficul∣ty of the things wherewith they charg'd him, But according to the opinion of others he did it to frustrate by the shortnesse of time, the accusation of the Acheins and Etoliens. He had seene them the day be∣fore at his departure ready for their defence, and to complayne of him. Wherefore at his ariuall he intreated the Commander of the Romans to treat of this businesse with him in priuate, to the end that in debating it, they might not fall to any outragious words, but draw it to some end. When he had often intreated this, Titus demanded of the Assistants their opinion what he should doe: and when they all yeelded vnto it, and that he should obserue his words, hee tooke Appius Claudius a Captaine of a thousand, and commanding the rest that retiring a little into the Sea, they should stay there, bidding Philip to come to Land. The King accompanied with Apolodorus and Demosthenes landed,Philip lands. and had a long discourse with Titus. In regard of that which was spoken of eyther side,The Articles agreed on by Philip. it is a difficult thing to iudge. Titus then when as Philip was retired, related vnto the rest the things which hee had propounded, namely that he would yeelde vnto the Etoliens, Larissa and Pharsalia, but not Thebes: That to the Rhodiens hee would leaue Perea, but not Iasson nor Bargulies to the Acheins Corinthe, and the City of Argiues: to the Romans that which hee held in Sclauonia with all the prisoners. That he would restore to Attalus the vessels, and all the prisoners that were liuing since the nauall fight. But when as the whole Company disliked of this accord, saying that they must generally decree that he must depart out of all Greece: Otherwise all these articles would be vaine and friuolous. Philip seeing this contention, fearing likewise the future accusati∣ons, he intreats Titus to deferre this assembly vntill the next day, for that it is now late, saying that hee would perswade them, or suffer himselfe to be perswaded. And when as Titus had granted this, they resolued to assemble againe at the Port of Tyronye, and so they parted. The day following they all mette at the houre appoynted. Philip hauing made a short speech,Another assem∣bly a Thronye. requires them all, especially Titus, that they would not breake of the treaty of peace: for that there were many things which did conduct to the conclusion of an accord, vn∣lesse the fault were in them, that the composition was not made. Otherwise they must send Embassadours to the Senate to order their differences, to the which he would obey, and doe all they should command him. These things thus propounded by Philip, the others said that they must doe that which concerned the warre, and not trust to his de∣mands: But the Roman Commander said, that hee was not igno∣rant
that Philip would not doe any thing that was propounded vnto him: and yet their cause was nothing impaired, in yeelding him this fauour which hee demanded. For there could nothing be spoken there that could be confirmed without the Roman Senate: and that moreo∣uer the approaching time would be very commodious to make tryall of their aduice. For as the Armies are vnprofitable in regard of the Winter, there could be no inconuenience, if in the meane time they referr'd themselues vnto the Senate, but a great commodity vnto them all. When they were of this opinion seeing Titus to concurre, that the pre∣sent differences should be transferrd'd to the Senate,Philips cause sent to Rome. they resolued to suf∣fer Philip to send an Embassie to Rome, and in like manner all in particu∣lar to make their causes knowne vnto the Senate, and to accuse Philip. When this resolution of the Assembly had succeeded according to the humour and aduice of Titus conceiued in the beginning, he presently pursued those things which were requisite for the Enterprize, hauing giuen order for his affaires. Finally, hee deales no more with Philip, but assignes him two Moneths onely, in the which hee should send an Embassie to Rome, and should retire his Garrisons for Phocis and Lo∣cre. Hee giues him likewise charge, that hee should not make Warre against any of the Roman Allies, and should giue order that in the meane time the Macedonians should doe them no outrage. And when he had dealt with Philip vpon these Articles by Writing, he brought the rest of the things propounded to an end of himselfe. Hee suddainly sends Aminandre to Rome, knowing his sufficiency in affaires, and to purchase Friends easily wheresoeuer hee came: and that he would procure some good conceite and hope, in regard of the name of Royalty. After whom hee sends for Embassadours, Quintus Fabius, his Nephew in respect of his Wiues Sister,Embassadours sent to Rome by Titus, the Eto∣lien, Acheins, and Athenians and Quintus Ful∣uis, and with them Appius Claudius whom they call Nero. The Etoliens sent Alexander Issien, Democrates a Calydonien, Dicearchus a Trichonien, Polymarchus an Arsinoen, Lamin an Ambracioe, and Nicomachus an Acarnanien: and of those which were Fugitiues from Thurion, and dwelt at Ambracia, Theodotes, Pherea a Fugitiue of Thessaly, and then remaining at Strate. The Acheins sent Xenophon an Egien: King Attalus, Alexander alone: The people of Athens Ciphesodorus. All which come to Rome to the Senate, to deliuer vnto their iudgements the things which they had resolued that Yeare, before that the two Consuls (at the re∣quest of the others) were sent into Gallacia against Philip. When as Titus Friends conceiued that the two Consuls should remaine in Ita∣ly for feare of the Ganles, they enter all into the Senate, and accuse Philip roughly, deliuering the same which they had formerly ob∣iected vnto the King: Yet they laboured carefully to possesse the Se∣nate with an opinion, that they could not hope for any liberty, if Cal∣chis, Corinthe, and the Demetriades connued in the hand of the Macedonians. They sayd, that Philip had vsed that speech, and had assured that
the said places were the Bonds and shackles of Greece: the which he might well say with reason and truth. For they could not sayle safe∣ly from Mrea to Corinthe, there being a royall Garrison: neither durst the Locrines, Beocians, and Phocoses doe it, whilst that Philip holds Calchis and the rest of Negrepont: Neither likewise the Thessa∣lians and Magnetians could not sayle freely, Philip and the Macedoni∣ans holding the Demetriade. Wherefore in that which Philip hath said, that hee would leaue the other places, it is a fancy and a shift to escape the present time: and when opportunity should serue, hee would easily subdue the Grecians, so as hee held the said places. For this cause they intreated the Senate, that Philip might leaue those pla∣ces; or else continue in his Enterprize, and fight valiantly: And that the greatest part of the Warre was already decided, the Macedo∣nians hauing lost two Battailes, and the greatest part of their forces at Land being consumed. These Speeches ended, they intreated them with all affection not to suffer the Grecians to bee frustrated of the hope of their liberty, nor themselues depriued of an honourable Title. The Embassadors of Greece hauing debated these things or the like: those of Philip had prepared a Mountaine of words, but they were suddainly reiected. For when as they were demanded if they would leaue Calchis,Philips Embas∣sadors reiected. Coriuth, and the Demetriades, they denyed that they had any thing in charge. Wherefore being check't,Warre declared against Philip. by this meanes they ended their Speech. The Senate sends the two Consuls into Galacia, and declares the Warre against Philip to be iust, giuing charge to Titus to attend the Grecians affaires. When as the newes came into Greece, all things succeded to Ti∣tus according to his desire. For besides that Fortune fauoured him, what soeuer hee vndertooke hee brought to an end by his prouidence and care.The Commen∣dation of Titus. Hee was in truth (if there were any among the Romans) a witty and ingenuous man. Hee not onely vndertooke ordinary af∣faires, but those that were secret, and with such Dexterity and Cou∣rage, as hee surpast all others, although hee were yet but young: for hee scarce past the Age of Thirty yeares. He was the first which past into Greece with an Army.
A certaine Parcell. MAn-kind which seemes to bee the most cunning and mali∣cious of all the Creatures, hath greater meanes to be more vicious. The others seruing their corporall Desires, are onely deceiued by them. But Mankind sinnes no lesse by a desire of glory through negligence and inconsi∣deration then by Nature. More of Titus and the Grecians Actions. ANd when as Titus could not learne where the Enemies Campe was seated, and being assured that they were come through Thessaly. he commands them all to cut stakes, and to carry them with them, to the end they may bee ready at necessity. This without doubt seemes (accor∣ding to the custome of the Grecians) impossible, being easie to the Romans. The Grecians in truth are no good Commanders of their Bodies in Marching,The Grecians delicate of their Bodies. and doe hardly endure toile. But the Romans hauing their Targets hanging at their backes in a Belt of Leather, and carrying their Head-peeces in their hands, beare the stakes. There was a great difference betwixt them.A difference betwixt the Ro∣mans Stakes and the Greci∣ans. The Grecians held a stake that had many branches at the foote very commodious. But the Romans vse stakes with two, or three, or foure branches at the most, so as they are easie to carry, for a man carries two or three Faggots together. There is also this difference: For the Grecians stake planted before the Campe, may be easily pull'd vp. When that onely which is strong, is fixed in the ground, and hath many and great branches, if two or
three of them shew themselues, and draw the stake vnto them, it is easily pull'd vp. And whereas this happens, there is a breach easi∣ly made, by reason of the greatnesse, and then the ioyning of them is vndone by the shortnesse and mutuall height of this kinde of Pallisado The Romans doe otherwise. They plant themright vp, and interlace them in such sort, as it is not easie for any one to dis∣cerne or know from which the of the stakes stucke in the ground, the shootes take their growth, nor from what stockes the branches come. Finally, it is not possible for him that seekes to pull them vp, to put to his hand, for that they are very thicke and intermixt together: And if they bee carefully planted, he that shall lay hold on them, shall not be able to pull them vp easily, for thatall their ioynts take their force from the Earth: Secondly, hee shall bee forced to transport many shootes together, which shall lay hold of one branch, in regard of their mutuall interlaing: Neither is it likely that two or three will seaze vpon one stake. Yet if it happens that some one pulls vp one or two, yet the space cannot be discouered. Wherefore there is a great difference, for that this kinde of stakes is easie to finde, and easie to carry, and the vse is more safe and firme. So as it is apparent, that if the Ramans haue not any thing touching the mannaging of the War which is worthy of imitation, yet this kind of stakes (at the least in my iudgement) deserues it. When as Titus had prepared all things ready to serue him at neede, he marcheth a slow pace with his whole Army.Titus plants his Campeneare to Pherees And when he came within fifty Furlongs of the City of Pherees, hee camped there. The day following at the breake of day, hee sent forth Spies, to seeke if they could by any meanes discouer where the Enemies were, and what they did. But when as Philip had receiued aduertisement, that the Romans were at that time Camped neare vnto Thebes, raising his Campe from Larissa, hee prepares his way towards Pherees with his whole Army. When he was within thirty Furlongs, planting his Campe there, hee commanded them to haue a care of their Victuals. At the breake of Day awaking his Army, hee sent forth those that were appoyn∣ted for Scouts, giuing them charge to gaine the Hills aboue Phe∣rees: Then at the Sunne-rising hee parts with all his forces. It hap∣pened soone after, that the Scouts of both Armies met on the top of the Mountaines. Knowing one another in the Darke, they stayed a little distance off: and aduertised their Commanders of that which had happened. And when they required Directions what they should doe, they were called backe. The day following either of them sent forth Horse-men, and a∣bout three hundred Souldiers to discouer: with whom Titus sent two Bands of Etoliens for their experience of the places: The which assailing one another neare vnto Pherees and Larissa,An encounter of the fore∣tunnes. they fought va∣liantly. But when the Etoliens of Epoleme fought with great cou∣rage, being also called the Italiques, it happened that the Macedoni∣ans were prest. But after they had skirmished some time, they re∣tired
to their Campes. And when as the day following the Plaine was displeasing to either of them, for that it was full of Trees, Hedges, and Gardens, they raise their Campes. Philip tooke his way towards Scotusse, making haste, to the end hee might draw Victuals from the City, and lodge his Army with more aduantage. Titus coniecturing what would happen, parts with his Army at the same instant, making haste to spoile the Scotussiens Corne before the comming of Philip. But for that in the marching of the two Armies, there was a great interposition of high Hills and Mountaines, the Romans nor the Macedonians could not discouer one another in the direction of their way. Wherefore that dayes iourney being ended, Titus came vnto Eretria, and Philip to the Riuer of On∣chiste, and presently planted their Campes there vnknowne to one another. And when as the day following they had marched on, Philip stayes at Melambie of the Seotusseins, and Titus about the Thetidie of Pharsalia: where they were againe vnknowne one to another. And as there fell a Raine and the yearely Thunder, it happened that the day following in the Morning there arise a great fogge, the which falling they could not see what was before their feete. Yet Philip making haste to dispatch that which was offred, Campt wandring with his Army: But being hindred by the troublesomenesse and difficulty of the way in regard of the fogge, he aduanced little, and pallisadoed his Campe. Finally, he sent Phedria, and giues him charge to gaine the tops of the Hills interposed. Titus likewise being Camped about The∣tidie, and being doubtfull where the Enemies were, he made choice of tenne Bands, and about a thousand of the most valiant, sending them before to search diligently, and to enter the Countrey: who marching to the tops of the Hill, fell by indiscretion into an Am∣bush of the Enemies,The Romans charged by the Macedonians. by reason of the darkenesse of the day. Ey∣ther of them at the first were somewhat troubled, but soone after they charge one another. They likewise send to informe their Com∣manders of this accident. But when as the Romans in this Charge were prest, and in danger by the Ambush of the Macedonians, they sent vnto their Campe for Succours. Titus commanding the Etoliens, sends those which were vnder the charge of Archidamus, and of the Eupolemus, and two Tribunes with fiue hundred Horse, and two thousand Foote. At whose comming they which in the beginning did but skirmish, re∣suming courage, presently put on another kind of Combate. The Romans relying vpon their Succours, double their forces for the fight. And although the Macedonians defended themselues braue∣ly, yet they sent vnto the King, being prest and annoyed by their Armes, and for their refuge recouered the tops of the Moun∣taines. And when as Philip had no hope but that they should be able that day to giue Battaile with all their Forces for the fore-sayd Causes,
hee had sent many of his men to forrage. But when he was aduer∣tised of that which happened by those which hee had sent, and that the mist was past, hee sent Heraclides the Gyrtonien, Chiefe of the Thessalian Horse, and Leon Commander of the Macedonian Ca∣uallery. Hee likewise sent Athenagórus with all the Mercenaries exept the Thracians. Who being come to the Ambush, and the Macedoni∣ans much re-inforced, they made head against the Enemy, and re∣puls'd the Romans from the Hills. The Dexterity of the Etolien Horse did much hinder the Enemies from turning head. They fought in truth with great courage and confidence.The Nature of the Etoliens as well on force as Horsebacke. The Etoliens in regard of the Foote-men, are faint both in their Armes and Ordo∣nance for a Combat in Field: But their Horse-men are excellent aboue all the other Grecians in particular and separated Combats. Wherefore it happened, that for that they had stayed the violence and fury of the Enemy, they could not so soone recouer the Plaine, but stayed for a time in Battaile. But when as Titus saw not onely the most valiant and his Horse-men retire but also his whole Troupes to bee dismayed,Titus puts his Army in Bat∣taile. hee drawes his whole Army to Field, and puts them in order vpon the Hills. At the same instant they which were in Guard, ran hastily one af∣ter another to Philip, crying out vnto him, Sir, the Enemies flye, lose not this occasion: The Barbarians seeke vs not: This day is yours, imbrace the time, and by this meanes they nire and stirre vp Philip to Battaile, although the scituation of the place did not content and please him. For the sayd Hills (which they call Dogs-head) are rough, difficult of all sides, and high. Where∣fore when as Philip had formerly fore-seene the vnequalnesse of the places, hee had not in the beginning made any preparation vnto Battaile: But beeing then prouoked by the great confidence of the aduertisements, hee drawes his Army with all speede out of the Fort. In regard of Titus, hee orders his Troupes and Bands for the Battaile, and followes them close which began the Skirmish, ma∣king remonstrances vnto the Battalions as hee turned. His Speech was short, plaine, and intelligible to the Hearers. Propounding then the cause, hee sayd vnto his Souldiers: Are not these O Com∣panions, the same Macedonians, who formerly holding in Macedo∣ny the top of the Mountaines towards Heordia, you haue forced with Sulpicius, and chased from thence with the defeate of the greatest part of them? Are not these the same Macedonians, who being seazed vpon the difficult places of Epirus, and leauing no hope of approach, you haue chased by your prowesse, and for∣ced to flye into Macedony, abandoning their Armes? What reason is there then that you should feare the same men, with whom you are to enter into an equall Combate? To what end doe we propound vn∣to you precedent actions to consider on, but that in regard of them you should fight more confidently? Wherefore Companions
attend the Battaile with resolution, giuing courage one to another. I hold for certaine, that with the good pleasure of the Gods, the end of this Battaile will soone bee the conclusion of the pre∣cedent. When Titus had vsed these Speeches, hee commands the right Wing of his Army not to budge, setting the Elephants before them: And assailes the Enemy with great courage with the left Wing, being accompanied by the most valiant. They which among the Romans had began the Fight, shewing their courage, prest the Enemies, ha∣uing beene relieued by some Troupes of Foot-men. And when as at the same time Philip saw that the greatest part of his Army was in order of Battaile before the Pallisadoe,A Battaile be∣twixt the Ro∣mans and Philip of Macedony. hee marcheth, taking the Targetteers and the Battalion of the right Wing, and ascends the Hills with speede: giuing charge to Nicanor (whom hee called E∣lephant) to command the rest of the Army to follow close. As soone as the first had recouered the top, hee defends the Battalion, setting the Targets before, and seazed vpon the higher Countrey. And when as the Macedonians prest the Romans much, vpon the two flankes of the Hills, he discouered the tops to bee abandoned. As he fortified the right Wing of his Army, it happened that the Soul∣diers were much annoyed by the Enemy. For when they they which were best armed, were ioyned vnto the most valiant of the Romans, and succoured them in this fight, they prest the Enemies much and flew many. As the King was there in the beginning, and saw the Combat of the valiant men not to be farre from the Campe, hee reioyced: againe, when hee saw them decline, and to haue neede of Succours, hee was forced to send them, and at that instant to hazard a Battaile, although that many of the Troupes of his Army were yet vpon the way, and approa∣ched to the Hills. And in taking the Souldiers hee rankes them all, as well on foote as Horsebacke on the right Wing, commanding the beares of Burthes and the Battalions, to double the Front of their Rankes, and to stand close vpon the right hand. This being done, when as the Enemies ioyned with them, hee commanded the Battalion that bending downe their Iauelings they should match in order, and mingle with the strongest. At the same instant, when as Titus had retired those which had bagunne the Fight, to the spaces which were betwixt the Ensignes, he char∣geth the Enemy. The Combat beginning on eyther side with great fury and clamour, all crying together, yet those which were without the fight cry∣ing vnto the rest, the Battaile was made very horrible and cruell, and it shewed the force of the Combat, Philips right Wing car∣ryed it selfe valiantly in this Battaile: charging the Enemy from a∣boue, hauing an aduantage in their order: which finally for the present fight was much more commodions, in regard of the di∣uersity and seuerall sorts of Armes. In regard of the rest of the Army, some were ioyned vnto the Enemy fighting a farre off, others
shewed themselues vpon the left hand hauing gotten the toppes of the Hils. When as Tytus saw and did well perceiue that his men could not in∣dure the force of the Enemies battallion, and those of the right wing to be repuls'd, and some seaine, and others to retire by degrees, and that all his hope of safety consisted in the right Wing, hee goes speedily vnto them, and considers the Enemies order. When hee saw some succeed in their places which had fought, and others to de∣scend from the Hils, and some to stay vpon the tops, he marcheth a∣gainst the Enemy with his Ensignes, putting the Elephants before. And when as the Macedonians had no duertisement by Trumpets and Cla∣rons, and that they could not make it good, nor receiue any true order of a battallion, aswell for the difficulty of the place, as for that the Combattants had the forme of goers, and not of an order of Battaile, and that there was no further meanes to fight single, or hand to hand with the Romans: Being also terrified and much iniured with the Ele∣phants, and likewise separated one from another, they marcht pre∣sently away. Wherefore many Romans pursued them continually and slew them. One of the Captaines Milleneirs being of this Troupe, hauing but twenty Ensignes, considering at the very instant what was to be done, did great seruice for the obtaining of an absolute Victory. For when he saw those that accompanied Philip, assailed the others often, and grieuously to annoy the left Wing, hee turnes to them that were in distresse, leauing those which vanquished on the right Wing, and charged the Macedonians in the Reare. When as they of the Battalli∣on could not make resistance, fighting man to man, this other was at their backes, killing those they incountred, there beeing no man that could succour them, so as in the end they were forced to turne head, and to abandon their Armes. Although that Philip (as wee haue sayd in the beginning) had a great hope in the Victory, making a coniecture in his owne conceite, yet seeing the Macedonians to abandon and leaue their Armes suddainly, and the Enemies to charge in the Reare, hee parts speedily from the Battaile with some Horse and Foote to consider fully of the Combate. When as he imagined that the Romans by their pursuite would ap∣proach to the right Wing on the tops of the Hills, hee seekes to draw together as many Thaesiens and Macdonians as possibly hee could. When as Tytus pursued the Chase, and had discouered the left Wing of the Macedonians to assile the toppes of the Hills,The signe which the Ma∣cedonians giue when they yeild. hee stayed: For that the Enemies held their Iauelings right vp: The which the Macedo∣nians are accustomed to do when they yeild, or retire from the Enemy. When hee had knowne the cause of this accident, hee restraines his men, being willing to pardon those that were amazed with feare. But whilst that Tytus considered of these things, some of the fore most Charge them from aboue and kill many:The victory of the Romans. few escaped abandoning their Armes. This Battaile being thus ended of all sides, and the Romans hauing the victory, Philip retires towards Tempe, and comming the first
day to the Tower of Alexander, hee past the Night there. The day following passing to Gonnes, hee entred Tempe, staying there for those which should escape in the flight. When as the Romans had pursued the Chase for a time, some strip the dead, others draw the Prisoners together, and a great part goe to force the Enemies Campe. There they finde the Etoliens, who had forced it before for spoile, and imagining that they were frustrated of a booty which was due and did belong vnto them, they beganne to accuse the Etoliens before the Generall, and to complaine, that hee had imposed the danger and the burthen of the Battaile vpon them, gi∣uing the profite and benefit vnto others: yet being returned vnto their Campe, they were somewhat pacified. The day following they assemble and gather together the Prisoners, and the rest of the spoile and booty, and from thence they tooke their course towards Larissa. There dyed in this battaile about seauen hundred Romans, and neer vpon eight thousand Macedonians;Number of the dead on either side. the Prisoners were not lesse then fiue Thousand. Besides many that escaped by flight. Thus en∣ded this Battaile giuen betwixt Philip and the Romans in Thessaly at the Dogshead. Of the difference of the Roman and Macedonian Armes. I Had promised in the sixt Booke, to make a Comparison of the Roman and Macedonian Armes, and of the ordring of their Battailes, and wherein they differ eyther worse or better: Now I will indeauour to performe my pro∣mise. As in former times the Macedonian Armies haue giuen good proofes of their Valour, hauing Vanquished the Asiatiques and Grecians, and that the Romans haue surmounted the Affricans as much, as all the Westerne Nations of Europe, and that in our time the conferrence of these Armies and men is to be made, not for once but for many times, it will be commodious and profitable to seeke out their difference, and for what reason the Romans vanquish, hauing alwayes the vpper hand in Martiall Combats: To the end that ac∣knowledging it from Fortune, wee should with reason call them happy Victors, as the ignorant vsually do: But knowing the true cause, wee should commend and holde these Captaines for miracnlous.
In regard of the Battailes giuen betwixt Hannibal and the Romans, and their losse, it is not needfull to vse any long Discourse. The Ro∣mans without doubt did not suffer those losses, for want of Armes, and the order of their Battailes,The Romans haue bin Van∣quished by the pollicy of Hannibal. but in regard of the good direction and pollicy of Hannibal. We declared this when we related the Battailes themselues. The end of the Warre confirmes our opinion. For when as the Romans had found a Commaunder like vnto Hannibal, they suddainely were Victors. So doth this, that when as Hannibal had Vanquished the Romans first, he furnished the common Souldiers better with the Roman Armes, reiecting their owne: Hauing vsurped them in the be∣ginning, he afterwards made continuall vse of them. Pyrrhus in like manner did not onely vse the Italians Armes, but also their ordering of Armies, when as by change he sets in the head of the Romans an Ensigne and Band of the Battallion. Yet hee could not ouer-come nor vanquish by this meanes, the end of the Combate beeing alwaies doubt to the one and the other. It shalbe therefore necessary and con∣uenient to Treae thereof first, to the end that nothing may seeme any way contrary vnto our opinion: but I will beginne our con∣ferrence. It is an cafie thing to know by many instructions, that if a Battalion obserues its proper order and forces, so nothing can annoy it, nor withstand it, for as an armed man hath three foote in his posture in a close Combate, and that the length of his Pike from one end to the other is of foure and twenty foote, and at the least of one and twenty: And that for the space of his hands with the end which remaines for to shake it, they abate sixe foote during the Combate, it is apparent that a Pike shall haue fifteene foote in length, besides the body of euery man that is armed, when with both hands hee presents it and chargeth the Enemy. Whereby it commonly happens that the other Pikes passe three foote before the second, third, and fourth rancke of the precedent: The others before the fifth, if the Battallions be fitly ioy∣ned and close, according vnto the order of those which are in the Reare and vpon the Flanckes: As Homer teacheth when hee sayth, the Target assures the Target, the Head-peece the Head-peece, and the Man the Man: The Head-peeces adorned with Horses haire, touch one another with their braue Crests: tending, that they should be ioy∣ned together and close. As these things are spoken with good reason and trueth, it is appa∣rently necessary, that the Pikes should be charged, according to those that go before, passing betwixt them the length of ten foot and a halfe. By this meanes they may visibly know of what force the preparation and order of a Battallion is, hauing the length of sixteene Ranckes: Whereof they which exceed the fifth cannot fight with their Pkes. For this cause they cannot fight hand to hand, nor man to man: but they support them at their backes vntill they take breath, to the end that the first ranke may hold a firme order, repulsing all manner of force with their Pikes, which (passing the first) might charge vpon the reare. For
in marching after this manner, they presse the fore-most with the weight of their bodies, to make a more violent charge. For it is im∣possible for the fore-most to turne backe. This being the order of a Macedonian Battalion, aswell in particular as in generall, wee must by way of comparison speake of the proper∣ties and differences of the Roman Armes, and of their ordering of a Battaile. The Romans haue three foote space with their Armes. The which in fighting they mooue from man to man,Order of the Romans Armes. for that euery man couers his body with his Target, the which they also vse when any occasion of Combate is offered. They commonly fight with the Sword by transport and apart: Wherefore it is manifest that these men haue betwixt them, a Retreate and space of three foote at the least, betwixt him that goes before, and the other which followes to fight more at ease, whereby it happens that a Roman standing still, contaynes the space of two Macedonian Souldiers, beeing in the first Ranke: So as he must offer himselfe and fight against ten Pikes: All which one cannot cut if hee would, holding them in his hands: Ney∣ther can the following Forces any way assist the first Ranke, neyther to assaile nor to mannage their Armes. So as wee may easily coniecture, that it is impossible for any man liuing, to sustaine and defend the vio∣lence of a Macedonian Battallion in Front,For what cause the Romans Vanquish. if (as wee haue formerly sayd) it retaynes its propriety and force, for what cause then doe the Romans Vanquish? Whence comes it that Macedonian Battallions, are frustrated of their Hope of Victory? It is for that the Roman Ordonance, hath in Bat∣taile infinite places and times commodious for the Combate, and the Macedonians haue onely place and time, when it may bee seruiceable and commodious. And therefore if vpon some necessity the Aduer∣saries all suddainly vpon the Macedonian Battallions, when they are to giue Battaile, it is likely that they which make vse of it, would be al∣wayes the Masters. But if they can diuert or turne it, (which is an easie thing) of what amazement and great terrour will this Ordo∣nance be? Moreouer it is very playne and manifest that a Macedonian Bat∣tallion hath neede of Plaines and Euen ground without any let or in∣cumbance, as Ditches, Springs, Vallies, Hills, and Water-courses: for all these things may disturbe, breake, and make frustrate their de∣sire and intention. It is (as a man may say) in manner impossible, to finde a Countrey of twenty Furlongs (I speake of no more) where none of the afore-mentioned things are found. It is without any que∣stion or doubt a rare thing, and which no reasonable man will deny. Yet I will allow there are some found. If the Enemies do not direct and guide themselues thether, but passing on ruine the Townes, Villa∣ges, Cities, and whole Regions of their Friends and Allies, what profite then will grow by this kinde of Ordonance? If it stayes in places of aduantage, it cannot giue succours to its friends, nor pre∣serue it selfe. For Victuals, Munition, and succours, may bee very easily intercepted by an Enemy, if without any opposition hee
be master of the field. If likewise in leauing places of aduantage, a Macedonian Battalion seekes to execute some enterprize, hee is in danger of the Enemy. For although that some one goes to field, and doth not at one time offer his Army to the fury of the Macedo∣nian Battalion, diuerting himselfe for a time during the fight, wee may easily coniecture by that which the Romans doe at this day, what will happen. The coniecture of that which wee say, must not bee taken from the effect. They doe not present their Battalion in such an indifferent place, as they must suddenly fight with all their forces in front. One part fights the other stirres not. Moreouer if at any time the Macedonians presse their Enemies ea∣gerly, and are afterward repuls'd by them, the proper order of the Battalion is broken. For they leaue the rest of the Army, whe∣ther they pursue those that are retired, or flye from those which charge them. The which being done, they leaue vnto the Ene∣my the place which they had held, not to charge in front, but to serue them vpon the flancke or in the reare, to succour those of the Battalion. Why it is not probable, that it should bee ea∣sie for a Roman Battalion, to obserue time and aduantage, and not for a Macedonian, seeing the differences are great, according to the truth of the said things. Moreouer it is necessary for those which make vse of the Ma∣cedonian Ordonance, to passe through all sorts of Countries, and to plant their Campe, and finally to seaze vpon commodious places and to besieged and indure sieges, and to present himselfe against the Enemy. All these things are requirest in warre: Sometimes also the generall moments which are great, serue much for the victory: all which are not easie for a Macedonian Ordonance, yea sometimes they are vnprofitable, for that the souldier can neyther serue in rancke nor man to man: Whereas the Roman is fit and profitable for these things. For euery Roman comming to fight with his Armes, is actiue for all times and places and for all charges: and hath generally one Ordonance, whither he be to fight in Troupe with the whole Ar∣my, or particularly Ensigne, to Ensigne or Man to Man. Wherefore as the commodity is most excellent, so many times the end and con∣clusion of the Battaile is more prosperous and successefull vnto the Ro∣mans, then to others. I haue therefore thought it necessary and con∣uenient to vse a long Discourse concerning these things, for that there are many Grecians at this day which hold it incredible, that the Macedonians should be vanquished and ouercome, being ignorant of the cause and meanes, whereby a Macedonian Ordonance is vanquished by the Roman Armes. When as Philip had vsed all possible meanes hee could in this Battaile, and yet was preuented of the Victory,Philips retreate into Macedony. hee foorth-with made great hast (passing by Tempe) to recouer Macedony, beeing accompanied with all those which had escaped from the Battaile. Hee presently sent vnto Laressa the second Night after the Battaile,
one of the Archers of his Guard, giuing him charge to teare and burne the Royall Letters, doing therein an Act worthy of a King, who in his aduerse Fortune had not forgotten that which was to bee done. He knew and did well perceiue that if the Romans were once seazed on his Commentaries, there might be many occasions offered vnto his Enemies against him and his Friends. It may bee it happened and fell out to him as to others, who not able to containe their power moderately in prosperous things, yet haue borne and suffered many Crosses and Disasters with patience: The which happened vnto Philip, as wilbe apparent by the following Discourse. So as ayming at that which was conuenient, wee haue plainly shewed and declared his At∣tempts tending to reason, and againe his change to worse, and when, how, and wherefore these things were done, hauing plainely set foorth and exprest his Actions: Wee must by the same meanes declare his Repentance and dilligence, whereby beeing changed tho∣rough his aduerse Fortune, hee carried and behaued himselfe at that time like a wise and discreete man. Finally, Tytus hauing giuen good order after the Battaile, for those things which concerned the Priso∣ners and spoile, he went to Larissa. A Parcell of an imperfect sence. TO define folly we cannot, for that they are desirous of the same meanes. This kind of remisnesse and dulnesse, is often  in many. Neither is it to be wondred at, if it hath place among others: But among those in whom this Spring of malice is found, there is ano∣ther cause, for the which that wise saying of Epichar∣mes doth not agree: Watch and remember that thou must distrust. This is the bond of hearts.
Of a certaine Accord betwixt Antiochus and the Romans. AT the same time came from the Vargyles Publius Lentulu,Antiochus makes an as∣sembly at Ly∣smachia. with ten Legats: and from Thasse Lucius Terentius and Publius Villius. When their comming was suddainly de∣clared vnto the King, they assembled all within few daies at Lysimachia. After whom followed Hegissinactes, and Lisias sent at that time to Titus. Finally, the conference in priuate betwixt the King and the Romans was gracious and courteous. But when the assembly met for affaires, they imbraced another dispositi∣on. Lucius Cornelius required that Antiochus should leaue all the Ci∣ties, the which being subiect to Ptolomy, hee had taken in Asia. In regard of those which were subiect to Philip, hee contested much to haue him leaue them. For it was a mockery, that Antiochus comming he should reape the fruites of the Warre which the Romans had made a∣gainst Philip: He likewise aduised him not to meddle with the free Ci∣ties. He also sayd, that it seemed strange, that without reason he had past into Europe with an Army as well by Sea as Land: That no man could conceiue it to be to any other end, then to make Warre against the Ro∣mans. These things being propounded by the Romans, they held their peace.Antiochus an∣swere to the Romans. The King in answere said, that he wondred for what cause they debated with him for the Cities of Asia, and that it was more fitting for any other then for the Romans. Finally, hee intreated them not to vsurpe, nor to deale with the affaires of Asia: And that for his part hee would not meddle with any thing that was in Italy. In regard of Eu∣rope, he had entred with his Armies to recouer the Cities of Cherrone∣se and Thrace: For that the command of all those places belonged to him: this gouernment in the beginning being due to Lysimachus: But when as Seleucus made Warre against him, and had ouerthrowne him in Battaile, all the Kingdome of Lysimachus became subiect to Seleucus by force. After the time of his predecessors, Ptolomy was the first who violently the sayd places, vsurped them: The like did Philip. And that for his part he recouered them, accommodating himselfe to his owne times, and not to those of Philip. And as for the Lysimachians, ruined without reason by the Thracians he reduced them to himselfe, no way wronging the Romans, and resto∣red them to their Countrey: The which he did to shew this mercy to
the affaires of Seleucus, and not to make Warre against the Romans. In regard of the Cities of Asia, they ought not to enioy liberty by the commandment of the Romans, but of grace. And for that which con∣cerned Ptolomy, that with all his heart hee gaue him thankes: and that he vnderstood that hee had not onely concluded Friendship with him, but made a League. When as Lucius was of opinion that the Lamp∣saceneins, and Smyniens, should be called, and audience giuen them, it was done accordingly. There Parmenio and ythodorus presented themselues for the Lampsaceneins, and Cerane for the Smyrnien. When as these men debated freely, the King being incensed to yeeld an ac∣compt of their debate before the Romans, interrupting the Speech of Parmeio, cease sayth hee, to plead so much, I am not well pleased to dispute with my Enemies before the Romans, but rather before the Rhodiens, and then by this meanes they brake off the Assembly with∣out any mutuall affection. Another Parcell. MAny men desire actions of courage and prowesse, but the experience is rare. Scope in truth and Ccomenes haue had great occasions for Combats and hardy Enterprizes. For as Scope was formerly taken, hee had resolued in the same hope with his Seruants and Friends, but hee could not saue himselfe. Finally, his iust death (hauing led a wretched life) hath giuen testimony of his great weaknesse. And although that Scope was aided and assisted with great Forces, hauing the gouern∣ment of the King in his nonage, and was of his Councell, yet he was soone ruined. For when as Aristomenes knew that hee had assembled his Friends in his house, holding a Councell with them, he sent vnto him by his Guards to come vnto the assembly. But hee was so trans∣ported in his iudgement, as hee did not that which hee ought to haue done, neyther could hee (being called) be obedient vnto the King: which was the greatest folly in the World: vntill that Aristomenes knowing his basenesse, lodg'd Souldiers and Elephants neare his House, and sent Ptolomy the Son of Eumenes with the Young men, to bring him with faire words, if he would come wil∣lingly; if not, to vse force.
When as Ptolomy was entred into his house, and signifying vnto him that the King demanded Scope, he did not at the first obserue his wods: But casting his lookes vpon Ptolomy, he was long in that estate, as it were threatning him, and wondring at his presumption. But when as Ptolomy approacht with assurance, and layd hold of his Cloake, then he required helpe of the Assistants. Being in this estate, and a great company of the young men comming about him, being also aduerti∣sed, that his house was enuironed with Souldiers, hee followed him obeying the times, being accompanied by his Friends. When as hee was come to the Assembly and Councell, the King charged him a lit∣tle: Then Policrates newly arriued from Cypres: and in the end Aristo∣menes. The accusation was according to that which had beene spo∣ken: but they added moreouer, that he had drawne his Friends toge∣ther to consult, and that being called by the King, he would not obey. For which things all they which were in the Assembly, not onely con∣demned him, but likewise the forreine Embassadors there assisting. But when as Aristomenes came to accuse him, he tooke many notable per∣sons, not onely of Greece, but also of the Etolien Embassadors, who were there for the accord: Among the which was Dorimachus, the Sonne of Nicostrates. And when as these men had spoken, Scope laboured to alledge some excuses: But when as no man giue eare vnto him for the foulenesse of his Crimes, hee was suddainly carryed to Prison with his Friends. The Night following, Aristomenes caused him to dye of poyson with all his Friends and Kinsfolkes.Scope pu to death by poy∣son. In regard of Dicearchus, hee put him to death, hauing suffred great Torments: hauing endured fit punishments for all the Grecians. This was that Dicearchus whom Philip (presu∣ming to breake the accords with the Ilands of Cyclades, and the Cities of Hellespont, had made him Commander of all his Army at Sea, and superintendant of the sayd businesse. And when he was sent to a mani∣fest execration, hee did not hold it an vnreasonable and wicked act, thinking he should be able to terrifie both Men and Gods by his rage. Making haste to recouer the ships,Altars set vp by Dicearhus to cruelty and iniquiry. hee set vp two Altars, the one to cruelty, and the other to iniquity: Vpon the which he sacrificed and prayed as vnto the Gods. Wherefore it seemes hee was punished by a iust Death, as well in the presence of Gods as Men. For as he led a life of a strange Nature, so he ended by a strange Death. Finally, when as the other Etoliens were desirous to retire home, the King suffred them to goe with all their Goods. Scope in his life time had a wonder∣full desire of riches. Hee exceeded all other in auarice. And after his death his houses were found abounding with Gold and rich moueables. Whereas he had for assistant the ingratitude and drunkennesse of Chari∣morthe, he had wholy corrupted the Realme. When as the Priuy Councell had taken order for the Etoliens affaires, they all inclined to giue power to the King to command: Not in regard of the maturity of his age, but for that they thought thereby, that the estate of the Crowne would further the affaires: and that if the King tooke vpon him a free power of the Realme, it would be a beginning
and aduancement to the better. Making then a stately preparation, they put it in execution with royall Magnificence. Policrates seemed to haue assisted them much in this Enterprize. For as this man was deare vnto his Father, being yet young, there was not a better Courti∣er in all the whole Court, neither for that which concern'd his fideli∣ty, nor the affaires, nor yet i more fauour with the King. When as Cypres with the reuenewes were deliuered vnto him vpon his faith and trust, in that dangerous time subiect to many hazards, he not only kept this Iland for the Infant, but also gathered together great store of Treasure, the which he then brought vnto the King, deliuering the gouernment of Cypres to Ptolomy the Megalopolitaine. And when vpon this occasion, he had purchased a great power for the future, in time he strayed and fell into a rash and wicked course of life. Ptolomy Age∣sandre by the force of his Age fell into the like infamy. Where∣fore when opportunity shall serue, it shall bee no great trouble to declare what great igno∣miny and reproach followed their gouernments. To God onely be all Honour and Glory.
The Contents of the chiefest matters contayned in this History. AN alliance made by Hieron with Leptine. fol. 6 Accord betwixt Hieron and the Ro∣mans, and what it containes. 10 Agregas besieged by the Romans. 11 Agregas spoiled by the Romans. 13 A defeate of Hannibals ships for want of a good wind. 15 An Engine inuented by the Romans, called the Rauen. ib. A defeate of 4000. allied to the Romans by Amilcar. 16 Army of 140000. Romans, and more Car∣thaginians. 18 A remonstrance made by the Carthaginian Captaines, vnto the Souldiers of their Army. 18 Amilcar vanquished. 20 A victory of the Romans against the Car∣thaginians. ibid. Aspis taken by the Romans. ibid. Asdrubal, Bostar, and Amilcar, Comman∣ders of the Carthaginian army. 21 A remonstance of Polybius: 24 Aspis besieged by the Carthagi∣nians. 25 A great number of the Roman ships perish∣ed by a Tempest. 26 Asdruball sent into Sicily by the Carthaginians. 27 A new army at Sea, prepared by the Ro∣mans. 28 A defeat of Carthaginians by the Romans. Army at Sea prepared by the Romans. 29 A conspiracy of mercinary Souldiers ser∣uing vnder the Carthaginians. 30 Alexon. ibid. A sally of the Carthaginians vpon the o∣mans Engines of battery. 34 An enterprize of the Romans vpon Tria∣num. 35 A Combate at Sea betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. 36 Appius Claudius deposed from the Consull∣ship, and afterwards condemned to dye. 37 Amilcar spoiles the Coasts of Italy 39 Amilcar. ibid. A good comparison. 40 Army at Sea prepared by the Carthagini∣ans. 41 A victory of the Romans, against the Car∣thaginians. 42 Amilcar Father vnto Hannibal. 43 Amilcar. 50 A mutiny of mercinary and oiher common Souldiers in Sardinia, and Bostare slaine. 52 A great inhumanity and wickednesse com∣mitted. 54 A cruell resolution. ibid. A defeate of the Carthaginians by Matho. 57 Assignation of a battaile. 58 Asdrubal chosen and made Generall of the army. 60 Agron King of Sclauonia. ibid.
A defeat of Etoliens by the Slauonians. 61 A reprehension of the Epirots. 62 A bold answer of an Embassador. 64 A Victory of the Slauonians against the A∣cheins. 65 Apotonia yeilded to the Romans. 65 Accord made with Tuto. 6 A treaty made betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. 67 A discription of Italy. 67 A price had to be credited. 68 A defeate and ruine of the Senogalloies by the Romans. 71 A defeate of the Gaules in Delphos. 71 Amazement of the Romans, for the descent of the Gaules. 72 A descent of the Transalpins into Italy. 72 A victory of the Gaules against the Ro∣mans. 74 A defeat of the Gaules army. 77 A victory of the Romans against the Mil∣lannoys. 79 Acerras besieged. 79 A defeat of Gaules by the Romans. 80 Acerras taken by Cornelius. 80 Asdrubal slaine. 81 All Morea reduced into a League. 82 A League betwixt the Dymonsoris and them of Patras. 84 Aristomachus, Xenon, Cleomenes 86 Antigones Tutor to Philips sonne. 86 Athenes. 86 A good consideration of rate. 87 A good inention of a rate. 87 Acrotorinth yeilded to Antigonus. 90 Argos taken by the Acheins. ib. Acrotorinth taken by Antigonus, ibid. Aristomachus. 94 Aristomachus strangled. 95 Army leuied by Cleomenes 97 Antigonus blamed. ibid. Antigonus campe seated vpon the bankes of Gorgile. 98 Attalus. 103 Agesilaus. 106 A good comparison. ibid. Antiochus an enemy vnto the Romans. 108 Asdrabal son in Law to Hannibal. 109 A good consideration and necessary for all Gouernours. ibi. Army of a hundred thousand men. 110 An Embassie from the Romans vnto Han∣nibal. 110 An other accord made betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. 118 An other accord. ibid. An other accord made with Asdrubal. ib. A diuision of Prouinces to the Consul. 125 A surprize made by the Bulloians vpon the Romans. 126 A defeate of the Numidians, by the Roman Cauallery. 129 Army of Hannibal decreased. 137 A combate of the horse, betwixt Hannibal and Scipio. 141 A Embassie from the Bullonians to Han∣nibal. 142 A plaine is sometimes an occasion of am am∣bush. 144 Ambush layd by Hannibal for the Romans. 145 A defeate of the Roman horsemen. 146 Army leuied by the Romans both by Sea and Land. 147 A defeat of some Romans by Asdrubal. 148 Ambush laid by Hannibal. 151 A defeate of the Roman horse-men by Ma∣herbal. 153 A Dictator created. ibid. Asdrubals prting from Carthage to goe in∣to Spaine. 158 Army at Sea prepared suddainely by the Carthaginians. 159 Acedux or Abilux. ibid. Acedux conspires with the Romans. 160 A combate betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. 163 A legion of fiue thousand men, and the man∣ner how the Romans raise an army. 166 A skirmish betwixt the Carthaginians and Romans. 168 A great amazement at Rome. 170 Asdrubal. 171 Acheus. Antiochus. 175 Ariston. 176
An Embassie sent from Arate to the Eto∣toliens. 180 A Fight betwixt the Acheins and the Eto∣liens. 181 A defeate of the Acheins. 181 Arate blamed by the Acheins. 182 Aduice of the Acheins touching the warre against the Etoliens. 182 Amity amongst the Lacedemonians. 187 Ambassadours sent from Lacedemonia to Philip 188 Alexander the Great. 188 Amphixions restor'd to their Lawes. 189 Answeres to Embassadors. 192 Aristocrates 193 A league made betweene the Lacedemoni∣ans and Etoliens. 195 An absolute Defeate of the Gaules Em∣pire. 200 Attalus and Acheins. 201 Achate caused himselfe to bee called King. ibid. Accord betwixt the Constantinopolitaines and the Rhodiens. 203 Accord made with Prusias. ibid. Alexander. 205 Assault giuen by Dorimache to the Fort of Egire. 206 Alexander slaine. 207 Athens taken by Lycurgus. ibid. Ambrachia taken by Philip. 208 An assembly of the Etoliens to keepe the passage of a Riuer. 209 Arate ioynes with Philip. 212 Appelles Tutour to Philip. 216 Appelles persists in his Enterprize. 219 Accusation of Appelles against Arate and and the Acheins. 221 Answere of Arate. ibid. Alexander Chamberlaine to King Antigo∣nus. ibid. Alexander the Great. 229 Amycle. 233 A multitude against Philip and his men. 237 Appelles taken Prisoner. 239 An Army neare to Ephesus. 242 Archidamus slaine by Cleomenes 243 Antrochus Sonne to Seleucus 245 Antiochus marries with Laodicea. 246 Antiochus puts his Army in Battaile. 252 Antiochus goes against Artabazanes. 253 Antiochus hath a Sonne. ibid. Artabazanes makes an accord with Anti∣ochus. ibid. Apoliphanes aduice to Antiochus. 254 Antiochus corrupts the Captaines of Seleu∣cia. 256 An Army rassed by Ptolomy. 258 Answere of Ptolomies Embassadors to An∣tiochus. 259 Aduice of Armies by Antiochus and Ptolo∣my. 260 Antiochus his army diuided into three. 261 Army of Ptoloy. 266 Army of Antiochus. ibid. Andrew the Kings Phisitian slaine. 267 Antiochus send Embassadors vnto Ptolo∣my. 270 Accord made betwixt Ptolomy and Antio∣chus. ibid. Arate prepared for the Warre. 272 Again and Cassander taken by Scardi∣lade. 273 Athenians abandon Ptolomy. 279 Antiochus passeth Mount Tourus. ibid. Aduice of Gouernment. 282 A true Monarchy. 283 A true Aristocracy. ibid. A Democracy. ibid. A Royalty. 284 Aristocratia. 286 Authority of the people. 289 Athenians. 304 All things subiect to corruption. 311 Accord made betwixt the Carthaginians, Macedonians and Grecians. 313 Aches taken & brought to Antiochus. 328 Accord made by the youth of Tarentum with the Carthaginians. 331 Appius besieged by Hannibal. 337 A wse consideration of Hannibal. 338 Amazement of the Romans. 339 Alexander ruinated Thebes. 348 Antipatr. ibid. Antigonus. 349
Alexander the Epirote. 352 Asdrubal abandoned my many Spaniards. 375 Aduice of Asdrubal for the War. 376 Andobale speakes to Publius Sipio. ibid Attalus against Philip by Sea. 379 Aduertisement by fire. ibi. Aduice of Eeas touching signes by fire. 380 An other kind of aduertisement by fire, in∣uented by Cleomenes and Demotrites. 381 Asdrubal brother to Hannibal slaine. 386 Accord betwixt the Romans and the Eto∣liens. 388 Anaxidmus slaine. 393 Asdrubals Campe neere to Elinge. 394 Asdrubal chargeth the Romans. 395 Asdrubal puts his men in battaile. 396 Agathocles cruelty. 407 Achiens free from fraud. 414 Apege the wife of Nabis. 416 Aduice of the Romans. 423 Articles comprehended in the accords past betwixt Scipio and Carthaginians. 430 Articles of accord propounded by Scipio to the Carthaginians. 435 Agathocles shewed her paps to the Mace∣donians. 442 Agathocles slaine. 443 Attalus chargeth Philips army at Sea. 446 A man may be commended and blamed ac∣cording to the diuersity of his actions. 453 Abideins besieged by Philip. 454 A course which the Abydeins take in des∣paire. 455 Alexander against Philip. 460 Antiochus answer to the Romans. 477 B. Beginning of the History. 5 Blame of Philin and Fabius Historiogra. 9 Battle at Sea betwixt the Carthaginians & Romans. 16 Battle at Sea betwixt the Romans and Car∣thaginians. 19 Battaile giuen by the Romans to the Cartha∣ginians. 24 Battaile won by the Carthaginians. 58 Boloniens defeated by the Romans. 71 Battaile of the footmen. 76 Boloniens Country spoiled. Boloniens yeild vnto the Romans. 78 Beginning of the League. 81 Bostar Chiefe of the Carthaginians. 160 Bremius chiefe of the Gaules. 200 Blame of Philip 238 Bold enterprize of Cleomenes. 244 Bataile betwixt Ptolomy & Antiochus. 268 Beginning of gouernments. 284 Blame of Nomarche and Philomale. 351 Beginning of the fight for Carthage. 362 Battaile betwixt Asdrubal and the Romans in Italy. 385 Battaile by the Elephants. 432 Braue answere of Philip to Marcus Emi∣lius. 456 C. Carthaginians loose the Battaile. 13 Carthaginians army 350. saile. 17 Complaint of the Souldiers. 45 Courtesie of Romans to the Carthaginis. 56 Causes of Alexanders war in Persia. 106 Cause of the first war betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians 108 Countries Conquered by Hannibal. 110 Cruelty of Hannibal. 153 Carthaginians defeated by the Romans vp∣on a Hill, and then surprized. 161 Course which Hannibal tooke in passing the streights kept by the Romans. 162 Campe of Asdrubal of 30000. foote, and 300. horse. 418 Campe of Syphax of 10000. horse, and 50000. foot. ibid. Carthaginians Senate hold a Counsell 421 Conspiracy of the Carthaginians against the Roman Embassadour. 426 Carthaginians presse Hannibal. 428 Cruelty of Virgins. 443 Causes why Philip challengeth the Victory to himselfe. 450 Cruelty of the Abydeins to themselues. 456 Courteous and wise answere of Philip. 459 Custome of the Etoliens very strange. 461 Commendation of Tytus. 465
Defeate of Hieron by Apius. Defeate of the Carthaginians by Apius. 8 Dissention betwixt Amilcar & Hanno. 55 Death of Amilcar. 59 Death of King Ageron. 60 Demetrius father to Philip. 61 Duraza surprized by the Sclauonians. 64 Diuers victories of the Gaules against the Romans. 0 Diligence of the Romans 73 Defeate of the forlorne hope of the Gaules. and the death of King Aueroeste. 77 Diuers defeates of the Acheins. 89 Duty of a Historiographer. 92 Death of many great Princes. 101 Demetrius lost his Realme and Life by con∣spiracy. 105 Demetrius King of Sclauonia. 111 Discretion of the head of an enterprise. 112 Demetrius a man of great courage, and lit∣tle iudgement. 114 Diuision of the world in three parts. 124 Delta an Iland in Aegypt. 131 Duty of a good Captaine. 150 Discription of the Country of Capua, and its scituation. 155 Diusion of the Roman Army, betwixt the two Dictators. 163 Discord betweene the two Consuls. 168 Diuersity of swords betwixt the Gaules and the Spaniards. 170 Defeate of the Roman horse-men by the Gaules and Spaniards. 171 Difference betwixt a priuate and publicke iiury. 191 Death of Thibete. 203 Dormache smothered 207 Defeate of the Etoliens. 212 Duty of a King. 230 Death of Appelles and his sonne. 239 Death of Molon. 252 Distribution of Ptolomies Army vnto his Captaines. 258 Diuers Townes taken by Antiochus. 261 Defeate of the Elienses. 274 Demetrius his aduice to Philip. ibid. Duty of the Senate. 289 Dooissty of the Romans. 295 Defeat of the Romans by night. 340 Duty of a Commaunder. 342 Disposition of Publius Scipio. 357 Duty of Commanders of an Army 369 Diogenes fights with the Barbarians. 371 Defeate of Asdrubal. 377 Diuers Nations vnder the leading of Han∣nibal. 394 Double policy of Scipio. 395 Disorder by the Elephants. 397 Defeate of the Spaniards. 402 Defeate of the Celtiberians. 422 Diuers opinions of the Carthaginians con∣cerning their warre. 423 Democrates Captaine Generall vnto Philip, sunke. 447 Death of Theophiliscus. 450 Death of Scope by poyson. 479 E. Embassadors sent by the Carthaginians, to Marcus Attilius. 22 Embassies snt through all Affricke by Ma∣tho and Spendiu. 47 Emilius slaine in the battaile. 172 Embassadors sent to Philip from the Messe∣niens and Acarnanians 226 Etoliens charge Philips reare ward. 231 Embassadors from Rhodes to Chios. 237 Elephants of Lybia feare them of India. 268 Earthquake at Rhodes. 270 Etoliens circumuented by a stratagem. 274 Embassadors come to Philip. 276 Etoliens blame Agelaus for making of the peace 279 Errour of Arate. Errour of Cleomenes. Errour of Philip. Errour of Nicins. 345 Exercises appoynted by Scipio for his Army by Sea and Land. 368 Excellency of Hannibal. 394 Excuse of Alexander vppon Calistines. 411 Enteruiew of Hannibal and Scipio. 49 Embassadors wronged by Philip. 438 Egyptians cruel. 443 Embassadors of Philip reiected. 465 Embassador sent to Rome by Tytus. 464
F. Fifty thousand men within Agregas. 12 Fore sight of the Carthaginians. 31 Forty thousand men slaine by Amilcar. Fertillity of Italy. 68 Fore-sight of Amilcar, father to Hannibal. 108 First Accord betwixt the Romans and Car∣thaginians. 116 Feare of the Elephants vpon the Rhone. 129 Fabius returneth to the Campe. 163 Fabius speech to Lucius Emilius. 165 Fort of Naples taken by Hannibal. ibi. Fifteene hundred Etoliens defeated by Phi∣lip. 209 Flight of Euripides. 112 Forces which Philip left at Dyme. 224 Flight of Megalle. 238 Flight of Lycurgus into Etolia. 239 Forme of a Buckler. 293 Forme of a Target. 293 Flight of Asdrubal. 421 G. Great resolution of the Rhodiens. 33 Geson makes remonstrances to the Souldi∣ers 46 Geson with his Company put to death. 54 Gales  of liuing. 69 Gaules turnes from the Romans 70 Gaules were seauen moneths in Rome. 72 Gessates dwell on this side the Rhine 79 Grecians terrified by the Gaules. 81 Great villany committed by the Mantini∣ens. 93 Gaules indeauoured to stop Hannibals pas∣sage ouer the Rhine. 127 Gaules inhabiting along the Rhine, haue of∣ten past into Italy. 130 Gaules repulsed. 143 Great Amazement which was at Rome, for the battle lost. 152 Great reputation of Fabius. 164 Gaules battallion of foote broken by the Ro∣mans, and reunited againe. 171 Great dilligence in Philip. 233 Gift of Antiochus to the Rhodiens. 271 Gouernment, constncy, and good Counsell required in a Captaine. 295 Geometry necessary for the Warre. 346 Great fury of the fight. 433 Gulfe of Neptune. 451 H. Hieron chosen King of the Saragossins. 6 Hieron followes the Carthaginians part. 7 Hannibal son of Amilcar Captaine of fifty ships, with 10000. men. 31 Hannibal a Rhodien. 33 Hanno hanged on a crosse. 52 Hannibal crucified. 57 Hannibal his speech to Antiochus 109 Hannibal answeres, when he comes to age he will be an enemy to the Romans ib. Hannibals victory on the Barbarians. 110 Hannibals answere to the Roman Embassa∣dors. 111 Hannibals Army of 50. thousand foot, and nine thousand horse. 123 Hannibal raiseth his Army to passe the Rhone. 127 Hannibals victory ouer the Gaules 128 Hannibals speech vnto his souldiers. ibid. Hannibal passeth the Alpes along the Rhone 130 Hannibal conducted by Guides at the pas∣sage of the Mountaines. 131 Hannibal makes a speech. 134 Hannibal goes on his course. 135 Hannibals speech to his souldiers. 139 Hannibal puts his men into battaile. 145 Hannibals speech to the prisoners that was allied to the Romans. 148 Hannibals policy to keepe himselfe from killing by Treason. ibi. Hannibal looseth an eye 149 Hannibal runs along the Coast of the A∣driatique sea. 153 Hannibal presents battaile to Fabius. 154 Hannibals pollicy against Fabius. 157 Hannibals speech to his souldiers. 169 Hannibal puts his men into battaile. ibid. Hannibals Army consists of forty thousand foot, and ten thousand horse. 170 Hannibals losse. 172
Hannibals proceeding after the battaile of Cannes. 312 Honors done vnto Arate after his death. 323 Hee turnes his discourse to the Carthagini∣ans. 329 Hannibals remonstrances to the Tarentins. 334 Hannibal within forty furlongs of Rome. 339 Hannibal sent to Tyche. 427 Hannibals speech to Scipio. 429 Hannibal flies to Adrumeum. 434 Hannibal forceth a Citizen. 435 I. Intelligence of the souldiers within Car∣thage. 44 Iirians and Sclauonians. 63 Iseas King. 84 I conceiue that this Promontory is that which they call the Promontory of Mer∣cure in Affricke, where as now the Citty Cleea stands. 116 Idlenesse of the Etoliens. 183 Ithoria very stronge. 210 Image of Minerua. 217 Indiscretion of Commaunders blamed. 275 Inconstancy of the people. 400 Iland of yrnon not well knowne by Ty∣mens. 404 Image of Diana. 451 K. King Etas and Gallus slaine. 71 King Andubal taken 148 King Darius 199 Knowledge of the diuersity of daies necessa∣ry for Captaines. 343 L. Letters from Tunes to the Mutines Campe. 53 Lucius Emillius and Caius Tarentius, cho∣sen Consuls. 164 Lucius Posthumus Praetor. 165 Lucius Emillius. 171 Lucius Posthumus defeated in Gaule. 173 Lycurgus chosen King. 15 Lyciens Towne raized and burnt 20 Lacedemonian Magistrtes slaine by C∣lon. 9 Lacedemonians vnfortunate after they the Lawes of Lycurgs. ibid. Leonce a Trator to Philip. 226 Lawes of Warre. 230 Lycurgus takes the Towne of El▪ 33 Leonce and his Faction returnd vnto A∣pelles. 237 Leuy of Armies by Antigonus and Ptolo∣my. 360 Logbasse sent Embassadour by the Slgen∣ses. 263 Logbasse and his children slaine. 265 Lycurgus called home. 272 Lyce defeated Euripdes 273 Lacedemonans Common-weale. 305 Lisse taken by Philip. 34 Laodicea the wfe of Acheus. 327 Lacedemon taken by Epaminudas. 340 Lelius assailes Syfax his Campe by fire. 420 Lucius Sruivus Lucius Citinus and Lu∣cius Fabius sent Embassadours vnto Carthage▪ 425 Losse of ships which Philip made. 449 M. Marcus Valerius, and Octatillius chosen Con∣suls. 10 Marcelle taken by assault. 16 Marcus Attillius taken, with 500. Ro∣mans. 24 Many Towers ruined by their Engines. Mount Erix. 8 Mount Aetna. ibid. Mutany of the common Souldiers. 45 Matho punished. 58 Megalopoly raized. 91 Mount Taurus 103 Modena besieged by a great number of the Gaules. 125 Misery very common among Souldiers. 137
Magobrother to Hannibal. 144 Marcus Manuttus Constable. 154 Many Countries ruined by Hannibal. ibid. Manuttus his Speech. 164 Messenians seeke the Alliance of the A∣cheins. 179 Musicke profitable to all the World. 186 Messenians alwaies friends to the Arcadi∣ans, and enemies vnto the Lacedemoni∣ans. 192 Machate sent Embassador from the Etoli∣ens to the Lacedemonians. 149 Machae preuailes in his Enterprize. 195 Metropolis taken and burnt. 209 Mountaine of Appiare. 212 Malicious policy of Appelles. 216 Money and Corne deliuered to Philip by the Acheins. 224 Methap taken by Philip. 228 Methape Razed by Philip. 231 Magalee & Leonce do outrage to Arate. 232 Magalee and Crinon condemned by the King in 12000. Crownes. ibid. Mutiny against Philip and his men. 237 Msery of Courtiers. 238 Magalee kils himselfe. 239 Molen goes to fied with an Army. 246 Mutiy in Antiochus his Campe. 250 Molen Crucified. 253 Myne of Whea about two of our Bushels, waighing an hundred and ten pounds. 263 Mutiny among the Megalopolitains. 273 Monrhall ouernment of one alone by feare. 283 Mutuall knitting together of three Com∣mon-weales. 290 Manner of Tribunes in the Choice of Legi∣ons. 293 Manner of the Romans Camping. 297 Manner how they punish such as faile in the Watch. 300 Manner of recompensing the Souldiers val∣lour. 301 Mago deliurs the Fort. 364 Many riuers comes out of Tauris 370 Machenides slane. 393 Manner of Libias liuing. 404 Manner of breeding Swine in Italy. 405 Maegarena saues himselfe naked. 440 Mutiny of the people. 441 N Narae. 51 Note the Iniustice of the Romans. 58 Nicophanes Cercids. 87 Neuer Commander did any thing worthy which was not pleasing vnto his Souldi∣ers. 109 Nature of Philip. 216 Nature of the Macedonians. 224 Nicagores accuseth Clemenes. 243 Number of Scipio's Army at Land 361 Number of Ships that were taken. 366 Number of the Dead. 387 Nabir Tyrant of the Lacedemonians. 415 Nion and Agathocl slaine. 443 Number of Philips Ships and of his Ene∣my. 447 O Order of the Battaile of Zantippus. 23 One hundred and fourteene Vessels of the Carthaginians taken by the Romans. 26 One hundred and fifty of the Romans Ves∣sels lost. 28 Occasion o renue the War betweene the Ro∣mans and the Gaules. 72 Order of the Gaules Battaile. 76 Orcomene taken with other Townes. 91 Order of Antigonus Battaile. 98 Other Articles past betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians. 107 Opinion of Polybius in the delight of an History. 120 Order which Hannibal gaue for the defence of Spaine. 121 Oration which Hannibal made to his Soul∣diers. 122 Order which Hannibal held to put his men into Battaile. 170 Occasion of the Ruines of Cynethenses 186 Ocanthy. 205 Order that Philip held to take to passe the Streights of Therme. 228 Old Arate made Chiefe of the Acheins. 240 Order required in all things. ibid. Order of Molens Battaile. 252
Order of Ptolomies Army in Battaile. 267 Order of Antiochus his Battaile. ibid. Ochtocracia is a gouernment of the Mutiny of the people. 283 Olygarch. 286 Office of the Cosuls. 288 Order of the Watches. 299 Order of two Campe in Marching. 302 Order for the Engines of battery. 320 Order of the Romans in the Diuision of the spoile of a Towne. 365 Order of Philopomns Battaile. 390 Order of Machanides Army. ibid. Order of Scipio's Battaile. 401 Of the voyage of Alexander against Drius Calisthenes. 408 Order of Battaile of the Romans Army. 422 Order which Syphax and Asdrubal held. ibid. Order of Scipio's Battaile. 431 Order of annibal his Battaile. ibid. Onanthe sad. 440 P unishment of Traytors. 5 Policy of Hieron. 6 Philin. 9 Palermo besieged by the Romans, and taken by assault. 27 Policy of Cecilius to defeate the Ele∣phants. 28 Port of Trepanum taken by Luctati com∣mander of the Roman Army. 41 Policy of Amilcar. 51 Prudence of Hieron. 55 Phenice taken by the Sclanonians. 61 Parthenia yeelded to the Romans. 65 Pillage made by the Gaules vpon the Ro∣mans. 70 Policy of the Gaules. 74 Pursuite of Emilius. 75 Pythagorians burnt in Italy. 82 Port of Corinthe taken. 85 Pillage of Mantinnia came to nine score 1000. Crownes. 96 Polybius hath beene present at a great part of the things which he hath written. 105 Philip. 106 Philiuus a Historiographer. 118 Polybius hath made forty Bookes. 120 Parting of the Roman Armies. 126 Polybius his Remonstrance against Histo∣riographers. 130 Polybius visited the Alpes. 131 Polybius his excuse. 135 Polybius hath visited Affricke, Spaine, and the Gaules. 137 Policy of Hannibal for an example to his Souldiers. 138 Paulus Emilius spech to the Souldiers. 167 Policy of Hannibal. 169 Polybius writes nothing but what hee hath seene or receiued from those which had seene them. 175 Philip. ibid. Ptolomy Philopater. ibid. Polymarches. 184 Philip comes to Corinthe 187 Philips wise Answer. 188 Phebidins. 190 Philips Army. 196 Prsias. 201 Pltor Chiefe of the Sclauonians. 205 Philips Army. 208 Poetia taken by Composition. 299 Peania taken by assault. 210 Philip fortifies the Fort of the Enia∣des. ibid. Psophis taken by assault. 213 Philip giues forces to the Aeheins. 214 Philip assaults Alphira. 217 Phialenses yeeld to Philip. 218 Prudence of Antigonus towards the Lace∣demonians. 229 Practice of a Tyrant. 230 Paphia burnt 231 Philip comes to Corinth. 233 Philip sayles to Corinth. 239 Ptolomy King of Aegypt. 241 Ptolomy slaine by Clemnes. 244 Practice of Molen against Epige. 250 Ptolomy the Benefactor. 255 Policy of Agathocles and Sosibius. 257 Pednelissenses besieged. 262 Peace concluded betwixt Acheus and the Selgenses. 265
Polomyes Victory against Antiochus. 269 Presents made to the Rhodiens by many Cities. 270 Ptolomy his Present to the Rhodiens. 271 Peace betwixt Philip and the Etoliens. 277 Philips Enterprize against Sclanonia 280 Philip leaues his Enterprize for feare. ibid. Prusias defeates the Gules. 281 Principality or Monarchy. 284 Pay and entertainment of Foote and Horse. 302 Platoes Common-weale is to be re∣iected. 306 ompe of the Romans to an honorable per∣son. 309 Philip causeth Arate to be poysoned. 323 Philomene appointed for Hunting. 329 Philip subdued by the Thessalonians. 348 Publius Scipi and his Brother Created Ediles. 358 Publius Answer to Andobale. 376 Philops men akes Warre against Macha∣nides Tyrant of Lacedemon. 389 Publius Scipi drawes his Army toge∣ther. 394 Publius Scipio assembles his Army. 398 Punishment of the Mutiniers. 400 Partell corrupted. 407 Pedisca the Wfe of Syphax. 417 Pursuite of the Romans after Syphax. 423 Phylon slaine. 453 Policy of Attalus his Eouldiers. 449 Prinassa besieged by Philip. 45 Queene uca. 61 Quintus Fabius chosen Dictator. 153 R. Rhegium besieged by the Romans. 5 Riuer of Ciamosure. 6 Romans resolue to succour the Mamer∣tins. 7 Retreate of Hannibal from Agregas. 13 Romans inuention to inure their men to the Oare. 14 Romans Army by Sea. 17 Rhodien taken with his ship. 34 Romans surprised by Arthal. 37 Romans Fleete broken at Sea. 38 Riuer of Mechera. 50 Reconciliation of Amilcar and Hann. 58 Rome taken by the Gaules. 70 Retreate of the Gales. 75 Reuolte of Aripote of Argos. 90 Reuolte of the Mantiniens. 93 Rier of Tagus. 110 Roman Embassadors sent to Carthage. 115 Remonstrances of the Gaulish Kings vnto the Carthaginian Campe. 128 Roman Embassadors signifie Warre vnto the Carthaginians. 121 Reuolte of the Bolonians. 125 Romans aduertised by Hannibal. 138 Retreate of Scipi. ibid. Riuer of Trebia. 142 Romans feare for the losse of the Bat∣taile. 147 Romans defeated and surprised. 151 Riuer of Vantoure. 156 Romans Army at Sea. 158 Romans Victory at Sea. ibid. Romans great Army at Sea. 159 Riuer of Fenne. 168 Romans Army of foure score thousand Foote, and 6000 Horse. 170 Romans lose the Battaile. 172 Rhodies succour the Synopenses. 205 Retreate of the Dardariens without doing anything. 211 Retreate of Euripides from Stympha∣lia. 212 Riuer of Eremanthea. 213 Reuolte of the Leapreates against the Eto∣liens. 218 Riuer of Acheloe. 227 Riuer of Erota. 235 Retreate of Molon. 248 Reasons of the warre propounded by Antio∣chus. 259 Rabatamassana yeelded to Antiochus. 262 Romans. 288 Roman Cauallery armed after the Greeke manner. 295 Romans manner in giuing the word. 299 Roman Common-weale more excellent then
the Lacedemonian. 308 Riuer of Lisson. 313 Race of Acheus. 328 Rier of Erota. 334 Romans in Field. 339 Remonstrance of Publius Scipio vnto his Army. 359 Royall City of the Persians 369 Remonstrance of Edecon to Publius. 374 Reprehension of Calistenes. 408 Remonstrance of the Roman Embassadors to the Carthaginians. 425 Rhodiens declard Enemies to Philip. 438 S. Succours required from the Romans by the Mamertins. 6 Supplies which the Carthaginians put into Agragas. 11 Scuerity of the Romans towards their Souldiers. 11 Sixscore Vessels made ready for the Sea by the Romans. 14 Spendius. 46 Surprize of the Carthaginians Campe. 49 Sephira. 50 Supplies of Numidians come to Spendi∣us. 51 Succours from Sclauonia to the Midio∣nians. 60 Scerdlade. 62 Some Gauies banisht their Countrey for their disloyalty 63 Sparia or Lacedemon. 101 Sardinia abandoned by the Carthagini∣ans. 108 Sagont forced by Hannibal. 112 Scipio his speech to his men. 141 Sempronius puts his men into Bat∣taile. 146 Scipio arriues at Empories, and conquers vnto Ebro. 147 Sixe thousand Romans taken in a Burrowe by composition. 162 Supplies sent from Rome into Spaine. 159 Scerdilade and Demetrius. 183 Scope chosen Head of the Etoliens 190 Scituation of Constantinople. 196 Shelfes in the sea. 198 Scituation of Synop. 205 Scituation of Egire. 206 Scituation of Ambrachia. 208 Scope makes an incursion into Mace∣dony. 208 Scituation of Sophia. 212 Sally of the Elienses vpon the Macedo∣nians. 213 Succours sent to the Elienses by Dorima∣che. 216 Scituation of Triphalia and its Townes. 216 Scituation of Alphira. 217 Slander of Appelles. 220 Scituation of Sephasenia. 225 Scituation of Amycle. 234 Speech of Hermes against Epigene. 245 Scituation of Media. 247 Scituation of Silucin. 255 Selutia assaulted. 256 Seleucus his present. 271 Scituation of Thebes. 275 Speech of Agelaus. 277 Succours sent by the Romans to Scerdi∣lade. 281 Six kinds of gouernments 283 Spanish sword. 294 Septier is two Mines, and a Mine is two London Bushels. 302 Signe of the Sardens negligence. 315 Sally made by them of Lisse. 324 Strong Fort yeelded vnto Antiochus. 328 Skirmish betwixt the Romans and Car∣thage. 334 Superstition of the Roman Dames. 339 Scituation of Carthage. 361 Second assault giuen to Carthage by the Romans. 363 Scipio ass ailes the Fort. 364 Souldiers Oathes touching the Pillage. 365 Scipio's prouidence concerning the Pris∣ers. 36 Syringe besieged by Antiochus. 372 Syringe taken by Antiochus. ibid Spaniards ioyne with the Romans 376 Scipio saluted King of the Spaniards. 377 Skirmish of the Bactreans with Antio∣chus. 34
Safety of Monarchies. 391 Suddaine Charge of the Romans against the Carthaginans. 395 Scipio ps his men in Battaile. ibid. Scipio's speech to his Army. 400 Scipio layes a baite for the Enemy. 401 Spaniads put themselues in Battaile. ibid. Scipe drawes to the Enemies Campe. 419 Scipio sets Asdruba Campe on fire. 420 Scipio tends the siege of Bysarthe. 421 Scipio drawes towards the Enemy. 422 Syphax returnes in safty. 423 Scpio's Answer to Hannibal. 429 Scipio's speech to his Army. 431 Strength of a Battaile. 432 Saying of Scipio. 444 Syphax King of the Masaisylins. 452 T. The Persians. 2 The Lacedemonians. ibid. The Maccdonians. ibid. The Romans. ibid. Timer us an Historiographer. 4 Taking of Messina by some Campanois. 5 Taking of Rhegium by the Romans. ibid. The punishment of Traytors. ibid. The Campanois holding Messina, are called Mamertins. ibid. The Mamertins deliuer their Towne and Fort to the Carthaginians. 6 The Mmertins recouer the Fort from the Captaine of the Carthaginians. 7 The order of the Roman Armies and the number of men in a Legion. 10 Tunes taken by the Romans by an assault. 2 The Numidians great Robbers. ibid. The leading of the Carthaginians Army giuen to Xantippus. 23 The policy of Cecilius to defeate the Ele∣phants. 28 Tree principall Promontories in Sicily. 30 Tone of Erix taken from the Romans by Amilcar. 40 The Canspiracy of the Women of Affricke. 48 The Victory of Amilcar. 51 The Victory of the Carthaginians against Spendius. 52 Townes of Hippona and Bysarthe reuolte from the Carthaginians. 55 The extreme necessity that prest the stran∣gers Campe. 56 The Victory of the Sclauonians against the Epirotes. 62 The Romans Embassy to Teuca Queene of Sclauonia. 63 The Turinois and Agoniens. 68 The Genouois. 68 The Poe. 68 The Venetians come from Paphlagonia. 69 The number of the Gaules Army. 73 The preparations which the Romans made for Warre. ibid. The number of Souldiers that was raised in Italy. 73 Tuscany ruiued by the Gaules. 74 The aduice of Aneroste. 75 The Armes which the Gaules did vse. 77 Taking of King Congolliane. ibid. The Army of Millanois. 78 The vneasinesse of the Gaules Swords. 79 The Pythagorians burnt in Italy. 82 The Lacedemonians and Thebanes. 83 The alliance of twelue Citties. 84 The enuy of the Etoliens against the A∣cheins. 86 The Nature of Kings 87 Tages yeelded vnto Antigonus. 91 The great Villany committed by the Manti∣niens: 93 The Mantiniens sold. 94 The cruelty of Aristomachus. ibid. The great fidelity of the Megalopolitains. 95 Third part of the Booty is due to the Gene∣rall. 96 The Number of the Nations that were in Antigon Army. 97 The Warres which Antiochus and Philip made. 103 Tostnes of Sclauonia reduced to the Roman obedience. 113 The war like policy of Emilius. 113 The Victory of the Romans vpon the Sclaue∣nians. 114
The number of Hannibals Army in a table of Copper, seene by Polybius. 122 The number of horse and foote which were in Hannibals Army at his parting from Spane. 123 The parting of the Roman Armies. 126 The meanes to passe the Elephants. 129 The Sauoyards hinder Hannibal and his Army. 132 They of the Mountaines charge the Car∣thaginians. ibid. Treason of the Barbarians against Hanni∣bal. 133 The number of men which Hannibal had, after he had past ouer the Alpes. 135 The policy of Hannibal for an example to his Souldiers. 138 The retreate of Scipi 141 Treason of the Gaules against the Romans. 142 The manner of the Numidians fighting. 146 The difference betwixt a Dictator and a Consull. 153 The meanes which Fabius made to stoppe Hannibals passage 156 Two Dictators at Rome at one instant. 162 The Riuer of Fante. 168 The Romans in old time very sermonious. 170 Ten thousand Romans taken aliue. 172 Three score and ten thousand slaine in the battaile. ibid. Tarent, Capua, and Naples reduced vnder the obedience of Hannibal. 173 Time of the death of Antigonus, Seleucus, and Ptolomy. 175 The causes of the war betwixt the Acheis and Philip against the Etoliens and La∣cedemonians. ibid. Taurion taken by assault. 177 The nature of the Thess alonians. ibi. The murther of the Gouernors of the La∣cedemonians 188 The blame of the Epirots. 192 The murther of the Lacedemon Gouernours by the young men. 195 The power of clemency in Princes. ibid. Townes taken in Argos by Lycurgus. 195 Two causes why the Blacke Sea and the Pon∣tique runne continally. 197 The refuge of Europe. 199 Thracians vanquished by the Gaules. 200 Tole imposed vpon those that sailed into the Blacke Sea by Constantinople 201 Towne of Thalam. 215 Thalame yeilds. ibid. Typaneates yeilds vnto Philip. 217 Townes which yeild to Philip. 218 Taurion dispossessed of the gouernment of Morea. 221 Therme spoiled by the Macedonians. 228 Temple of Apollo. 234 Taking of Leonce. 238 Thedote. 245 Towne of Broches 247 Towne of Broches besieged. 257 Taking of Ptolomy. ibid. Trce made with the Selgenses. 264 Thebes besieged by Philip. 275 Thebes yeilded to Philip 276 Timoxenes Chiefe of the Acheins. 299 Tyranny. 285 Townes for retreate for those that are vo∣luntarily Banished 290 Thebains. 304 Two principle of euery Common-weale. 306 Treason practised against Acheus by Cam∣bila and Bolis 325 Tarentum betrayed vnto Hannibal by trea∣chery. 329 Tarentum taken by Hannibal. 332 Tegea taken 393 Three causes of the peoples mutiny against Princes. 309 Two kindes of vntruths. 406 Tymerus reprehensible. 407 Tymerus speakes by heare say and imagina∣tion. 412 Tunis taken by Scipio. 423 Two ends in Histories. 444 The scituation of Phigalea. 175 The Etoliens spoile and iniure the Messe∣niens. 176
V. Varro offrs battaile, and the order which he held. 170 Varro flies with threescore and ten Horse. 172 Vanquish an enemy by mildnesse. 230 Victory of Garsyere against the Selgenses. 263 Vnderstanding more commendable then for∣tune 357 Voyage of Alexander against Darius Ca∣listines. 408 Vices of Heraclides 415 Vca besieged by Scipio 417 Victory of the Romans against the Cartha∣ginians 434 W What is required in a Tragedy 92 What the Carthaginians held in Affrick. 124 Warre attempted by the Etoliens against Morea. 177 War concluded against the Etoliens. 189 Whom the suruey of the watch belongs. 300 What a Ladder for the War ought to be. 346 Wife of Mandonin. 366 Wisdome of Scipio. 397 Witty answere of a young man 408 Warre like to a disease. 411 X Xantippus a Lacedemonian 22 Xantippus returnes into his Country. 25 Xenoete his Army defeated and spoiled. 249 Z Zalucus the Law-giuer. 407 Zachantia spoiled and ruined by the Car∣thaginians. 435 FINIS.
The Plot of the Romanes CAMPE. Euery side of the Campe hath 2100 foot in the Ditch. The Ditch and Pallisadoe. Euery side of the situation of the Tents 17000 feet. 200   100 Footmen strangers and newly come.   Footmen of the Allies extraordi∣nary 840.   Footmen of the Allies extraor∣dinary 840.   Footmen strangers and newly come. The Length. 100 Horsemen strangers and newly come.   Horsemen of the Allies extra∣ordinary 300.   Horsemen of the Allies extraordi∣nary 200.   Horsemen strangers and newly come. 100   100 Choice foot∣men and vo∣luntaries. Choice horse∣men and vo∣luntaries.   The Market place. The pretorium. The Questory or Treasury.   Choice foot∣men and vo∣luntaries. Choice horse∣men and vo∣luntaries. 100   The Tribunes.     50       100   100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principal 120.   Tria∣rij Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120.   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120.   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 0 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120.   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120.   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 50   A crosse streete   100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 327. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 200 foot 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40.   Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120   Tria∣rij 60 Romane horse 30   Romane horse 30 Tria∣rij 60   Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 0   Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 200 foot.     175 foote. 150 foot. 50 100 100 50 50 100 50 100 50 50 100 100 50 150 175     Footmen Allies 1260 Horsemen Allies 400   F. Iauelins 1200 Princip. 1200   Tria R. 600 Horse 300   R. horse 300 Tria 600   Prin p. 1200 F. Iauelins 1200   Horsemen Allies 400 Footmen 60   The Romans Campe containes in its square, equall of all sides, 91. Acres and about 12. Rod: after 22. foot to the Rod, and 100 Rod to the Acre. In regard of the Gates of the Campe, I haue purposely omitted them, for that Polybius makes no mention: Although the manner of the Romanes was to haue foure according to the foure Corners of the world: And it is placed in the middest of euery side of the Ditch. As for the light Iauelins or Darts, they are diuided among other Bands: And as for the streets I haue not set them downe, for that they may be easily imagined.
