20754 99850858 16090
THE COPIE OF A LETTER WRITTEN from PARIS, the 20. of May 1610. Declaring the maner of the execution of FRANCIS RAVAILLART, that mur∣dered the French King. With what he was knowen to confesse at his death. And other the circumstances and de∣pendencies thereupon. Together with two Edicts; One of the Parliament alone; The other of the new King in Parliament, declaring and confirming the Queene mother Regent of France. ¶ Imprinted at BRITAINE BVRSE. And are there to be sold. ANNO 1610.
THE COPIE OF a Letter written from PARIS the 20. of May 1610. Declaring the maner of the Execution of Francis Rauaillart that murdered the French King, &c. SIR, THough Tragedies bee sorrowfull representati∣ons, yet the Specta∣tors hauing beheld and seene the former acts, they are likewise desi∣rous to know the catastrophe; So fareth it with you, (as I coniecture,) who hauing vnderstood by my former Letters, what hath hitherto passed about this direfull acte, you will likewise couet to heare the end of this execrable actor, with other the consequencies; which here you haue. Two dayes since, being the 18. of this moneth, I was an eye witnes of the exe∣cution
of this accursed creature, which was in this maner as I shall here truely tell you. As soone as hee was brought vpon the Scaffold in the ordinary place appointed, Hee began first with crossing himselfe, and the people, (as in deed he had truely done in an other sence: For ne∣uer came there a heauier crosse nor losse to any Nation, then this vntimely death of this King to this kingdome;) Then fell hee downe vpon his knees, making his Confession to the Priest. What he said in particular could not be heard, but the Priest thereupon there openly gaue him Absolution. Then was hee layed naked vpon the Stage, and pinched in diuers places with hot Pincers, After which they burned his hand with the knife therein, wherewith hee killed the King; Then powred they hot lead into the wounds made with the Pincers, And lastly drew him in pieces with horses. His torments lasted two houres, and at euery action with horrible cries and struggling, he testified the sence
he had of his paines; Albeit all the while his torments lasted, he ceased not speake∣ing, and in the intermission thereof was demaunded diuers questions by his Con∣fessor, and by the Officers of Iustice, but as it is said, hee persisted obstinately with∣out confessing any materiall thing. The people did exceedingly reioyce to see him thus tormented, And much adoe there was through their rage, to bring him aliue to the execution, and after his death they satisfied themselues what they could by dragging and trailing his members in great fury about the towne. This was the maner of his death, and all that is made knowen of his confession: but there is generally conceiued a secret ielousie against the Iesuites: And what∣soeuer of his confession is concealed, may be presumed to be feare to discouer that of the Church of Rome, which they are ashamed to lay open. He suffered the torment onely twise before his death, and had bin executed foure or fiue dayes soo∣ner, if the Queene by expresse comman∣dement
had not hindred it. The causes of his speedie execution that are alledged by the Court of Parlia∣ment, are these; That by their forme of proceeding, they neuer torment any man before he be condemned, and keepe him not aliue aboue a day after. That they feared he might die of his torments, & so they to be bereaued of his cōfession at his death, and the people of so desired a spe∣ctacle; who were much pleased and satis∣fied to see him so cruelly (though deser∣uedly) tortured. He confessed that hee had conuersed and spoken with a certaine Iesuite in Paris called Father d' Aubigny, but denied that he had in any sort cōmu∣nicated his purpose vnto him; but this Ie∣suite being examined, vtterly denied that euer he had seene this man before, which deniall made the matter the more suspici∣ous, they finde by letters written to this towne, & by autentical certificates that the very day of the Kings murther, & the day before, there were reports spread thereof out of the Kingdome. They say further
that they doe well finde, that the damna∣ble Maximes which haue bene insinuated these 20. yeeres by seditious Bookes, and Preachings, in derogation of the sacred∣nesse and authority of Princes, haue bene a chiefe occasion of this mischiefe. A point which all Princes had neede neere∣ly to regard. And so St for this time I wil adde no more to your trouble: what else may insue, you shall heare soone after that I may know that to be true which I shall be about to tel you: and other then truth you shall euer be assured neuer to receiue from mee; and so I rest euer ready to doe you seruice. Paris 20. May. 1610.
THE SENTENCE of Court of Parliament for establishing the Q. Regent the same euening that the King was slaine. WHereas the Kings At∣turney generall hath made remonstrāce vn∣to the Court of Parli∣ament and all the Chambers there∣of assembled, that (the King being now murdred by a most cruell, inhu∣mane, and detestable paricide com∣mitted vpon his sacred Person) it were necessary to prouide for the af∣faires of the present King, and of his Estate; and required that there should be presently order giuen con∣cerning his seruice, and the good of his Estate, which could not be ruled and gouerned but by the Queene,
during the minoritie of the saide King her sonne; And that it would please the said Court to de∣clare her Regent, that the affaire of the Kingdome might be ordred by her. The matter hauing bene deliberated vpon, the said Court hath declared, and doth declare the said Queene (mother of this King) Regent in France for the admini∣stration of the affaires of the King∣dome during the minoritie of the said King her sonne, with all power and authority. Done in Parli∣ament 14. May 1610. Signed DV TILLET.
THE KINGS CON∣firmation of the Sentence of the Court of Parliament, Maij 14. de∣claring the Q. his mother Regent of France. THe KING sitting in his Seat of Justice, by the aduice of the princes of his blood, and other Princes and Prelates, Dukes, Peeres, and Officers of the Crowne, hauing heard the request of his Atturney generall, hath declared and doth declare (according to the Sentence of the Court of Parlia∣ment the day before) the Queene his Mother Regent of France, and to haue the care of the education, and bringing vp of his person, and the administration of the affaires of his
Kingdome, during his minoritie, and this present EDICT shall bee published and registred in all the bailliages & senechauses, and in o∣ther Iurisdictions depending vpō the said Court of Parliament, and in all other Parliaments of this saide Kingdome. Done in Parlia∣ment the 15. of May, 1610. Signed DV TILLET.
