22224 99846332 11292
THE seuenth Tragedie of Seneca, Entituled MEDEA: Translated out of Latin into English, by IOHN STVDLEY, Student in Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge. ¶Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate, beneth the Conduit, at the Signe of Sainct Iohn Euan∣gelist, by Tho∣mas Col∣well. Anno Domini M. D. LXVI.
¶To the ryght honorable Frauncis Lord Russell, Earle of Bedford, one of the Queenes Maiesties priuie Counsell: Knight of the moste honorable order of the Garter, Lord Gournour of arwicke, and Warden of the East matches. Iohn Studley wissheth healthe, with ncrease of Honor. AS it was not (right Ho∣norable) the great ex∣cesse, & abounduance of ANTONIVS glut∣tinge fare, but the lytell precious Perle of CLE∣OPATRA that wan¦the price, when thei con¦tended, whether of thē might deuoure more at one meale: Euen so this my lytell volume wherwith I present your Honour, may argue vto your Lord∣ship a more manifest proofe of my good will towards your Honour, then y• rich Iewels and sōmes of gold & siluer, y• wordly minds do vse to gratifie their frends withal. Ther¦fore I knowynge your Honour to be of the lyke mind with hym y• was Iudge betwene CLEOPATRA & ANTONIVS, lightly esteme, & highly contempne al bribyng gol∣den
gifts that as much or more glutteth ver∣tuous minds, then might Antonius excessiue fare: I haue presumed, to offer vnto your Honour, a smal Pearle of y• pearless Poet and most Christian Ethnicke Seneca, wherin no glutting, but swete delectacion, is offred vnto y• mind that doth hunger after vertue. But I neede not to burnish Gold beinge so bright of it self, neither to cōmend the value of it vnto him whose skilfull & lerned iudge∣ment cā beter esteme of it thē mi imbecilitie is able to expresse. Therfore trustyng your Honour (whose ale in fauouring & furthe¦ryng all learnynge & good Studies is most manifest) wil accept my good will signified by this trauel of my simple, rude & vnskilful pen, & beare with my bould attempt, wher∣vnto your Honors great curtesie hath high∣ly encouraged me to aspire, beseching your Lordship to take vpon you the tuicion of so weake a Fortresse, whom wtout your trustie aide, the parlous force of yll onges might soone ouerthrow: promisyng your Honour hereafter the further fruytes of my ryper Muse, I cease at this instant to trouble you: whom I leaue to he tuicion of our sauiour Iesus Christ: wishing our encrase of ho∣nour, long lyfe and luckie successe in all af∣fayres and attempets. Your Honours to cōmaunde, Iohn Studley.
¶ The Preface to the Reader. IF I had not gentle Reader a bet∣ter truste in thy gentlenesse, then affyance in myne owne weake∣nesse, I had not assayed thys se∣cond attempte, to bewraye my rudenesse and ignoraunce, vnto thy skilfull iudgemente: but though I mystrusted my selfe, yet I so reposed my hope in thee, that it gaue me corage to trāslate this one Tra∣gedie more of SENECA, for the pleasure of the learned, and the profyte of the vn∣learned by readynge of it in theyr natyue language. What kynde of Tragedie it is, or what is to be learned therby, I nede not stand at large to dyscusse, beinge so playnly set furthe by SENECA, far better then I am able to showe or translate it, so worthe∣lye as he hath wrytten it: yet as God hath gyuen me grace, rudely and symply I haue performed it: And bycause that all thynge myght be to the better vnderstandyng and commodytye of the vnlearned, as in some places I do expoūd at large the darke sence of the Poet: so haue I chaunged the fyrste
Chorus, because in it I sawe nothyng but an heape of prophane storyes, and names of prophane Idoles: therfore I haue altered the whole matter of it, begynnynge thus: Who hath not wist. Diuers reasons could I aledge to mayntayne thys myne altera∣cion, but I truste thy gentlenes wyll waye it to the vttermoste, and take all thynges in better parte. Thus I byd thee farewell. W. F. in the Transla∣tours behalfe. GRudge not though yonger yeares do toyle, where horye heddes might wade, Whose sappye wytte more apter seemes to trauell in thys trade. For who can more Mineruas face then lustye youth expresse? Or where doe Muses more delyght then in thys youthfulnesse? Dame Nature sheweth in her workes how yonger thynges excell, The yonger flowers commonlye do gyue the sweter smell
The yonger bowes wyth grener leaue a tayrer face doth showe: More gladsome is the pleasant plot, where grener grasse doth growe, We see also the fresher grape doth make the sweeter wyne, Why then should doyng age at youth for wante of age repyne? Le Senec crounde wyth Lawrll leafe, in England now appeares, Medea pende wyth hawtye style now Englysh Meetre weares: O Psquell paynte theyr pynyng shame, and Parcae do not spare Wyth spede to shred theyr lyes that do denye to graunt the share And prayse vnto the paynfull pen, that hath deserued so, In brynging thus abrode hys Mus to profyt reynde and foe
The Argument to the Tragedie by the Translatour. Cre sore did gripe Medeas hart, to see Hr Iason whom she tendred as her lyfe, And rescued had from plunge of peyis fre Renounnge her, to take another wife, Loue spnt in vayne breedes hate and malice rife, nynlyng coales, whose heate & gredie flame (Saue streames o blood,) nought els can quench the same Medea mad in troubled minde doth muse, On vengaunce fell, to quit her greous wronge. Roughe plages at length entendth she to vse: Yll venemous things she charmes wt charming song Seekes out a Baane mad of their poyson stronge In traytrous giftes a Rob, and chayne of Golde Nicely she doth the hidden poyson folde. Sent are the Giftes to Creuse nd her Sie, They takyng them that brought their dol to passe Vnwar are bunt by meanes of charmed ier, Due vengeaunce yet for Iason greater was, Lyfe fir on chyld by mothers hande (alas) Expired hath, whiche thoughe it hym agryse, Yet his othr chlde shee slayes before his eyes. The names of the Speakers of this Tragedie. Medea. Chous. Nutrix. Creon. Iason. Nuntius.
¶The fyrste Acte. Medea. O Gods whose grace doth guide their gob∣les that ioy in wedlocke pure, O Iuno thou Lucina hyght, on whom the chary cure Alotted is of those, that grone in paynfull chyldbed andes, O Pallas by whose heauenly arte Sir Typhis conning handes Haue learnde to bridle with hys helme hys newly framed boate, Wherwith the force of fighting fluddes he brekynge rydes a flote. O God whose forked Mace dothe stormes in rygour rough appeas, And cause the rufflyng surges couche amid the rampinge Seas: O Titan who vpon the swifte and wherlinge Hemisphaer Duides the chearefull day and nyght by egall turnes tappere. O threfolde shapen Hecte that sendest furthe thy lyght, Unto thy sylent Sacryfyse that offered is by nyght,
By whom my Iason sware to me o heauenly powers all, And ye on whom Medea aye with safer conscience call, O Dungeon dark, moste dredfull den of euerlastyng nyghte, O dampned gohstes: o kyngdome set agaynste the gods aryghte: O Lord of sad and lowrynge lakes, o Ladye dire of Hell, (Whom though that Pluto stale biforce yet did his roth excell The ficle fayth of Iasons loue, that he to me dothe beare,) With cursed throte I coniure you, o grysye gohstes appeare. Come out, come out, ye hellish hagges, reuenge this deede so dire, Bryng in your scratting pawes a bur∣nyng brande of deadly fyre. Rise vp ye hiddiuos diuelish feendes, as dreadfull as ye weare, When vnto me in wedlocke state ye dyd sometyme appeare. Worke ye, worke ye, the dole full death of thys new wedded wyfe. And martyr ye this father in lawe: depryue of breath and lyfe
Kynge Creons ruthfull famylie: in plunge of passyng payne Torment ye me, that on my spouse do wyshe thys woe to reyne: Preserue my Iasons lyfe, but yet let hym be bayted oute A mychyng, rogyng, runagate, in forren townes aboute. To passe from dore to dore, wyth care to begge hys nedy bread. Not knowing in what harbryng place to couche hys curssed head: A banysht wretche, dysdaynd of all, and styll in feare of lyfe, Then let him wish ten thousand times for me agayne hys wyfe: Thys famous gest whom euery man wyll entertayne and haue, Let hym be dryuē at straungers gates the table crūmes to craue. And that my bytter bannynges may wyth myschefe moste abounde, God graunt in gulphe of lyke dystresse hys chyldren may be drounde, To synke in sorowes stormes, that do there mother ouerflowe: Now, now, I haue, I haue the full reuenge of all my woe.
I haue dispatcht: my pyteous playnte and wordes in vayne I lose: What shall not I wyth vyolence get vp agaynste my foes? And wryng out of theyr wrested hādes the weddyng torche so bryght? Shall I not force the firmament to lose his shrynkyng lyght? What dothe my grandsirs Phaebus face this heuie hap beholde? And standynge gasyng at thys geare yet westwarde is he rolde, On glystrynge chariot hoysted hyghe, and kepes his beaten race, Amid the christall colourde skye, why turnes he not hys face, Retyringe faste into the East backe vp the day to twyne? O father Phaebe to me, to me, thy Charyot reygnes resygne, That I aduaunced vp, aboute the marble skyes may ryde, Bequeath thy brydle vnto me, and giue me grace to guide Thy yoked prauncyng team, with yer∣kyng lasshe of burnyng whyp, That with thy feruent fyry beames on purple poale doe skyp.
Let Corinthe cuntrey burnte to duste by force of flame and fyre Gyue place, that both the umbled seas may ioyne: whom to retyre It dothe compell, and dassheth of from banke on eyther syde, Least mete in one their chanels might, whose streames he dothe deuyde. No way to worke theyr deadly woe I haue but thys at hande, That to the weddyng I should beare a ruthfull brydall brande, Anoyenge Creons carelesse Court: when fynyshed I haue Such solemne sruyce, as that ryght of sacrafyce do the craue, Then at the Alters of the Gods my chyldrn shal be slayne, With crimsen colourd blod of babes harte, their alters wil I staine. Through liuers, lounges the lightes & through euery gut and gall, For vengeaūce breake away perforce, and spare no blood at all: If anye lustye lyfe as yet within thy soule do reste, I fought of auncient corage styll doe dwell within my breste,
Exile all folysh female feare, and pyye from thy mynde, And as thuntamed Tygers vse to rage and raue vnkynde, that haunt the crokyng combrus caues and clumpred frosen cliues, And craggy rockes of Caucasus, whose bytter colde depryues The soyle of all inhabytours, permyt to lodge and rest, Such sauage brutysh tyranny within thy brasen breste. What euer hurly burlye wrought dothe Phasis vnderstand, What myghtie moustrous blody feate I wrought by sea or lande: The lyke in Corinth shalbe seene in moste outragyous guyse, Moste hiddious hatefull, horrible, to heare, or see wyth eyes. Most duelysh, desperate dredful dede, yet neuer knowen before, Whose rage shal force heauen, earth & hell to quake and tremble sore. my burning brest that rowles in wrath and dothe in rancour boyle, Sore thrysteth after blood, & woundes with slaughter, death and spoyle,
By rentyng racked lyms from lyms to dryue them downe to graue: ush, these be but as Fleabytynges, that mencioned I haue: As weyghtie thinges as these I dyd in greener girlysh age, Now sorowes smarte doth rub the gall and frets wyth sharper rage. But sith my wombe hath yellded fruit, it doth me well behoue, The strength and parlous pussaunce of weyghtier illes to roue. Be redye wrath, wyth all thy myghte that furye kyndle maye, Thy foes to theyr dystruction be redy to assaye: Of thy deuorsement let the Pryce to matche, and counterpayse The proude & precious pryncely pomp of these new weddyng dayes. How wilt thou frō thy spouse departe? as hym thou folowed hast In blood to athe thy blody handes and traytrous lyues to wast. Breake of in tyme these long delayes, abanden now agayne, Thys lewd alliaunce, got by gylte, with greater gylt refrayne,
¶Chorus altered by the Translatour. WHo hath not wist that windie wordes be ain, Ad that in talke of truste is not the gounde, Here in a mirrour may he see it playne, Medea so by rofe the same hath founde. Who beynge blynde by blynded Venus boye, Her bleared eyes could not beholde her blisse: Nor spye the present poysen of her ioy, Whyle in the grsse the Serpent lurked is. The shafte that flew from Cupids golden bowe, With fethers so hath dyd her daseld eyes, That can not see to shun the waye of woe: The rancklyng head in dentd hate that lyes, So dulles the same, that can not vnderstande The cause that brought false Iason out of Greec To come vnto her fathers fertill land, Is not her loue, but loue of golden Fleece. Yet was hys speache so pleasant and so milde, Hys tongue so fylde, hys promyses so fayre, Sweete was the fowlers songe that hath beguylde The selye byrde, brought to the lymed snare. Fayth, in hys face, trust shyed in hys eyes, The blusshyng brow playne mnynge semed to showe, In double hate black treason hydden lyes, Dissembling thoughtes that weaue the webbe of woe. The honyed lyppes, the tongue in suger depte Do sweete the poyson rancke within the brest, In subtle shew of paynted sheath is kept, The rustye knyfe of treason demed least, Lyfe seemes the bayte to syght that lyeth brym, Death is the hooke that vnderlyes the same, The candell blase delyghtes wyth burnyng trym, The Flye, tyll e be burned in the flame, Who in such shewes least demd any illes. The hungrye fysshe feares not the bayte to Brooke, Tyll vp the lyne doe pluck hym by the gylles,
And fast in throte hee feles the deadly hooke. Woe Iason, woe to thee most wretched man, Or rather wretche Medea woe to thee, Woe to the one that thus dyssemle can, Woe to the other that trayned so myght be. Thoughst thou Medea hys eyes to be the glasse Whein thou myghte the face of thoughtes beholde, That in hys brest with wordes so couered was, As cancred brasse wyth glosse of yelow golde? Dyd thou suppose that nature (more then kinde) Had placed hys harte hys lynge lyppes betweene, Hys lookes to be the mirrour of hys mynde? Fayth in fayre face hath ldome yet ben seene. Who lysteth to the flateryng Maremaides note, Must nedes commyt hys tyred eyes to slepe, Yelding to her the aking of hys boate, That meanes vnware to drowne hym in the depe. What boteth the Medea to betraye The golden Fleece, to fawnyng Iasons hande, From Dragons teethe hym safely to conuaye, And fyrye Bulles the warders of the lande? Why for hys sake from father hast thou fled, And thrust thy selfe out from thy natyue soyle? Thy brothers blood what ayd thee to shed, Wyth Iason thus to trauell and to oyle? Beholde the meede of thys thy good deate, The recompense that he to thee doth gye. For pleasure, payne, for ioye, most eger smarte, With cloggyng caes in banyshment to lye. Tho, and thy babes, are lyke to egge and are, In Nacion strange, (o miserable lyfe) Whyle Iason from hys promyses doe wau, And takes delyght in hys new wedded wyfe. O grounde vngrate, that when the husband man Hath tylled it, to recompence hys toyle No corne, but weedes, and hstles cendder can, To ynge dys handes, that truyte sekes of his soyle. Such venome growes of pleasaut colourd flower: Lo, prynces loe, what deadly poyson sup Of bae, erst sweete, now turned into sowe, Mede dranc out of a goulden cp.
¶The seconde Acte. Medea. Nutrix. AYe me alas I am vndone, for at the brydall cheare The warble note of weddinge songe resoūded in myne eare. Yet for all thys scant I my selfe, yet scant beleue I can, That Iason wolde play such a prancke, amoste vnthanckfull man, Both of my countrey, and my syre, and kyngdome me to spoyle, And yet forsake me wretche forlorne, to straye in forreyn soyle. O hath he suh such a stonye harte, that dothe no more esteme, The great good turnes, and benefits that I imployde on hym? Who knowes, that I haue lewdly vsed enchauntmentes for his sake, The rigour roughe, and stormy rage, of swellyng seas to slake. The gruntyng fyryefomyng Bulles whose smokyng guttes were stufte
With smoltering fumes, y• from theyr iawes, & nostrels out they puft I stopt their gnasshing moūching mou∣thes I quēcht their burning breth, And vapors hott of stewyng paunche, that els had wrought hys death. Or fedes he thus hys fansye fonde, to thynke my skyll of charme Abated is, and that I haue no power to doe hym harme? Bestract of wittes, wt wauering mind perplext on euery parte, I tossed, and turmoyled am, wyth way warde crasy harte. Now this, now that, and neither now, but now another waye, By dyuers meanes I toyle, that so my wronge reuenge I maye. I wolde the wreatche a brother had: but what? he hath a wyfe. Go cut her throte, with gastly woūdes bereue her of her lyfe. On her ile worke my deadly spyte, her, her alone I craue, To quit such bitter sowsyng stormes, as I susteyned haue. If any graund notoryus gylt in all Pelasga lande
Be put in practyse yet vnknowen vnto thy harmyng hande, Therof to get experience the tyme doth now begyn: Thy former feates doe byd thee tak good hope to thryue herein: Let al thy gyltes with thronging thic assemble thee to ayde, The golden Fleece (the cheefe nouel) of Colchis Ile betrayde. My tender brother eke, that wyth my sier dyd me pursue, Whom wyth hys secrete partes cut of I wycked virgin slewe, Whose shreaded & dismembred corps, wyth swerd in gobbits hewd, (A wofull coarse toth fathers harte) on Pontus ground I strewd. How horye he added Plias hys wythred age to shyfte To grener yeares, for longer lyfe, hys doughters by my dryfte Hys members all and mangled flesh wyth lycour scaldyng hot Ysodden, and perboyled haue, in sethynge brasen pot. How ofte in haynous blood haue these my cruell handes ben dyed?
And neuer any gylte as yet by wrath inflamde I tryed. But now the parlous poysnyng woūd of Cupids percing darte Doth boyle and rage wythin my brest, it rancles at my harte. But how could Iasn it redresse, whom fortunes froward wyll Hath yeld vnto anothers hand, at luste to saue or spyll? O rage of rusty cancred mynde thys sclaundrous talke amende, If fortunes grace wyl graunt it thus, let hym vnto hys ende Lyue styll my Iason as he was, but if not Iason myne, Yet caytife suffer Iason lyue, though Iason none of thyne: Who beinge myndfull styll of vs some fauour let hym showe, For these good turnes yt our good will could earst on hym bestowe: Kynge Creon is in all the fault, and onely worthy blame, Who puffed vp wyth scepter proude, vnable for to frame Hys tyckle mynde to modestye, made breache twxt vs agayne,
Whom Hymens bands, and link of loue had made but one of twayne, By whom eke from her ender brats the mother (wreatche) is drawne, He breakes the vowe, that gaged is wyth such a precyous pawne. Seke after such a vyllaynes blood, in daunynge panges of smarte Let hym alone be surely dowst, such is hys due desarte, A dungell heapt of Cinders burnt hys Pallayce make I shall, that Malea where in winding strightes, the lyngryng shyppes doe crall, Shal gase on smolthryng turrets tops turmoylde in cracklyng flame. Nu. ¶For godsake madame I you praye your tongue to sylence frame. Eke hyde your pryuye languyshyng and greefe in secret vayne: Who wyth a modest mynde abydes the spurres of pryckyng payne, And suffereth sorowes paciently, may it repaye agayne. Who beares a pryuie grudge in brest, and kepes hys malyce close, When least suspection is therof may most anoye hys foes.
He leseth oportunytie who vengeance doth requyre, That shewes by open sparks the flame the heate of kyndled fyer. Me. ¶Smal is the grype of greefe that can to reasons lore obaye, And snekyng downe with steling steps can stylie slyppe awaye. But they that throughly sowsed are wyth showers of greater payne, Can not digest such corsyes sharpe, but cast it vp agayne: Fayne wolde I gyue them trouncyng girds. Nu. ¶Good doughter dere asswage Thunbrydled swaye, and boyling heat of thys thy gyddie rage: Scant maist thou purchase quyetnesse although thou holde thy tongue. Me. ¶The valiant harte dame Fortune yet durst neuer harme wyth wronge But dreadyng dastards downe she dri∣ues. Nu. ¶If any corage dure, And harbred be in noble brest, now put the same in vre. Me. ¶The showe of sturdye valiant harte at any tyme doth shyne. Ne. ¶No hope doth in aduersytye the way to scape assygne.
Me. ¶He that hah none affiance lefts, nor any hope at all, Yet let hym not mystrust the luck of ought that may befall. Nu. ¶Thy Cuntrey clene hath cast thee of to let thee synke or swym, As for thy husband Iason he, there is no trust in hym: Of all the wealth, and worldly muck wherwyth thou dyd abounde: No porcion remaynes at all, wherby some helpe is founde. Me. ¶Medea yet is lefte, (to much.) and here thou mayst espye The Seas to succour vs in flyght, and landes aloofe that lye: Yea iron tooles, wyth burning brands we haue to worke them woe, And Gods that wyth the thunder dynt shall ouerquell our foe: Nu. ¶who weares y• goldēcrested crowne hym dread wyth awe ye should. Me. ¶My father was a kyng, yet I betrayed hys Fleece of gould: Nu. ¶Can not the deadly vyolence of weapons make the feare? Me. ¶No though suche grislye laddes they were as whilom dyd appeare,
That bred of gargell dragons teethe in holow gapyng ground, When mutually in blody fyght eche other dyd confounde. Nu. ¶Then wylt thou cast thy selfe to death, Me. ¶Wolde God that I were dead. Nu. ¶Fly, fly to saue thy life. Me. ¶w worth the time that once I fled. Nu. ¶What o Medea. Me. ¶Why shal I flye? Nu. ¶A mother dere art thou, Fly therfore for thy chyldrens sake. Me. ¶Ye see by whm, and how, A wretched mother I am made. Nu. ¶Thy lyfe by flyght to saue dost thou mistruste? Me. ¶Nay, fly I wil, but vengeance first ile haue. Nu. ¶Then some shall thee at heeles pursue, to wrecke the same agayne Me. ¶Perhap ile make his commyng short. Nu. ¶Be still, and now refrayne. O despret dame thy thondring threates, and slake your raging ire. Apply, and frame thy froward will as time and tides require. Me. ¶Full wel may fortūes weltyng whele to beggynge brynge my state, As for my worthy corage that she neuer shall abate.
Who bowncing at ye gates, doth cause the creakinge dores to iar? It is the wreatche Creon his selfe, whome princelie power far Hath lyft aloft, with lordlye looke, paft vp with powncinge pryde, That he maye Corinth contry with the swaye of scepter guyde. Creon. Medea. MEdea that vngracious imp kyng Aetas wicked chyld Yet hath not from our carfull realme her lingrynge foote exild. Som noughtie dryft she goes about, her knackes of olde we knowe, Her iugling artes, her harming hands ar knowne well longe agoe. From whō will she wt holde her harme? whom will this cruell beast Permit to liue from perrill fre in quietnesse and rest? Clean to cut of this parlous plauge it was our purpose bent, But Iason by ntreting hard did cause vs to relent.
At his request we graunted haue her lyfe she shall enioye, Let her acquit our contrye fre from feare of all annoye: Yea safely let her pack her hence, in eger gyddye fitt With lompish lowring looke she coms in talke with me to knitt: Sirs kepe her of, and set her hence, lest vs she touche per hap, And driue her backe from cōming nigh commaund her kepe her clapp. And let her learne at length, how that her selfe submit she maye, The puissaunt payse and maiestie of princes to obaye. Run, hie the quickelye, trudge apace, haue hence out of my syght This horible, most odious quean, this monstrous wycked wight. Me. ¶My soueraygne liege, what greater crime haue I or lesse offence Commit agaynst thye maiestie, to be exiled hence? Cre. ¶Alas the gyltles woman doth demaunde a reason whye: Me. ¶If thou be iudge indifferent, ordaynd my cause to trye,
Consyder then my doubtfull case, and wey the ground of it: If thou b kynge, cōmaunde a Iudge for uch a matter fyt. Cre. ¶The prynces powre thou shalt obey, bit eyther ryght or wronge. Me. ¶The prosperus pryde of wrongynge crownes cannot endeuer longe. Cre. ¶Auaunt, & yell out thy complayntes at Colchis, get thee hence. Me. ¶Full gladly wyll I get me home, if he that brought me thence Uouchsafe to bare me back agayne. Cre. ¶Alas to lae aryse Entreatyng wordes, when as decree is taken otherwyse. Me. ¶He that not heryng either parte pronounceth hys decree, Unryghteous man accompted is, though ryght hys sentence bee. Cre. ¶Whyle Pelias trusted to thy talke, from lyfe to death be fell. Go to, begyn, we gyue you leaue your goodly tale to tell. Me. ¶That type of regall maiesty that erst by Fortunes hand Aduaunced to I dyd attayne, hath taught me vnderstande,
How harde a thynge it is of wrath the rygour to asswage, When burnyng heat o boylyng brest in flames begyns to rage. Eke for thaduaūcement of their power more to dysplay in syght Theyr kyngly corage bolstred out with maistie of myght. They dme it dothe importe aswaye, and hath a reater grace, Whom stately scepter causd to climbe alofte to prouder place. To perseuere with fansye fonde, in that to reasons spyght, Whose gredy choyse attaynted fyrst hys mynde wyth vayne delght. For though in pytyous plyght I lye, throwne downe to great decaye, With heau hap, and ruthful chaunce, to myserable staye, Thus hunted out from place to place, forsoke and left alone, A wyddow whyle my husband lyue, wyth cause to wale and mone, Perplext in maze of myserye, wyth cloyenge cares so rse, Yet whysom I in golden trone haue led in happy lyfe.
By hygh and noble parentage my bryght renoune doth shine. From Phebus eak my graundsire great deryued is my ligne. Whear syluer streamed Phasis flood hys wasshyng waues dothe shed, Or wyth contrary crokyng wayes hys bathyng channell spred. what euer wandring coast stretcht out is left aloofe behynde, From whence the roaming Scithyan sea hys channell furthe doth fynde, Where as Meotis fenny plasshe wyth pure fresh water sprynges Dothe season sweete the bryny sea, that tyde in thyther brynges. Eke all the coastes enuyroned and kept wythin the bankes Of Thermodon, where warlyke troupes, and armed wyddowes ranckes, with paynted bucklers on theyr armes holde all the lande in feare, with rigour rough of threatning swerd with force of dentyng speare. So far to al these wandryng coastes and cuntreyes round aboute, My fathers ample regiment at large is stretched out.
I beinge thus of noble race and in an happy plyght, With glorious glosse of princely pomp in honour shynyng bryght, Then pearlesse peares my spousal bedd dyd sek and sewe to haue, But those to be theyr louyng feres now other Ladyes craue, Rash, ticle, peuysh, vndyscrete, and waueryug fortunes wheele, Hath cast me out the crusshyng cares of banyshment to feele. In scepter proude and hautye crowne fr thyne affyance aste. Syth vpsydowne wyth welkyn wheele whole mountes of wealth is caste. Thys prynces do possesse, that should theyr royaltye dysplay, Whose fame shall neuer raed be wyth storme of lowryng daye, To succour those whom myserye in pyt of paynes do the ouse, To sheylde and harber supplyantes in roofe of loyall house. This onely brought I from my realme the precyous golden Fleece, That iewell cheefe, and eke the flower of Chyualry in Greece,
The sturdy prop, the rampir stronge the bulwarke of your wealth, And Herculs the boystrus Imp of oue I kept in health. It was by meanes of my good wyll that Orpheus dyd escape, Whose harmony the lyulese rocks wyth such delyght dyd rape, That forced euen the clottred lumpes with hoblyng pryckt to praunce, And eke the ioconde nodding wooddes wyth fotyng fyne to daunce. And that those heauenly twyns Castor and Pollux dyd not dye, My dew desarte is doubled twyse, syth them preserued I. Of Boreas blustryng out wyth puf∣fed cheekes hys blastyng breath Hys wynged sonnes I kept alyue bothe Calais and Zeth. And Linceus that with pearcing beames and sharper syght of eye Could Nauyes on the farther banckes of Sicill shore espye. And all the Minians that did come the golden Fleece to wyn As for the Prynce of Prynces all I wyll not brynge hym in.
Wyth sylence Iason wyll I pase, for whom though hym I saue, Yet is not Greece in dbt to me, no recompence I craue To no man hym I do impute, the rest I brough  agayne For your auayle, that you therby some profyt myght attayne. But onelye on my Iason deare, hym for my owne loues sake I kept in store, that he of me hys wedded wife should make. None other fault (God wot) ye haue to charge me wyth but thys, That Argo Shyp by meanes of me returned safelye is. If I a shame fast mayde had not wyth Cupids bayte ben caught If more my fathers healthe to haue then Iasons I had sought, Pelasga land had bene vndone, and falne to great decaye, The lustye valyant Capytaynes had cleane bene cast awaye: And iolye Iason fyrste of all this now thy sonne in lawe, The Buls had rent his swalowed lims in fyery chompyng iawe.
Let Fortune fyght agaynst my case as lyst her eluysh wyll, Yet neuer shall it greue my harte, repent my dede I nyll, That I should for so manye kynges theyr relynge honour saue, The guerden due that I for thys my cryme cōmyt must haue, It lyeth Creon in thy hande, if thus it lyketh thee, Condemne my gyltye gohste to death, but render fyrste to mee, My fault that forced me offende, then Creon graunt I thys, Receauyng Iasn (cause of cryme) I gyltye dyd amysse. Thou knowest that I was such an one when courynge low I laye, Before thy fete in humble wyse and dyd intreatynge praye, Thy gracyous goodnes me to graunt some succour at thy hande. For me a wreache and wreached babes I aske wythin thys lande Some cotage base, in outcast hole, some couchyng corner vyle, If from the towne thou dryue vs out to wander in exile,
Then some bye place aloofe wythin this realme let vs obtayne. Cre. ¶How I am none that tyrant lyke wyth churlysh septer raygne, Nor proudly or dysdaynfullye, with hawtie corage hye, with vaūting foote do stamp thē downe that vndertroden lye, And daunted are in carefull bale, thys playnlye dothe dysclose, In that to me of late I suche a sonne in lawe haue chose, Who was a wandryng pylgrim poore, wyth sore afflyctyons fraight, Dysmayde wyth terrour of hys foe, that laye for hym in wayght. Because Acastus hauynge got the crowne of Thessail lande, Requyreth in thy gylty blood to bathe hys wreackfull hande. He dothe bewayle that good olde man hys fyble father slayne, Whom wayght of yeres wyth bowing back to stoope alow constraine The godlye mynded systers, all yblynde wyth mystye vale And clokyng colour o thy crafte durste ventrusly asayle.
That mount of myfcheife merueylus, to mangle eaw, and cut, Theyr fathers dere vnioynted lym In boylyng caldon put. But for thy open gylynes if thou can purge the same, Strayght ason can dyscharge hym selfe from blot of gyltye blame. His gentle handes were neuer staind wyth gore of any blood. Aloofe from your conpyracie refraynyng far he stood. Hys harmelesse handes put not in r wyth gorye tooles to mell. But thou that sest on fyer fyrste thse myghty myscheifs fell, Whō shamelesse womans wile brain and manly stomack stoute Doe et a gog, for to a tempt to brynge all ils aboute. And no regarde at all thou hast, how scundyng trumpe of fame Wyth ryngyng blast of good or ill do blowe abrode thy name: Get out and clense my yled realme awaye togther bare Thyne herbes vnmylde of sorcery, my Lyeges ryd fro feare.
Transporte thee to some other lande, wheras thou may at ease With odious noys of diulish charme, the troubled Gods dysease. Me. ¶If nedes thou wylt haue me auoyde, my shyp to me restore, Or els my mate wyth whom I fyrste aryued on thys shore: Why dost thou byd that by my selfe I onely should be gone? I came not hether at fyrste wythout my companye alone. If thys do thee aggryese, that brunt of warres thou shalt sustayne, Comaunde vs bot the cause therof to shu thy realme agayne: Syth both are gyltye of one acte, wy dost thou partte vs twayne? For Iasons sake, not for myne owne, poore Plias was slayne. Annex vnto my traytrous flyght the conquerd bootye braue, My horye headded naturall sir, whow I forsaken haue, Wyth brothers blody flesh that mang∣led was wyth caruynge knyfe, Or ought of Iasons forged lyes he gabbes vnto hys wyfe.
These dreary dedes are none of myne, so ofte as I offende, Not for myne owne cōmodytie, to come therby in thende. Cre. ¶time is expierd, by which thou ought to haue bene gone awaye, Wyth kepyng such a cha why dost thou make so longe delaye? Me. ¶Yet of thy bountye ere I goe. thys one boone wyll I craue. Although the mother banyshed so sore offended haue, Let not the vengeaunce of my faulte through wrathfull deadly hate, Myne innocent and gyltlesse babes torment in wreached state. Cre. ¶Away: wyth louing fryndely grype thy chyldren I imbrace, And as a father naturall take pytie on theyr case. Me. ¶Euen for the prosperus good encrece of fertill spousall bed, Of Glauce bryght thy doughter deare, whom Iason late hath wed. And by the hope of fruytfull seede, whose flowre in tyme shall bloome. By thonour of thy glystryng crowne ythralde to fotues doome,
Whych she so full of chop and chaunge with tycle turnyng wheele Whirls vp & downe, in staggring state makes to and fro to reele. I thee beseche, (syth to exyle I am departing now) O Creon but a lytle pawse for mercye me alow, Whyle of my mournyng brats wt kysse my last farewell I take. Whyle gaspe of faylyng breath perhap my shyueryng lyms forsake. Cre. ¶Wyth craft entendyng some deceite thou crauest thys delaye. Me. ¶What falshed for so lytle tyme be cause of terrour maye? Cre. ¶No iote of tyme is shorte ynough dysplesure to preuent. Me. ¶Can not one iote to wepyng eyes and tryllyng teares be lent? Cre. ¶Although agaynst thy ernest sute vnluckye dread do stryue, One day to settle thee awaye content I am to gyue. Me. ¶Thys is to much, and of the same sumwhat abrydge ye maye. Cre. ¶Make spede apace if from our land thou get thee not awaye,
Ere Phaebus horse wyth golden glede theyr streamyng beames do shed, Of dawnyng lampe, thou art condemd to lese thy wretched hed. The holye day and brydall both doe call me hence awaye: And wyls me at the sacred aare of Hymneus to praye. ¶Chorus. LAuin of life and dreadlesse was the wyght, Attempyng fyrste in slender totryng Barge Wyth slyuyng Ore the slyced waue to smyte, Ad durst commyt the dayntie tender charge Of hazered lyfe to inconstant cours of winde, That turnes wyth chaunge of chaunces euermore, To vew the land foroke aloofe behynd, And shouyng furthe the syp from sfer shore, And glauncyng through the fomy channell deepe On sundr ct wych slender stem the waue, Twy hope o lyfe, and dread of death to sweepe, In narrow gut hym selfe to pyll or saue: Experync yet of Planets no man had, Thy nded not the wandryng cours to knowe Of Stas, (wherwyth he paynted skye is clad,) Not las, (whych returne of saylyng w) Nor Hyads that wyth showrs th Seas do bae) No nor the strne Amaltheas hrned ead (Who gaue the yppes of luckyng Ioue the tate) Were wonte to put the blundeyug shyps in dread. They feared not the northerne ysye wayne, whych lazy olde boots wlds behynde,
Ad twynes aboute, no name yet could they fayne For Boreas rough, nor smother western wynde. Yet Typhys bould on open seas durst shwe Hys hoysted sayls, and for the wynds decree New lawes: as now full gale aloofe to blow, Now tackle turnde to take syde wynde alee, Now vp to fale the crossayle on the mast, Theare safe to hange, the topsayle now to spred, Now missel sayl, and drabler out to cast, When daglyng hanges hys shatryng tackle red whyle stasman stur, and busy ner blyn, Wyth pyth to pull all sayles eke to dysplay, wyth tooth and nayle all forc of wynde to wyn, To sheare the seas, and quyck to scud awaye. Th golden worlde our fathers haue possest, where anysht frade durst nur come in place, All were content to lyue at home in rst, wyth horye head, gray eard, and surrowed face. whych tract of tyme wythin hys conrey brought, Ryche hauyng lytle, fr more they dyd not toy, No vente for wares, nor Traficque far they sought, No wealth that sprange beyonde thyr natye soyle, The Thessail shyp together now hath set, Th worlde that wll wyth seas dysseuered laye, It bydds the floods wyth oats to be bet, And streams vnknowen wyth shypwrack vs to fray That wyckd Rle was loste y ruthfull wrack Ytossed through such perylles passyng great, where Cyanes rocks gan rore as thunde crack, whos bouncyng boult th shaken soyle doth bea, The sowsyng surges dasshed euey star, The petrd seas the cloudes alote beayd, Thys scufflyng dyd boule Typhis mynd detar, Hys hlme dyd slyp fom trmblynge hande dismaid. Then Orpheus wyth his drowpng Hap was mum Dead in hr dumpes the launtyng Argos glee, All hust in rest wyth sylence, wxed dum, what hardye harte astound here wolde no bee To see at once eche yawnyng mouth to gape, Of Syllas gulph compact in waloyng paunche, Of dogges, who dothe not loth her mongell shape,
He visage, brst, and hyddyous vgly aunche whom erketh not the scoulde wyth barkyng styll? To her the Mermaydes die who doh not quayle, Tat lure the eares wyth pleasant syngyng ryll Of such as on nsonius sea doe sayle? when Orpheus on his twancklyng Harpe did playe, That carst the Muse Calliop gaue to hym Almost those Nimphes that wonted was to staye The shypps, he causd fast folowyng hym to swym. How earely was that wyckd iourney bought? Medea accurst, and eke the golden Flecce, That greater harme thē storme of sas hath wrought Rewarded well that voage rst of Grece. Now seas controulde doe suffer passage free, The rgo proude erected by the hand Of Pallas fyrste, doth not comlayne that she, Conued hath back te kynges vnto theyr land, Eche whirty ot now scuddes aboute the deepe, All stynts and waares are taken cleane awaye, The Cytyes frame new walles them selues to keepe, The open worlde lettes nought res where it laye: The oyes of Ind Arexes luckwarme leake, The Persans stoute in Rhene and Albis streame Do bathe heyr barkes, yme all in fyne out breake when Ocean waue shall open euery realme. The wandrynge worlde at wll shall open lye. And Typhis will some new found land suruaye. Some trauelers shall the Cotrees far escry, Beyonde small Thule, knowen furthest at this day. ¶ The third Acte. Nutrix. Medea. WHy trost thou fysking in & out so rash from place to place? Stand styll, and of hyne eger wrath suppresse the ruthull race,
The rigour rough of rampyng rage from burnyng brest out cast, As Bacchus bedlem preystes that of his spryte haue felt the blast, Run frantyck hoytyng vp and downe wyth scytysh wayward wyttes, Not knowyng any place of rest, so prycte wyth frowarde fyttes, On cloudye top of Pindus mounte all hyd wyth snow so chyll: Or els vpon the loftye ridge of braunched Nisa hyll: Thus startyng still with froūced mind she walters to and froe, the sygnes pronoūcyng profe of pangs her frensie face doth showe. with glowing cheekes, & blood red face wyth shorte and gaspyng breath, She fetcheth depe ascendyng syghes from sobbynge harte beneath. Now blithe she smiles, ech ōbled thou∣ght in pondring braine she beats, Now standes she in a mammeryng now myscheyfe sore she threats. w• chaufing fume she burnes in wrath, and now she doth complayne, With blubbering teares a fresh biliue she weepes and wayles agayne.
Wher will this lumpish loade of cares with hedlong swaye allighte? On whome entendethe she to worke the threates of her dispite? Wher will this huge tēpestious surge slake downe it selfe agayne? Enkindled furye newe in brest beginnes to boyle a mayne. She secretly entendes no miss∣chife small nor meane of syse To passe her selfe in wickednes her busye braynes deuise. The token old of pinchyng ire full well er this know I: Sum hainous houge, outragious great and dredfull storme is nie: Her firie, scowling, steaming eyes, her hangynge groyne I se, Her powting, puffed, frownyng face, that sygnes of freating be. O myghtie Ione begyle my feare: Me. ¶O wretche if thou desire, What measure ought to paise thy wra¦the then learne by Cupides fire, To hate as sore as thou didst loue, shall I not them anoye That do vnite in spousall bed, theyr want on lust enioye?
Shall Phaebus fierie footed horse go lodge in westerne waue The drdwping day, that la I did with humble crowchinge craue, And with suche ernest busie sute so hardlie graunted was, Shall it departe er I can bringe my deuylishe dryfte to passe? While houeryng heuen dothe counter pai∣sed hange with egall space, Amid the marble hemispheares, whyle rounde with stinted race, The gorgeous skye aboue the earthe doth spinning roll about, Whiles that the number of the sands, lyes hid vnserched out. While dawninge daye dothe kepe hys cours with Phaebus blase so bright, While twinkling stars in golden trai∣nes do gard the sombrie night, While I sie vnder propping poale with whyrlyng swyng so swyft The shyning beares vnbathed aboute The frosen skye do lifte, Whyle flushing loodes y• frothy strea∣mes to rustling seas do send, To gird them gript wt plonging pangs my rage shall neuer end.
With greater heat it shall reboyle, lyke as the brutyshe beast, Whose tyranye most horryble, excedeth al the rest, What gredye gapynge whyrle poole wide what parlous gulphe vnmild, What Sylla coucht in roryng rockes or what Charybdes wylde, (That Sicil and Ioinum sea by frothy waues doth sup) What Aetna bolking stifling flames, and duskye vapours vp, (Whose heauye payse wt stewyng heat doth smoldryng crushe beneath Encelades, that fierie flakes from choked throte doth breath) Can wyth suche dreadfull menaces In swetyng furye frye? No ryuer swift no trowbled surge Of stormye sea so hye, Nor sturdy seas (whom rufling winds wyth ragyng force to rore) Nor puissant flash of fyre, whose might By boysteous blast is more, May byde my angers violence: my furye shall it foyle: His court I le ouer hourl, and lay it leuel with the soyle.
My Iasons harte did quake for feare of Creon cruell kyng And lest the kyng of Thessalye would warr vppon hym bryng. But loyall loue that hardens hartes makes no man be afrighte. But beet, that he conuit hath yeilde hym selfe to Creons myght. Yet once he myght haue vysyted and come to me hys wfe, To talke, and take hys last farewell. if daunger o hys lyfe In doing thys (harde harted wretche most cruell) he should feare, He beyng Creons sonn in law, for him it leul were, To haue proroged somwhat yet my heuye banishment, To take my leue of chldren twayne one onlye day is lent: Yet do I not complayne, as though the tyme to short I thought As profe shall plaine pronoūce, to day, to day, it shall be wroughte, The memorye wherof no tract of tyme shall wype awaye. With malyce bent agaynst the godes my wrath shall them assay:
And rifling euerye thyng, both good, and bad, I wyll turmoyle. Nu. ¶Madame thy mynde that troubled is, and ost with such abroyle Of swarming ills, thy vexed brest now set at rest agayne, The peuyshe fonde affeccions all of troubled minde refrayne. Me. ¶Then onlye can I be at rest, when euerye thyng I see Thrown hedlong topsie turuey downe to ruthfull end wyth me. Wyth me let al thynges cleane decay: thy self if thou do spyll, Thou mayst dryue to distruction what els with the thou will: Nu. ¶Yf in this follye styff thou stand beholde what after clappes Ar to be feard, none dare contryue for princes traynyng trappes. Iaon. Medea. O Luckles lot of froward fates o cruel fortunes happe, Both when she lyst to smyte, or spare, in woe she doth vs wrapp
A lyke, the salue that God hath geuen so oft, to cure our grefe, More noyeth then the sore it selfe, and sendeth lesse reliefe: Yf for her good desares to me amendement I shuld make, I hazard shuld my ventrous life to lese it for her sake. If I wyll shun my dismall daye and wyll not for her die, Then want the loue of loialtie O wretched man must I. No dastardes dread my stomak stoute can cause to droupe and shrynke, But mere remorse appaulleth me, when on my babes I thynke. For why? when carfull parentes are ons reft of lyfe and breath, Sone after them ther wretched seede ar drawne to dolfull death. O Sacred ryghteousnes (if thou enioye thy worthye place In perfect blysse of happie heauen) I call vppon thy grace, And the for witnes here alledge, how for my chyldrens part With pitte pryckte I haue committ these thynges agaynst my harte.
And so I thinke Medea her selfe the mother rather had, (Though francticklye as now she fares with rage of hart so madd And dothe abhor with paynfull yoke of combrous cares to toyle) Her spousall bed, then that her seede should take the plonging foile. I dyd determin in my minde, to go her to entreate With gentle wordes, & pray her cease, in feruent wrath to freate. And loon me when ons she kaste the beames of glauncinge eie, Full blythe she leapes, she iumpes for ioye, in fittes she ginnes to frye. Depe deadlie blackish hate she seemes in out warde brow to beare, And whollye in her frownynge face doth glutting grefe appeare. Me. ¶I packing, packyng, Iason am: this still to chopp, and chaunge The fletynge soyle of my abode, to me it is not straunge. The cause of my departure yet (to me is straunge) and new. I wonted was in folowyng the all places to eschewe:
I wyll depart, and get me hence, to whom for helpyng hande Entendest thou to sende vs furthe, whom hence so flie the land Thou dost compell wyth thyne alies? shall I repaire agayne To Phasis flood, to Colchis Isle, or to my fathers raygne? Or gorye swetyng feldes, that wyth my brothers blood do reeke? What harbring lands aloufe dost tho commaund vs out to seeke? What seas appoynt ye me to pase? shall I my iurney dryue, Uppon the parlous hatefull iawes of Pontus to aryue, By which I dyd saufe conduct home kynges valaunt armies great, Wher roring rockes with thundrynge noise the flapping waues do beate, Or on the naro wrackfull shore, of Simplegades twayne? Or els to small Hiolcos town can I retourne agayne? Or toyle, y• gladsome pleasant laūds Of Tempe to attayne? All places that I opened haue Unto thy passage free,
I shut them vp agaynst my selfe, now whether sendest thou me? A banysht wretche to banyshment thou woldest haue enclyne, Yet to the place of her exyle thou canst not her assygne. Yet for all that wythout delaye I must departe and go: And why? for sothe the kynge his sonne in lawe cōmaundeth so. Well: nothyng wyll I stand agaynste, wyth grypes of passynge payne Let me be scourgde, of my desartes suche is the gotten gayne. Let Creon in hys pryncely ruffe lay to hys heauye handes, To whyp an whore, in torments sharp, wyth iron gyues, and bandes Let her be chaynd, in hydiouse hole of nyght for aye her locke: Let her be cloyed wyth pestryng payse of restlesse rowlyng rocke. Yet less than I deserued haue, in all thys shall I fynde: O thou vncurteous Gentleman, consyder in thy mynde The flamye puffes, and fyrye gaspes of gastly gapyng bull,
And Aetas catell ryche wyth Fleece of gorgious golden wooll, That went to graze amyd so great and myghtye feares in feylde, Of vncontrouled nacyon, whose soyle dothe armyes yeilde. Reuoke to mynde the deadly dartes of suddayne startynge foe, when gastly warriours (Tellus broode) to grounde agayne dyd goe through slaughter red of mutual laūce, to thys yet further passe, The lurched Fleece of Phrixes Ramme, that all thyne errand was. And vgsome Argos slumberlesse, whom fast I causde to kepe Hys werye watchyng wynkyng eyes wyth vnaquaynted slepe. My brother eke, whose fatall twyst of feble lyfe I shred, And gylt that wrought so many gyltes when as wyth thee I fled. The doughters whom I set on worke entrapte in wylye trayne, To slaye theyr syre, that shall not ryse to quyckned lyfe agayne. And how to trauell other realmes, I set myne owne at nought.
By that good hope whych of thy seede conceaued is in thought, Eake by thy stable mancion place, and myghtie monsters, that Downe beaten for thy health, I causde before thy feete to squat, And by these drudgyng handes of mine vnspared for thy sake, For dread of daungers ouerpas that caused thee to quake, By heauens aboue, and seas belowe, that wytnesse bearers be, To knyttyng of our maryage vppe, thy mercye vayle to me. Of all the heapes of treasure great so far of being fet, Whych Atas sauage Scythians dyd trauell for to get, From Ind where Phaebus scorching blase dothe dye the people blacke. Of all this golde whych in our bowers we could not well compack, But tryck and trym we garnyshed our groues with golde so gaye, I banysht wretche of all thys stuffe gat nought wyth me awaye, Excepte my brothers flaughtred flesh, yet I employed the same
On thee: the cares of cuntreys healthe my honestye and shame. My father, and my brother both hath yeilded place to hee, Thys is the dowrye that thou had my wedded spouse o bee. To her whom thou dest abrogate restore her gooddes agayne. Ia. ¶When Cron in malycyous moode had thought thee to haue slayne, Entreated wyth my tears exyle, and lyfe he gaue to thee. Me. ¶I toke it for a ponyshment, but surely as I see Thys banyshment is now become a freyndly good rewarde. Ia. ¶Whyle thou hast time to go be gone, for moste seueare, and harde The kynges dyspleasure euer is. Me. ¶Thus woldste thou dodge me out? Thy hated trull cast of thou doest that please Creuse thou mought. Ia. ¶Doest thou Medea vpbrayde me wyth the breache vnkynd of loue? Me. ¶And slaughter vyle wyth trecherie wherto thou dyd me moue. Ia. ¶When al is done what canst thou say my gyltynes to stayne?
Me. ¶Euen whatsoeuer I haue done. Ia. ¶Yet more thys doth remayne: That thy vngrayous wyckednes of harme should e accuse. Me. ¶Thine, thine, they ar, they ar al thine what euer I dyd vse. Who yt of lewdnes reapes the fruite, is grafter of the same. Let euery one wyth infamie thy wretched spouse defame, Yet doe thou onely take her parte, her onely doe thou call A iuste and vndefyled wyght, wythout offence at all. If anye man shall for thy sake polute hys hand wyth ill, To thee let hym an innocent yet be accompted styll. Ia. ¶The life is lothsome that doth worke hys shame who hath it chose. Me. ¶the life whose choyse doth werke thy shame thou ought againe to lose. Ia. ¶Let reason rule thy eger mynde so vext wyth crabbed ire And for thy tender chyldrens ease to be at rest reqyre Me. ¶I do defye it, wholie I detest it, I forsweare,
That bretheren bred vnto my barnes Creusas wombe shall beare. Ia. ¶It wyll be trym, when as a Queene of maiestie and myght Hath issue, kinn vnto the seede of the a banisht wyght. Me. ¶So cursed day shall neur on my wretched children shyne To myngle base borne basterdes wyth the blood of noble lygne. Shal Phbus stocke (that beares y• lamp of heauen in starrye throne) Be macht with drudginge Sisihus that roules in hell the stone? Ia. ¶What meanest yu wretch both the & m in banishement to yoke? I pray thē hence: Me. ¶ When humbly I my mynd to Creon broke, He gaue an eare vnto my sute, Ia. ¶What lyeth in my myght To do for the? Me. ¶ If no good turne then do thy worst dispyght. Ia. ¶On this side with his swerd in hande Kyng Creon doth me scar: On other part wyth armed hoast Acast doth me detarr. Me. ¶Medea eke to coape wyth these, that more apaull vs maye:
Go to, to skyrmyshe let vs fall Let Iasn be the praye: Ia. ¶I yeld whom sore aduersyties haue tyerd wyth heauye swaye. Learne thou to dred thy luclesse lost that oft dothe thee assaye. Me. ¶ I euermore haue rulde the swinge of fortunes waueryng wyll. Ia. ¶Achastus is at hand and nygh is Creon the to spyll: Me. ¶Take y• thy heles to scape them both, I do not the aduise, That thou agaynst thy father in law In traytrous armes should ryse. Nor in Achas thy csens blood thy woundyng handes to gore, The voles vnto Medea made, do trowble the so ore. Whyle yet y• hast not spylt there blood yet, fly, with me a way. Ia. ¶when armies twain their banners o Defiance shall dysplaye, And marchyng urthe in fylde to fyght ske battayle at my hande, Who then for vs encounter shall theyr puyssace to wythstand? Me. ¶If Cron and Acastus kynge encampe to gether shall
Admit that these in one wyth them should ioyne there powers all My Contreymen of Cholchis Ile, and Atas lustye kynge, Suppose the Scythians ioyne wt Grekes, to ground I wyll them brynge, Cleane put to foile. Ia, ¶The puissant power of hawty mace I feare Me. ¶Take hede, lest more thou do affece the same, then for to cleare, Thy selfe of Creons seruile yoke, Ia. ¶Least some suspicion grow. Of thys our tatlynge long here let vs make an end and go. Me. ¶Now Ioue hurle out thy flames and thy thundring olts to fly, With fierie drakes bryght brandishing force disparst in burnyng skye: Strayne furth thy dreadfull thretning arme, dispose in due araye The tossyng dynt of lyghtnyng flashe, that wrecke our quarrell maye. With rumblynge cracke of rentynge clowd cause all ye world to quake, And leuell not thy houeryng hande to stryke wyth fyrye flake Uppon my pasht and crushed corpes, or Iasons carcas slayne:
For whether of vs thou smyte to death hys dew rewarde shall gayne, thy thumps of thwacking boltes on vs amisse they cannot lyghte. Ia. ¶Fie, let thy mynde on matters ronne that seme a modest wyghte. And vse to haue more cherfull talke, if any thynge thou craue, Wythin my fathers house to ease thy flyght, thou shalt it haue. Me. ¶thou knowst my mind both can, & eke is wonte, to do no lesse, Then to contemne the bryttell wealth that Prynces do possesse. This, this shalbe the onelye boone that at thy hande I craue, As mates wyth me in banyshmente, my chyldren let me haue, That restyng on theyr syghing brestes my carefull mournyng hed, I may my chrystall arye streames into theyr bosomes shed. But as for thee, new gotten sonnes of wyfe new wed do staye. Ia. ¶ I graunt that vnto thy requeste I wysh I myght obeye: But nature me wyth pytye pryckes, that nedes I must denye.
For though both Creon and Achast, in tormentes force me lye, I could not yeild vnto theyr wylles: on thys my lyfe doth reste: In times of teares, thys is the ioye of dull afflycted breste For better far I can abyde the wante of vitall breath, And succour of my lymmes, or loose, the lyght of worlde by death. Me. ¶What loue vnto hys selye babes is depely grafte in hym? This worketh well I haue him trypt lo nowe there lyeth brymme. An open place whearbie receaue a vennye soone he maye. Let me or I departe, vnto my selye chyldren saye. These lessons of my last adewe, and graunt to me the space, With tender grype of collyng laste theyr louyng lymmes embrace: This wilbe comforte to my harte: yet at the latter worde I aske nomore but onlye that you shuld me thys afoorde. If eger anguysh cause my tongue to cast out woordes vnkynde,
Let al thyng flye, let nothyng be Engraued in your mynde But let remmbrauce otherwhyle of me to touche your thought, Let other thynges be wypte awaye that byle of wrath hath wrought. Ia, ¶I haue forgotten euery whit god graunt thou may of shake These surging qualmes of frownced mynde & mylder mayest it make: For quyetnes doth worke theyr ease that dented are wyth woe: Me. ¶What is he slyle slypt and gon? falles out the matter so? O Iason doest thou sneake awaye, not hauyng mynde of me, Nor of those former great good turns that I haue done for the? Wyth the now am I cleane forgott: but I wyll bryng about That from thy carefull sighing minde shall not be banysht out: Apply to bryng thys to effect, call home thy wyttes agayne, And all thy wylie fetches farre, eache artifycyall trayne. Thys is the perfect fruyt that maye to the of myschefe sprynge,
To presuppose that myschefe is not graft in anye thynge. Scante haue I oportunyte for my pretensed guyle, Because we are mystrusted sore, But trye I wyll the whyle To set vppon them in such sort, as none can deme my sleyghte: Marche furth, now venture on, fall to, bothe what lyeth in thy myght, And also what doth passe thy power. O fayth full nourse and mate. Of all my heauye hart breakyng, and dyuers cursed fate, Come helpe our symple meane deuice. remaynyng yet I haue A robe of Pall the present that our heauenlye graundsyre gaue, Chefe monument of Cholchis Ile, whiche Phaebus did bestowe On Etas for a pledge, that hym hys father h myght knowe. A precyous fulgent gorget eake, that brauelye glytters bryght, And wyth a seamlye shynyng seame of golden thrydes is dyght, Through wrought betwene the row of pirles do stand in borders round
Wherwyth my golden crispen lockes is wonted to be crounde. My lytle chyldren they shall beare these presentes to the Bryde, That fyrste wyth slybber abbar sosse of chauntmentes shalbe tryed. Request the ayde of Hecate in redynes prepare The lamentable sacryfyce, vpon the bladye Aare. Enforce the fyers catchyng houlde vpon the rafters hye With crackling nois of flamie sparkes rebounde in azur skye. ¶Chorus. NO fyers force, nor rumbyng cage of boysteous blustryng wynde, No darte shot whyling in the skyes such terrour to the mynde Can dryue, as when the reull wyfe dothe boyle in burnynge hate, Depryued of her sposall bed, and comforte of her mate, Nor where the stormye southerne winde wyth dankysh dabbye face, Of horye wynter sendeth out the gusshyng shooores apace. where veighment Isters waumbling stream comes walterynge downe amayn, Forbyddyng both the bankes to mee, and canno ofte contayne
Hym selfe wthin hys channels scoue, but further breakes hys waye, Nor Rodanus whoe russhyng streame dothe launche into the sea, Or when amydde the floured sprynge wyth hotter burnynge sonne, The wynters snowes disolued with heate downe to the ryuers ronne: The clottred toppe of Haemus hill to water thynne dothe turne, Such desperate gogyn flame is wrathe that inwardly doth burne, And modest rule regardeth not, nor brydels can abyde, Nor dreading death, doth wysh on dite of naked blade to slyde. O Gods be gracyous vnto vs, for pardon we do craue, That hym who tamde the scuffling waues, vouchsafe ye wolde to saue. But Neptune yet the Lorde of Sas wyth frownyng face wyll lower, That ouer hys second scepter men to tryumphe haue the power. The boy that rashlye durste attmpt that great vweldye charge Of Phaebus euerlastynge carte, and ouyng out at large, Not bearyng in hys recklesse breste hys fathers warnynges wyse Was burned wyth the flames whych he dyd scatter in the skyes. None knew the costlye glymsyng glades, where stragglynge Phaeton rode, Passe not the path, where people safe In formar yme haue trode. O fondynge, wylfull, wanton boye, do not dyssolue the frame Of heauen, syth Ioue with sacred hande hath halowed the rame.
Who rowde wyth valyante oaes tough, that were for Argo made, Hath powled naed Pelon mounte of thycke compacted shade. Who entered hathe the flerynge rockes and srched ot the tyle And tyrynge trauels of the sas and hath on saluage soyle nyt fast hys stretched cable rope, and goinge fourthe to lande. To cloyn awaye th foren golde with gredye snatchyng hade. Vnto the seas (because that he transgres theyr lwes deuyne) By thys vnluckye ende of hys he payes hys forfeyte fyne. The troubled seas of teyr vnrest for vengeaunce howle and wepe. Syr Typhis who dyd conquer fyrst the daungr of the deep, Hath yeilded vp the conynge rule of hys vnwldye strne, To such a guyde, as for that vse hath nede as yet to lerne. who gyuyng vp hys gohste aloofe om at hys natyue lande, In forreyn ore lyes buryed vyl wyth durtye soddes in sande. He syts amonge the flyttrynge soules that straungers to hym weare. And Aulis Isle that in her mynde her masters losse dothe beare, Helde in the shppes, to stand and wyl in crokyng narrow nooke: That Orpheus Caliops sonne who styd the runnynge book, whyle he recordes on heanly Harp wyth twancklynge fynger yne, The wyne ay downe his pipling his harmonye diuin
Procurde the woods to styr thm selues, and trees in eraynes alonge Cam furth, with byrds that held their laies and lystned to hys songe. wyth lyms on sunder rent in felde of Thrace he lyeth ded. Vp to the top of Heber flood eke hald was hys hed. Gone downe he is to Stygian dames. whych seene he had before, And Tartar boylyng pyttes, from whenc retrne he shall no more. Alcydes bangyng bat dyd brynge the Northerne laddes to grounde. To Achelo of sundry shapes he gaue hys mortall wounde. Yet after he could purchase peece both vnto sea and lande` And after Ditis dungeon black rent open by hys hand, He lyuyng spred hym selfe along on burnynge Otas hyll: Hys members in hys propr flame the wretche dyd thrste to spyll: Hys blood he brewd wyth Nestors blood, and lost hys lothsome lyfe By traytrus gyfte that poysoned shyrte receaued of hys wye. wyth tuske of brystld groyyng bore Anceus lyms were torne. O Melager (wycked wyght) to graue by thee ere borne Thy mothers brethren twayne, and she, for it wyth ruthfull hande Hth wrought thy dolefull destenye to burne thy fatall brande. The rash attemptyng Argonantes deserued all the death That Hylas whom Alcides loste beeft of fadyng brah.
That springall whych in sowsyng of watrs drowned was: Go now ye lustye bloods, the seas: with doubtfull lot to passe. Though Idmon had the calking skyll of destenyes before, The Sepent made hym lue hys lyf in tombe of Liby shoore. And Mopsus that to other men could well theyr fates scrye, Yet onely dyd deceyue hym selfe vncertayne wheare to dye, And he that could the secret hap of thynges to come vnfoulde, Yet dyed not in hys cuntrey Thebes. Dame Thetis husband oulde Dyd wander lyke an outlawde man. Our Palimedes syre Dyd hedlonge wholme hym selfe in seas, who at the Greks retyre From Troy, to rushe on rocks did them alure wyh wylye lght. Stoute Aiax Olens dyd sustayn the dynt of thunder bryghte, And cruell storme of surgyng seas, to quite the haynus gylte, That by hys cuntrey was commit, in seas he lyeth spylte. A leeste to redeme her hus∣bandes Phereus lyfe from death The godlye wyfe vppon her spouse bestowed her pantyng breath. Proude Pelias that wretche hym slf who bad them fyrste assaye The golden Fleece that botye braue by shyp to feche awaye, Perboylde in glowyng cauldro wyth feruent heatche fryes, And fletynge pecmeale vp and dou in atr thyn he lyes.
Ynoughe, ynoughe, reuenged are o Goddes the wronges of seas, Be good to Iason, doing that he dyd, hys came to please. ¶The fourth Acte. Nutrix. MY shyuerynge minde amazed is, agaste, and sore dysmayde: My chyllysh lyms with quakyng colde doe tremble all afrayde. Such plagues & vengeance is at hande in what excedyng wyse Do sharpe assaultes of gredye greife styll more and more aryse, And of it selfe in smotheryng brest enkyndles greater heate? Ofte haue I seene how rampyng rage hath forced her to freate. Wyth frantickfyts, mad, bedlem wise agaynst the Gods to rayle, And eke bewytched gohstes of heauen in plungyng plagues to trayle: But now Medea beates her bu∣sie braine to brynge to passe A myscheyfe greater, greater far, then euer any was.
Ere whyle when hence she trypt away astonyshed so sore, And of her poyson closset close she entred had the dore: She powreth out her iewels all, abrode to lyght she brynges That which she dreadyng lothed long, moste irksome vglye thynges: She mumblyng coniures vp by names of illes the rable rowte, In hugger mugger cowched longe, kept close, vnserched oute: All pestlent plagues she calles vppon, what euer Libie lande, In frothy boylyng stream doth worke, or muddye belchynge sande: What teryng torments Taurus bredes, wyth snowes vnthawed styll Where winter flawes, and hory froste knyt harde the craggy hyll, She layes her crossynge handes vpon eache monstrus coniurd thynge, And ouer it her magicke verse wyth charmyng dothe she synge: A mowsye, rowsye, rustye route wyth cancred scales ylad From mustye, fustie, dustye dens where lurked longe they had,
Do raull: a walowing arpent houge hys combrous corps out draggs, In fierye fomyng blaryng mouthe his forked tongue he wagges. He stares about wyth sparklyng eyes, if som he myght espye, Whom snapping at with stinging spit he myght constrayne to dye: But hearyng once the magycke uerse he husht as all a gast, Hys bodie boalne byg, wrapt in lumps n twynyng knotes he cast. And wamblynge to and fro his tayle in lynkes he rowes it round. Not sharp enough (quoth she) y• plages and tooles that holow grownd Engenders for my purpose ar, to heauen vpp wyll I call, To reache me stronger poyson down, to frame my fea wyth all. Now is it at the verye poynt, Medea thou assaye. To brynge about sum farther fetche, then common wyches maye. Let down, Let down, that sprawlyng snake that doth his bodye spred, As doth a runnyng broke abrode his myghtye chanell shed.
Whose swellyng knobes of wondrous sise & boysteus bobbing bumpes Doth thumpe the great & lesser bear that fele his heauye lumpes. The bygger bear with golden glede the greekishe fleete doth guyde: But by the lesse the Sidon shypps their passage haue espied. He that wyth pinche of gripyng fyste doth bruse the adders twayne, His strenyng harde & claspyng hande, let him vnknitt agayne. And crushe thair squeased venom out, com further thou our charme O flymie serpent Python, whom dame Iuno sent to harme Diana and Apollo both, (those heauenly spyrytes twayne) With whom Latona trauelynge did grone wyth pynchyng payne. O Hydra whom in Lerna poole Alcides gaue the foyle, And all the noysom vermen vyle that Hercules did spoyle. Which when on sunder they were cutt wyth slysyng deadlye knyfe, Can knyt agayne ther sodred partes, and so recouer lyfe.
Helpe wakefull Dragon Argos whom firste magicke words of myne Made Morpheus locke thy sleppe liddes and shut thy slurgynge eyen. Then hauyng brought aboue the groūd of serpentes all the rowe, Of fylthy wedes the ranckest bane she pyckes. and gathers out, That spryng on knotye Eryx hyll wher passage none is founde, Among the ragged rockes, or what on Caucasus his ground Doth growe that styll is clad in cote of horye morye froste. That euermore vnmelt abydes, whose spattred fylde is soste With gbbs of blood, yt spowteth from Prometheus gapyng maw, Whose gutts with twitching talēt out the gastlye grype doth drawe. Or anye other venomous herbe amonge the Medes that growes, that with their sheafe of arrowes sharp in fylde do scar theyr foes. Or what the lyght held Parthian to serue her turne can sende, Or els the ryche Arabians, that dyp theyr arrowes end
In poyson tronge: the ioyce of all Medea ot doth wrynge, That vnderneth the frosen poale In sweia land doth sprynge. Whose noble state Hircinus wood do the highe enhaunce and reare. Or what the pleaaūte soyle doth yeild in pryme of smiling vere, When nature byddes the byrd begin her shrowdyng nest to buylde, Or when the chursyshe Boreas blast sharpe winter hath exild, The trym aray of branche and bough to cloth the naked tree, And euerye thynge wyth bytter could of snowe conealed be. In any pestylent flower on stalke of anye herbe doth grow, Or noysome ioyce doth ly in rot∣ten writhen rotes alowe, Hath anye force in breadyng bane, those takes she in her hande. Sum plagye herbes dyd Athos yeald that mount of Thessayle land. And other Pindus roches hye and sum vppon the top Of Pingeus, but tender twyggs the cruell sythe dyd lpp:
Thes Tigris ryuer noryshte vp, that chokes his whyrlpoale depe With stronger streame. Danubius those in fostryng waue dyd kepe. Those dyd Hidaspus mynister, who by the parchyng zone With luke warme siluer chanel runes, so ryche wyth precyous stone. And Bethis sonne, who gaue the name vnto his contrey great, And with his shallowe fourd agaynst the Spanyshe seas doth beat This herbe abode the edge af knyfe in danwnynge of the daye Or Phebus face gan pepe, bedecte wyth glyttryng goulden spraye His slender stalke was snepped of in depe of sylent nyght, Hys corne was cropt, whyle she wyth charm her posned nailes did dight. She chops the dedlie herbes, & wrings the squesed clottered blood Of serpentes out: & fylthye byrds of irksom mirye mud: She tempers wyth the same and eake: She brayes the harte of owle Foreshewing death with glaring eyes and moapyng visage foule
Of shrke oule hoarce alyue she takes the durtye stynkyng guttes, Al thes the framer of this feate in dyuers percels puttes. This hath in it deuouryng force of gredye spoylynge flame, The frosen eysye dullyng coulde engenders by the same. She chantes on those ye magicke vers, that workes no lesser harme, With bustling frātickelie she stampes, and ceaseth not to charme. MEDEA. O Flittring flocks of grislie gostes that syt in sylent seat O ougsum buggs o gobblyns grym of hell I you intreat: O lowryng Chaos dungeon blynd, and dredfull darkned pytt, Whear Ditis muffled vp in clowdes of blackest shades doth sytt, O wretched wofull wawlyng soules your ayed I do implore, That linked lie with ginglyng chaines on waylyng Limbo shore,
O mosye den where deth doth couche his gastly carrayn face: Releas your panges o spryghtes, & to this weddyng hye apace. Cause ye the snaggye whele to pawse that rentes the carkas bound, Permitt Ixions racked lymmes to rest vpon the ground: Let hungry bytten Tantalus wyth gawnt and pyned panch Soupe vp Pirenes gulped streame his swellyng thyrst to stawnche. Let burnyng Creon byde the brunt and gyrdes of greater payne, Let payse of slypperye slydyng stone type ouer backe agayne His moylynge father Sisyphus, amonges the craggye rockes. Ye doughters dyre of Danaus Whom perced pychers morkes So oft wyth labour lost in vayne this day doth long for you That in your lyfe wyth bloodye blade at once your husband slewe. And thou whose aares I honored haue o torche and lampe of nyght, Approche o ladye myne wyth most deformed vysage dyght:
O thre folde shapen dame that knitst more threatnyng browes then on, Accodyng to the contrey guyse wyth daglyng lockes vndon And naked fote, the secrete groue about I halowed haue, From duskye drye vnmoystye cloudes the showers of rayne I craue. Through me ye chinked gaping ground the soked seas hath drunk, And mayner streame of thocian flood beneth the erthe is sunke, that swelteth out through holow gulph with stronger gushyng rage. Thē were his suddy wamblyng waues whose power it doth asswage the heauens wt wrong disturbed course and out of order quyte, The darkned sonne, & glīmering stars at once hath shewed theyr lyght, and drēched Charles his stragling waine hath ducte in dasshyng waue, The framed cours of roamyng time racte out of frame I haue. So my enchaūtments haue it wrough that when the flamyng sonne In sōmer bakes the parched soyle then hath the twygges begonne,
with sprowting blossom fresh to blome' and hastye wynter corne Hath out of haruest sene the fruyte to barnes on suddeyn borne. Into a shallowe foorde hys sture dystreame hath Phasis wast And Isters channell beynge in so manye braunches cast, Abated hath hys wrackfull waues, on euerye sylent shore He lyeth calme: The iumbled flooddes wyth thndryng noyse dyd rore, When couched close the wyndes were not mouing pipping softe, With workyng waue the prauncynge seas haue swolne & leapt aloft, Wheras the wood in alder tyme wyth thyck and braunched bowe dyd spred hys shade on gladsome soyle no shade remayneth nowe. I rollynge vp the magicke verse at noone tyme Phaebu staye, Amyd the darkened skye, when fled was lyght of drowsye daye Eke at my charme the watry flockes of Hyads went to glade. Tyme is it Phaeba to respecte the seruyce to thee made:
To thee with cruell blooddye handes thes garlandes grene were twind Whych with hys foldyng circles nine the serpent rowgh dyd bynd. Haue here Tiphoas fleshe, that dothe In Etnas furnace grone, That shake with batterye vyolent kynge Ioues assalted trone. This is the Centaures poysened blood whiche Nessus vyliane vyle Who made a rape of Dianire entendynge her to fyle, Bequethed her when newlye woūde he gaspynge lay for breth, While Hercles shaft stack in his ribbs, whose lawnce did worke his death: Bholde the funerall cinders hear whyche vp the poyson dryed Of Herculs who in hys fyre on Oeta mountayne dyed: Lo here the fatall brande, which late the fatall systers three Conspyred at Melagers byrthe, such shulde hys destnye be, To saue alyue hys brethyng corpes, whyle tha myght hole remayne, Whche safe hys mother Alte kept, tyll he his vncles twayne,
(That from Atlanta wolde haue had the head of Conquered Bore,) Had reft of lyfe whose spytefull death Althea toke so sore, That both she shewed her feruentnes in systers godlye lous, When to reuenge her brothers death mere nature dyd her moue, But yet as mother most vnkynde of nature moste vnmylde, To hasten the vntymely graue of her beloued chylde, Whyle Melages atall brande she wasted in the flame, Whose swelting guts & bowels moult consumed as the same, These plumes the Harpyes raueninge fowles for hast did leue behind, In hidden hole whose cloase accesse no mortall wight can fynd. When fast from Zethes chasyng them wyth spedye flyght they fled. Put vnto these the fethers whyche the Stymphall byrde dyd shed, Whom duskyng Phaebus dymned lyght syr Hercules dyd stynge, And galled wyth the shafte, that he in Hydraes hyde dyd flynge.
You Aares haue yeld a clattryng noyse I knowe, I knowe of olde, How vnto me my Oracles are wonted to be coulde, That when the tremblyng flowre doth shake then hath my Goddesse greate, Uouchfafe to graunt me my requeste as I dyd her intreate. I see Dianas waggyn swyfe, not that wheron she glydes When all the nyght in darkened skye wyth face full ope she rydes: with coūtenaūce bryght & blandishyng but when with heauie cheare, With duskie shīmering wannie globe, her lampe doth pale appeare. Or when she trots aboute the heauens wyth horsehead rayned straite, When Thessayle wytches wt the threates of carmynge her doe bayte. So wyth thy dumpysh dulled blase, thy clowdye faynting lyghte, Sende out, amyd the lowryng skye, the harte of people smyte Wyth agonyes of suddeine dread, in straunge and fearefull wyse, Compell the precyous brasen pannes with iarryng noyse to ryse
Through Corinth contrye euerye wher, to shylde the from this harme, lest hedlong drawne thou be frō hauen to earth by force of charme. An holye solempne sacryfyce to worship the we make, Imbrewed with a blooddye turphe the kindled torche doth take Thy sacred burning night fyre at the dampishe morie graue. Sore charged with thy trowbled ghost my hed I shaken haue, And dukyng downe my necke alowe with shrykyng lowde haue shright, And groueling flat on floore in traūce haue lyen in dead mans plight. My tuffled lockes about myne eares downe daglyng haue ben bownde Tuckt vp about my temples twayne wyth gladsome garland rownd: A drerye branche is offred the from fylthye stigis flood. As is the guise of Bacchus prestes the Coribanthes wood, With naked brest and dugges layd out Ile prycke with sacred blade Myne arme, that for the bubling blood an issue maye be made,
with trilling streams my purple blood let droppe on Thalter stones: My tender chyldrens crusshed flesh and broken broosed bones Lerne how to brooke wt hardned harte in practyse put the rade To florysh fearce, and kepe a coyle, wyth naked glyttrynge blade: I spryncld holye water haue, the launce once being made, If tyred thou complaynest that my cryes thee ouerlade, Gyue pardon to my ernest sute, o Perceus syster deare, Styll Iason is the onelye cause that vrgeth me to reare wt squeking voice thy noisome beames, that stynge lyke shot of bowe. So season thou those sawced robes to worke Creusas woe, Wherwt when she shal pranke her self the poyson by and by To rotte her in warde marye oute, wythin her bones may fry, The secret fyer bleares their eyes wyth glosse of yealow golde, The whych Prometheus gaue to me that fyer fylcher bolde.
On whom for robbery that he dyd in heauens aboue commyt, Wyth massy payse great Caucasus thunweldye hyll doth syt, Where vnder wyth vnwasted wombe he lyes, and payes his paine, To feede the crāmyng foule wt gubbes of guttes that growes agayne. He taught me wyth a pretye sleyght of connyng, how to hyde The strengthe of fyer close kept in, that may not be espyed, Thys lyuely tinder Mulciber hath forged for my sake, That tempred is wyth brymston quick at fyrste touche and take. Eke of my cosen Phacton a wyld fyer flake I haue Hys flames the monstrous stagharde rough Chimera to me gaue, In head and breste a Lyon grymme, and from the rump behynde He swepes the flower wt laggyng taile of Serpent force by kynde. In rybbes & loynes along his paunche yshaped lyke a Gote. these fumes that out the bull perbrakt from fyrye spewing throte,
I gotten haue and brayd it wyth Medusas bytter gall Cōmaundyng it in secret sorte to duske and couer all: Breath on these venoms Hecate wyth deadly myght inspyre, Preserue the touchyng poulder of my secret couert fyre, O graunt that these my cloked craftes so may bewytch theyr eyes, That lykelyhood of treason none that may herein surmyse: So worke that they in handlyng it may fele no kynde of heate: Her stewing brest, her sethyng vaines, let feruent fyer freate And force her rosted pynyg lymmes, to droppe and melte awaye, Let smoke her rotten broylyng bones: enflame thys bryde to daye To caste a lyght wyth greater glede on fryseled blasynge heare Then is the shynyng flame that dothe the weddyng torches beare. My sute is harde, thryse Hecate a dreadfull barkyng gaue From dolefull clowde a sacred flash of flamye sparkes she draue.
Eache poysons pryde fulfylled is: Call furthe my chyldren deare, By whom vnto the cursed Bryde these presentes you may beare: Goe furthe, goe furthe my lytle babes, your mothers cursed fruite, Goe, goe, employ your paines wt brybe and earnest humble sute To purchase grace, and eke to earne you fauour in her syght. That both a mother is to you, and rules wyth Ladyes myght. Go on, applye your charge apace and hye you home agayne, That wyth embracyng you I maye my last farewell attayne. ¶Chorus. WHat arpe assaultes of crull Cupydes flam Wyth gyddie hede thus tosseth to and froe, Thys bedlem wyght, and dyuelysh desret dame what rouyng rage be pryckes to worke thys woe? Rough rancours byle coneales hr trosen face, Her hawtie brest bumbasted is wyth pryde, She shakes her head, she stalkes wyth statelye pace, She threates our kyng more then doth hee betyde. who wolde her deme to be a banysht wyght, whose skalet cheekes do glowe wyth rosye red? In fayntyng face wyth pale and wannye whyght The saguy hew exyled thence is fed.
Hr chaungyng loks no colour log can holde, Her siftyng fete styll trauasse to nd oe. Euen as the farce and tnyng Tge old That dot vnware hys suckyng whees fogoe, Doth rampe, and rage, most eger fce and ood, Amonge the shrubbs and bushes tat do  owe On Ganges stonde that goldensanded lood, whose syluer strame through India doth flow. Eun s Mdea somtyme wantes her wytts To rule the rage of her vnbrydeled e, Now Venus sonne wyt usye frowad fyts, Now wrath and lu, enkyndle both the fyre. what shal she do? when wyll thys heynous wyght wyth foworde foe be packyng hence awaye, From Grec? to eae our realme of terour quyght, And prynces twai whom she so sore doth fraye: Now haebus lodge thy Charyot in the wste, Let nether raines nor brydle staye thy race, Lt groueing lygt wyth dule at nyght oppreste In clokyng clouds wrapt vp hys muffled fac, Let Hsperus the ladesman of the nyght, In westerne flood drenche depe the daye so bryght. ¶The .v. Acte. Nuntius. Chorus. Nutrix. Medea Iason. Nun. ALl thynges are opsy turuy turnd, and wasted cleane to nought To passynge great calamyye our kyngdome state is brought The syer and doughter burnte to duste in blendred cynders lye. Cho. what train hah thē entrapt? Nū ¶such as are made for kyngs to dye,
False tratrusse gifts. Cho. ¶what priuy guile could wrapped be in those? Nun. ¶And I do meruayle at thys thynge and skante I can suppose that such a mischeife might be wrought by any such deuyce Co, ¶Reporte how thys dystruction and ruine should aryse Nun. ¶The fyzzinge lame most egerlye dath scoure wyth swepynge swaye Eache corner of the prynces courte, as though it should obaye Commaunded therunto so fat on flowre the pallayce falles: We are in dread least further it wyll take the townysh walles. Cho. ¶Cast quenchyng water on it then to slake the gredye lame. Nun. ¶And thys that semeth very straunge doe happen in the same, The water fedes the fyer faste, the more that we do toyle It to suppresse, wyth hotter rage the heate begyngs to boyle: Those thinges that we haue gotten for our helpe it dothe enioye. Nut. ¶Medea thou that doest so sore kyng Pelops lande anoye,
Twine hence in hast thy forward foot, at all assayes depart To anye other kynde of coast. Me. ¶can I fynd in my hart To shun this land? if hence I had fyrst falne awaye by flyght, I would haue traueled back agayne, to gase at suche a syght. To stand and se this weddynge new why stayest thou dotyng mynd? Apply, applye, thy sore attempt, that good sucesse doth fynd. What great exployt is this, that thou of vengeance dost enioy? Styll art thou blynded witlesse wench with vale of Venus boy? Is this suffisaunce for thy grefe? is roote of rancour ded, If Iason lead a syngle life in solytary bed? Som netling, thornie, stinging plages vnpractysed deuyse: Prepare thy selfe in redynes and fal to on this wyse: Let all be fyshe that commes to net, haue no respect of ryght, From mynde on myschefe fixed fast let shame be banysht quyt:
The vengeaunce they receaued at my lytle chyldrens hande, Is nothyng worth: in ernest ire ententyue must thou stand. When heat of wrath beginnes to coole cheare vp thy selfe agayn: Rayse vp those touches old that won∣ted were in the to raygne, That buryed depe in brest do lye: and as for all the same That yet is wrought. of godlynsse let it vsurpe the name Do this & I shall teache them learne, what tryflyng cast it was, And common practised flymflam tryck that erst I brought to passe. By thys my ragyng maladye a preamble hath made, To shew what howgier heapes of har∣mes shall shortlye them inuade What durst my rude vnskillfull hand assaye that was of wayght? What could the mallyce of a gyrle inuent her foes to bayte? Styll conuersant with wicked feates Medea am I made. My blunt and dulled braynes hath so ben beat about this trade:
O so I ioy, I ioy, that I smot of my brothers hed, And slasht his members ofeak that from parents and I fled: And filched haue the priuy fleece lo Mars that sacred was. It glads my hart that I to bring ould Pelias death to passe. Haue set his douggters all on worke, O griefe picke out awaye Not any guilt thou shalt with vn∣acqueinted hand assaie Against whom wrath entendest thou to bend thyne Irefull might? Or with what weapon dost thou mean thy traiterous foes to smite? I know not what my wrathfull minde consulted hath within And to bewraie it to him selfe, I dare not yet begin. O rash and vnaduised foole, I make to hastie spede: O that my foe had gotten of his harlots bodie seede: But what so euer thou by him enioyest, suppose the same To be Creusas babes of them let her euioy the name.
This vengeaūce this doth lyke me wel good reason is their why The last attempt of yls, thou must with stomacke stout applie. Alas ye lytell selie fooles that erst my children were, The plaging price of fathers fault submyt your selues to beare O, horrour huge with sodayne stroke my hart doth ouercom with ysie dullynge colde conieald my members all benum. My shiueryng lims appauled sore for gastly feare do quake, Ad banisht rage of malice hot begins it selfe to flake: The hatefull hart of wife against her Spouse hath yelded place, And pityous mothers mercy mild restoreth natures face. O shall I shed their giltlesse blood? shall I the frame vnfould Of that, whiche louyng natures hande hath wrought in me her mould? O dotyg fury chaunge thy minde, conceiue a better thought, Let not this haynous sauage dede by meanes of me be wrought.
What cryme haue they (poore fooles) cōmit for which they shuld abye? Upon theyr father Iason ryght all blott of blame shuld lye. Medea yet theyr mother I am worser far then he Tush let them frankly go to wracke, no kith nor kyn to me They a: dispache them out of hand hould, hould my babes they be God wot most harmelesse lambes they ar, no cryme nor fault haue they Alas they be mere innocentes I do not this denaye: So was my brother whom I slew: o falce reuoltyng mynd Why doest thou staggryng to and fro suche chaunge of fancyes fynde? Why is my face be sprent with teares what makes me falter so, That wrath & loue with striuing thoug¦htes do lead me to and fro? Such fyghting fancyes bickeryng stor¦mes my swaruyng mind detar, As when betwene ye wrestling windes is raysed wranglyng war, Eche where the tumblynge walloinge waues, ar hoist and reared hye
Amyd the iustlyng swolues of seas that whot in urye frye: Euen so my hart wt strugling thoughts now synkes, now swells aman, Wrath somtyme chaseth vertue out and vertue wrath agayne. O yeld the yeld, a grysyng grefe, to vertue yeld th place: Thou onely comfort of our stocke in this afflicted case, Come hether comdere loued impe with collyng me imbrace, While that by me your mother dere swete Boyes ye are enioyed So longe god graunt your father may you kepe from harme vncloyd Exile and flight approche on me, And they shall by and by Be puld perforce out of myne armes, with vapourd weping eye Sore languishing with moorning hart yet let them go to graue Before heir fathers face as they before their mothers haue: Now rancorus grefe with firy fits begins to boyle agayne, The quenched coles of dedly hate do fressher force attayne.
The rustye rancour harbred longe within my cancred brest Startes vp, and stirres my hand anew in myscheife to be prest. O that the rablement of brattes whych swarmde aboute the syde Of Niobe that scornefull dame who perysht by her pryde Had taken lyfe out of hys lymmes. o that the fates of heauen A fruytefull mother had me made of chyldren seuen and seuen. My barreyne wombe or my reuenge hath yeilded lytle store Yet for my sire and brother, twayne I haue, theyr nedes no more: whō seke this rufflyng rowt of feendes wyth gargell vysage dyght; Where wil they deale their stripes, or whom wyth whyps of fyer smite? Or whom wyth cruell scorching brand and Stygian faggot fell, wyth mischeife great to cloy, entendes this armye black of hell? A choppyng Adder gan to hisse wyth wrethynges wrapped round, As soone as dyd the lasshyng whyp erte out wyth yerkyng sound.
whom bumping with thy rapping post Megeta wilt thou crush? whose ghost doth here mishapt frō hell with scattered members rush? My slautred brothers ghost it is that vengeaunce coms to craue: Accordyng to his dire request due vengeaunce shall he haue. But flap thou fearce the fierbrandes full dasshed in myne eyes, Dig, rent, scrape, burne, & squea thē out loe ope my brest it lies, To fightyng furyes bobbyng strokes O brother, brother bid These royles, y• prease to worrey mee, them selues away to rid. Down to the silent soules alowe Not takynge any care: Let me be left heare by my selfe alone, and do not spare. To bast, and capperclaw these armes that drewe the blody blade: To quenche the furyes of thy sprite, that thus do me inuade, With this rigt hand the sacrifyce on thalter shalbe made. What meanes this sudden tramplyng noyse? a bande of men in Armes
Come bustlyng towarde vs, that m wyll cloy wyth eadly harmes. To ende thys slaughter set ppon I wyll my selfe conuaye Up to the garrets of our house, come Nurce wyth me awaye, Bestowe thy bodye hence wyth me from daunger of our foes. Now thus my mynde on myscheife set thou must thy selfe dyspose, Let not the flyckeryng fame & prayse in darkenesse be exilde Of stomack stoute that you dyd vse in murtherynge of thy chyld. Proclayme in peoples eares the prayse of cruell blodye hande. Ia. ¶If any faythfull man here be, whom ruyne of hys lande, And slaughter of hys prynce do cause in pensyue harte to bleede, step furth that ye may take the wretch that wrought thys deadly dede. Heare, heare, ye iolye champyons lay lode wyth weapons heare, Haue now, hoyst vp this house, frō low foundacyon vp it reare. Me. ¶Now, now my scepter guilt I haue recouered once agayne:
My fathers wronges reuenged are, and eke my brother slayne: The gouldens cattels Fleece returnd is to my natyue lande, Possessyon of my realme I haue reclaymed to my hande: Come home is my vigynitie, that whilom went a straye. O Gods as good as I could wysshe, o ioyfull weddyng daye, Go shrowde thy selfe in darkenesse dim dyspacht I haue thys feate: Yet vengeance is not done inough, to coole our thrystye heate. O soule why dost thou make delaye? why dost thou doubtyng stande? Go foreward with it yet thou mayst, whyle doinge is thy hande: The wrath that might should mynister doth qualefye hys flame: The pryckes of sorow twitch my harte attaynt wyth blusshyng shame: Through rygour of thy haynous gore o wreatche what hast thou done? Though I repent a caytyfe vyle I am, to slea my sonne: Alas I haue commytted it, importunate delyght,
Styll egged on my froward mynde that dyd agaynst it fyght: And loe the vayne coniecte of thys delyght increaseth styll, Thys onely is the thyng, that wantes vnto my wycked wyll, That Iasons eyes should see this syght as yet I do suppose Nothyng it is that I haue done, my trauell all I lose, That I employde in dyry deedes, vnlesse he see the same. Ia, ¶Loe heare she loketh out, and leanes vpon the houses frame, That pitchlong hanges wt falling sway: heare heape your fyers fast, Wherby the flames that she her selfe enkyndled, may her wast. Me. ¶Go Iason, go the o ryghtes the wyndynge sheete and graue Make redye for thy sonns, as last behoueth hym to haue, Thy spouse and eke thy father in lawe that are entomde by me Receyued haue the dutyes that to ded mens ghostes agree. Thys chylde hath felte the dedly stroke and launce of fatall knyfe,
And thys wyth walsome murther like shall lose her tender lyfe. Ia. ¶By all the sacred ghostes of heauen, and by thy ofte exile, And spousall bed, wt breache of loue in me dyd not defyle, Now spare, and sae the lyfe of hym my chylde and also thyne: What euer cryme commytted is, I graunt it to be myne Make me a blodie sacriice to dew deserued death, Take from my synful giltie hed the vse of vitall breath. Me. ¶Naye sith thou wylt not haue it so as greeues thy pynched minde, Here way to wreck my vengeaūce ell my burninge blade shall finde. Anaunt, now hence thou pesant prowd employ thy busye payne, To reape the fruites of virgins bed, and cast them of agayne whē mothers they ar made. Ia. ¶let one for dew reuenge suffyce. If gredye thryste of hungry handes that still for vengeaunce cryes, Myght quenched be with blood of one then aske I none at all,
And yet to staunche my hongry greefe the number is to small, If onely twayne I slea, if pleadge of loue lye secret made, My bowels Ile vnbreste and searche my wombe wyth pokynge blade. Ia. ¶Now fynysh out thy deadly deede, that enterprysed is, No more entreaaunce will I vse, yet onely graunt me thys, Delaye a whyle hys dolefull death, that I may take my flyght. Least that myne yes wt bledyng harte should vew that heauye syght. Me. ¶Yet lynger eger anguyshe yet to slea thys chyld of thyne. Ronne not to rash wyth hastye speede thys dolefull day is myne: The yme that we obteyned haue of Creon, we enioye. Ia. ¶O vyle malycyous mynded wreache my lothsome lyfe dystroye. Me. ¶In crauing this thou speakest, that I should shew thee some releefe, Well goodynough, all thys is done: o ruthfull gyddye greefe, Thys is the onely sacryfyce that I can thee prouyde,
Unthankfull Iason hether caste thy coyesh lookes asyde. Lo heare dost thou beholde thy wyfe? thus euer wonted I, When murther I had made, to scape, my way doth open lye That I may sprynge into the skyes the flyeng serpentes twayne Submytted haue theyr saly neckes to yke of ratlyng wayne, Thou father haue thy sonnes agayne I in the wandryng skye, In nymble wheled waggyn swyfte will ryde aduaunced hye. Ia. ¶Go through the ample spaces wyde, infecte the poysoned ayr, Beare wytnesse grace of God is none in place of thy repayre. FINIS
