23581 99853282 18653
portrait
THE PARLIAMENT Of Vertues Royal: (Summoned in France; but assembled in England) for Nomination, Creation, and Confirmation of The most Excellent Prince PANARETVS A Praesage of Pr. DOLPHIN: A Pourtrait of Pr.—HENRY: A Promise of Pr. CHARLES. Translated & Dedicated To His Highnes, by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
To the Honourable, Sir Robert Carie: Sir Iames Fullarton: Sir Robert Carr: Sir Dauid Foulis: Mr. Thomas Murray. GRaue Guides & Guards of Hopeful CHARLES his Wayn, Least I incurr the least of Your Disdaigne; f, without Leaue, I (ouer-rashly rude) surp Your Rooms, or on Your Rights intrude; humbly craue Your Licence; and Your Loues, or My Address, When My Access behoves. I know, the Field of His Yong HIG Hnes heart So duly till'd by Your deep Care and Art Adding His Fathers Royall golden Writt; And goodly Practize, to demonstrate it: His (late) rare Brother's Pattern, of Renowne: With Honest Quin's new-cast Prince-Worthy Crown: And holy Promptings of that reuerend Payre, ilborn and Hakwill, from the saecred Chaire) That little needs Hee the Stagyrian's store, The Corduban's, or th' Attik-Muse his Lore: Much lesse (alas!) My silly Muses Myte, With borrowed Feathers to aduance his Flight. Yet, sith, too-often, to a tender Eare, oo-serious Lectures sound buttoo-severe;
Especially, to Princes dainty Taste, They seem but harsh, and will not down in haste (As holesom'st Dishes, if but homely drest, Some queasie Stomachs hardly can digest): Let me presume (with your good leaues) a while To imitate Physicians honest Guile; Who, oft, in Sugar sheathe their bitter Pills, The better so to Cre vnwilling Ills, When way ward Patients, for the Sugars sake, Take-in their Health, which else they would not ta Sad Rules of Patience, Abstinence, Austeritie, Humility, Frugality, Sincerity, Religion, Labour, Care of Common-Wealth, And Manie, meet for Prince and Peoples Health; Which hardly can, in their Owne Likenes, sinke In Youth-ful Mindes (scarce in their Eares, I think) How grauly oft, with greatest Diligence Prest; and imprest with Tullian Eloquence: Sweetly disguis'd, in artificiall Suts, Dancing the Measures after Delphian Lutes, Washed in Nectar, wrapt in sugred Verse, Enter more easily, and more deeply perce. This I endevour: and to This Intent I summon CHARLES to Vertues PARLAMENT
TO The High-Hopeful CHARLES, Prince of Great-Britanne. WHere witty Bertault (in his Fancy) meant But a faint Praesage of His Pr. of France; Our Hopes of Ours the better to aduance, We haue presum'd to cal a PARLAMENT Where Royal Vertues, from Olympus sent, By seueral ACTS of sacred Ordinance, Conform, confirm Your future Gouernance; So please it Heav'n Yor hart & hand consent. O! please it Heavn, You may be pleased Thus, These Works to imitate, These Acts to act; o proue yor self, This same PANARETVS, hen future Age shal see our Hopes in Fact, , while I pray; sweet Prince, in humblest sort cite Yor HIGHnes to This Soverain Court. To Yor Highnes Seruice humbly-devoted, Iosuah Syluester.
TO The right Honourable Lords Spirituall & Temporall: The Knights and Burgesses of the Lower-House: & To all generous and ingenuous Readers. PResuming all Your Lordships will appear, Not by your Proxies, but in Person, Heer; And in your Turnes, say (Every-one) Content, To Every Act, in Vertues PARLAMENT: I humbly bring You Every-one A Briefe Of every Bill; or, at the least, the Chiefe. An Act against Duels, desperate Combats, and R¦sing Boyes. Pag An Act for better Execution of the former Act. An Act against Hypocrisie. An Act against Superstition. An Act against Abuses in the Courts of Iustice. An Act for some Mitigation of the former Act. An Act for due Execution of Iustice in generall. An Act against Persian State, in proud Retirednes. An Act against prosuse Prodigality. An Act of exceeding Loue and excellent Resolution. An Act of rarest Pietie in a Prince.
An Act for Imitation and continuance of the former Act. 61 An Act for right Imployment of Publike and Priuate Treasure. 61 An Act against Ingratitude. 63 An Act against King-Killers, Powder-Traitors, and their Abettors. 64 An Act for Clemency, and against Impunity. 65 An Act for Propagation of Princely Piety. 66 An Act against the Mitred-Monarchy. 66 An Act of Admiration. 67 An Act for Reading of Histories. 68 An Act against ignorant and ignominious Chroniclers. 68 THese All are Publike Acts: Priuate, This Session Hath Passed None: but in the next Impression, Your Acts of Bounty, and the rest of Mark, Shall be recorded, By Your Vnder-Clark, Iosuah Syluester.
Names of the Nobles in This Parliament, Interpreted. PANARETVS: AL-VERTVOVS Andria: Prowesse. Phronesia: Prudence. Pistia: Fidelitie. Eumenia: Clemencie. Euergesia: Liberalitie. Hypomoné: Patience. Cateria: Constancie. Aletheia: Truth. Dicea: Iustice. Eusebia: Pietie. Interpretation of other tearmes vsed in This Parliament. Dysidaimoné: Superstition. Fridea: Contention. Merimné: Careful-vexation Dapania: Charge or Cost. Adicia: Iniustice. Oval: Crownes for vnbloudy Vic¦tors
PANARETVS. YERES timely Turns, vnto a Lustre run, Brought forth at last the long-long wished Sun, here on our Hopes our iust Desires pursewd, o see our PRINCELING with a Name indewd Which, Since WEE sawe, or heard that Happie sound, turn's slowe Teem had trotted twice the Round) hen, lo, Th' Etern All-Maker's Maiestie, Quick-darting downe his All-discerning Eye, hereby his Goodnes all his Works dooth guide; d seeing prest the sacred Pomp and Pride As in so solemne Mysteries is wont) ado the Altars and the hallowed Font; th' instant summons with a gratious beck imble Scouts, which scudding light and quick, spch more speedy then a Thought the things o inioind them by the King of Kings, ho, with a most-mildly-maiestike gest, heauenly words, his pleasure thus exprest: The yong french DOLPHIN in euen ready Now o take the Name my fore-Decrees allow:
A frequent Name of Kings, and famous farre; Wonders in Peace, Thunders in dreadfull Warre And, One of them, more excellent in Grace, Among my Saincts hath iustly held a place. But yet, besides that Name, which France affects For one Man's vertue, and for due Respects; Besides th Name, which onely Men haue giuen, I'll giue him one my Selfe, as sent from Heauen: And such a one as one day, by Euents Shall proue it a true Praesage of that Prince; And, in One Word, mysteriously contracts The Historie of His succeeding Acts. Go therefore, quickly from all Quarters cite The rarest Vertues, and most requisite For Royall bosomes, that did euer rest Within the Closet of a Kingly brest. Tell them it is Ou pleasure and Decree, That to This Prince they All God-mothers bee: And Shee among them that is found most fit, And best behoues in Crowned soules to sit, Shall at the Font, Her sacred Name impose; And from thence-forth inspire him, as he growes▪ With all her Powers, to correspond the scope And full Extent of that great Empires Hope,
Whose Limits yet vnlimited appeare, Where Sire and Sonne to mee are equal deare. I see th' Aegean streames, and Thracian strand, Already trembling vnder his Command: And th' horned Crescent (which hath scornd to vale) Before the Beams of This new Sun growes pale. To greatest Ships (as Guides of all the Fleet) The cunning'st Pilots euermore are meet: Mine, most Immediate, seems the souuerain care Of Soueraign Kings (who but My Subiects are); And therefore, I, that haue behight This Lad An ampler Rule then euer Monarch had, As, of the WORLD to make him Emperour, 'll haue his Vertues equall to his Power: 'll make them so: and to approue it, all The Earths foure Corners I to witnesse call. This publisht thus: eft-soones the winged Posta ddresse them quick to these inferiour Coasts, nd (swift as Arrow) hee that tooke to finde, aire Andria, of great and goodlie mynde, mong the manie Idols of our Dayes hat counterfeit her fashion and her phraze, py'd her at last, for her heere slight account, eady to leaue vs, and about to mount
A winged horse in hope els-where to gett A new Renowne, 'mid stranger Nations yet. Her Helmet (euer as her head she stirrs) Seemed to twinkle with a thousand Starrs; A stately groue of azure Plumes did waue, And proudly shadowed her gilt Armour braue: The bright keen Blade that by her side she wore, Inur'd to blood in Battaills long before, As it were, weary of that rusting rest, And greedy longing for his wonted feast, Seem'd malcontent and his proud Sheath disdain (The golden Prison that him still detaind) Whereon were grauen (with Arts Art-passing By such a hand as could giue Metall life, The noblest feates of Valour (most extolld) In later Times, and in the Dayes of old, Of greatest Monarchs that yet euer were, Whose marks the World (vnto this day) doth b There, by the Banks of Granic dy'd in graine, (As then: no Banks, but rather Hills of Slain) Philips Great Sonne (inspite of Multitude) To his sole Scepter the whole World subdewd. There, valiant CAESAR (Rome's first Empero Qushing the Senats and the Peoples power,
nd stooping all their Lawes to his Sword's lawe, ramples the Tropheis of his Son in Lawe; ho pale without, and all appalld within, lyes from Pharsalia, and his Hoast, vnseen. Why flyes Great Pompey? so (at once) to lose Th' Honors so oft wonn from so many foes? cause Thine fainted, must Thou faulter too? yes! with Caesar thou hadst heer to doo. hr's thy Excuse: & though Thou lost the Game, hy Victor yet some-what abates Thy Shame. Thear (on the Chape of massie gold, vnmixt other Metall plain or wrought, betwixt) own, great HENRY, smear'd with blood & dust, urses th' Iberians with keen fauchin iust; nd iustlie keening his couragious sprite gainst those daring Demi Mores despight, out of breath the brauest of their Troupe, h bleak for feare, begin to faint and droupe: he gold there loose, seems euen to fly and (more) ooks pale in faces full of pride before. ut Hee (well marked by his milk-white Plume) ith Kinglie scorne, disdaining th'odious fume f vulgar blood, in valiant furie runns pon the proud Commanders Dukes and Donns.
Who (either proud of Port, or rich Attire) Had by his hand a suddaine death for hire. Their royall Patterne all his Troopes take-after, And of the rest they make a glorious Slaughter: Whence streams of gore that to their Center scud, Met in a Rubie, make a Lake of Blood. Such costly Sheath sheath'd in such workmanship The sheen keen Blade on Valour's brawnie hip, (Hung in an azure Scarf, all ouer sow'n With Crowned-Swords, and Septres ouer-throw'n.) A thousand other famous Battailes, fought At sundry times, with Cunning-cost were wroug Within her Crimsin Bases, waving lowe About her Calues, in Buskins white as snowe. Shee seem'd like Palias, gainst the Giants prest; Or (on Mount Ida) against Mars addrest. At suddaine sight of Heau'ns bright Messenger, In mylder port she straight composed her; And when He briefely to her heedfull thought Had done the sacred Arrand that he brought, And (by the way) had question'd her (beside) Whether her Haste was bent, she thus replyde: Celestiall Herald, While th'heroïck Prince, Whose gentle Yoak his Celticks so contents,
aru'd with his Sword a Statue to my Name, o stand triumphant in the House of Fame, othing could hold me from his steps, a-part; y hand did guide his hand, my hart his hart: ea, I was with him, nay, within him, prest, is spirit's familiar, and perpetuall guest. ut fithens Peace Him now hath quight disarm'd, nd keepeth Mars within her Temple charm'd; did giue way to my keen Swords Request, Which can no longer lie and rust in Rest) nd, while his hart, now all in loue with Peace, ath left His hand, for mee, no businesse, meant to seeke some other Strand for Stage o act my Wonders, in Warrs dreadfull rage; hat in braue Battaills I againe might reap he Palms Hee wonted on my head to heap. For, with the sparkles of my glorious fire, h'incensed brests of Younglings to inspire, can no more find in my hart; fith they o rashly rush to cast themselues away, o oft, for Trifles (bred of idle breath) o madly run to an vntimely death; o daily sacrifice their Life and Soule, n some so foolish Quarrells, some so soule,
That, in the issue (fatal for the most) The Victors self may rather blush then boast; And such, as for such to vsurp the Sword (Besides the Conquest's euen to be deplor'd) Is nothing else but to profane the same, And to blaspheme myne honour and my Name. Not that I blame (where Blood & Nature bind In point of Honor (Idol of braue mindes) A Caualier, so sensible of wrongs, To hazard Life and all that him belongs; Sith, void of Honour, hee is voide of sense, That houlds not Life a deadlie Pestilence. But I would haue them rightly learne before (Not, of a heart meer valiant and no more; But, of a heart valiant at-once and wise) Wherein that Point of pretious Honour lyes, For which, hee's happie that his Life shall lose; And cursed hee that care-lesse it forgoes. For such a cup-fume ouer flowes the braine Of such whose Soules this Error entertaine; That One will weene his Honour interess't To bear a Word, though spoken but in iest; Who neuer thinks it tainted with a Lye, Nor toucht with base and will-full Periurie:
Nor with his Treason, when for some pretence, Hee hath betrayd his Countrye or his Prince, Or yielded vp some vn-distressed Place, Or ed the first to saue a Cowards case. So th' Hypocrite, through Superstitious Error, Thinks he hath don some Sinn of haynous horror, When, by mis-heed, or by mis-hap, hee comes Vhallow-washt, into the Sacred Roomes; Yet, makes no Conscience, yet hath no Remorse To haue vndonne, or donne to death, by force Of vniust Doom, or fraude of Euidence, A many poore and harme-les Innocents: Nay, laughes at Widowes and at Orphanes teares, By his deceipt, dispoild of all was Theirs. Those valiant Romans, Victors of all Lands, They plac't not Honour there where now it stands; Nor thought it lay, in making of the Sword Interpreter of euerie Priuate word; Nor stood vpon Puntillios, for Repute, A now-adayes your Duellers pursew't. But from their Cradle, traind in Rules more fitt, They nether knew th' abuse nor vse (as yet) Of Challenges, Appells, and Seconds-ayde. But, when the Lawes their Bridle loose had layd,
For Publique Glory, ginst a Publique Foe, There Hono point there Valos proofe to show. But, wh behoou'd brauely and first to front An Armies force, or beare their suddaine Brunt; Or,  thick with darts, victorious, die Vpon a Breach, or on a Rampire high; Or, leap aliue into a yawning Hell, To saue then Citie, from Infection fell; Liu'd neuer Men that lesser feared death, More-daring Valor neuer yet had breath. Witnes (vnto this day) th' vndaunted harts In urtius, Decius, and Horatius Parts: With many Wothies more, Immortaliz'd, Which for their Countries haue Selues sacrifiz'd; And whoe braue deeds, whose honors, whose deserts Moue more Despare then Enuy in Mens harts: For, dying so▪ Garlands & glorious Verse, No Ces & Teares, honord their happy Herse; Their Flower of ame shall neuer, neuer shed, cause their Death, their ountry profited: the death which brings now brainsick Youth nto then Graue, dseues but Tears and Ruth; Their Courage casts them euen away, for nought; Without Memoriall, saue a Mounfull Thought,
Which, banning but the furie that inflam'd-them, Honors enough, if that it haue not blam'd-them. O what a number of Couragious Knights, Abortiuely, haue in These Single Fights, Lost the faire Hope the World conceiu'd of them, Haue idlely frustred, of their Valors gem, Their gratious Prince, who iustly might expect, Against his Foes, their forward Worths effect; And, sacrilegious, to their Wrath haue giuen And headdy Rage (whereby they haue been driuen) The Sacrifice which (with more sacred zeale) They ought to God, their King, their Cōmonweale! Ynow to make (could they return from death, Such as they were, when heer they lost their breath) Not a sole Squadron, but an Hoast of Men Whose Acts alone would furnish euery Pen; An Hoast of Hectors, and Achilleses, Caesars and Scipios, who, by Land and Seas, Following Great HENRY for their Generall, Mought (if he wold) haue made him Lord of ALL. Where, now, they lie in an inglorious Toombe, Longing for Light vntill the Day of Doome: Or lower, in eternall Dungeons dwell, With Ghosts & Shadowes skirmishing in Hell.
This mischief therefore, springing day by day, And spreading so, as nought his course can stay; And seeing (too) mine Honour blurr'd with Blame, When these rash Mad-caps doo vsurpe my Name; To be, from heoceforth, from the Rage exempt Of such as turn my glorie to contempt, And thus desace my Vertues grace with Vice, I hop't els-whear some holier Exercise: And rather would, hearts so intemperous Should not inioy mee, then imploy mee thus. Here Andriae ceast: The Angell, gracefully, Humours her Anger with this milde Reply; Ceites, faire Namph, your Plaint hath Right & Truth, But yet, excuse the boyling heat of Youth; Perhaps 'tis harder then you ween (precise) To beat-once a French-man, Yong, and Wise. This Euill from This inborn Error springs, That a Braue Mynde, when wrongd in any things Hee weens himselfe (if so hee Armes professe) Must no-whear seek but in his Sword redresse: And that an Eye, a No, a Nod, a Nick, Ynough t' oftend a Noble sense and quick- Petnitious Error, which dooth vndermine Both Martial Thrones and Ciuill, and Diuine!
or, to no end the Publique Sword shall serue If euerie man may with his Priuate carue. And then, in vain are Souueraine Princes Lawes, When Subiects dare Themselues decide their Cause. But I beleue This Madnes will no more Praecipitate their courage, as before. The curb of Law which by their prudent Prince, Is now new made against This Insolence Will barr their Boldnes, and (directing meane How (This deer Honour saued whole and clean) A gallant Spirit, wronged in any kinde, May lawfully his Satisfaction finde) Will bind their hands, & euen glew-in their blades, Till, when some Foe the Common Right invades, In forward Zeal of their deere Countries good, It shalbe honour (euen) to dyue in blood. Disposed therefore to expect Amends, Dispatch the Order which Heauens Monarch sends; And goe not hence whear thou art so renown'd, Till all the world be but This Empires bound: Were it for nothing but That Rising Sunne Where on all Eyes already haue begunne (Both Friends & Foes) to fixe their Hopes and Fears, That braue Yong Prince, who from his cradle bears
Thine Image in his eyes, and in his armes, Thine Exercise in euery kind of Armes. Surely, said Andria, 't had been hard to find A stronger Charm heere to arrest my mind, (Chiefly, heere liuing my Soules Sympathie, His Father; rather, that same other I) For, as in th'one I am a Miracle, So will I be a match-lesse Spectacle In th'other too, when to his Ancient Right His daring Sword shall make his Claime by Fight: Whether his Armies royall Front aspire. Those craggy Hills whose Name is taen from Fire; O tend vnto those fruitfull Plaines which spred Toward Bootes, and Hyperions Bed, Whose Princes in then Fables Antique—Fram'd, Counts among Kings, Kings among Counts are nam'd. After these words, pronounc't with voice & gest, As Oracles are wont to be exprest, Both took the flight throgh the thin chrystall Aire, Towards the Place appointed for Repaire Of all therest of Royall Vertues Band, Which were conuerted by Heauens high Cōmand. Royall Eumenia was already come, And simple-mannerd (Pistia, thought by some
Long-since exided from the World); and Shee Who from afarre doth all Euents fore-see. There was (apparant by illustrious things) Faire Euergesia, Ornament of Kings, And sirme Hypomonè, with her Twin-sister Cartéria, and She whose Patrone and Assister Are often shent, Alethia, little know'n To mortall men (no scarce among her owne) With vailes and cloaks they doe be-clowd her so, Whose spotesse Selfe should rather naked goe. In briefe, of all the Vertues summon'd heere, There wanted none but Dicea to appeare, And St. Eusebia, in her Shadowes hid, That long it was yer Her the Angell spid. For heer among vs a queint Idol haunts, Whose simple habite, whose sad countenance, Whose lowely look, whose language mildly meek, Whose zeale-like gestures, & whose postures like, So counterfeit Her, with the Maske it makes, That many times the wisest it mis-takes. You'ld think, her hart had onely God for Ioy, Her Exercise onely to fist and pray; That she bhoris the World, and lodg'd therein, Lines as the Fish that out of water bin;
That burning Zeal of Heauen consumes her so, That all seemes bitter that shee tastes belowe. Yet all the while, This hollow Holy-Tricks Dats but of Honours, dreames of Bishopriks, Thirsts for Promotion, thrusts for Primacie, Hunts glorie still, yet seemes it to defie, Neuer does good, but for some great applause, Nor euer did good, for meer Goodnes cause. This Ben of Soules, and that same Fopperie (Of old) sirnamed Dysidaimonié, Whose hart, deiect with Terrors ouer-strong, To feare God's Iustice, doth his Mercie wrong (Right Seruile Feare, with Errors foolify'd) Haue driuen Eusebia hence, els wheare to bide. Because th' one loues not, th' other miss-beloues What best to fear and least presume behoues. The Angell therefore ferrets euerie nook, And narrowly her wonted haunts dooth looke, In euerie Cloister and in euerie Cell, Where Folk belieu'd that She did euer dwell: Yet nothing findes hee of her, anie-wheare, Saue same old track or footing heer and there; No, though he visite the austerities O famous▪ Abbyes and faire Nunneries:
, in Her stead, he meeteth euermore, One of These Haggs in euerie Couent Doore, esst in a habite of so humble showe, That hard it was the difference to knowe. Yet, at the last, prying on euerie side, Her (as conceald) in a by-place hee spi'd, Where, with incessant teares shee stayd to rew And to bewaile our Errours old and new; Amid an humble Troupe, whom like Desire To loath the VVorld, and from it to retire, Had made preferre a poore and meane estate, Yea Want it self, in place so separate, Before the Wealth, the Honours and Delights, Where-with the World inueigles, as inuites: As choosing rather heer to lose all These, Then lose thereby, their Soules eternall Ease. In this sequestred place, prostrate in Prayer (Best Antidote gainst Hopes-pride and Despaire; The Two grand Poisons of Soules Faculties) The Angell found Eusebia on her knees. Their Talk was short, the Time inportun'd so: I brief therefore hee doth his Message showe, Acquaints her quickly VVhence, and Why he came▪ Then She eftsoones consenting to the same,
Away they post in a swift Aierie Coach Towards the place where all the rest approach, The generall Rendez-vous for all This Act: VVhere yet (alas!) the Ladie Dice a lackt. For, th' Angell tasked to goe seek her forth, Sees her no more conuersing on the Earth, Nor findes her sitting (as she wont of-old) On Princes Thrones, and Prelats, vncontrould; Nor among Magistrates, which are the Tongue And fe of Lawe, 'interpret Right and Wrong. Where at amazed, and desiring more To sound what reason Men could yield therefore, Assumes a Bodie, bearing in his hands A bgg of VVritings and seem-Deeds for Lands: Comes to a Hall, all full of Murmuring Of people pricked with the angrie sting Of ed , who her Venome sheds Euen into Boores and Paisants harts and heads, By Her kee surie (as wiith Brizes) stung; And by Merimnè and Dapania wrong: In This great Hall, vnknow'n vnto Repose, Stalke that stern Furie, either among those O her owne Frye, or 'mong the wretched Crew VVhom Her hard Gripes had made (in vain) to re
A Rank of Seats, each vnto other fixt, And euery-one a sundrie Name affixt, Bordred the Walls, smoakie with age' and foule; Perches of manie plumie-pownced Fowle, Whose nimble Quills haue learnd to flye for that Rih Minerall, which makes men peace and prate. There was no Order: a lowd-buzzing Presse VVith whirling Eddies hurry'd without cease, Full of all Sorts; of Priests, of Gentlemen, chants, Mechaniks, Grooms and Husbandmen: Each iustled other, crowding to and fro, A heer and there the stream did ebb and flowe. This yauld, that brauld, another beat the Barr; Oe woo'd the Iudge, another vrg'd him farr; This proues Default, That pleads a Warrantie; This auoides Witnes; That, appeals more high; other, fleering dooth his Aduerse flowte. With Rod in hand the Vshers trudge about: A world of Lawyers swarm'd; yet some had leasure (s least imploy'd) the Places length to measure. boyld with Discords; one no sooner don, instantly another New begun; With such a Noise as soundeth neer the Shoare When, towards a Storm, the Sea beginns to roare.
Hard-by this Ocean, which Night only stilld, Appeerd an Old-man (as one deeplie illd, And inly galled for some grieuous Losse) With eyes lift-vp, pale cheeks, and armes acrosse; Whom th' Angell spying, towards him he speeds▪ And (seeming Mortall by his Shape and weeds) Good Father, sayd hee (so to sound his minde) Where might I (think you) Lady Dicea finde, VVhom I haue sought already far and neer, And surely thought now to haue found her heer▪ Dicea, my sonne, said the Old-man (well-nigh Gushing out Teares which stood in either eye; And sending forth a deep-et Sigh, before) Dicea, alas! is in the World no more. That Fire which only Death hath power to quench That fel Desire no Deluge else can stanch; The burning Thirst of Worldly Goods and Gol And all Sinns, taught to warr against her, bold; Haue forc't her to forsake this wretched Frame, And fly again to Heauen whence first she came. Or, if in Earth she yet haue anie Stance, 'Tis with the Chinois, Turkes, or Scythians: But in This Climat hardlie dooth appeer Anie small signe, to showe she hath bin heer.
Cruell Adicea in her Roome is sett: e Fauour, Fraude, and Madame Countersait, (Out of all Courts hunting all Conscience quight) Make of Right crooked, and of Crooked Right. Art and Deceipt keep thear their open Schooles: son and Lawe are but the phraze of Fooles, Law and Reason are now waigh'd (by Sleight) I golden Scales; where, only GOLD is waight. Thus, the Old-man proceeding still complaind; Tl th' Angell, thus his Blasphemies restraind: Alas! good Father, your fresh Grief (I see) For some great Suite, late lost vnhappily, om your sad lipps this bitter language drawes; usable (perhaps) for your Grief's Cause: th' eye of Passion ill discernes the truth. This hauing spoken; the Celestiall youth rns to another, lesse disturb'd in minde; d likewise askes, Where he might Dicea finde. ee, more discreet, and milder-spoken, farr, Replyes: My Sonne, sure verie few there are (Yea of the wisest, who best vnderstand) That easily can answer thy demand. For One perhaps will think her to be there, Whereas, another (seeming wrongd) will swear
By Heau'n, and all that in it Heau'n containes, That not a spark nor mark of her remaines: Each holding her, present, or absent, still As his owne Cause hath thryued well or ill. But I'll assure thee (and past all Appeal) That in this Place shee dooth not alwayes dwell. Sometimes shee comes, and brings for Companie, Honor, and Faith, and old Integritie: But the strange Tricks of a bold babbling Dame Call'd Quiddi-quirk, as barbarous as her Name, Molest her so, that soon they driue her hence; For, Both at-once haue no-where Residence: And Plutus too, her many-times dismaies. With that sweet Power whereby the world he Causing her oft return with heauie cheer: And that's the Cause she stayes so seldom heer. Oft haue I seen her on the souverain Seat In that high Senate, whose Edicts compleat Sway all the Kingdome; and (if anie-where) I sure belieue, you yet shall find her There, If those Abuses whose bold Tyrannie From other Thrones hath driuen her openly, Haue not crept-in by some close Golden Port: But, farr bee That from such a reuerend Court.
eer ceased Hee: and instantly, with all ng his sight, the Angell leaues the Hall; aierie Bodie to the Aier repayes. while he takes to other Courts his wayes, happily the wished Lady meets: o, inly ioyd (which outward gesture sweets) ause in Iudgement shee had ouerthrow'n ōgs proud Support, & giuen poor Right his own, me from deciding of a Cause of waight, ore the Peers and Councel of Estate. ut, her Content was doubled when she heard av'ns sacred will (as th' Angell had auerrd) d His high pleasure (whose Omnipotence e Heav'ns adore) for Surname of the Prince: th him therefore Her speedie she directs wards the Troupe which only her expects. Now all these Nymphs assembled, seemed prest All diversly with Ioy and Hope possest) ll take their Flight to that King-fauourd Place here (pre-ordained for this VVork of grace) hey should impose the Royal Infants Name, he Worlds main Hope (as most conceiue the same) hen soudainly there did among them breed noble strife, which stayd their forward speed:
Though great desire to see the radiance Of that yong Sunne which should enlighten Fra Hasted their haste: and though on euerie side As well the sacred Pomp as ciuill Pride, The King himself, Princes and Princely Dames Glittring in gold, sparkling in pretious Flames, And all the Court adornd in rich Array, Seem as offended at the least Delay. But yet, because Heauens Monarch had decreed, That of the Vertues Shee which should exceed, As most conducing to Kings happie state, Should with her Name this Princeling nominate; When one of those high Hearlds vrg'd them on, Among them selues This to consult vpon: Consult? said Andria: Why consult about A Point, whereof (I think) was neuer doubt? Mine, Mine's this Honour: for among vs all Who more adorns a Kings Memoriall, Or better keeps a Sceptres Maiestie At his full Height in Royall hands, then I? I fill his Name with glorie and Renowne; I make him feard abroad of euerie Crowne. I with the terror of his Arms deterr Ambitious Tyrants that they dare not stir
siue Warre against Himself or His, euer spurrd by Spight or Auarice; amous Valour gaining This, for Meed, t at the last hee seemes it not to need: esse hee list his Conquests to extend ough-out the World; then is it I that bend prowdest Mountaines vnder his Command, strongest Holds, I render to his hand; with fear, I chill with trembling Ice boldest harts of oldest Companies t dare resist his quick and thick Alarmes, th th' only lustre of his glittering Armes. n only with his Trumpets sound ithout a stroak) his Enimies confound; dreadfull, make the most redoubted heer nk it no shame to flye his fierce Career, if (no Steel, of proof to ward his blowes) were Rashnes more then Valour to oppose. uch were of-old those hardie Heröes found, Prowesse, Then for Demi-gods renownd: h, Hee whose showlders shor'd Olympus walles: h, Hee who conquer'd th' Empire of the Gaules: h, that Great Macedon, and such (again) ose famous Paladines, whose Fables vaine,
(Yet vse-full Tales) tho'ld Romants fain so fitt, That euen they seeme by Mórpheus fingers writt. But what they had Idéally from Art, That Réally I to a Prince impart. Who knowes not, that I, only vs'd in Field, Serue all the Vertues both for Sword and Shield? Your Selues, indeed, seeme to agnize no lesse; Although, in words, you shame it to confesse. For, when the furie of Warrs dreadfull Stowres Beginns to thunder neer Your daintie Bowers, All pale for Feare, all trembling, all dismayd, To Mee yee flye, to Mee yee crye for Aide; Vnder my wings yee creep, to keep you sure: Where (and but there) you think your selues sec And, rather I, then Any (who expose My Self alone against the Haile of Blowes) Begin Estates, begett, and bring them forth, And plant (in blood) the Empires of the Earth. Th' admired height of Romes great Sceptre yerst (As that of Greece) was but My work, at first; And that same Other, famous, glorious Throne, Whose Greatnes, Yet, doth in it's Cinders grone. For, though by Warr, with Fire and Sword, I waste What Heav'ns Decree hath doom'd to be defac't;
while I raze, I raise; and of the Rubble ettie States, I build One hundred double; orrid Dragons growe so hugely great manie Serpents that alyue they eat. ou are indeed extold (and worthylie) knowing well, to vse a Victorie: without Mee, You can haue none to vse; out Mee then, your Knowledge nought accrues. refore, your Honor's lesse; at least 'tis such, (at the best) on Mine dependeth much. n brief, in all the sacred Works wee doo, Merit's diuers, and our Honor too: rule the humble, I the proudest tame: adorn Kingdomes, and I conquer them: can direct, and I protect a Crowne: doo besiege, I dare assault a Towne: showe the vtmost of Mans Witt and Art; t your aimes with valiant hand and hart: (lastly) plott, in shadie Chambers sield, at I performe, abroad, in bloodie Field. ut, in all These, I passe you All, as farr, o subdue the stoutest Foes in Warr; see about one (Lightning-like) to flash lions of Shott, Millions of Swords to clash;
To hear no noise but Canons roaring Thunder, Diuorcing Soules from Bodies pasht in sunder; To march in blood euen to the Knees; and yet In all vndaunted, not dismaid a whitt, Is both more painfull and more Princelie too, Then, cleering of a clowdie Fraude, or two; To shield by counsail Equitie oppresst; To gaine the Fame of Wisedome with the best; To fast and pray, or giue abundantly; Or get the name of gratious Clemencie. Then well fare Valour: and long liue the Storie Of valiant Princes in the Phane of Glorie: No humane Virtue hides so well as I, Obnoxious staines when Princes step awry; An ALEXANDER ARISTIDES seemes, Because the splendor of my spreading beames With radiant lustre dazles so the sight, That nought is seen but Great and glorious Light Whear, if he lack my Raies, or my Renowne; Boast he of double or of trebble Crowne, Bee hee benign, be he munificent, Iust, wise, religous, learned, eloquent, Precise of Promise (both to Frend and Foe) Princes abroad little regard him though;
, might heeiustlie all (els) Vertues vaunt; t wanting mee hee seemeth all to want. His Hare-like hart, at Wars least noise doth quake, d to his Beads hee dooth him all betake; Fear strikes Fear in his best Refuges, d his no-courage doth discourage His. brief, as blesse with Peaceful Vertues rare, e seemes far fitter (in a time of Warr) th Keyes and Crosiers a POPE'S Part to play, en Sword and Sceptre, as a KING, to sway. As Andria had ended here her Part; ee, in whose Schoole wee learn the heedfull Art neuer fondlie Vndertaking ought; ft, soft, said shee: To boast our Selues, we ought ot blame our Equalls; nor (with proud Exchange) o our owne Praises their Dispraises change: dria, I grant, Thy merit's great; but Mine if not greater, full as great as Thine: hens, to raign in Soule of Maiestie, ere is no Vertue to bee matcht with Mee. For, let a King be full of High-deseigns, t him be Valiant, as your Paladines; t him be gratious, iust and liberall, ue of his word, and so deuoute withall,
That at his Feet all Vices prostrate ly; If Mee he lack that am all Vertues Eye, Blindfold hee vses (nay, wel-neer abuses) These diuine Gifts, which bountious Heav'n inf And right resembles a faire Ship, for Sea All ready rigd, and furnisht euerie way With everie Needfull; Men, Munition, Beef, Beer, Biscuit, all: only shee wants (the Chief, The Life and Soule; the Sense, the Lawe, the Lig Wherby she liues, moues, stirrs, and steers aright A skillfull Pilot, with Discretions hand Her winged Manedge rightlie to command VVith hempen Raines, and woodden Bridle, so That neuer wry she saile, nor wrong she rowe: Without whose guidance, if the puffing gales Into the Deep transport her huffing sailes, She runns at randon, and with ruefull Knock, Soon splitts her self vpon som Shelf or Rock. Euen so it fares with Princes, when they make Or Peace, or Warr, and not My Counsaile take; Or, without Mee, as it were blindefold, vse Their other Gifts the gracious Heav'ns infuse. They thryue so little, that (as in a Wrack) Their owne rich Burthen often breaks their back
ir forward Valour but sad Fruit doth yield y Winn the Victorie, yet lose the Field; y brauely fight, and yet are brauely soild: e Error still hath all-their Actions spoild. ir Bountie bindes not, but vnbindeth harts: ir Clemencie much more then Rigor smarts: ir Zeal it self, proues to them selues pernitious; vnto others blind and superstitious: ir Vice and Vertues them so inter-nex, t scarce can one distinguish their Effects. Not that Ill still is not Good's Opposite; that, They wanting Mee, their only Light, (euen) Good cuill; or doo, out of season, ood, which is not good, done without Reason; , of faire Vertues, fruitefull Seeds of Glorie, p blasted Buds, which stain their goodly Story, hat famous Conquest euer yet was gott ich to the Victor I prepared not? u fightest bravely, and in Victories loodie blades, gettst the first Crown, for prize; I, by th'art of Prouidence, dispose glorious issue thy couragious blowes. ely take the fitt aduantages Time and Place, to second Courages:
I, skillfully the Squadrons range and rank; I marshall them to showe their Front or Flank As best befitts (by warrlike Stratagem) T'inclose their Foes, to clip, or curtall them; Or, brest to brest (as angtie Lyons wont) With braue incounter, charge them full afront: I by an Ambush, layd with luckie speed, Opprest with number, help thee at thy need. I manie-times preuent thy like miss-hap, When seem-fly Foes would traine thee to the t I, to bee brief, with euer watchfull brain Assist, to make thy Valour neuer vain. But, if a Prince must needs want one of vs, And mought not bee both Wise and Valourous; Sure Reason would our glorious Parts assign, Thine to braue Soldiers, to great Captaines Min Because, my Powers are proper to Command, As Thine to Execute with hardie hand. But though our humors so fair diuers bee, Yet may wee Both, in one braue Spirit, agree; And, for This Age, wee need no Witnes els But famous HENRY, who in both excells; With so great Wisedome ruling on the Throne Which with such Valour hee hath made his Own
ictories, yet, making Men dispute, hich of Vs, they should them best impute. t hundred Laurells neuer widow-curst, hundred Ovals, which no skin haue burst, e I haue often Conquer'd without Thee: euer wert Thou Victor without Mee. I haue oft seene Armies dissiped, proud, strong Cities often rendered, ll mur'd, well manned, & well stord with food) out the spilling of a drop of blood; g no other then the ancient Wile asting fields, where Publique losse (the while) urnd This Gaine, to stoope by Famine Those ch could not else haue been subdu'd by Blowes. des, th'off-cutting of all Passages, ell of Succours, as of Forrages; en to conquer by vncasuall course, t-lesse to fight, and without force to force. reat Captaines therefore did Vs neuer part: either, sole, is as a head lesse Dart; (if not head-lesse) heed lesse thrown (as ill) m feeble caster, without aime, or skill. T is said of Pallas, in the Troiane Broyle, t Shee in fight stern Mars himselfe did foyle;
To showe how faire Wise-Valour doth excell A rash Excesse of Courage boiling sell; Whose fume-blind force, wanting Discretions b Resembles right a sight-less Polyphem. But. whether ioynt or seuerd be our Powers, My Cunning still yields fairer fruits and flowers, Then doth Thy Violence (though oft it spread Bright vertuous rayes about Thy glorious head). For, onely then are Thy stiffe armes imploid, When stubborn War dares to haue all destroid. But, when sweet Peace fills Crownes with Coron Thou art lockt vp in Princes Cabinets; Among the Corselets, which, now wariefied Through loue of Peace, they haue new layd aside; Or those, which idlely (through Times alteratio Hang by the Walls, both out of Vse and Fashio But I, indifferent, serue in War and Peace; I breed her, feed her, and her yeeres increase, By prudent Counsailes, prouident Decrees, Kind turns, calme Treaties (sitting all degrees); In briefe, by all means meet to render Kings Mutually friends; and rule their Vnderlings: Whence to their States if happy fruits accrew, Th'honour of all to Mee alone is due.
t, in the World, what State hath euer thriuen; ther, which hath not to Wrack been driuen, re lackt My Conduct, and where onely Chance steerd the course of Publique Gouernance? t humane Action, what Design, what Thought, out Mine aide hath euer com'n to ought? t Priuat stock, what Publique stem of Blood, out my Rules hath sprung, or long hath stood? oblest Arts, all nimblest Works of worth, ch humane brains cōceiue, & hands bring forth, d they not Mee for rich and fruitful Wombe, whence their births (both first & second) come? kindest Counsailes, without Mine among, wee not call them Treasons of the Tongue, n blind and bad Adnise (though malice-less) s the Friend to whom it meant Redress? ay nothing, nothing vnder Heavn, may misse Minds guide rayes of my Resplendencies: the true Sun of all humane acts; out Mee, Fortune all their praise exacts. ght  leaue to Fortunes doubtfull deed, all appeare well set, though ill succeed: where My Sceptre hath a soucraine sway, nes false Die hath little power to play.
Then, bee't on Cedar, with a Pen of Gold, For Memorie and Glorie too, inrold, That Of all Soule-adorning Gifts diuine, The Maiestie, the Monarchie is Mine: That I, Their Queene, life of Their lawes and spring, Am, of all VERTVES worthiest of a KING. To whom, I seem so much more requisite (Being both his Guide & Eye to giue him Light) As hath a Guide (so iudge the most discreet) More need of Eyes, then either hands or feet. Heere ceast Phronésia: Andria instantly, Weening her wrong'd, seemes willing to reply, And to her Selfe already soft shee sayes, Shee hath lesse skill in Phrases then in Frayes; But, to maintaine the honour of her Cause, Where need requires, not words but swords she d Then St. Eusebia, ioyntly raising faire Her Soules pure Zeale, and hersweet Voices aire, See, see (said Shee) how proudly insolent, Vaine Men, admiring and too confident Of Their fond Wisedome, and fraile Fortitude, (Forgetting Heavns quick Eye and Arm) conclu That their own strength, or their own Prouidenc Hath foyld their foes, or giuen their own defence:
lly children (set on fourm or stoole) se hands are (first) held at the Writing-Schoole, ing some Letter, vaunt it for their Owne, think their Art-less fingers skilfull growne. t, ô fond Mortalls! Neither is't your Art ystique State, nor your high hand and hart, ch in your Borders Peace and Plenty brings, nds your Battailes in your Tryumphings: Heavns Right-hand invisibly addrest, eskue You, hath death it selfe represt; ell'd all Perills, put-by all Miss-haps dy to quell you with tempestuous claps): then retorting all vpon your Foes, u of Laurels (which They did propose) s Terrors, Errors, or Disorders rife, utinies, or other Ciuill strife, ther Mischiefe, which confounds their powrs their own Swords, or makes thē fall on yours: at your hands, victorious Thus, doe beare t glorious Palmes, and Olyues euery-where rne your Coasts with their rich oylie tresse: all with you is Victory, or Peace. t you, ingrate the-while, throgh blind Self-loue, seeing that these Gifts come from aboue,
Sacrifice to your Selues, conferre the honor Of all, to all, saue to their own right Owner. O cursed Soile! ô barren Sand and dry! Not betterd ought by any husbandry; Hardned with heavnly deawes, the more the worse More worthy nothing then a heauy Curse. O vvretch! refer, refer aright, and bring These sacred Streams birth to their sacred Spring, That perfect Good, which can no more desist To doe thee good, then Thou Him to resist. Through all thy Prouince let his Name be pr If to a Crowne his fauour haue thee raisd, Reare Him an Altar in thy Soule anon, And for Burnt-Offring lay thy hart thereon: His power (alone) adore, implore and trust; And in thy Selfe kill euery kind of lust: So shalt thou not, what euer Hap succeed, Neither so much Courage, nor Counsaile need. For, couering thee with his protecting hand, Did all the World in Arms against thee band, Besiege thee round, assault thee in such sort, That nought could saue thee; neither force, nor Fo Amid all dangers which might fright thee there, He, he would free thee from all cause of feare;
hine, preseru'd from death and deadly Foes, d be amaz'd to conquer without blowes. rayers would put a hundred Hosts to flight: ach a Casar to commaund them right, ghting on thy knees, with armes acrosse, , thou (alone) shouldst conquer, without losse. e, His Angell would assume the sword e-with som-times th' Assyrian swarms he gor'd; , Senacherib's brauing Blasphemies, d find a King, with waterin his eyes, nquish him with vowes: and as with charms, shold'st do more with tears, thē he with Arms. y then, thus vainly dare We heere consult hers Right? or of our Owne insult? shee that giues to God (nay, giueth God) er of right this Crown should be bestow'd; er possessing, they All Good possesse: anting her, All else is emptinesse. neither Prowess then, nor Prudence, ween elfeKings glory, neither Vertues Queen: e seene Valiant Kings, and Prudent too; uch as knew in all turns what to doo, uch whose Constance was incomparable, retchedly, and die as miserable:
But, neuer saw I but a happy End Of Pious Princes, which on God depend; And in all doubts, all dangers (from their Birth) Haue (sacring vnto Heavn the thoughts of Earth) With eyes ay-fixt on That Sunn's sunnie side, Belieu'd his Loue their Guard, his Law their Gui Not that I would a Prince secure and idle, Should so let-go his Empires Rains and Bridle; To cast on God the Cares, the Managings, And glorious labours that belong to Kings: Nay, rather would I, that with Vigilance, Constancie, Iustice, Wisedome, Valiance, And all else Vertues which his God hath giuen, He second full th' assisting hand of Heaven; Aye well assurd that God will not neglect Iust-armed Prayers of his own Elect. But, to His onely Bountie must they giue Th' honor of all the fruits they shall archieue By their most noble Cres, most Royall Paines: Not to the depth of Machiauilian Brains, Not to the vaine Effort of humane force, Nor Martiall Courage, mowing Men and Horse, Which in effect (how glorious Name it beare) Is but a Publique, (lawfull) Massacre.
briefe, what Worth, or Wit in King may bee, ns King cōmands he make Them wait on Mee: That, the Spur; Me, Raine of each Intent; , of his Counsaile; Me, the President: it Them often, Me continually: They inspire his Hart, his Iudgement, I. that in nothing They with Mee compare; any else (how Royall) Vertues rare: make Mee sit in Honors fourm the first; without Mee, esteeme his State accurst: d Them for helpfull, Mee for necessary: rme belieue, when Times are aduersary, er to faile, with Prowes and Policy, fall, with All; then flourish without Mee. hrogh such a Faith, that great King-Prophet yerst, h litle force, so many Foes reverst: ft escap't so many Snares of Death, ch Envies hand had set to stop his breath: ortunate, in euerie ieopardie, almost seemd t'haue wedded Victorie. hat Monarch would not gladly be the Heire hese high fortunes of His Vertues faire? o would not purchase at the deerest rate ll his Paines, the glorious Praise He gate?
And yet, the Vertue which aduaunc't Him so, And on his Acts such honors did bestow; Was not his Prowess (though he durst enough) Neither his Prudence (though of famous proofe)▪ But his religious Pietie and Zeale To serue the Lord, the God of Israel: Zeale, which consuming Him with heauenly flame, Made him to consecrate his Facts, his Fame, Himselfe, his Sword, his Sceptre, and his Song, At the Authors feet, to whom they All belong: As still esteeming that hee held his Crown, By his support who had it first bestow'n; Not by the Prowess, or the Policy, Of his owne darefull hand, or carefull Eye. Let noblest Princes imitate this Part, This pious zeale of his religious hart: And let them know, that nor their Heed in sway, Nor their Good-hap (which seem's t'attend them Their Knowledge, Courage, nor Victorious fame, About their heads so glorious Garlands frame, Neither from heavn so many blessings bring, Neither so much doe magnifie a King, Nor dignifie the Sceptre in his hand So manie millions iustly to command;
ho, after this worlds Diadem, em a-new, in New Ierusalem: God himself-vouchsafes to watch Their state, s Their Counsaile, Their Consederate, Rock, their Refuge from their Enemies, ets them daily glorious victories: without Mee, no Vertue is compleat; at, in That which maketh truly Great, e the rest, and all the best They can, re as God in Greatnes passeth Man. ebia heer concluding her discourse, began her Title to enforce: (said shee) long lent you eare a-like, om your Reasons, and your Rhetorike er nothing, from the most of you, surpations of Mine honors due; mine own Noursling from my side you steale, in, with Iustice, you scarce iustly deale. , if of Vertues any worthy bee ign, as Kings eternall Companie; ith more lustre their great Names do grace, n Shee may iustly claime that Place; ee alone, who, by One duety, doo happy Kings, & happy Subiects too:
Shee, that of all the Graces from aboue, Acquire them most their Peoples hate or loue: Shee that the Stock of Traytors doth extinguish, She that good Kings from Tyrants doth disting Shee that to Each due Recompence imparts According to their good, or bad Desarts: Shee, without whom, the rife-full strife-full sou Of Mine and Thine, would all the World confo Not that I am so inly blunt, or blind, As not to value Valours valiant mind; Or not to see, What Benefits to Kings Sacred Eusebia, and Phronēsia brings: But saue Easebia (whom I honour more Then all the Greatnes Worldlings most adore) Not one of you produceth her effects So fortunate and free from all defects, But oftentimes some euill them succeeds Which equalls oft their Good, somtimes exceed Much like some Herbs, of doubtful fame and fo Which cure one Griefe, and cause perhaps a wors 'T's a glorious Work tryumphing worthily, To win by force a famous Victory, To  a field with dead, to swim in blood, To glasse ones Valorin a Crimsin flood:
hat's all This, but a meer Massacre ous Lions (not a humane War) the Right of the bright Sword victorious the Cause iust, & the Effect as glorious? re not those so bloody Palmes, (the while) red in Countries, ruin'd with the spoile arrs dire fire, flaming on euery side se sad fields, for saken far and wide? udy Vertue, for Warre onely fit, or the Mischiefes that doe waite on it! least (alas!) her thirstie Steele should rust n her Sheath, too-long restrained; must, men with Tears see their deer Countries spoild, fields with heaps of slaughtred bodies pyl'd, Cities sackt, their Houses all inflam'd, treasurs shar'd, their wines & daughters sham'd tenderbabes (which haue no help, but cryes) d, broached, broyl'd, in horrid Sacrifice? e, Noble surie of heroïck harts, idous Stage wheron thou act'st thy Parts, -too-costly to a State; too-deer ll thy Palms, thy Glory walks too-neer Miseries, Pains, Perills, Dolors, Deaths, dire Euents; which not alone the breaths
Of Foes hereaue, and Foraine States vndoo; But wrack withall thine own Domesticks too. For, what Effects, but such nefarious things, Haue been the fruits of thousand valiant Kings; Whose memories so ring of Battailes yet, That euen with bloud their Stories may be writ: Leauing their Names, iust Arguments of terror, Loading the Earth with Monuments of horror, Filling both Land and Sea, with Gore, with Gall, And, to no purpose, topsie-turning All: Sith all the gaine of all their Victories, Is but a fame of Valiant Robberies; Reproachfall praise to Souerain Potentates, To Supreme Pastors, to high Magistrates: Yet, most of These haue reapt no other fruit, From bloudy labors, but This odious Bruit: Wheras They should (only) their Powers implo To salue, to saue; and neuer to destroy. One onely King (no further Name is need) Iustly constrained to arme, & mount his steed, By force to enter to his Own by Right; Hath sacred all his Art, his Hart, his Might, To's Empires good: and chasing War away, Makes Peace approu'd his Valors daughter ay.
est, still greedy of new Isles, new Indes, raisd such storms with their Ambitious windes, heir own Seas haue nigh sunk Themselues, ast their Subiects vpon Rocks and Shelues, e (through more woes) they, euen with tears, behold ll it is to haue a King too Bold. w, for your Prudēt (but, meer Prudent) Kings, much Discourse, wch frō their iudgmēt springs, akes them timerous, loth to take-in-hand; se their time, while waiting Time they stand; aring nothing, but Discoursing still, r as much as Those that dared ill: akes them, more (in Worldly matters, heer) e and sharp, then loyall and sincere. t as They, of dangers heedfull are; em, no lesse behoues it to beware. not say, that many times the grounds on the worlds, blind, foolish wisdom founds, ontrarie vnto the solid Base heavns true wisdom euery where doth place. t, one Thought neuer it selfe extends can) at once, to two so diuers Ends: ore then can the sight of mortall eyes same instant, Heav'n and Earth comprise.
What shall I say of Thee (and doe thee right) Sweet St. Eusebia, Gods own deere Delight? Thou fillest Kings, indu'd with Thy desires, With sacred feruour of Celestiall fiers; Thou mak'st their Liues a liuely speaking Lawe, To rule their Subiects more by Loue then Awe▪ But yet, thou mak'st (if Thou alone be Theirs) Them too-too-slack in other Kingly Cares; Too-mew'd in Peace, in War too-scrupulous; And think so much of Heavn, that Earth they lo And▪ Euergésia, praising Thine Effects, Amid the best well may we doubt defects: For, what in Kings more Heavn-like seems to Or God-like more, then to be liberal? Yea, liberal Princes seeme euen Gods on Earth, Com'n-down frō Heavn to hunt Despaire & D Care, Indigence, Incomber, and the rest, Where-with poore Vertue often is opprest. Yea, euen as Gods, Their Names are honord And, for their Seruice, nothing is too-deer. (The ground of which so great beneuolence, In some, is Hope; in some, Experience): So that all Vowes, all Voices end in Them, And, as the Sun, Their Sceptres brightly beam.
, oftentimes, those Bounties of thy hand publique Burdens, bitter to a Land; fluent Princes (least their Fauors source d be exhausted) haue too-oft recourse ributes, Imposts; and some worse withall: ce Flowers to few, to many Thornes befall: Ararice her selfe vniustly fills what Profusion ouer-fondly spills. r Thou, Eumenia, though extold so high chest Type of Heauenly Clemencie; nely Shield of such  dare infrenge cred Rules, to saue them from Reuenge: canst not cleere thee from the confluence ills vs'd to Follow Indulgence. y too-sparing, Thou doost Vices spread; losest sound, to saue corrupt and dead: illing Ciries with home-Enemies, ardons turne to publique Iniuries. I, by practise of vnpartiall Rigor, ain good Orders, keep the Lawes in vigot: Kings at-once belou'd and feared too ed, alone of those that euill doo). Subiects (set on happy Plenties knee, ir possessions from Oppressions free)
Blesse them, adore them, hold them (euer deer) Their Countries Fathers, nay their Gods wel- In briefe, no Blessing can befall a Realm, But Theirs inioy, from, by, or vnder Them. For, as it is, of the Wilde-Ash-tree, said, That th' onely sauour, nay the onely shade, Instantly kills (by strong Antipathie) What euer Serpents vnderneath it lye: Such, to the Snakes of Vice, those Princes are Which gainst Iniustice haue proclaimed War, With no lesse Care to make My Rules to raigne, Then their owne Sceptres in their hands sustain Can no Rebellion spring (at least) none speed In their Dominions, neither Factions breed: Sith gracious Heauens vouchsafe them this A For hauing vs'd so equally My Sword (To all Degrees, in Citie, Field, and Towne) In Ciuill Warre they shall not weare their Own Their People, feeling in Their happy Sway, What Hap, what Rest, what Freedom they inioy, Deeming them as their Gods, and meting (rife) Their length of Blisse by Their deer length of Watch for Their Safetics; and can suffer nought Gainst them to be mis-done, mis-said, mis-tho
ore then' gainst their Publique's Prospering, eof they hold Their Iustice only Spring. r, of all rarest Vertues that may meet ust Prince, They onely taste the sweet ine Effects; and of that Equall Care ot surcharging more then they may beare. boots it that their Maiesties be meeke, animous, franke, pious, politique. of a spirit surpassing each Extrem; they but Mee, They little reck of them: loue them not, they listen farre and near, e welcom newes of their wisht death to hear. n, if they vse My sacred Exercises, ugh they be staind (perhaps) with other Vices, hold them perfect; and, in spight of Fate, after death, their Names they celebrate; ing Reliques, still preseru'd aboue mes faire bosome, and their Peoples loue. es, vnto this day, that Norman Prince, Rollo, still belou'd (though dead long since) alld vpon (as for His iust Revenge) n some new Wrong doth their old Right in∣frenge. nceforth therefore, ô Princes, that desire aue your Names to highest Fames aspire,
To leaue behind you Monuments of Worth, To giue your Glories, after death, new Birth; Endeuour not to dazle proudest eyes With Towers of Marble mounted to the skies; Neither by War (whose Train is Plague & Dea With fire and bloud to mingle Heauen & Earth; To thousand Perills to expose your liues, Wherby your Greatnes, not your Goodnes, thriue Onely, loue Mee; let Mee be reuerenc't Through all your lands, by all your hands defen Let Mee sit by you on an Awefull Throne, To daunt the Lewdest with my looks alone; And with my Sword still drawn to prune-away Luxuriant Twigs that break my iust Array: Let My Tribunals be the Poores Refuges; Let here-on sit no Mercenary Iudges: Let Innocence finde there her surest Fort; And who wants Right, there let him want Suppo There let My Balance be impawn'd to none; ut, as his Right is, let Each haue his Owne: In briefe, with You let Mee be set so high, That absolute as you doe Raigne, may I: And I shall more enrich your lasting Stories, Then all your golden Towers, your Cōquering
precious Gifts that with full hand you giue, ght besides, whereby your Names can liue. a as yet did her Discourse pursue, ugh milde Eumenia, loth to lose her due, onger to endure her Vaunts so high, open mouth was ready to reply; her Sister Euergesia eek, little choler colouring her cheek) from th' Empyreall (right Imperiall) Court, a new Nuntio with a new Report, ie Truch-man of supernall Pleas, gentle Iarres thus gently to appease. ortall Beauties of past-humane Soules, t both Globes in his one hand-gripe holds, you to weet, that His high pleasure is uench for euer all your Differences) ll haue th'honour to impose the Name, hom he means such fauor & such Fame, ARETVS (for an auspicious Signe. e markt him All with all your Tipes diuine) All transformd into that reuerend Clark, s hallowed Organ, for this sacred wark; s, Thou (whom Hee resembles best) Name the Child, in name of all the rest;
After that He hath six times sounded tho That other Name his Nation fancies so. Hy, by ye then, Time calls you; for the thro These Rites expecting, thinks each minute long. And I, the while, with no lesse speed must spy Th'vnholsome Den where Pestilence doth ly, And in Heav'ns name, her straitly countermand, That Shee presume not once to lift her hand, Nor from her Quiuer shoote one Arrow out At any of the Royall Courtly Rout Assembled for the sacred Mysterie, During the Pompe of That Solemnity. Heer-with the Angell hence't, & bent his flight Tow'rds Our sad Citie, which then deeply sigh't Vnder the fury of that Monster fell. Hee found her out in a hot-humid Cell, About to Arm her, & to scout abroad, Euen towards the Place which now the Heav'ns forbod Foule seamrent rags (whch som old Robe had Cas't heer and there her yellow-sallow skin, Where-in hot fierie Carbuncles were fixt, With poisonie Rbies, heere and there betwixt: A quench-lesse Thirst, with a continuall Feauer, Broild in her brest, boild in her body euer;
rie Breath was as a deadly stroak: rsed Stance ready with stink to choak: se it was, that neuer Wind could fan, 'vnrefin'd autumnall Affrican, noisome aire a stuffing fogge did pen mustie Vapours of a moistie Fen. round about her, by her side did ly ts of Fruits that soonest putrifie, ns of Milions; Peares, Plums (passing nūbers) humor-poysoning, crudie-cold Cucumbers; Grapes; & that soft Persian fruit (so deer) ll at home, & little better heer. e Angel, wonted to Heav'ns Bliss-full Hall, little stay in this vnholesome Stall; athing soone that thick contagious aire, edily dispatcht his Message there: eav'n-ward quickly from the Furie flew, e horror yet so seemd him to pursue, he had fainted to haue bin so nigh-her, e not felt him of th'immortall Quier, immortall Sisters, in one troope, the while ch from their Owners euery Vice exile) ported swift vpon a winged Clowde, ir Arrivall made the Palace proude.
The pompous Scaffold, for this purpose re Seemd at their sight to tremble (as afeard): The stately Towers of th' antique Edisice, The massie Porch, and Arch, and Frontispice, Seem'd round about to lighten smiling flames, As at eir Entrance to adore these Dames. They, sing them (vnseen) amid the thro Of those Good-Great, whom (as they past along) A soft sweet Murmur, for their Vertues, blest; Serued with Them (each in her office prest) That goodly Rising Sunne, whose Rayes, new sp So rathe a Spring of flowring Hopes haue bred And, after both his fauourd Names were giuen, The humane first, then that they brought frō He All, in a ring, about him did appeer (Vnder the form of some faire Princesse neer, Or some great Prince then present there in view) To doe his Name the Honors iusily due; Each cheering Him to follow for direction The Propertie Shee brings to Kings perfection. Maist Thou (said one, as his sweet Eyes she ki Great little Prince, be of the Heav'ns so blist, That, though Augustus fortunes Thine surpasse, Thy Fortunes yet may giue thy Prudence place:
Thou abound in royall Bountie so her said) that Traiane thou out-go: said another: how my Hopes aspire!) alour, one-day euen excell thy Sire: here (said one) one-day appear in Thee, artiall Fathers match-lesse Clemencie: aist Thou, frō thy Child-hood (said another) d in Zeale thy Mother and God-mother. efe (Pandora-like) Each offered there precious Gifts, in Praesage (as it were) ith aduantage gracious Heav'ns produce wished-Counsails into Act and Vse. nt, God Almighty, King of Kings, that Hee on These Thrones hisroyall Turn shall bee, ay haue care t' accomplish euery-where all our Hopes haue for him dar'd to swear, hat his Looks, Words, Maners, Motions, seem ery part, to promise still for Him. y Hee, his People tender, loue, protect; ght in Iustice, yield them her Effect: ee forbeare to over-charge their backs novel Tributs, or with need-less Taxe: et them see that of all Titles giuen l the Kings that haue been vnder Heav'n,
Hee holdeth Good the best; better then glorious, Warrs-thunderbolt, Earths-Terror, Great, Victori Whose loftie sound makes Princes oft become Abroad more feared then belou'd at home. High swells the Ocean, when the Moon's at And with proud Billowes threats both Hill & H But sinks againe, and shrinks into his Bed, When Cynthia mues her neuer-constant Head: So (swelling proud; so, surly browd the while; So, temper-lesse; tempted with Fortunes smile) Ignoble Natures are too-lightly pufft; And with her Frowne as basely counterbufft. Farre other be His firm and generous Mind, Whether his Fate be curst, or be she kinde; Yea, fawn-shee, frown-shee, (firm indeed to non Be He still like him Selfe, The same, still one; Still bountifull, still milde-maiesticall, And still vouchsafing free Accesse to all: So that no Barre (a Barbarous deuice) But due Respect doo seuer Him from His. For, be a Prince neuer so mighty Great, If betwixt Him and His a Bar He set; At length he sets one (which scarce ought repair Twixt their Affections & his own Affaires.
He, to th' idle Pomp of Prester-Ians, -proud Sophyes, and soft Asians, are, to keep their tawny Maiesties, ubiects sight (saue once a yeere, or twice) Him daily (like the Sunne) goe out er and cheer the clowdie World about; o the poore oppressed Widow right, p the Orphan, ouer-born by might; e the iust sighes of sad Labourers: waies (like that best of Emperors) That no Day, or think it lost (for nought) in he hath not some such Action wrought; t he liues not then, or liues in vaine; a Subiect, not a Soueraine. sume not Hee in frivolous Expence, gold a iust Loue's gentle violence or his Succour (in extream Affaire) his poore People from their hands to spare, frō their mouthes, nay rather frō their bellies) s, drawn-dry with Pump of former Tallies. her, counting it (with some Remorse) old, but Bloud; may He with greater force to lauish vpon idle Vaines, biects soule, & th' humor of their Veines.
That great King-Prophet (so renownd for Song) Once for the water of a Well did long, Which at the Postern of a Citie rose, Amid an Host of his most deadly Foes: Three of his Worthies (in despight of death) Brake through their Armie, euen to vnderneath The very vvall whereas the Well did spring; Whereof they drew a portion for the King. Then, off againe they brauely come their waies (Couer'd with wounds, but more with worthy Praise) And re-arriu'd in their owne Camp, their Prize Vnto their Prince present in humble wise. But He, bethinking through how many deaths Those dreadless Champions had then fetcht their breaths, In fetching of that wished Water so; For all his thirst, hee would not drink it tho: For, what is This (said he) but the hart-bloud Of These that Thus haue ventur'd for my good. So, to Gods will, His, willing to accord, Hee offers it on th'Altar of the Lord. So, may Our Prince another-day imploy The publique Treasure, which with carefull Ioy, His louing Subiects shall (as ought the loyall) Yield to support his Port and Charges royall.
Hee present to th'in-sight of his Thought, how much Sweat & Sorrow it is bought: t Rigor (vsed in his Name perhaps) rts it from oppressed Widowes laps, wretched Crafts-men, frō hard-racked Swains, om Pouerty at her owne Mess maintains: , in Compassion say (with tender griefe) is my Subiects bloud, my Peoples Life: must not then in idle Pomp and Play vvater spil) be spent and cast away. n doubting lesse the damage then th'abuse) it to God, as to the rightfull Vse. nd, 'tis to consecrate, and vow it right, d in a fashion pleasing in Gods sight) poure it out in Royall (right) Expence; er in War-works for his Realms defence, or his Honor; to all Times to seale King-like Bounty, Prouidence, and Zeale. lose-fisted therefore may He neuer be the true Seed of sacred Memorie; Those whose lustre doth adorne Renowne, d honors Kings more then their orient Crown: stately Structures, speaking Eminence, as their Vse match their Magnificence:
To wall High-waies; to heaw-down harmfull R To paralel Eld's Aquaeducts and Bridges: Found Hospitals, or to endow them founded: To stop Sea-Breaches where they haue surrounded To fence with Peers & Piles of sundry sorts From Neptunes furie his importing Ports: To build faire Shops for th'Helyconian Loomes, T'advance Their Arts, and giue chiefe Parts chiefe Room And (as with liuing Nets) by Benefits, To catch both Valiant Spirits & Learned Wits. Millions of Verse haue sounded loftily The Prudence, Prowesse, Pitie, Pietie, And sacred Iustice of our Souerain Sir, As diuerse gales their diuers Sailes did stir: But not a Voice, in low or loftie vaine, Hath of his Bountie euer sung a straine: Yet yeerly from his liberal hand hath come A million (a more then Royall Sum) Among those (happy) whom his Goodnes graces, Or whom their owne in his opinion places. Which of his Predecessors (first or last) In Gifts or Guerdons these faire limits past? Not one of them did euer reach so high: Yet Vulgar bruit (halfe false, halfe flattery)
es some of them the great and glorious Name Liberal Princes, of illustrious fame. shall not wee then, beare through th'Vniuerse worthy Praise vpon the wings of Verse? l not wee say that his renowned hand, orthily (in Peace) with Bounties band binde vnto him whom he worthy knowes, rauely conquer (in the Field) his Foes. e mute that list, and muzzle they their stile, whom his Bounty neuer daign'd to smile ere't through their own mis-fate, in hauing none, auing Vertues, not to haue them known.) I, whose hap hath been to march with those wards whose laps This golden Riuer flowes, Voice and Verse shall trompit farre and nigh modern eares, and to Posteritie. d (without Flattery) say, that all the scope Wishes wayting on our future Hope, all our Prayers for a Compleat Prince in the rest of Royall Ornaments) ed of the Heav'ns no greater Hap require, that in This, the Son be like the Sire; d that he may (obseruing Golden mean) e like a King that means to giue againe;
Yet, with such feruour to This glorious Part, That still he giue lesse with his hand, then hart. Vouchsafe th'Eternall Destinies-disposer, Kings sole Advancer, & Kings sole Deposer, That mugre Tyrants wrath, and Traytors wile (Whose Maister-peece we Heer haue seen yer-while) Hee may wax old (after his aged Sire) In Peacefull Raign, vntill his Raign expire: And neuer, but at Tilt, or Tourney, feele The combrous burthen of a Case of steele; Or, when iust  shall inflame his sp'rite Against Vsurpers of His ancient Right. But, whether law-lesse Need, or Glories loue, Him driue, or draw, his Force in Field to proue, May He in Counsail, Courage, and Successe, Match his great Parents constant Happinesse, So as there be no need to spur Him forth, With braue Remembrance of His match-less wo But, Laurell burnt crackles in vain; and of-it Champing the Leafe alone, makes not a Prophet, If that his Tutors haue not more to do, To hold him from, then to incite him to; To coole, then kindle, that courageous heat, Which makes men feare no death, no dangers th
as once Theseus, ready to be kild, s known to be the Kings sonne, that so wild; is gilt Sword & sign engrav'n thereon: shall be known to be His Fathers Son, the Exploits of His, in such a Rank, would haue made the two first Caesars blank. e He Benign, so as his Indulgences d not Bad-Boldnes, Feed not Insolences: to some Winters, ouer-milde and warm, ich neither kill the Weed, nor chill the Worm; breed the Plague, Pox, Murrain & the rest, t otten Humors may, in Man and Beast. ot, but I know it farre more honorable saue then spill (in Cases tollerable) heer a World of Dust-bred Creatures liue, reaue-Mans life, which onely God can giue: too-oft Pardoning oft too-many drawes au need of Pardon, throgh contempt of Lawes Magistrates; whom the Audacious reak Bugs, & Bridles to base minds & weake. Mildnes then, be Hee so moderate His owne safety and the publique State) t neither Horror taint his Executions; ther his Fauours harbour Dissolutions,
And, too-remisse, by His too-oft Repriues, Turn Pitties Temple to a Den of Thieues. May He fear God, loue, worship, seek, & serue hi Know, it's He sole doth stablish & preserue him: That Kings, as his Annointed, haue Regard: That but He guard them, little boots their Guard. May hee belieue His Word, honor, obey; Take it, for Compasse in this Worldly Sea, Make it the Measure of Kings Power, in all, And counting That of Lawes the principall, Haue it ay written in his harts deep rooms, But, as a Prince, not as a Priest becoms. Vnder th'old Law (now abrogat long since) One might be both a Pontife and a Prince, For nothing seemed then to hinder them From matching so Mitre and Diadem: But now their Functions are diuided far, And Monkish Kings, now but contemned are: There Man and Maister but Hail-fellow is; And subiects play the kings, where Kings play Pri May He be loyall, constant in sinceritie; In soule, abhorring lyes, and louing veritie: That as his Deeds shal (for the most) be Miracles, So may his Words be altogether Oracles.
h'Almighty grant, that during all His daies, sparks be quencht which Factions wont to raise; , for the most (to double Miserie) ere be Two Kings where two great Factions be. , if there should (which God forbid) succeed h Mischiefs heer (as heer-to-fore there did) y Hee not want sound Counsailes happy Light, guide him in his Fathers steps aright: o, reauing th'eldest Emperors their Palmes, dainly turnd such Tempests into Calmes, Means so milde, that it was rather thought heav'nly Hap, then humane Wisedom wrought. , were it Wisedome, were it Happiness, tch He our Wishes, and His Wise success: one of Himselfe, th'other from Heav'nly hand, at Peace may prosper ouer all his Land. I know that Princes beeing born for th'Arts ich Coūsails, Camps, & Dangers schoole imparts, e Books most needfull and peculiar Theirs, Politiques, of State, & State-affaires. t, sith so few yeers doe our Age comprise, at euen the greatest of the greedy-Wise, ould know but little, if no more they knew en from Experience of one Age they drew:
That He, at once, may see all Accidents Of all past Ages, with his own's Euents; May Hee propose & set before his eyes The goodly Tables of all Histories; And there contempling all the true Records Of other Monarchs, mighty States, and Lords, Obserue their Acts, their Counsails, their Discourse, All (notable, or rare) in all their Course; Both what to follow there, and what to shun, And whether Fame or Shame their liues haue wo May He there glasse himselfe, & mark it brim, Whether the same shall not be said of Him. For heer, Our Verses smoothly sing and smile, But History will hisse, in other stile: And Kings that heer haue been compar'd to Gods, Entombed once, though vnder golden Clods, If in then Liues they haue deseru'd it, first; Shall hear their Names torn, and their Fames acc What may I add vnto These Wishes more? N more but This; that All heere wisht before, And All presaged of the DOLPHIN heere, Conur in CHARLES: that all His Parts appeer A liuing Picture of all Parts of Worth Of all those Worthies whence Hee takes his Birth:
at gracious Heau'ns (which promise euen as much) all These Vertues daign to make Him such, t really hee giue royall Assent all the Acts of Vertues PARLIAMENT: t in his Turn, the Ages after Vs, y finde, and know him for PANARETVS: d, sith That Name must needs Immortall bee, t no prophane hand blurr His History: some sweet Daniell, or some sacred Hall, iuill Hayward, (milde-maiestike, all) purest faith, in a peculiar stile, lorious Work of His great Works compile: if that Any of more worthy Skill-is, He the HOMER to This new ACHILLES, EAT BRITANS great Hope of Great Hap to∣come; nix arising from a Phoenix Dust: hom the Heav'ns (as mercifull, as iust) ore our great losse, in Great HENRIE'S Toomb. ong, long and Happy (in thy Brother's roome) ceed Thou CHARLES, euer as Good as Great: iving, old, to Thy old Fathers Seat, e, Great, Good STVARTS, till the Day of Doome. ch while I pray, sweet Prince, vouchsafe a space ead and rue Your humble Bead-mans Case.
HEer (like LEANDER in the Hellespont) Tost in a Tempest, in the darkest Night, Distract with Feares, divorced from the fight Of My High Pharus which to guide me wont: Spying Böotes in your HIGHNES Front, For life I labour towards your hopefull Light (May neuer Care belowd that Beam so bright, Come neuer Point of least Eclipse vpon't) Yet, though (alas) your gracious Rayes haue sho My wracked limbes a likely way to land: Vnlesse (by Others Help, or by your Own) The tender Pitty of your Princely hand Quick hale mee out, I perish instantly, Hal'd-in againe by Sixe that hang on Mee.
xe-times already, ready euen to faint, ith grievous Waight of guiltless Want opprest, RTAS and I haue bow'd, and vow'd our best re the Altar of our Souerain Saint: yet, the Eare that heareth euery Plaint; Heart that pitties euery poore Distrest; e (alas!) seems Deafe to My Request; only, is not moou'd with My Complaint. must I needs (NEED still importunes so) ortune still, till some milde Soule relent: (vnder Heav'n) no Help, no Hope, I know, e YOV alone, my Ruine to preuent: OV onely may, Novv onely, if at all: ast Help, past Hope, If Now YOV faile, I fall. Your Highnes's most humbly deuoted, and obseruant Seruant, Iosuah Syluester.
To The Soveraine of Women, ANNE Queene of Great-Britan. By IOSVAH SYLVESTER. 1614.
TO The right right Honorable LADIES, Lucie, Marchioness of Winchester. Countess of Bedford. Countess of Dorset. Countess of Exeter. Frances, Countess of Hartford. atherin Countess of Salisbury. Susan, Countess of Montgō. Barbara▪ Vi-Countess Lisle. Elizabeth, Vi-Countess Haddington. Elizabeth, Vi-Countess Fenton. , Baroness Zonh. argaret, Baroness Wotton. noria, Baroness Hay. Eliza. Baroness Knowlis. Eliza. Baroness Cavendish. Iane, Baroness Roxborough. Irrors of HONOR, Models of Perfection, Lowe, to You all, bowes the BETHVLIAN eeching All, but chiefly, You, by Name, (Dame; aign her grace and place in your Affection▪ oblest Lights, whose Vertues bright reflection, e-richly sparkles euery-way some flame iuerse in Form; in Vertue still the Same) Obiects vvorthy of your Worth's Election: kinde Address Shee craues, your sweet Direction wards the Presence of Your Souerain DAME, ose High Endowments, by the Trump of Fame, e All Vertuous vnder Her Protection; ch, IVDITH humbly prayes You, pray, for Her: d, milde interpret Her Interpreter.
ETHVLIANS Rescue. THE FIRST BOOKE. ing the Vertues and the valiant Deed Of th' Hebrew Widow, that so brauely freed lian Doores from Babylonians Dread; with iust Fauchin did behead their Head. hou, that to saue from Pagans seruile Rigor, e Isaac's Heires, didst steele with manly vigor ke IVDITH'S hart, my feeble hart advance; e, raise my Thoughts in high & holy Trance: my Spirit, ô! let thy Spirit reflect: nt I may handle in a stile select acred Stuff; that whoso reads This Story, Profit reap, I Comfort, and Thou Glory.
And Yo, great Comfort of Great-Britan's Whoe Vertues heere I vnder IVDITH sing; Thrice-ryall ANNE, vouchsafe auspicious Rayes Of Princely Fauour on These Pious Layes (Compoed first vpon a Queen's Command, (Disposed next into a Queen's owne hand, Transposed now to a more Queen's Protection: As most peculiar to all Queen's Perfection.) Great-gracious Lady, let it not distaste, That! VDITH made not (as she ought) more haste T kisse Your Hands; nor deeme, nor doubt, the wor Though Shee haue seen Your Royall Spouse the first It was her Truth-man, much against Her minde, Betrayd her so, to goe against Her Kinde. For which Offence, with other mo, to Her, Sh' hath got her now a new Interpreter; Shee hopes, more faithfull (wishes, more discreet) To say and lay Her Seruice at Your Feet: To giue Du BARTAS (at the last) His Due, In Her behalfe; and in Her, honour You. Whie Israel a happy Peace inioyd, And, dagerlesse, with diligence imployd Soile, which 70. yeeres vnsow'n before, with Thistles over-grow'n;
Lord, Who often, by some Stroak seuere st Correction, vvakes his Owne (for feare t too-long Resting make them like the Horse, th standing still too-long, doth lose his Force, ets to manege; and too-pampred, growes ly, restiue; and his Rider throwes) rs their Country with so huge an Hoste, clowds of Arrowes darkned all the Coast, , Bills, and Darts, seem'd, as they stirr'd, or stood, ouing Forest, or a mighty Wood: of all sorts of Souldiers, rankly-rude, r their Ensignes marcht such multitude, en drew dry the Rivers where they past ugh rich Iudea; so that, at the last, Iordan's Selfe, in his dry oazie Bed, ing for shame, was fain to hide his head; se (flat Bankrupt) hee no more could pay Tribute-stream, of all hee ought the Sea. he sun-burnt Reaper had yet scarcely rid ridged Acres of their richest Weed: needie leaner had scarce gatherd clean scatterd Ears the Binder lest, to glean: scarce, as yet, the Flayls vpon the Floors n to groan: When Iacob at his Doors,
Sees HOLOFERNES his weak Frontires spoil In bloudy Rivers drowne his fertile Soile; Not sparing fel the tender Female-kind, Nor hoarie haires (already short confin'd) Nor Sucklings, swaddled in their Mothers arms, From insolence of his insulting Arms. Then, as a Flock of Sheep, which sees their Foe Come forth a Wood (who oft hath scar'd them Minds no Defence; but scudding to be gone, Makes, in an instant, hundred Flocks of one: Th' Isaaciant seazed with a suddain Feare, Thinking his Hoast behind them euery where, Disperst and scatterd (like those silly Sheep) Fly into Woods, in Rocks & Caues they creep. Th' affrighted Swains, neglecting Fields & Flo▪ To saue their liues, clime steepest Hills & Rocks: Artificers, leauing their Tooles to play, Gain-greedy Chap-men, laying Trades away, Hie them to hide them, in securer sort In mossie Caues, then in a martiall Fort. And greatest Lords hold Denns of Wolues & Bean A safe Hold, then Gold-lyn'd Walls of theirs. Feare, lending wings to th' Aged, makes them With lustie speed vp to the Mountains nigh:
are makes the Mothers, all forlorn and lost, g their deer Cradles to the Clowds almost: ar makes the Children (like so many Lambs) aule on all foure after their dabbled Dams: her's nothing heard but hideous Cryes & Plaints, d Lamentations, pitifull Complaints. O Lord! (say they) wilt thou, for euer, Thus hrill down the Darts of thy fierce Wrath on vs? all the Chaldēan Idolists again y Chosen Flock in seruile Yoak enchain? all our sad Houses, turnd to Heaps of stone. ith Weeds & Thorns again be ouer-grow'n? all sacrilegious Fire again presume hy sacred House, thine Altar, to consume? But Ioachim, High-Priest of God, that tide, nd of the Hebrews then the chiefest Guide, ollowes the stout and expert Pilots guise, ho, when hee sees a suddain Storm arise, dds not more Fear, with His Fear, to his fellowes, or leaues his Ship to mercy of the Billowes; ut, hiding his distrust, opposes braue is Arm and Art against the Winde and Waue: or, quick dispatching (hourely) Post on Post, o all the Coverts of the Able-most
For Pate, Prowes, Purse; commands, prayes, presse the To come with speed vnto IERVSALEM. Since first th' Eternall gaue his sacred Law, Vpon Mount Sinai (in so dreadfull Awe) Th' Ark, which contained, in Two leaues of stone, Much more sound Wisdom, in it selfe alone; Then subtile Greece, or Rome (renownd for Wise) In Worlds of Volumes euer could comprise; Wandred from Tribe to Tribe, from Race to Race, Throughout all Iury, without Resting-place, Yea, somtimes too (ô too audacious Theft!) The sacrilegious Philistins it reft: Till th' happy day when Iesse's holy Stem Lodg'd it for euer, in IERVSALEM. But, sith as yet, great Dauids hands were red With bloud of Thousands he had slaughtered; The King of Peace would haue a peacefull Prince In Peacefull dayes, with all Magnificence To build his TEMPLE; whose high Battlement Seemd Earth to scorn, & threat the Firmament, Till th' hapless Day wherein a hatefull King, (In name and nature, iust resembeling This Tyrant's Lord) with execrable Blaze, Did burne it downe, & the Foundation raze.
A long-while after, Abr'ham's sacred Stems, urnd from Shores of Tyrant Tygris streams; set with Fears, with Perill, and with Pain, -builded Heer God's glorious House again. hich, though (alas!) That first no more it matcht, hen a Kings Palace a poore Cottage thatcht; Bignes yet, Beauty, and Height, obscur'd Pagan Wonders which most Fame procur'd: ' Assyrian Queen-king's (sometime) sumptuous Bowers, ' Ephesian Temple, the Egyptian Towers, e Pharians Pharus, Carians costly Toomb, odes high Colossus, the huge Heaps of Rome. r, for admired Art, This glorious TEMPLE ru'd Ctesyphon for Model and Example; nt rare Apelles curious Pensill Light, d led Lycippus cunning Chizel right. Thither, by Troops, th' Isaacian Tribes deuout, turnd to Salem, flock from all about: , when the Heav'ns, opening their Sluces wide, ure suddain Showers, surrounding euery side; e gurgling Rills with rapid Course descend om sundry Hills, and to some Riuer tend. But, sad-sweet IVDITH in the midst (almost) ined as Cynthia 'mid the Nightly Hoast:
For, God (it seem'd) her Beauties Form had cast In rarest Mould of Nature (first or last). Th' High Primate then, assisted with the Lig Of Eleazar (Priests, whose sacred Crine Felt neuer Razor) on his oyled head A pearly Mitre sadly settelled; His sacred Body also soon hee heals With sacred Vesture, fring'd with golden Bells: Then burns for Offring▪ slayes for Sacrifice, Kidds, Lambs, Calues, Heifers, in abundant wise: Th' horns of the Altar with their blood bedying, And lowely-lowd, thus to th' Almighty crying: Wee come not heer, ô dreadfull Lord of Hoasts, To plead a Roule of Meritorious Boasts; Nor to protest, that, in these Punishments, Thou wrongst thy Iustice, and our Innocence: No; wee confesse, our foule and frequent Crimes Worthy worse Plagues then These, a thousand tim Could'st thou forget Thy deer authentik Pact With Abraham, or would'st thou (so exact) Forcing thy Mercy in thy Iustice Scale, Our Waight of Sins with Iudgements countervaile Remoue our Cause, wee therefore (Lord) intre From Iustice Barr, vnto thy Mercy-Seat:
holy Father, pardon vs (wee pray) turn from vs this fearfull Storm away. Alas! vvhat boots vs, that thy mighty hand th brought vs home from Tigris hatefull strand, from the Yoak, which wee so long (before) der th' Assyrian cruell Tyrants bore; ese fat Fields, we haue but new re-tild, ese faire Frames, we doe but now re-build, ese (ô Dolor!) our deer louing Wiues, r Babes, Sons, Daughters (deerer then our liues) st serue the Chaldés, Ammonites for Pay, d be the Persians, and fel Parthians Prey; This thine Altar, if these hallowed rooms, re-profan'd with Heathen Hecatombs? O! if thou wilt not pittie Vs, abhord; least, be Iealous of Thy Glory, Lord: least, haue pitty on This Holy Place, here, to no God, but to IEHOVA's Grace, Incense burnt, nor any Sacrifice, t to thy Selfe, of all the Deities. rd! therefore turn, ô turn the Chaldean Torches om these rich Cedar Roofs, these stately Porches: eserue these Plates, this pretious Furniture, om sacrilegious Pilferers impure.
And let our Sorrow, and our Sacrifice, Vnto thy Iustice, for our Sinnes suffice. The Seruice done, Each doth his way depart, And Ioachim instantly calls apart The States of Iuda, and thus, sadly-sweet, Consults with Them, how with this Storm to mee Graue Peers (said he) if your braue Zeale, of old, Be not quight quenched, be not yet key-cold: I Care of Wiues, if tender Childrens loue, Had euer Power Your Soules deer Soules to moue: If in your Brests rests any noble Worth, Now, now or neuer, bring it brauely forth: For, but God aide, and your auspicious Speed, Wee are vndone, Wee & our wretched Seed: And neuer more shall the Immortall see This Altar Smoaking to His Maiestie. While th' Aire is mute, so that it scarce can make, In Summer dayes, an Aspen leafe to shake: While Seas be calm, so that, with Streamers braue, A thousand Saile slide on the sleeping Waue: While all the Winds be mew'd vp in their Cell; 'Tis hard to say, which Pilot doth excell. But, when a Tempest, one-while sinks a Ship Down to the Bottom of th' infernall Deep;
ther-while, with swelling Fury driuen, with her Tops against the Stars of Heav'n; ng a Shelfe now, and a Rock anon; , and but then, is a Good Maister know'n. herefore (alas!) let now no carnall Care, oods, liues, honors (for your priuate Share) e you forget your Common-Country's Loue, Sacred Place, th' Honor of GOD aboue: umbly all into His hands resigning Soules whole Sway & all your Spirits refining Flame from Drosse & Mists impure, h too-o-oft the cleerest Eyes obscure; e (I pray) the best, in likely-hood, pleasing God, most for the Publique Good. aged Traytor then, whose breath distill'd Hony Words, whose brest with Gall was filld, ging false Tears from his dissembling Eyes, used Drift did in These Terms disguise: Spirits faint, my Speech doth faile me quight, roste haires for horror stand vpright, I consider how This Tyrant fel, Boud-floods drowning where he coms to quel, es ner Vs; threatning to our Houses Flames, to our Selues, dishonor to our Dames:
Bur, when (on th' other side) to minde I call This might Princes milde Receipt of All (Not only th, as, rude and Reason less, Serue (like him Self) dumb Idols, Blocks & Be But such, as, matching our Zeal's holy Height, Are Abrahms Seed, both in their Flesh and Faith▪ Which wisely hue (and timely) turn'd (submi) The deadly Ege of his drad Vengeances: I  the Lord for such a Foe; so meek Lambes, to Lyons Lyon-like; As flexible to humble Tears, as fel To esolutions that (in vain) rebell. Sith therefore, yet we may haue Choise (for Of War, or Peace; his Fauor, or his Furie; Winking in Dangers, let's not Wilfully Follow our Fathers stubborn Sur-cuidry: But, striking Saile in such Storms violence, Let's liue secure vnder so good a Prince. Yet, None mis-take, that I this Counsaile To saue My Stake, as one too-fain to liue: Alas! my Years are of them Selues of age To dye alone, without Assyrians Rage; Without the help of their keen Dart or Pole, To launce my Hart, or to let out my Soule:
e, were my Youth's Spring now re-flowr'd again eateful blood boyling in euery vein. eale to GOD, and to my Country's Good d shew me well no Niggard of my Blood; t (Samson-like) My Death bring Death to all agan Hoast and their proud General. ore I feare, least, with a Zeal too-Yong, ighting for the Law, the Law impugne; ng so the Soldiers Insolence, sing so the Fury of the Prince, they by Conquest of one Day vndoo Izrael, and drown GOD's Glory too. ee bereft, What People, in This Place, ly-religious, shal implore His grace; , of all Nations that dispersed Wun Shores of Indus, to the Stting Sun; rom the farthest Hyperbarean Coasts, ose whose Clime continual Summer roasts, chosen only Iacob for his Owne, on This Mount His drad-deer Glory showne? t, good old Cambris (else the mildest Prince) nes, griev'd and pale with Passions vehemence; interrupting That, with This Discourse ens the heartless Peers and Counsellors:
Rather, ô Earth (for which our Earthlings stri) Gape vnder me, and swallow Me alive: Rather, iust Heav'ns, with sulphury Fire and Fum (As Sodom yerst) Mesodainly consume, Then I should (Saint with-out, within Malitious) Give Izrael a Counsail so pernicious. Were it, the Head of this inhumane Band Meant but our Bodies only to command, Though with our Birth, to this fare Light we bro Sweet Liberty (so sweet and deer, that nought, No Hopes, no Heaps may be compar'd to it:) The TEMPLE sav'd, I might perhaps submit. But, sith this Tyrant, puft with foolish Pride, With heavier Gyves to load our Soules (beside) Which (only Vassals of the Thunder-Thrower) Nor knowe, nor owe, to Any Sceptres lower; Would that (forgetting Him who made vs All, And of all People chose vs principall▪ And fatherly provides vs every thing▪ And shields vs ay with Shadow of his wing) We take for GOD, His proud ambitious Prince, Who Nimrod-like, with hellish Insolence, Would climbe to Heav'n, although his life be s As merits not the Name of Man, by much.
eard him boldly, bravely stand we to't, against Arms, Man to Man, Foot to Foot. y lies not in vain-glorious hearts, er of Horses, not of Pikes, and Darts: be but Instruments th' Eternal moves, own with Conquest whom his Goodnes loves. , should the Lord now suffer Heathen's rage er-un his sacred Heritage, se in life his Name we so dishonor; ath, at least, in Death, let's doo him Honor: f we cannot▪ Assur over-come, in, by Patience, Crowns of Martyrdom. d, could our Foes (as fel as Lestrygons) off the Earth extirp our Tribes at-once; could not though GOD's glorious Name interr ese Apostates falsly would inferr). e that with so sundry Nations stor'd peopled World, from one Man; and restor'd g after that) by one smal Bark, the waste Flood had made, when it had All defac't; He able even of stones to raise ople Zealous of his glorious Praise? He able once again to ope ara's Wombe, and giue her Spouse (past hope)
More Sonnes, then Sands on Lybian shores be By ruffling Boreas, lowd, Cloud-chasing Blast; Or twinkling Spangles nightly brightly roule On sabled Circles of the whirling Pole: Which, with more sacred Voice, more humble Shall sound his Praises, and observe his Law? Then rather, Fathers (foule befall You else) Let vs die Hebrews, then live Infidels. Let's not preferre, too-base, and too-too-blame, Profit to Duty, idle Feare to Shame. Cambris Oration was no sooner done, But all th' Assembly (as all ioyn'd in one) Confirm'd His Counsail both with voice & gest: And Ioachim, (Ioy-rapt, above the rest) Lifting to Heav'n-ward reverent hands and face, Said, Lord wee thank thee, that thy speciall grace Hath steeld our hearts, and linkt our Wils no les: A hopefull Signe of happy good Successe. Then, to the Princes he the Charge commits Of Townes and Provinces, as Each befits: Least any, spurt'd by Envie or Ambition, In Zrael should kindle new Sedition. So, Each with-drawes, and bravely-bold prepare To front the worst that martial Fury dares.
ho th' Aristaean busie Swarmes hath seen Hybla's Top; Whether, with Launcets keen, rging the Drones which over-neer their homes e humming out to rob their fragrant Combes: ther, collectiwg their delicious Deaw various Thyme, and other Flowers not few: ther, extending, in rare Symmetrie, wondrous Art, their Waxen Canapey; arching even, so many Thousand Cells, uick, so thick; so like, as Nothing else: ther, conducting their too-ful Supplies where, to plant their goodly Colonies; ch keep, still constant, in their new Plantation, ir Mother Citie's Manners, Lawes, and Fashion: seen the Iewes as busie Diligence, quick Desire to put them in Defence. ome stop the Breaches made by Art or Age; he Heav'ns anger, or the Heathens rage: he, least the Ram, butting with boisterous Fals. uld pash to powder their too-feeble Wals, Bastions, Bulwarks, Rampiers, Ravelins, Forts, k on all sides their Cities where imports: e to and fro trudging with Baskets fill'd, laces needfull sodain Sconces build:
Some wanting time, or meanes their Town to With broad deep Trenches soon begirt it all: And from a River neer they cut a Rill The hollow bosome of their Dike to fill. While Armorers, in order, beating quick Hot sparkling Steel on Anvils hard and thick, Transform it soon to Corslets, Curtellaxes, Helms, Gorgets, Gantlets, Bills and Battail-axes; And some, for need (to furnish and set-out Th' vntrained Shepheard, Neatheard, and the Lo Ground the ground-slycing Coultar to a Blade, And of the Sickle a straight Weapon made: None Yong and healthy took Repast or Rest: One on his back, another on his Beast, Others in Waggons carryed-in apace Corn, Wine, and Food to some importing Place: Even so, in Summer (as the Wise-man tels) Th' Emmets by Troupes haste frō their hollow To get-in Harvest, graving where they gone Their Diligence even in a path of Stone: The lastiest Swarmes for their Provision range, The sick and old wait at their thrifty Grange T'vnloade the Burthens, and lay-vp their Store In their great Garnier, byting yet before
every Graine, least kept so warme belowe id the Molde, it after sprout and growe. The end of the first Booke.
BETHVLIAN Rescue. THE SECOND BOOKE. NOw Holefernes, in the Scythik Fort Had pight his Standards; and in various Sp His Youthfull Pagans did them still delight; Nought less expecting then Affront, or Fight: When he had newes, The Iewes stood brauely out, Defy'd his Pride, and fortifi'd about. Shall then (said He) shall then a sort of Slaves, A sort of Clownes & Shepheards, arm'd with St With Slings and Stones, presume to stop the Co Of Mine exploits: Which, nor the roaring source Of rapid Tigris and swift Euphratés, Nor snowie Tops of Taure and Niphatés, Conspir'd, could stay? You Chiefs of Moabites, Of valiant Ephraim and fierce Ammonites; You that as Neighbours (having long converst) Knowe all the Nations on these Hills disperst, Say, from what People had they their Descent? What lies their Strength in? What's their Gouer For, He that wisely knowes his Foe (they say) Hath, in a manner gotten half the Day.
hen Ammon's Prince, bending his humble knee, s to the Duke reply'd right prudently r though in hart a Pagan, born and bred; inst his Minde, his Tongue diuinely led hat same Spirit which did the Seer compell, ch came to curse, to blesse his Izrael; th' Hebrewes State did such Relation make, f in Him Moses and Esdras spake;) y Lord, I shall, sith You so please, recite Isacians Story; and will follow right ingenious Bees, which wont not to devoure Sweet they meet, nor suck of every Flower; even of those they chuse, take but the Crops. s People (Sir) vpon the Mountaine Tops amped heer, originally came forth the Loines of famous ABRAHAM, o, to obey the GOD of Gods, most High er of All; of All Support, Supply; e to This Countrey (then, in Occupation Cananites, the rich and native Nation) ere that same GOD not only heaps with Gold d Goods, his House; but also (though He old hundred years; a third part lesse, his Wife; d, till that season, barren all her life)
Sent him a Son: swearing, His seed should sway Trivmphant Sceptres many, many-a-day: But, when good Abraham's old-old Age expects This happy Promise in the sweet effects, Th'Immortal Voice (ô pitious Mysteries!) Commands that He his ISAAC sacrifice. Euen as a Ship vpon the raging Sea Between Two Windes Cross-tossed every-way, Vncertain, knowes not in what Course to set-her, Till one of them, striving to get the better, Doubles his bellowes, and with boisterous blast Driues her (at random) where he list, at last: So, th'Hebrew, feeling in-ward War (that season) T'wixt Loue and Duty, betwixt Faith and Reason▪ Doubts what to doo; and his Perplexities Leane now to that hand, and anon to this: Til th'heav'nly love he ought his GOD had won The earthly love he bore his only Son. Then, having ready Fire and Fagot laid, And on the Altar his deer Son displayd; The knife he drawes with trembling hand, and ha Even heav'd his arme about to strike the Lad, When GOD, in th'instant staies the Instrument Ready to fall on th'humble Innocent:
satisfied with so sufficient Trial Abraham's Faith; to Him his GOD so loyal. rom ISAAC, IACOB; & from IACOB sprung elue sturdy Sons; who, with sore Famine wrung, rsaking Canaan, for a great-good-while d happy Biding by the Banks of Nile: ere their blest Issue multiply'd so fast, at they became th'Egyptian's Feare, at last: , though (alas!) their bodies had no rest, l though their backs with burthens were opprest; e noble Palm-Trees, mounting stiflly—strait, e more, the more they be surcharg'd with waight. Therfore the Tyrant which then held the Raines hat rich Soile where sad Heav'n never raines, mmands that all male Hebrew Infants found ore Innocents!) be quickly kill'd, or drown'd, oon as Wombes had them delivered; tone same day might see them born and dead. O Tigre! thinkst thou? thinks that Rage of thine cut-off quite Isaac's Immortall Ligne? may it reave the scarce-born Life of those -hatched Babes, and them of Light fore-close: notwith-standing, Iacob's swarming Race hin few Years shall cover Canaan's Face;
And, thine owne Issue even the first shall be To break (and iustly) thine vniust Decree. Pharaeo's faire Daughter, with a noble Train, For Blood and Beauty rarely matcht again, One Evening, bathing in the Crystall Brook Which thorough Gossen crawls with many a Cro Heares in the reeds a ruefull Infants voyce; But thinking it some of the Hebrewes Boyes (As'twas indeed) her Fathers bloody Law Stopt for a while her tender eares with Awe. But, at the last, marking the Infants face (I woat not what vnvsuall Tracts of Grace And Types of Greatnes sweetly shining there) Love vanquisht Duty, Pity conquer'd Feare: For, She not only takes him vp from thence, But brings him vp, and breeds him as a Prince, Yea, as Her owne. O Babe belov'd of God! O Babe ordain'd to lighten th' Hebrew's Load! To lead then Bodies, to direct their Mindes, First, best, most, Wrighter, in all sacred Kindes Thou hadst but now no Mother (to be seen) And now for Mother, Thou hast found a Queen Lo, thus (my Lord) could their wise God extra Good out of Euill, and convert the act
ersecution (bent against the blood Life of His) vnto their greater good. seph's Brethren, by their Envious Drift ver-throwe him, to a Throne him lift: id proud Haman's deadly Hatred lend Mordechay a Ladder to ascend Honors Top, and trimd his neck (past Hope) gracefull Chain, in steed of shamefull Rope. ne day, this Hebrew, driving Iethro's Sheep n Mount Hereb (where he vs'd to keep) e on the sodaine a bright blazing Flame e in a Bush, and yet not burne the same; n whence, anon he heard (with Fear & Wonder) oice, might shake both Heav'n & Earth in sunder. I that (only) AM-WAS-SHAL-BE, Who e All of Nothing; and can All vn-doo, n pleaseth Me: I-A▪ M, The Holy-One, Great, The Good, The Iust; Whose hand alone aines, maintaines, and rules the World: I-AM, mni-potent, The GOD of Abraham; e to my Foes with my Revenging Rod, nto Those that worship Me for GOD, ole, and whole in Thought, in Word, & Deed, t Mercisull; to Them and all their Seed.
Then doo my Will: dispatch thee speedy hence; Go, say from Mee, to that vnhallowed Prince Which ruleth Memphis, and the fertile Plaine Where swelling Nilus serves in steed of Rain, That he dismisse my People: and least He, Incredulous, distrust thine Embassie; Cast-down thy Rod, thy Message to confirm, It to a Scrpent shall eft-soons transform. He throwes it down, and instantly withall Sees it begin to live, to move, to craule, With hideous head before, and tail behinde, And body wriggling (after Creepers kinde). Re-take it vp, his GOD commands him then; Which, taken, takes the former Form agen: And, past Mans Reason (by the power of GOD) Of Rod turns Serpent, and of Serpent Rod. Arm'd with this Wand, wherewith he was to quel The sceptred Pride of many an Infidel, He many a time importunes Pharao, In GOD's great Name, to let the Hebrews go Into the Desart, at their liberties To serve the Lord, and offer Sacrifice. But Pharao, deaf vnto his sacred Word, Sifly withstands the Message of the Lord:
hen, by Moses working many Miracles, rized His Orator and Oracles. t, He not only turned into Blood seav'n-fold Waves, and every other Flood attens Egypt; but even every Spring, c captive Crystal, golden Pipes do bring ve the Court: so that the King is forc't hat red liquor to allay his Thirst. n, from the Fens, frō puddly Ponds & Lakes, ns of Millions of foule Frogges he makes, ver Memphis with their ougly Frie, ot forbeare the Kings owne Canapy. en, of all Ages, of all sorts, and sexes, burning Vlcers, and hot Biles he vexes, t th' Egyptians, in vncessant anguish, know'n Poyson, on their Couches languish: an their Leaches their owne Leaches be, ir vnheard-of, hidden Malady. en on their Cattle; Flocks, & Heards, & Droves wnes & Dales, Fens, Forrests, Fields & Groves, g Contagion suddainly he spred; took so quickly both their heart and head, lly Shepheards neer the Rivers side, Cattle dead, sooner then sicke, espi'd.
Then turns the Earths Dust into Swarmes of Then dims the Aier with dusky Clouds of Flies, Of Drones, Wasps, Hornets, humming day & In every place, with every face to fight, And fixing deep in every Pagans skin Th'vnvsual anger of their steeled Pi. Then (when appeer'd no Threat of troubled No signe of Tempest) at his Servants Prayer Th' Eternal thundred down such Storms of Hail, As with the noise and stroak did stoutest quail: Heer falls a Bul, brain'd with a Hail-stones rap; There sprawles a Childe, split with a Thunder- Heer a huge Forrest, lately all a Clowd Of tufted Armes, hath neither Shade nor Shrow And, if the native Sap again re-suit The naked Trees with comely Leaues and Fr▪ Again (alas!) the Caterpiller crops, Within few houres, the Husbands yearely hope Then, with gross Darknes vailing close the He so sield-vp stubborn Egyptians eyes, That for three dayes with fearefull foot and ha They gropt their way (except in Gossen-Land) And Titan, tir'd in his long Course, for ease, Seem'd then to rest him with th' Antipodes.
, as the same Sun, the same instant, makes Mud to harden; and to melt, the Wax: d These Works, so full of admiration, uerse Subiects, diuerse Operation. humble Hebrews, GOD's great hand adore; ilfull Pharao spurns it more and more: as a Coselet, when 'tis cold enough, ore 'tis beaten growes the harder Proofe. t, at the sad Newes of the Prince, His Son, ll their Heires, all in one Night vndon; as so daunted, that he early bod Hebrews goe to serue the Lord their GOD: , in a Piller of a Clowd, by Day, re, by Night; directed right their Way. , soon retracting his extorted Grant, stubborn Tyrant strangely arrogant, all his Egypt, and in post pursews Arm-lesse Legions of the harm-lesse Iews, lodg'd secure along the sandy shore, e th' Erythraean ruddy Billowes rore. as not such Noise, when, tearing Gibalt, Herculean Sea came first to spred so far t Calpe and Abyle; nor when Onotri sighing lost her deer neer Trinacri;
As in both Armies: Th'one insulting proud; Th'other in skriches, & sad cryes, as lowd, ( Deafned the Shores: while Fifes, Horns, furio With Noise & Neighes, did euen the Welkin for Cursed Seducer (cry'd the Iewes) what Spight Moou'd thee to alter our Liues happy plight? What! are we Fishes, that we heere should swi Through these deep Seas? Or, are we Fowls to Ouer the steepest of these Mountains tall? Were there not Graues in Egypt for vs all? In our deere Gossen? but wee needs must come In this Red-Sea to seeke our rewfuil Tombe▪ Yet, mildest Moses, with his dead-liue Wand Strikes th'awfull Streams: which, yielding to his Discouer Sands the Sun had neuer spy'd; And Walld the same with Waues on either side: Between the which (dread-less & danger-less) The Hebrews dry-shod past the Crimsin Seas. But, when the Tyrant rashly them pursues, Marching the Way was made but for the Iewes; The Sea returns, & over-trns his Force, Him Selfe, his Men, his Chariots, & his Horse. O happy People, for whom GOD (so kind) Arms Fire, & Aire, & Clowds, & Waues, & Wind
All things serue: which hast All things in Pay. euer let Time's File to fret away re a Fauour? rather let the Tongue ll thine Aged tell it to Their Yong; to their Seed, & They to theirs again; ally These Wonders to retaine. em, forty yeeres, GOD in the Desart fed Angells Food, with a celestiall Bread; from a Rock (as dry as Pumice first) Riuers gush, to satisfie their Thirst: (euen) their Shooes, & all their Garments there, od, the last, as the first day they were: sith our Soules will faint for want of Food, liberall in All, for all their Good, (on Mount Sinai) in his Sacred Lawe, to their Soules, through sharp-sweet filial Awe: hing them all (as dutie All doth binde) ue Him first, & next to Him, Man-kinde; We might neuer break That sacred Twine h Man to Man, & Man to GOD doth ioyne. aue Moses dead, braue Iosuah's rule began; e happy Sword soon conquered Canan; n few yeers vnto subiection brings Liues and States of one and thirty Kings.
At His cōmand, more powerfull then the Thund The firmest Rocks & Rampires fall in-sunder; Without the Shock of Tortoise or of Ram, To batter Breaches where his Armie came: For, but with bellowing of hoarse Trumps of As with an Engine, prowdest Towers are torn: As at his Beck, the Heav'ns obey his will; The Fire-foot Coursers of the Sun stand still, To lengthen Day, least vnder wings of Night, His Heathen Foes should saue themselues by Fli This scourge of Pagans, in a good old age▪ (To liue in Heav'n) leauing this Earthly Stage, Israel had many Magistrates of Name, Whose Memories liue euer fresh in Fame. Who knowes not Ad, Sangar, Samuel, Dbor, Bara, and Othoniel? Who hath not heard of mighty Samsons Coile, Who, sole, and Arm-less, did an Army foile? What Praise with Iephthe's might haue wel com Had but his Rashnes his deer Daughter spar'd▪ What Clime, what Time, what Riuer, Dale, or But rings of Gedeon, and his high Renown? After the Iudges; Kings (some good, some b) The sacred Helm of th' Hebrew Vessell had:
their Dauid's holy Harp and Skill, ng but Dauid would I wable still: (my Lord) great Dauid's Deeds, could none while) atchieue, but Dauid's Selfe alone; one but Dauid's Harp, & Dauid's Hymne nd aright the Honors due to Him: not therefore, with vnworthy Layes, ing to praise him, derogate his Praise. , shall I balk his Son, whom Heau'n adorn Health, Wealth, Wisdom, & All-Plenties horn: e prudent▪ Problems, touching euery Theam, thousand Sophysts to IERVSALEM, ians, Indians, Africans, among; 'd by the Charms of his All-Skilfull Tongue? m, whose Zeale the Idols so defac't; urg'd GOD's TEMPLE, & his Rites re-plac't? im, that sawe a heau'nly Hoast descend ccour Sion, and his Foes offend? im, whose Army, neer to Gerar, yerst, d Ethyopians swarming Troops disperst? im, who praying for Heav'ns aide, to fight st Ammon, Moab, and Mount-Sērit; by Them-selues, his sad Request ful-filld, n, Self-incenst, Them-Selues they enter-killd?
But Chaldei's King, by Their's Captiuity, Put (late) an End vnto That Monarchy. Ye did Great Cyrus Them again restore To Liberty; and gaue them furthermore Leaue to elect Two Rulers of their Race: Whereof the One (who yet supplies the place) Was Ioachim; who, for his holy Life, Prowesse, and Prudence, is respected life, Not sole in Sion; but with Ammonites, Syrians, Sydonians, Madians, Moabites, Thus was (my Lord) the Prime, this the Of ISRAEL, through euery Times success And Thus the Lord hath lift them (nigh) to He Som-times; som-times, them (euē) to Hel hath But, whether Princely-Priest, or Iudge, or Ki▪ Of th' Hebrew Tribes haue had the Gouerning; So long as They obseru'd the sacred Pact GOD with their Fathers did by Oath contract▪ Ay prosperous, tryumphantly they troad On proudest Foes: and all the World abroad, Conspir'd in Spight, could nothing Them Much lesse distract them; least of all, destroy: On th' other side, soon as they haue infreng'd His Ordinance, their GOD (to be aveng'd)
hrall'd them, now, to cruell Moabites▪ to Edom, then to Ammonites, Philistins: and ay his Wrath hath bin y vpon them, when they hapt to sin. o be therefore, any their Offence▪ ealous Iustice of their GOD incense; not their Mounts, nor vndermine their Bowers, ring thy Rams against their rampir'd Towers, ale their Walls, nor lead thy Legions, h Resolution) to assault them once: et them heap, on Carmel Libanus; iban▪ Niphate; there-on Emmäus: in one Chanel let them muster hither and Rhone, Nilus and Rhine togither, and Iber too, to fence their Coast: cannot scape from thy victorious Hoast. t, if they haue not broke the Covnant h GOD to Abraham & his Seed did grant: re (my Lord) beware how you come neer holy Nation, to their GOD so deer. hould swart Auster him dispeople quight unish Thee with all His fit to fight: ld swarming Borea from His vtmost end is tall Souldiers to Thy seruice send:
Should Zephyrus add to Thy dreadfull Power His martiall Legions, all Hesperians Flower: Should (lastly) Euru send Thee for Supplyes His Troops which first see Phoeb Rayes ai All These, all-daring, all-devouring Swarms, This armed World, or all This World of Arms, Could neuer conquer (in a thousand yeere) The least▪ worst, weakest, of these Cities heer; Because Their GOD will be Their sure Defe▪ That GOD almighy, whose Omnipotence Can with a breath confound all Kings that dare (As Thou doost now) 'gainst Him make op As th' Oceans Billowes swell not by and by, When (first) the Winds begin to bellow high; But, first begin to foam, & then to fume, Higher, and higher, till their Ragepresume To chide the Earth, & check the Welkins Front, And andy Hills against the Heav'nly Mount: Euen so, the Princes of this Pagan Rout, Hearing GOD's prayses, forth-with break not o In ragefull Furie; but as th' Ammonite Growes in Discourse, so grow they in Despight; Till at the last, with lowd, proud murmuing▪ They euen blaspheme the glorious King of King
Kill (cry they) kill; let's heaw & hale in peeces e subtile Traytor, that with wylie Speeches, saue his Hebrews from Khamnusias Rod, uld fright vs with a false and idle God. Renowned Generall, send but out a score All thy Troops, & they shall soon run-o're ose rascall Rebells, and reduce them all strate and humble at Thy feet to fall: Coward, Villain. But, the Vice-Roy then, pping their lowd outrageous Storms again, an him Selfe Th to the Ammonite; , impudent Impostor! Tell Mee (right) at Fiend, what Fury hath inspir'd these Spels: at Trevet told thee, or what Sybel else de thee belieue the Syrians shall not quell Isaacian Troop, but stoop to Israel, ose GOD is but their Dream, or Fansie vain▪ meer Deuise of MOSES subtile brain; ther, of power to giue them Victorie, , from Our hands to rescue Them nor Thee. at GOD haue we, but the great King of Kings, BVCHADNEZZAR? whose drad puissance rings e all the Earth: who couering far & nigh▪ Plains with Horse, Hills with Infanterie,
Shall raze these Runnagates; which, fled from Haue heervsurped Others Right, yer-while. Die therefore, Vilain, die; take the desert Of thy false Tongue, & of thy treacherous heart. What said I, fond? No, Dastard, I disdain My valiant Blade in Thy base bloud to stain: Thou shalt so quickly not receiue the meed Of thy disloyall and detested Deed (For, a quick Death is Wretches blisse, wee know▪ Them quickly ridding both of Life and Woe) But, with thy Dayes thy Dolors to protrack, Thou shalt from hence vnto Bethulia pack, Where still thou shalt, through infinite dismay, Vndying, die a thousand times a day; Vntill, with Those invincible (thou saist) With thousand wounds a wretched End thou ha. Why tremblest Thou? why doth thy colour faile▪ Why seems hy heart for horror so to quale? If so Their GOD be GOD (as thou hast vnted) Now, by thy Face witnesse thy faith, vndanted. Then, the Lord Marshall, in Authoritie Vnder the Vice-Roy, not in crueltie, Transporteth speedy, neer Bethulians side Th' vn-pagan Pagan, hand and foot fast ty'd;
uing His Troops wounded with wondrous griefe be depriued of so braue a Chiefe: n so the Puttock in his crooked Serrs e peeping Chicken through the Welkin bears; ile the poore Dam, below cluk-clucking thick, es, but in vain, and calls her rapted Chick. The Citizens, seeing th' approach of Foes, n in alarm, them all to Arm dispose; d, with meet Number of their Men of worth, d choice Commanders, brauely slly forth; er then Torrents, gusing from the Hills, n hopping downe into the lower Fields. e Foe, retiring to their mightier Bands, ues captiue Ammon in the Hebrews hands; om with a forced foot, though free in thought, d Will right willing, to their Town they brought. ere, round-environd with a curious Crowde, ing to Heau'n his hands and eyes, aloude s hee began: O Thou great GOD, the Guide Heau'n and Earth, and All that is beside; ose liuing Spirit (spred in, and over All) es All things Life, Breath, Growth, Originall, ue Thee, Lord, a thousand Thanks deuout, at thou hast daign'd, yer death, to take me out
Of my wilde Stock, to graft me in the Stem Of th'happy Tree, deaw'd with thy Gracious stre Which (maugre Blasts, and Blastings, rough & ) Of All the Trees, bears onely Fruit of Life. And, good Isacians, for GOD's sake, I pray Miss-doubt me not, as comming to betray, Or vnder-mine by wylie Stratagem, Your Strength or State; or wrong IERVSALI No: GOD doth knowe, I suffer This, for You, For witnessing before yon wicked Crew, GOD's mighty Arm for Your Fore-Fathers As ready still, to saue and shield his Own: Feare not therefore Their mighty multitude, Whose sight (almost) so many hath subdewd. Nor let their Boasts, nor brauing Menaces, Kill, quaile, or coole, your holy Courages: For, should the whole Earth send her Sonnes, in swar Against you onely, all to carry Arms; So that your Trust be fixt in GOD alone, Not in an Arme of Flesh, not in your Own: You shall, no doubt, make ruddy, Mcmur's Flo With Idolist Assyrian Armies blood: You shall, no doubt, of Fearfull, Fierce become, Your strong Asslants stoutly over-come.
Almighties hand, so ready bent to smight, ut to humble, not destroy you quight; but to shew you, that in all Distresse, onely Hee, can giue you quick Redresse. s from a Bramble springs the sweetest Rose; om a Weed the whitest Lilly growes: so, diuinest Sighes, deuoutest Teares, urest Life, are Fruits Affliction beares. heere the Faithfull are much like the Earth, ch, of it Selfe (alas!) brings nothing forth Thorns and Thistles, if the Plough she lack, daily wounds to launce her bunchie back. yet the Lord (who alwaies doth relent, oon as Sinners earnestly repent, , in his time, his sharp hand doth retire, cast, at last, his Rods into the Fire) rid your dangers, and restore you rest, in an hour, when you can hope it least. hen, courage, Friends: let's vanquish GOD with Tears▪ d then Our Arms shall quickly conquer Theirs, eir World of Men. And, if as yet in Mee any Strength; if any Courage bee; ine Experience may in ought availe: ith mine Age, all be not old & fraile:
I vow it all, and All that else is Mine, To your Defence, and for the Law diuine. The end of the second Booke.
ETHVLIANS Rescue. THE THIRD BOOKE. Lame-snorting Phlegon's ruddy breath began, Reducing Day, to gild the Indian; n early wakened with their ratling Drums, Heathen Souldier from his Caban comes, s-vp his Arms, and marching in Array, ards Bethulia tends the ready way. May, the Meads are not so py'd with Flowers, ndry Figures, Colours, Sauors, Powers; s this Hoast, with Squadrons, different nguage, Maners, Arms, and Ornament: at th'old Chāos (Wombe of th'VNIVERSE) neuer made of Members more diuerse. heer-in All agreed, for all their Ods, arre against th' Eternall GOD of Gods, se breath, whose beck, makes both the Poles to shake, Caucasus and Libanus to quake. er, cold Hyrcania's bold & brauing Seed, with (Their neighbors) both Armenias Breed, e wanton Crests. There Parthian Archers try ward to shoot, the while they forward fly.
The Persian, there, proud of th' Imperiall state, With golden scales scalops his Armed plate. Heer would the Mede show, that for want of Not Heart, He lost His (late) Imperiall Cap. And that, nor Pomp of his too sumptuous Suits; His painted Cheks, his Phrygik Layes & Lute His crisped Bush, nor his long, borrowed Lock, Had euer power his Manly mind to smock: Happy-Arabians, who their Fern-thatcht Town Tumble in Tumbrels vp & downe the Downes: The subtle Tyvians, who did first invent, Our winged words, in Barks of Trees to pri: The men of Moab, and the Ammonites, The Iduméans, and the Elamites, Learned Egyptians: Those that neer confine The swelting Coasts of swartest Abyssine: In briefe; All ASIA was immur'd almost Within the Trenches of This mighy Hoast; Wherein, almost as many Nations clustred, As th' Hebrews Armie single Souldiers mustred. But, of all These, none plagu'd the Israelite More, then their own Apostate Ephraimites; Who, not to seem of kinne to Israel, Rag'd with more fury, fought more deadly fel.
the Spring time, while a Poole is still, mooth alost, the Froggs lye croaking shrill; the least Stone that a Child can fling ir the water, straight they cease to sing: hile a happy Peace IVDEA blest, Constancy of These stood with the best ng the Saints; and the Lord's sacred Praise n their mouthes daily and many waies; at they seem'd like burning Lamps to shine d the Flock, devoutly-most-divine: t the Noise of Holofernes Name, r famous Faith nothing but aire became; r Mouth is stopt, the Zeale they did presume ghly hot, is vanisht into Fume. turned Pagans (for some Profits sake) , worse then Pagans, their poor Brethren rake. ! what a Number of such Ephraincites ow-adayes (Deceitful Hypocrites!) -in the Church, the while a prosperous winde, gentle Gales, blowes faire and full behinde; ch seem with Zeale the Gospel to imbrace, le that it yeelds them either Gain, or Grace: if the Chance change; if it hap to puffe half afront; if Shee be faine to luffe;
Faint-hearted, then forth-with they cast about: And, with th' Almighty playing banque-rout, With greater Rage his Law they persecute, Then yerst with Zeal they did it prosecute; And in their Malice growe more fierce and furious, Then Iulian yerst, or Celsus, or Porphyrius. Soon as the Hebrews from their Turrets spie So many Ensignes waving in the Skie; And such an Hoast, marching in such Array, Begirt afarre their Citie everie way: They faint for dread; not having where to run, Save to the GOD their Grandsires trusted on. O Father (cry they) Father of Compassion, Whose wing is wont to be our strong Salvation; Sith now against vs all the World doth swarm, O! Cover vs with thine Almighty arm. Thus having pray'd, the Careful Gouernour To Charge his Watches doth him quick bestirre; And when the Sun in his moist Cabin dives, With hundred Fires the Day again revives; Watches himselfe amid the Court of Guard; Walks of the Round: and weens, that over-hard Poebe's black Coachman drives his sable Steeds, Hebrews Ruine hasting more then needs.
hile, opposite, the Pagans think her fast ith her Emdymion, in a slumber cast: t, Mens fraile wishes have (alas!) no force, o hold, or hasten, the Heav'ns settled Course. Soon as they saw Aurora's saffron ray n their Horizon to renew the Day; he Vice▪Roy makes a thousand Trumpets sound, assemble all his scatter'd Troops around; hich from all parts with speedy pases went nvironing their Chief-Commanders Tent: s round about a Huntsman, in a morn, he Hounds do throng whē once they hear his horn, Having, in vain, summon'd the Town; hetries hundred wayes, it (wrathfull) to surprise: eer, th' Enginer begins his Ram to rear; eer mounts his Trepan, and his Scorpion there; ends heer his Bricol, there his boysterous Bowe; rings heer his Fly-Bridge, there his batt'ring Crowe: sides high Timber-Towers, on rowling Feet ov'd and remov'd; controlling every Street. Heer, Pioners are put the Ditch to fill; o level Mounts, to make a Hole a Hill: o play the Moules, to dig a secret way, to the Town their Soldiers to convay.
Heer, others must their Ladders raise the while, And quick surprise the Sentinels, by wile: Others must vnder-mine: others aspire, With matter fitting, every Gate to fier. But the most part stand ready in Array To give Assault, soon as they see their Way Made meet and easie by the batterring Thunder Of all their Engines pashing Wals in sunder. Tower-tearing Mars, Bellona thirsting-blood▪ Fill there the faintest with their Furious-mood: There fierie Steeds, stamping & neighing loud; There Pagans fell, braving and raving provd, With hideous noise make th'Heav'nly Vault resound, The Earth to eccho; and even Hell astound. But He that keeps eternall Sentinel On Heav'ns high Watch-Tower, for His Israel; Pitying his People, alters, in a trice, The Tyrants purpose, by a new Advise; Causing the Captaines of brave Moabites, Strong Iduméans, and stout Ammonites, Thus to advise: Most noble General, Terror of Kings, redoubted Scourge of All; We would not wish (my Lord) in any sort, You bring Your brave Bands to assault this Fort:
or, neither Pike, Dart, Sling, Bow, Sword, nor Shield, o back the Foe, or make them slack to yeeld; these proud Rocks, which, by wise Natures grace, ampire the Rampires of this wretched Place: Which yer You scale, vndoubtedly will cost adders of Bodies; and even Tythe your Hoast. he Victor is no Victor, if his Gain asse not his Losse; nor th'Honor drown the Stain: ise-valiant Prince, that Fisher, Fool we hold, ho for a Gull, venters a Line of Gold: nd, ill doth th'Honor of a Crown beseem h'inhumane, bloody, barbarous, Head of Him ho rather would the Death of many Foes. hen Life and Safety of one Friend, to chose. You may (my Lord) you may, with-out Assault, Or Losse of Man, reduce them all to nought, in you Hillocks you but seize the Springs, hence hollow Lead the Hebrews Water brings; ho, so by Thirst distrest, and so put to 't, ill come and cast them haltred at your Foot. The noble Lion never sets-vpon se fearful Beasts, but on the noblest one: VE'S sulphury Darts He seld or never thrils t on Mount Atlas, or the Ryphean Hils:
And stormfull Auster, ever rather smote Clowd-cleaving Turrets then a lowly Cote: No more, no more let your drad Arms assail So faint a Foe as of himself will quail. It is not Fear (my Lord) and much less Pittie (Fear of our Selves, or Favour to the Cittie) Makes vs oppose vs to Thy Purpose yet: For, yer that We Thy happy Standards quitt: For Thee will We defie th' immortal Gods: For Thee Wee'll breake their Altars all to Clods: For Thee will We march with vnweary soles, Beyond the Arctik and Antarctik Poles: For Thee will We with winged Arms go fetch IOVE's Aigle down; and Neptun's Trident snatch: For Thee, the Sonne shall not his Sire forbear, Nor Sier the Sonne, nor Brother, Brother spare. The General, who for Avail revolves, Peizes this Counsail; and re-peiz'd, resolves: Dispatching speedy a selected Force, To seize the Waters, and divert their Course. Th' Hebrews, Their Drift, & their Own Danger see In that Attempt: so, sally instantly To stop the Foe from stopping of the Stream Which should derive Liquor and Life to Them.
Then Pagans fighting for ambitious Fame; ewes, not to die with vn-revenged Shame; ravely incounter with so fel Disdaine, That now the Pagan flyes, now fights againe; ollowes his flying Foe: and now the Iew, Nigh foiled, faints; now doth the Fight renew: So that faire Victory seems long to waver, As it were, doubtfull whether side to favour: Till (at the last) th' Hebrews, all over spread With Clowds of Shot, back to their Bulwark fled: Even as a Pilgrim, in the naked Plain Meeting a Storm of mighty Hail or Rain, Runs dropping wett some hollow Rock to find, Or other Covert built by Nature kinde. Pagans pursue them, and pel-mel among Enter almost the City in the Throng. Then every where did dreadfull Noise arise: From street to street th'amazed Vulgar flyes; Tearing their haire, beating their brest and face: As if the Foe had even possest the Place. Why flieye Cowards? Whether? Do you knowe? What Fortress have you, if you This forgoe? Or, in this Citie seek you for a stronger, To gard you better, or preserve you longer?
If now (alas!) you dare not beare you stout Against the Foe, while he is yet with-out; How will you dare resist his violence, Were he once Maister of your weak Defence? The People, chid thus by their prudent Chief, Somewhat re-heart'ned, rescue with relief Cambris and Carmis; who, the while, like Towers, Had in the Gate withstood th' Assalting Stowers Of almost all the furious Infidels. For Lance, along Mast, either strongly welds, For Arms an Anvile; each a massie Targe Of steel about his neck, as long as large: Adown their shoulders from their Helms did wave Thck Plumy Clowds of Colours brightly-brave: Both like, in age, in Courage, Name, and Nature; Both like, in bulke, both like in Strength & Stature. Both, like Two Popplars which (on either side Some silver Brook) their tressie Tops do hide Amid the Clowds; and shaken by the Winde, Oft kiss each other, like Two Brethren kinde. The Heathen, seeing still fresh Troops descend From every side, the City to defend; Leave-off their On-sett: and, welnigh disbanded, Gladly retreat whether their Heads commanded.
When I consider the extreame Distress Which thirty Dayes did the Bethulians press; ong sad enough I hardly can invent, o deadly Plight lively to represent: My hand for horror shakes, and can no more uide on this page my Pen as heertofore: et doo mine Eyes with Teares bedeaw it so, well appears a subiect full of Woe. Thou Spirit which doost all Spirits vivisie; Which didst vnloose the Tongue of Zachary; nd, through the World thy sacred Name to preach, hy Messengers so sundry Tongues didst teach: irect my weary Quil, my Courage raise, hat I, This Work may finish to Thy Praise. Though th' Hebrews saw their Town, on every part, ot with an Hoast, but with a World begirt, et had they Hope the long Siege would no less onsume th' Assyrians, then themselues distiess: at when the Foe had all the Pipes depriv'd, hence, Water yerst the sacred Town deriv'd, las! their Hope and even their heart did shrink, s quite cut-off, and dry'd vp with their Drink. The Rulers though (yer Bondage, Death to take) ive to the People what Themselves did lack:
To wit, a hope, Water enough to keep In private Troughs, and publick Cesterns deep; Both Citizens and Soldiers to suffice, So that they would be moderate and wise. So: th' Officers divide in silver measures, To all, of all sorts, of these liquid Treasures, This welcome Liquor; which might serve (at first) To keep their life a while, not quench their Thirst. Their Cesterns dry'd, they seek in every sink: Of every Gutter greedily they drink; T'appease their Thirst a while, not please their taste, With Drink whose stink was oft the Drinkers last. O wretched Men! O wondrous Misery! Little, or much; drink, or drink not; they dy. Plenty and Lack of Liquor, in extreme Though Contraries, concurr to murder them: With-in whose Bodies warreth Thirst, as fell As outwardly th' outrageous Infidell. Street, Lane, nor Ally had this wofull City, Where-in the Sisters, Enemies to Pitie, Invented not some new and vncouth guise To murder Hebrews; and from firmest eyes (In signe of Sorrow) showers to extract Of pearly Tears, of bitter brine compact;
Mid all Degrees; if rested any-where ut so much moisture as could make a Teare. There, an Old man complaineth that a Lad Hath new snatch from him all the Drink he had; ut Thirst contracts his Throat, his voice, & vains; nd ends at once his Life, his Plaint, and Pains: Soldier heer re-swils again (and gladder) h'vnsavory Water which had swelld his bladder: here th'woefull Mother, on her Couching-Settle, er half-dead Childe reviveth with her Spettle: eer the sad Lover sighes her latest breath ith the last Sighes of her deer Love, in Death. or, cruell Thirst, com'n from Cyrenian Strand Where ay Shee lives amid the burning Sand, erpetual panting for continuall Drouth, anging her Tongue a foot without her Mouth, er Face all wrinkled, both her Eyes deep sunk, er Body leane and light, her Bowels shrunk, er Brest transparent, and her Veins repleat ith Brimstone, all, in steed of Blood's moist Heat) owes from her rotten Lungs a loathsome breath hrough all the Town; infusing Fumes of Death th' Hebrews Artires: causing every Porch bscurely shine with some Funereall Torch.
So that the Heav'ns, seeing so many Woes, Could hold no longer; but would faine with those Sad-weeping Hebrews Their sad Tears haue melld, Save that their Tears the Lord of Hoasts with-held. And, I my Self, that drown mine Eyes with Theirs, Vnable though well to express those Tears, Will with my Silence vaile their Countenance; Following that Painters learned Ignorance, Who well conceiving that his live-less Colours Could not to life express the deadly Dolours Of Agamemnon at his Daughters End, Cover'd his sad Face with a sable Bend. Mean-while, the few that of this Wrack remain; Against their sad Chiefs murmur and complain: The Lord, say they, in Iustice recompence Your wilfull Malice, and Our Innocence: The Lord look down vpon the wretched Teen Your wicked Counsails have heer plung'd vs in: For, had you yeelded to the Foes demand, Yer he had entred on the Holy Land, We, happy we, had never seen our Friends So hap-less brought to so vntimely Ends. Alas! What Comfort rests? O wretched City! Those that besiege thee round wold show thee Pity;
Thine Own are Cruel: Foes wold fain preserve-thee: hy Frends destroy thee: Those wold fain reserv thee, ould saue thy Children; thine own Children rather un headlong all on wilfull Death together. Lord, well we know, our wicked Deeds haue made hee (iust displeas'd) to drawe the keenest Blade f thy fierce-kindled ire, which iustly sheads hy deadliest Darts on our disloyal heads. et, Thou, which dost not long thy Wrath retain, Against thine Owne) O turn to Vs again: ord, change the purpose of our wilfull Lords, ho 'gainst our Bosomes whet the Pagan Swords: r grant (at least) with thousand Arrowes thrill'd, e rather may by Heathen hands be kill'd; hen longer Languor of this banefull Thirst o linger vs in living Death accurst. Deer Brethren, 'tis our only Duty bindes, heir Rulers said (not our sinister mindes f vndermining, or of pyning Ours) hus to hold out against these Heathen Powers. You haue Pain, We have our Portion too; e are imbarkt in the same Ship with You: n the same Deep we the same Danger run; ur Cross is common, and our Loss is one:
As common shall our comfort be when GOD Shall please to ease vs of th' Assyrians Rod: As sure he will, if Your Impatiency Stop not the Course of his kinde Clemency. Then, strive not with th' All-Perfect; but depend On God alone: Whose Actions all do tend To profit His: Who, in his Season, ever (Almighty) can and will His Church deliver. Sometimes the Archer lets his Bowe, vnbent, Hang idly by; that, when it is re-bent With boisterous Armes, it may the farther cast His winged shafts, and fix them far more fast: So, oft the Lord seems, in his Bosome, long To hold his hand; and after (as more strong) To hammer Those whose impious Impudence Miss-spends the Treasure of his Patience, Which (at first sight) gives all Impunity (As think the Lewd) to all Iniquity. But, at the last, his heavie Vengeance payes Them home, for all his Iustice long Delayes: As th' Vsurer, for bearing of his poore And needy Debtors, makes his Debt the more. What though th'high Thunderer, in his Fury dread▪ Strike not in th' instant this proud Vice-Roy dead?
n all th'Amasse of Waters which he pent ove and vnder th'ample Firmament, ditious, so shake-off his Soueraigne Power, not to send the thirsty Earth a Shower? o, no: though Heav'ns, on every side so cleer, d nothing lesse then Rain, or moisture ner: ey with their Tears shall shortly soak the Plain, on the Day when Saul began to raign: all the Heav'ns, the Starres, and Elements, st execute his high Commandements. But still the Plebe, with Thirst and Fury prest, us roaring, raving, gainst their Chiefs contest: holy Nation! shall we, shall We die, eir Elderships grave Sights to satisfie? ! shall we die to please These foolish-wise, o make themselues rich by our Miseries; d with our Bloods would purchase them a Name, live for ever in the Role of Fame? , no: Let's rather break their servile bands ich hold vs in: let's take into our hands r Cities Helm; that freeing it from Sack, wisely so may free our Selves from Wrack. As the Physician, by the Patient Prest, , on his Bed (vnruly) will not rest;
Permits sometimes what Art prohibiteth: Osias so, importun'd, promiseth To yeeld the Town, if in five Dayes appear No certain Signe of divine Succour neer. The People then, their woeful past estate, Their present paine, and future Fears, forgate: Sith though it should not hap as most they thirst▪ At least, they should of Evils scape the worst. But IVDITH (who the while incessant Showres From her sad eyes, in signe of Sorrow poures) With mourneful voice now cals vpon the Lord; Anon, her sad Soule comforts in his Word: Praiers, were her Staires, the highest Heav'ns to clime GOD's Word, a Garden, where (in needful time) She found her Simples (in Examples pure) The Careful Passion of her Heart to cure. There, IVDITH reading (then not casually, But by GOD's will, which still works certainly) Light on the place where the left handed Prince, Who, griev'd for Israels grieuous Languishments Vnder the Heathen; to deliver them Slew Moab's Eglon, by a Stratagem. The more she reads, she marks it, and admires That Act of Aud; and in Zeale desires
imitate his valour. But fraile flesh th thousand Reasons would her purpose dash; oposing, now, the Facts foule odiousnes; en, Feare of Death; then, Dangers numberless, ere-to she puts her Honor: and that (though, Israels sake, God should the Act allow) oes a Man's hand, not a Woman's (there) ich fitter for a Spindle then a Speare. hile IVDITH thus with IVDITH abts doth wage, iddain Puurns-ouer that same Page: d, that which followes showes, how Iahel yerst urageously the sleeping temples per't that fel Pagan, who from th' Hebrews flying, cursed found in his Defence his dying: teach all Tyrants in all Times to-come, at they may fly, but not out-fly their Doome. This last Example did so fortifie e fearfull Widow, that euen by and by e would with Engine of Reuenge endeuour wicked Soule's and Bodie's knot to seuer. ut while apart Sh plots and plots anew, me wylie way her purpose to pursue; e hears reported, by a neighbour Dame, e Townes Decree, much grieued at the same:
So: to preuent Mischiefs so neere at hand, She sends forth-with for Those of Chiefe Cōmand, Whom sharply sweet She thus begins to chide: Why! How-now, Lordings, shal the Lord be ty'd Vnto your Terms? Wil you th' Almighty's Arms Chain with your Coūsails? limit with your Charm O! vniudicious Iudges, will you Thus Giue law to GOD, who giues it Heau'n & Vs? Will you biect, to Times confined Stayes, Th'Author of Times, Months, Moments, Yeeres  Dai Be not deceiu'd; The sacred Power Diuine No Circumstance can compasse or confine: God can do, what he will; will, what he ought: Ought loue his righteous (whō his loue hath bog This (Fathers) This my dead Hopes most reviues; That, in our Citie not a man surviues Who lifts his hands (after the Heathen fashions) Vnto the dumb, dead Idols of the Nations. All Sins are Sins: but that foule Sinne, alone Exceeds all blinde or bold transgression That we haue heapt 'gainst sacred Heav'n: for, that Seems to degrade GOD of his Souerain State; To giue his Glory to a Wedge of Gold, Or Block, or Stock, or Stone of curious mold.
th then That Sin doth not our Conscience taint, GOD's deere Succour let vs neuer faint: think (alas!) how▪ now all Iuda's Eyes, st, are cast vpon Our Constancies: think, that All will (ouer all the Land) r Example, either stoope or stand: think, that All these Altars, Houses, Goods, (after GOD) on our couragious-Moods: think, Wee keepe the Gate of Israel; hat, so soon opening to th' Infidel hates so deadly all our Abramides) hall be held Traytors and Paricides. e cannot, neither will we now deny at our Counsaile (Thus the Chiefe reply) oolish, and offensiue to the Lord: w (alas!) wee cannot break our word. Thou rew our Common miseries; nst not see our Tears with tear-lesse Eyes; night and day: ô! weep & sigh so much, hy sad Sighs & Tears with Ruth may touch ernall Iudge; whose gentle Eare is ay to All that to Him humbly pray. all, said Shee, and (if GOD say Amen) edge this Citie, yer we meet again.
Sound me no further, but expect th'Euent Of Mine (I hope) happy as high Intent: And, soon as Night hath spred her dusky Damp, Let Mee go forth into the Heathen Camp. Go on, in GOD's Name: & where ere thou art▪ GOD guide (say They) thy Foot, thy Hand, thy The end of the third Booke.
ETHVLIANS Rescue. THE FOVRTH BOOKE. DITH, the while, trills Rivers from her Eyes, tterrs her knees, tends toward th'arched Skyes harm-less hands: then Thus, with voice devout, very Soule to GOD she poureth out: rd! that didst once my Grandsire Simeon arme Iustice Sword, t'avenge his Sisters harme; n Me that Sword, that I may punish (iust) Tyrant fel, farr passing Sichem's Lust: , not suffis'd with Virgins Ravishment, Rape of Wines; is execrably bent oot Thy Name out from the Earth around; rze Thy Temple, level with the ground. mptuous Prince! whose whole Affiance stands ndred-thousand Souldiers He commands, ndred-thousand Horse, which (thirsting-fight) lofty Bounds the lowely Earth doe smight: out Beliefe, that Thou alone (ô Lord) st Heads or Hands; with either Crown or Cord: gthnest the Feeble, quickly foylst the Strong; ay'st the Power of prowdest Kings along.
Grant therefore, grant, good GOD, his charm The curious tramels of my Tress may chain: ( Let euery looke of mine be as a Dart With amorous Breach to wound his willing hart: O! let the little grace of Face and Form Thou hast vouchsaft mee, calm his furious storm: Let the smooth cunning of my soothing Lips Surprise the fel Fox in his Suttleships: But, chiefely, Lord, let my victorious hand Be Scourge & Hammer of this Heathen Band: That all this All may knowe, that Abram's Rac Is euer couered with thy Shield of Grace; And that no Tyrant euer toucht thy Iury, But felt in fine the Rigor of thy Furie. Let not, good Lord, ô let not one of These Return to taste Hytane or Euphrates. Thus IVDITH prayes: & in the sted of stops, With thousand Sighs her words She interrupts. Then, from her sad sole Chamber, late she packs, Adornd with Ophir, Gold, and Serean knacks. O! siluer-browd Diana, Queen of Night, Da'st thou appear, while heer below, so bright Shines such a sacred Star, whose radiant flame Would euen at Noon thy Brothers splendor shame
ough, as vnknown, to passe vnshown she ween, Odors made hersmelt, her Iewels seen; sk, Ambergris, and Civet, where she went, all along an odoriferous Sent: arbuncle shin'd on her Brow so bright, at with the Raies it clarified the Night: ver Tincel wauing in the winde, wn from her head hung light & loose behind: d bound her golden Tress; her Ivory Neck ies and Saphires, counter-chang'd in check: ither Eare, a richer Pearle then yerst pts proud Princesse in her Cup disperst: soft white Bosome (as with Curtains drawn) nsparent coverd vnder Cob-web Lawne: Robe, Sky-colour'd Silk, with curious Caule golden Twist, benetted ouer all. rest she wore, might haue beseem'd for Tires stately Foundresse of th' Euphratean Spires. or, though her Selfe were Modestie it selfe; tice this Pagan to the wrackfull Shelfe, es her Own, sh'had borrowed Ornaments ther Ladies of most Eminence. chior, watching in the Court of Guard, g her passe so late, and so prepar'd;
Enquires of Carmis (who then watched too) What, Whence, She was, & what she went to doo▪ So braue a Gallant, trikt and trimmed so; In such a Time, in such a Place of Woe. Ye-while, said Carmis, in our Citie dwell'd Mrari; a mn heere high in Honor held: To whom, for Seed GOD but this Daughter sent; His House's Ioy, This Citie's Ornament. Gain-greedy Fathers, now-adayes turmoyle Bodies & Soules, Heap vpon Heap to pile: But, haue no care with the Mind's Goods to grace Th'heires of their Goods (which after melt apace): Much like a Man that keepeth in his Chest His costly Garment, folded faire and prest, But lets his Body, it was made to serue, Naked the while, in Wet & Cold to starne. But, as the Farmer spares no pains, nor cost, In husbanding his Land; but carefull most, Now rids the stones, anon ips-vp the Ridges▪ Heer casts a Dtch, there plants, there plashes hedg And neuer is his hand or toole there-fro: But chiesely careth there good Seed to sowe, That when the Summer shal haue ryp't his Plains, His Crop may pay him for his Cost and Pains:
r, as some Damsel, hauing speciall Care f some faire Flower, which puts-out earely-rare h' Incarnat Bud; weeds, waters euery-houre he fertile Plot that feeds her Gilli-flower; hat, one-day blown, it may some Sunday-morn er lilly Bosome, or her head adorne: wise Merari did endeuour faire o form the Maners of his tender Heire; hat, in his Age, he thence again might gather h' Honor and Comfort worthy such a Father. r soone as euer, stutting yet and weak, er tender Tongue did but begin to speak; ee taught her not (as many Fathers doo: oo-many now) vain words, and wanton too, t some good Prayer, or GOD's Ten-fold Lawe; hat, with her Milk, she might euen suck the Awe the Almighty: which not vain appeers; r that the Damsel brought forth in few yeers, its worthy of such Seed: whence did ensew, at this her Nurture to a Nature grew. doth a Vessel long retain the Sent the first Liquor we haue settled in't: doth a Bough bend euer (when 'tis big) o the same side that it was bent, a Twig:
So, Bears, Wolues, Lyons; & our wildest Game, Bred tame with vs, with vs continue tame. When as 12. times She 12. new Moons had past, This vertuous Pattern all Perfection grac't. For, th' expert Pilot is not more precise To shun, in Sayling, all the Ieopardies Of Cyane Streight, of hatfull Syrtes Sand, Charybdu Gulfe, and of Capharean Strand, Then was wise IVDITH to avoid the Dames Neuer so little spotted in their Names: Knowing that long conversing with the light, Corrupts the sobrest; or at least, though right, Right safe th' Honor be sav'd; the Names not so, From common Bruit (though often false) we know. For, haunting Good, good are wee holden ay: Bad, with the Bad: Like will to like, vve say. Shee, euer modest, neuer vs'd to stay Abroad till midnight at a Maske or Play: Nor tript from Feast to Feast, nor Street-webs span▪ To see, and to be seene of euery man. But rather, knowing that such fond desire To gaze and to be gaz'd-on (Flax and Fire) Vndid light Dina, and such gadding Dames A thousand more; their Noble Houses Shames;
h wisely kept at home; where, Morn and Even▪ aily she calld vpon the God of Heav'n. The rest of euery day in dutious course he seru'd her Nursers for a tender Nurse: s wont the Storks kind and officious Brood or their old Parents to goe gather Food; nd on some high Firre (far-off hauing flow'n) ing life to Those from whom they had their own. If in the Day, from Houswifes needful care, he had perhaps an houre or two to spare, he spent them reading of the Sacred Booke, here faithful Soules for spirituall Manna looke. ometimes on Cloth sh'embroidered cunningly ome Beast, or Bird, or Fish, or Worm, or Fly. ometime she wrought with silver needle fine n Canvas-web some History divine. Heer Lt, escap't from that dread Flame, frō High hich burnt his Town, with winged Feet doth fly o little Zoar: while his Wife (alack!) credulous, and curious, looking back; GOD in the instant smighting for that Fault, ransforms her Body to a Bulk of Salt. Heer, chaste Susanna (andred of dishonor) eems led to Death, People seem prest to stone her:
But, Truth appearing, soon they seem at-once To turn on th'Elders all their storm of stones. Heer loyall Ioseph rather leaues behinde His cloak then hart with his too-Lady-kinde: And rather chooseth (by her false disgrace) His Irons, then her Armes, him to imbrace. Heer, rash, rough Iephthe in vnsacred slaughter Imbrews his own Blade in his onely Daughter; By priuate and improuident Annoy, Troubling the Publique & the generall Ioy. Weary of Work, on her sweet Lute she playes, And sings withall some holy Psalm of Praise; Not following such as by lasciuious Dances, Lauish Expences, light and wanton Glances, Seek to be sought, courted, and lov'd of most: But, as the Fisherman that baits the Coast With poysonie Pastes, may haue a greater draught, And (though lesse wholesome) hath more Fishes caught▪ Then those that only vse their Hook, or Net: So may these Gallants them more Lovers get, Then modest Mayds; But, their immodest flame Fires none but Fools, Frantikes, or Voids of shame, Vertue alone begins, begets, conceiues, A perfect Loue; which, though it flowe receiues
s Form & Life, nor is so soone afire: , neither doth it halfe so soon expire. we kindles quickly, & is quickly past: heats but slowely, & it's heat doth last. Now IVDITH'S fair Renown throgh Iuda rings euery Citie; and great Suters brings rom All-form Fashions, from faire painted Faces, om Powdred Tresses, from forc't Apish Graces, om Prince-fit Pompe; from Peacocks strutting by ith Bosoms naked to the Navel nigh) o woo Her Vertue. But, Loues burning Dart ould neither harm, nor warm her Icie hart. r, as hard Hammers, harder Diamant; e harder did resist Loues grace to grant; auing resolued, sole and single, rather o spend her dayes with her deer-loued Father. t at the last, importun'd long, and prest her deere Parents, carefull of her Rest; e tooke MANASSES, one of Noble bloud; ch, in the Mind's, Nature's, & Fortune's Good. Their Mariage then was neither stoln, nor packt, or posted; to preuent some Pre-contract, o cheat some Heire, some Auarice to choak, o couer Others, or their own Sin cloak:
But duly past, modest, and reuerent, With Either's Parents knowledge and consent. Dina's Disasters to this day doe proue The sad successes of prepost'rous Loue; Of priuie Choice, close Matches, and vnkend; Which seldom bring Louers to happy end: And that our Selues ought not our Selues bestow, But Those frō whom our Birth & Breeding grow. This happy Match begun thus holily, And holy carried, did so firmly tie This chaste young Couple, in so mutuall loue, That both their bodies seems one soule to moue. Th' one neuer wisht but what the other would: Both by one Organ their one-minde vnfold: And, as a Hurt on the Right side (we see) Reacheth the Left; euen so, by sympathie, Her Husbands Sorows did sad IVDITH share, And IVDITH'S Sorows her sad Husband bare. The Husband did not his deer Wife controule, As Tyrants rule: but as the tender Soule Commands the Body; not the same to grieue, But comfort rather, cherish and relieue. Him IVDITH lou'd as Brother (or more, rather) Feard as her Lord, & honord as her Father.
heir House, for Order so religious, nd more a Temple then a priuate House: re, did no Mayd, with merry-tricks, intice bashful Stripling to lascivious vice: re did no drunken Groom sick Healths disgorge, against Heav'n blasphemous Oathes re-forge: e no broad Iester, no bold common Lyer, Gamester, Thiefe, Rogue, Ruffin, Apple-squier, euer harbor: but all Seruants there, heir graue Rulers Rules conformed were. ANASSES, knowing what a Floud of Crimes ounded all, in His enormous Times; cially, what Euills Confluence euen corrupted sacred Gouernments that, for fauour, or for Mony (more) s, Knaues, Boyes, Basest, highest Burthens bore) odestly refus'd all Publique Charge: ing him happy so, free and at large, from the Courts of State and Iustice too, et at Home, his Houshold dues to doo. t notwithstanding, knowing too, that none euer borne so for himselfe alone, hat the best part of our dayes (though few) r Country, Kindred, & our Friends is due;
No Magistrate, Hee daily serv'd the State More then a hundred that in Offcesate. For, in His House did sacred Iustice liue, And from his Lips would She her sentence giue, He euer was th'afflicted Poores Protector, Widowes Supporter, Silly-ones Director, Orphans kinde Father: Euery age, Sex, Sort, Had from his hand some kind of kinde Support. Neuer vain Thirst of the 'curs't Earth of Iude, Made Him wound Water, neither woo the Winde Neuer did Avarice his Life endanger, With mercenarie Sword to serue the Stranger: Neuer did Hee, to Adverse-Clients, sell A double Breath, blowing to Heav'n & Hell. But, strife-less, vsing harm-less Husbandry, Tooke of his Land both Stock and Vsury Of his let Labours. For, somtimes, by Line, Hee plants an Orchard; which he orders fine, With equi-distant Trees, in Rowes direct, Of Plums, of Pears, and Apples most select: Heer-there He Crab-stocks sets, then grafts then Some stranger Slip: inocculates anon: Anon with keen Share the kinde Barth he shreds: Anon the Vine vnto the Elme hee weds:
he prunes-off the superfluous shoots: the Bodies pares, then bares the roots. either Dog-Dayes, nor December's Ice, keep Him Prisoner in his Chamber, nice. , is one-ay, his Reapers he beheld, swelting, swift the yellow handfulls feld; om his head, caus'd a Catarrh descend, hat shortly after caus'd MANASSES End. hat can number, in November, all ithered Leaves that in the Forrest fall: at can number all the Drops, in Showers, Hyades, Pleiades, and most Orion poures the Plaines: may tell the Tears Shee shed, r deer Husband so vntimely dead. ealth and Treasure he had left her, kinde, d of easing, more afflicts her Minde: e of his Goods still sets before her eics good old Owners sweet and gracefull guise. he had all the Gold was gather'd ever the shoal Sands of the Lydian River, d not been Rich, being berest of Him, ut Whō, Wealth doubled her Woes extream: ith Whō, glad she would have born the crosses etched IOB'S, sad, sodain, many Losses.
Phoebus had thrice through all the Zodiakpast, Since His Decease: Yet Time, which all doth waste And cures all Cares, could not her Griefs recouer, For Losse of Him, her decrest Lord and Lover. Still therefore, cover'd with a sable Shrowde, Hath She kept home; as all to Sorrow vow'd: For, for the most part, solitarie sad, Tears in her eyes, sack on her back she had, Griefe in her heart: so, on the wither'd Spray The Widow-Turtle sighes her mournfull Lay; Sole, and exil'd from all Delights, that move; Chastly resolv'd t'accept no Second Love. If any time IVDITH went out of Doore (As Duty binds) it was to see some Poore: Some woefull Woman in deep Passions toyld For sodain Losse of her deer only Childe: Some long-Sick body, or some needy soule, With needfull Comforts of her Bag, or Boule: Or else to go (as GOD commanded Them) To pray and Offer at IERVSALEM. Thus, deer Companion, have I briefly show'n Faire IVDITH'S Story: on whose Worth alone All eyes are cast, but cannot tell you out Whether she goes; lesse, what she goes about.
e may, from former things infer e of future; We may hope from Her Happiness: and sure, me thinks, her Cheer, int chang'd, boads some good fortune neer. is Discourse, the wakefull Hebrew Knight, g between, wore-out the wearie Night. ITH the while, her Handmaid with her, hies s the Trenches of the Enemies. m the Fort She had a furlong gone, athen Scouts desen'd her, and anon her Thus: O! more then humane Beauty, ? What are You? What Cause hath hither brought ye? Assyrian Camp? Alas! I am g, quoth She) a woefull Hebrew Dame, escape so many Deaths, or Thrall, ere to yeeld me to your General. to the Duke they lead her. Who-so-e're n, in Cities, how they flock, to hear ating Montibank; or see some Monster ught from Asrick, frō Inde; may conster esse of Soldiers from all parts did throng, is Tent; and even prest in among hat compleat She, so comely deem'd; e more look't on, the more lovely seem'd.
Her waved Locks, some dangling loose, some p In thousand rings curld-vp, with art-less art; With gracefull Shadowes sweetly did set-out Her broad high Fore Head, smooth as Ice, about: Two slender Bowes of Ebene, equall bent Over two Starres (bright as the Firmament) Two twinkling Sparks, Two sprightfull Ietty Eye (Where subtle Cupid in close Ambush lies, To shoot the choisest of his golden Darts Into the chariest of the chastest hearts): 'Twixt these Two Suns, down frō this liberal Fro Descendingly ascends a pretie Mount▪ Which, by Degrees, doth neer those Lipps extend, Where Momus Lips could nothing discommend: Her ruddy, round Checks seem'd to be composed Of Roses Lillied, or of Lillies-Rosed: Her musky Mouth (for shape and size so meet, Excelling Saba's pretious Breath, for sweet) A swelling Welt of Coral round behemms, Which smiling showes two Rowes of orient Ge Her Ivory Neck, and Alabaster Brest Ravish the Pagans more then all the rest: Her soft, sleek, slender hands, in Snowe bedipt, With purest Pearl-shell had each Finger tipt.
rief, so passing Her Perfections were, t, if rare Zeuxu had but found Her there, such another; when from curious Cull Croton Dames so choisely Beautifull, any Beawties (seuerally mett) cunning Pencil drew the Counterfait er for Whom Europe and Asia fought; only Piece had he sufficient thought. DITH no sooner came within the Tent, oth her Cheeks a bashful Blush besprent; mbling for Fear: vntill, inviting neerer, courteous General's gentle words re-cheer-her. eet-hart, I am not, I am not so fel lse Report hath told fond Israel: Me for Father, I for Chldren take; e whom love my Lord their God to make: who do both, may be assur'd to have t ever Good, Mans heart can hope, or crave: h Israel well should finde, would they give eare hat Kings Favour, whose drad Power they fear: n fear not Thou, my Love; but tell me free happy Cause that hither bringeth thee. Prince! said She (with, then, firm Countenance) eme, for Fortune, Wisedome, Valiance,
Of all that ever had Command in Field, Or ever manag'd martiall Sword and Shield: Although my fraile Sex, and weak bodie's state, No longer could endure the wretched fate; Wants, Labours, Dangers, and the deep Affrig My fellow Towns-folk suffer day and night: Yet is not That the Cause that drives me thence, Nor That which drawes me to Your Excellence: But, 'tis a never-never-dying Worm Which gawes my Conscience; a continual Sto A holy Fear, least I be forc't to eat (Among my People) some vnlawfull meat. For, I foresee (Sir) that our Folk, yer long, With cruell Famine so extreamely wrung, Wil be constrain'd to fill, and file them too With vnclean Flesh, which GOD forbids vs do And that the Lord (who strikes, with iust Reveng Whom-ever dare his dread iust Lawes infrenge) Will then, without Fight, give Thee vp their Plac And one of Thine Thousands of Them shall ch Therfore (my Lord) GOD's Wrath and yours to Ot of BETHVLIA, to your Camp come I: Beseeching humbly, for your Honors sake, That heer no Rigour, neither Wrong I take.
s more then Wit-less that him wilfull throwes king) in Dangers that he well fore-knowes; when he may live, pain-less, and secure; oil-full Fears will his owne Death procure. ow: please thee grant me, in this Vale (away n noise▪ and number) nightly to go pray; ews no sooner shall GOD's Wrath incense, , inspir'd, shall shew thine Excellence: then shall I thy valiant Legions lead all Iuda; and thy Standards spread swell in SION; where not one shal dare aunce against thee, nor Defence prepare: not a Dog so much as barke at Thine s-clashing Army, nor their Armors Shine. Name alone shall tame the stoutest Troup: Thee the Hils their proudest Tops shal stoup: rs, for Thee, their rapid Course shall stay, Thine Hoste a new vn-wonted way. e Prince replies: O, Worlds sole Ornament! , as faire as wise and eloquent; t-Welcome are You: and we wish you ever l Contentment with vs to persever. if you proue in Truth and Loyalty, ou are pleasing to mine Eare and Eye;
I shall from henceforth worship evermore The mighty GOD you Hebrewes do adore: You shall from henceforth only Lady be Both of my Sceptre, of my Soule, and Me: Hence-forth your Name with high Renown sh Where Heber, Ister, Nile, and Ganges spring. With Licence then, soon as the Moon with light Of silver Rayes began to cleer the night, The Widow hies to a dark Vale apart; Where first she bathes her hands, and then her hea Then, from her Eyes a luke-warme Rill she shown Then, from her Soule this fervent Prayer powres: Lord GOD, no longer now Thine Aide deny To those that only on Thine Aide rely. Lord rescue Those that ready are to spend Their bloods and goods, Thine Honor to Defe Lord, let our Infants sad and cease-less Mones, Our woefull Elders deep and dismall Grones, Our Matron's Scrieches, Cryes of Virgins faire, Our sacred Levit's Day-and-nightly Prayer, Perce to Thy Throne, to wake thy slumbring Ey Drad GOD of Iustice, glorious Father; Why Do sulphury Bolts of thy best Thunder light On Carmel's Top, and little Hermon smight:
d let th' Heav'n-threatning Sons of Ecarth alone; proudest Ossa prouder Pelion? Alas! What said I? Ah! forgive me, Lord, is idle, rash, and vnadvised Word; hich, in frail Passion, my fond Lips did borrow om fervent Zeale of mine vnfained Sorrow. o: ô, Our Lignes sole Piller deerly dread, nowe, Thou shortly wilt their Head behead: nowe, This hand, by Thy right hand led out, all at one Blowe, This Heathen Army rout. The end of the fourth Booke.
BETHVLIANS Rescue. THE FIFT BOOKE. FOr blood and marrow, in his veines and bones, The Vice-Roy feeds new Pains, new Passions; Which, while he shuns, he seeks; feels, yet not know A dead-live Fire, which of Self's Cinders growes. For, th' Hebrew Lady's rapting Rarities Being now sole Obiect of his Soule's dimme Eyes; Sad, peevish, pale, soft, drowsie, dream-awake, Care of his Hoste he doth no longer take: Goes no more out, a-nights, to set his Watches, And Courts of Gard about, on all Approches: Comes not to Counsail, neither gives The Word: Nor viewes the Quarters of his Camp: nor stir'd. As Sheep, that misse their wonted Gard & Guide▪ Dispsed stray▪ now, by some Rivers side, Or gugling Brook; now, vp & down the Downes; Now, in the Groves; now, on the Fallow grounds▪ So th' thni Army, without Rule or Reine, Tsue their I lasures, violent, or vaine:
one will obey; None but will now Command; ch, as him listeth, dares him now dis-band. Hebrews, Why stay you now mew'd in your City? ow, now or never, doth the Time befit-ye o ally on the Foe; whose rank Disorder mong themselves, themselves (in Fight) wil murder▪ y; bouge not though: of uch a Victory OD will the Honor have, and Author be. Yer that blinde Cupid did this Tyrant blinde, take the Town was Day and Night his minde; ow, day and night he mindes but how to gain Lady's grace; Who, taken, is not taen er Soul being temper'd more then Fancy-proof): r-while, th' vndanted mighty Theban rough uld not have fear'd Him▪ with his massie Mace; w, but a Glance of a weak Woman's Grace maies him, daunts him, nay evē wounds him deep▪ t care of Cure; and doth him Captive keep: while Ambition, with Drums rattling Din, akt him early, yer the Day pept-in; w Love awakes him; and with His Alarms kes him neglect the Hebrews and their Arms: -while, he hd Princes and Kings at bay; w, of Him Selfe hath neither Power no Sway.
Alas! alas! Vnhappy Change, said Hee: Must I live Captive to my Captive-Shee? Is This (alas!) to live: the Body base't; The minde as brute; and both their Power defac't! This's not a Life: or is worse Life to feel, Then sad Ixion's, on the brazen Wheel Eternall turning: or a life (in brief) Most like the Life of that celestiall Thief, Whose ever-never-dying heart and liver On Schythian Rocks feed a fel Vulture ever. What boots me, t' have subdew'd so many Land What, to have tam'd with my victorious hands All Nations lodg'd betwixt Hydases large, And th' Haven where Cydnus doth in Sea discharge▪ Sith I am vanquisht, by the feeble Might Of Captive IVDITH's Glance. What boots my bri Strong steeled Targe? my brazen Burguinet? My martiall Gard about my Body set? Sith the keen Shot which her quick Eye doth dart, Throgh Sel, & Bass, & Gard, doth wound my What boots my Courser swifter then the Winde, Leaving the Swallowes in his speed bhinde? Sith▪ on his back flying, I canno flie The willing Chaines of my Captivitie.
ange, change then, Hebrews, into Smiles yor tears; umph of Me, mine Hoste, Arms, Swords & Spears: no more the Duke, whose Name alone while with Terror shook you every-one: : I am He whose Courage, late so brave, ow become but Slave vnto my Slave: n not come, to Warr with Israel, burne your Cities, or your Selves to quell: to intreat You, to intreat (for Me) r match-less IVDITH, that She milder be. ut, whither, Wit-less, whither am I borne Loves fond Fury; willfully forlorne? e I not Her heer in my Patronage, at can the Anguish of my Soule asswage? d yet with idle Plaints I pearce the Skyes; d thus vn-Manly melt me at mine Eyes. nhappy Me! my wretched Case is such His, who wants most, what he hath too-much; rystall River flowing to his Lip; dies for Thirst, and cannot drink a sip: , so do I respect her Excellence, r Heav'n-given Graces; that, for Reverence, ne eyes dare scarce behold her, and my Tongue, steed of suing, to my roof is clung.
O that my Brest transparent Crystall were, That She might see my hearts dire Torment there; And there read plainely, what my Loves excess (Alas!) permits not my sad voice t' express. Since IVDITH first came to th' Assyrian Camp, Thrice had the Heav'ns light & put-out their Lamp; And now Aurora, with a saffron Ray, Began, in Inde, to kindle the fourth Day: When as the Duke, who Food and Rest forsakes, This heauy Mon, to 's Eunuke BAGOS, makes: BAGOS, my Sonne, adopted, not by Chance; BAGOS, whom I, still studying to advance, Have made, of Meanest and neglected most, First in my heart, and Second in mine Hoste: BAGOS, I bu, Iave, I rage, I die Of wounds receiv'd from that faire Strangers Eie. o, seek her out: go quickly: tell her Thou My loving Languor: tell her, that I vow To make her equal, nay above the best Of greatest Dames whom royall Crowns invest: Especially, insinuate so, that She Be pleas'd this night to come and sup with Me. We ar't not a Folly, nay a Madnes meer, In Me, to have the rarest Beauty heer
Age hath bred; and yet, too-faint a Foole, uld not dare my hearts hot Thirst to coole? ld not my Soldiers laugh at it apace? : would not IVDITH blush at My Disgrace? GOS, too-apt, too-vs'd to such a Turn; oyles the Fire, which but too-fast did burn: ord, if Private men (whose otious Care e passe the Threshold of their owne Door dare; se Mindes, content with their vnhappy Hap, ther Grace or Greatnes never gape) not content (alas!) vnless some-while warme Comforts their chill Cares beguile: more vnhappy then, are Those that beare tlas Burthen: Those that Rest forbeare, thers Rest: Those that (like Argus) wake e Others, fear-less, their full Naps doo take: ong all their Gall, their Toil, their Teen, (Cupids) Hony be not mixt between? en, Sir, pursue your Love: lose not the Game, of it self comes to your Net, so tame. if in like Imployments, heertofore e found Me fit and faithfull evermore; is new Trust, you shall by speedy Trial, me more secret, diligent, and loyall.
Alas! How-many BAGOS's, in our Time In Princes Courts, to highest Honors climbe, More, for their Cunning in such Embassies, Then for Repute of learned, flout, or wise: Whilome, grea Courts were Vertue's Accadems; Now, Schools of Vice: now (rather) Sinks of Re You, who, Great minded▪ cannot be content To be close-Brokers forth' Incontinent: Who cannot brew (with too-too-dangerous Skill) Both a Love-Potion, and a Cup to kill: Who cannot, noble, your free Natures strain, With flattering pencil on your Face to fain A Face of srownes, or Smiles; of Wrath, or Ruth; To please the Great (rather with Tales then Truth)▪ Come not at Court; if I may counsail you. For, There, in steed of Grace and Honor, dew Vnto your Vertues; you shall nothing gain, But that which There still haunts the Good; Disdai You, Noble Ladyes, in whose heart is graven A filial Fear of th' All-see GOD of Heaven: You that more prize your Honor's pure Report, Then Love of Princes: keep you from the Court. But You, who, hauing neither Land nor Money▪ Out-brave the bravest: Who with words of Hon
d Friend-like Face, Dissemblers, humbly greet om your false harts wish in their winding sheet: o, lavish, sel your Wives for Offices: o, make you Noble, by base Services: o, seruing Time, can set your Faith to sale; t your Religion; saile with euery Gale: o, Parasites, can put more Faces on en euer Proteus in the Seas hath show'n: o, forcing Nature, can your Manners fit my Lords Humor; and so humor it; e a Chamelon, which, heer blew, there black, r gray, there green, doth with his Obiect take: o can invent new Toules, new Taxes finde, charge the People, and the Poore to grinde: o, fayning to possesse your Princes Eare, e Sutors crouch and court you euery-where; , subtle Shifters, sell them deere your Smoak, ding the Wretches with a wilie cloake. ou, warbling Sirens, whose delicious Charms wariest youth into your wrackfull Armes: Circes, you whose powerfull Spells transmute r Loues to Stones, Hogs, Dogs, & euery Brute: Stymphalides, whose Auarice deuoures richest Treasure of Youth's freshest Flowers:
You, you, whose Painting, and Pearl-golden-glister, Of Priam's old Wife, make yong Castor's Sister: You Myrrha's, you Canaces, Semi-ram's: And, if there be any more odious Dames: Come You to Court: come quickly: There, on A hundred Honors shal be heapt, vn-dew: You, there shall sell Iustice, Preferments, Places: Yea, you shall sell mis-gouernd Princes Graces. But, Muse, it boots not: Hadst Thou thousand The Strength & Stomack of Alcides bold, Thou couldst not clense These Sin-proud shining Hall Fouler by far then foule Augeas Stalls. Let's back to IVDITH; who to bring about Her hard deseign, survayes her, sets her out, Be-curles her Tresses; makes her Crystall cleer Her Beauties Iudge, which had in Earth no peer. Then comes she to the Tent, rich hanged rou With curious Arras, from the top to ground; Where Artfull fingers, for a Web of glory, Had woven Medes, Persians, Syrian Princes Story There Ninus first, pusht by vain Prides amisse, Vsurps the East: heer comes Simiramis, Who, fayning Her a Man, th' Assyrians swayes; And to the Clowds her BABYLON doth raise▪
ee, see a Prince, with soft white singers fine, minate, sits spinning Flaxen Twine: d, for a Launce, bearing a Distaffe, showes t more to Female then to Male he owes: how he poats, paints, frizzles, fashions him; es, basks, anoints, viewes, & re-views his Trim in his Glass, which for a Glaine he weares. how he shifts to hide his Shame and Fears: m Vardingale to Vardingale, he flyes braue Lieutenant, least Hee him surprize. see, at last (to act one Manly thing) burns himselfe, not to out-live a King. e, heer an Infant sucking of a Bitch er a Hedge, and in a shallow Ditch; , grown a Man, heer musters in his Train bond and free, the Soldier and the Swain; ues the East, and into Persia drawes Medes proud Sceptre; & he giues them Lawes. , who's That marches so dis-figurd there, re an Army, without Nose, and Eare? that good Servant, who reduc't, alone, er Darins, Rebell Babylon. hile, with these Showes sad IVDITH entertaind Eyes, but not her hart (too-inly-paind)
In comes the Duke: & with right courteous che Kindely salutes her, hands her hand; and neere Causing her sit in a rich asie Chaire, Himselfe, at ease, viewes & re-viewes her Faire▪ Then, seeing him so nigh his wished Pleasure, His hart's a fire: nor hath he longer leasure To stay for Venus, till, Star-crowned bright, On their Horizon Shee bring back the Night. The Widow, knowing Time & Place, as yet, For God's Decree, and her Deseign, vnfit; Findes still Delayes: and, to delude his Loue, Shee (wylie) still Speech vpon Speech doth moue My Lord, pray tell me, What so great Offence So grievously your Fury could incense? What? When? Where? Why? How? & by Whom Could so the Wrath of such a Prince provoke, ( So separate, in Language, Land, and Law; Who neuer Vs, and Whom we neuer saw? Vnciuil were He (Sweet) replyes the Prince, Could ught deny to such an Excellence. Then: s the Heav'ns cannot Two Suns sustaine▪ N more can Earth Two Kings at once contain, O equall Power and State: for Soveraintie Brooks no Co-partner, no Equalitie.
es my Soverain: who, offended at Power & Pomp of mighty Arphaxat, , high aspire, and farre to spred began; to the Clowds had built his Ecbatane, ve's's Shame, and dread of Babylon: ely endeuors to supplant, His Throne, aue his Sceptre, sack, raze, ruinate, oodly Cities, and himselfe dis-State. t Arphaxat, as valorous as sage, both, right worthy of his Crown & Age) ld rather venture Media's Royall Rings, n vaile to Anie. So between Two Kings, stout, & stirring Spirits (whereof, the one d brook no Peer, th' other, Superior none) n a dreadfull and right deadly War, ng (alas!) too-long, spreading too-far. phaxat arms Those, where the Flower of Greece t, not the Locks of an old Golden Fleece, assie Ingots, which doe richly pave appy Plains great Phasis Streams belave: Harmastans, th' Albanians, wont to mowe e times a yeere, where only once they sowe: m Oxus boundeth with his swelling Tide: m Anti-Taurus double Horns diuide:
Those on the Mountain, whose high-lowely back Bow'd to the Vesell which preserv'd from wrack The Worlds Abridgement: Those along the Where proud Iaxartes rapid Current rores: In short, besides his Medes he had in Pay All, neere the Pontike and the Caspian Sea. So that, already, This great King-Commander, Had Hopes as high as euer ALEXANDER. My Prince, resolv'd to conquer, or to die, Omits no point of Opportunitie For his Affaires: Hee armeth Sittacene, Levies the Archers of all Osrohene: Those, whose rich Plains hundred for one repay, From Euphrates and Tigris march away: Fish-fed Carmanians (who with Seal-skin Iacks, In sted of Iron, arme their warlike Backs) Gold-sanded Hytan's natiue Shores forgo: You, Parthians, Cossians, and Arabians too, By your sage Magi's deep prophetike Charmes Sacredly counsail'd, take you all to Armes: And Thou, Chaldéa, turn'st to Swords & Speares And Shields, Thy Rules, Squires, Compasses & For, of his Subiects spares he not a man That beare a Launce, or Pike, or Crosbow can:
es, Beldames, Babes, Gray-heads (& Sickly, some) ough all his Countries onely kept at home. e also sends for Persians and Phnicians; oft Egyptians, Hebrews, and Cilicians, ckly to come, and kindly take his Part: Neuters, They (more Friends in face, then hart) ct his earnest Sute, Himselfe neglect; vse his Legats but with small respect. y Lord dissembles for a while This wrong, auing tryumpht of a Foe more strong, may with more ease, and with danger lesse, r Sacrilege and surly Pride represse. Ragau's ample Plain, one Morning, met e Royall Armies, of two Kings, as great er Mars with steele and Furie arm'd: and Pride so Either Souldier warm'd, hardly could they stay till Trumpets shrill ounce the Battaile, & giue leaue to kill: with stern Looks, & brauing Threats, afar; nd, with Blowes; they had begun to war; anging wounds. Two thousand Perduz first e brauely th' Onset: and not much disperst, suddain whirle-wind of their nimble Slings, ick a storm of humming Pebbles sings
So sad a Dirge of Deaths, that they suppose, That not one Troop, but All, had bin at Blowes. To second Those, then, in good ordinance, With waving Ensignes, thousand Troops advance▪ Both Armies ioyne. Now fiercely fall they to 't, Mede vpon Chaldé, pressing foot to foot; Incount'ring felly with a furious noise Of clashing Arms, and Angry-braving Voice: Lowder then Nile, rushing from Rocky-Coomb; Or then Encélade, when he shakes his Toomb. Heer lyes one headlesse: foot-lesse there (alas!) Another craules among the gorie Grasse: One's shoulder hangs: another hangs his Bowels About his neck (but new bound vp in towells): This, in the Face, That in the Flank is hurt: This, as he dyes, a Floud of Blood doth spurt: That, neither liues nor dyes; but sees at once Both vpper Iove's and neather's diverse Thrones; Because, some little spirit (too-stubborn-stout) Still, in the Body, will not yet come out. Yer-while the ground was yellow, green, & bl Now onely coverd with a Crimsin hew: While one doth (hee) another deadly thrill, Another Him, Another Him doth kill:
Rage increases: still doth Fury spread, all the Field be but a Heap of Dead. One-while the Syrians by the Medes are chas'd; n the Medes by Syrians are re-chas'd: ne-while, from the Sea vnto the Shore, ge after Surge, Waue after Waue doth rore; ther-while, from Shore to Sea they ply e after Waue, Surge after Surge to fly: s (we see) the Flowery Ears, in May, hen Zephyrus with gentle Puffs doth play) y to and fro; forward and backward bend; w stoop a little; and now, stand an end. oth Kings the-while, whose Force & Fortitude past their Subiects, so their Blades imbrewd loud & Slaughter, that an open Glade ere-e're they came, in either Camp they made; hat, nor Casks, Cuirets, nor Shields could saue n mighty Stroaks their massie Weapons gaue: h like two Torrents, which with headlong fall n two opposed Hills, downe-bearing all, s▪ Bridges, Trees, Corn, Cattell; seem to vy ether of either shall most damnifie. cially, the Medes King thundred so n our Battailes, that our Bravest tho,
Began to shrink, & with that shameful sight, Our Hoast dis-ord'red, fell to shameful flight: The Foe pursues, slayes, slashes (swift as wind) Millions of wounds, and every one behind. In briefe, that Day had Niniué bin downe, Her King vndone (dead, and depriu'd of Crowne) Had not I (full of Force and Furie) quick, Like Lightning, rusht where deadly Blows were th Mails, Murrions, Corselets, Iron, Steele & Brasse, Before My Sword were brittle all, as Glasse. And onely I, My hand alone, which lent More deaths then blowes, brought more astonish Vnto Their Camp, then all Our Camp beside. Their Foot no longer could my Brunt abide: Their Horsmen, fainting, in their Saddles shake; Arms on their Backs, harts in their Bellies quake. Heer, with a down-right Blowe, from top to twist, I cleaue in sunder one that dar'd resist: There, I so deep dive in Another's minde, That neer two handfulls peers my Sword, behinde So, that the Medes, now more then wauering, In th' heat of Fight, abandon All their King. Who, seeing him so betray'd, his Tresses tore, Re'd to Ragau, all besmeard with gore:
re, over-taen by Ours, He brauely fought; thickest Darts a glorious Death he sought; wes, thunders, thrills, & of his Manly blowes one in vaine, not one amisse bestowes: yer He die, with quick, keen, Fauchin fel, ends before, thousand stout Soules to Hell: e fierce Tigre, compast every-where Men & Dogs, to Fury turns his Feare; ts where he findes the greatest danger ly; s, tosses, kills; not, vnreveng'd to die. at, at the last, the vainly Valiant King, rie of killing, and of conquering, illd with a thousand Darts, and wounded rife, ed at once his lofty Rage and Life: , falling, fares as doth a mighty Oake, ch, planted high vpon a massie Rock, ousand times hath felt the Winds to beat, thousand Axes, it a Fall to threat; at the Root groan'd, & the Valley nigh o'd the noyse vnto the steepest Sky, le that the Top still reeling to and fro, , These; now, Those, threatens with overthrow: still it stands, in spight of all their spight, at the last, all vnder-mined quight
With million stroaks, it falls, and with the Fall, Bears to the ground, Trees, Rocks, Corn, Cattell▪ For, Arphaxat extinct, extinct with-all Was Median's glory: and, My Lord of All Raz'd Ecbatane; and now grow Weeds & Grass Where, late, His lofty, rare-rich Palace was: Where, late, the Lute, & the lowd Cornets noise In curious Consort warbled sweet their voice: The voice of Scriech-Owles, & Night-Ravens is And euery fatall and affrighting Bird. My King-God, weary of Warrs tedious toile, In NINIVE the great, for four months-while Made Publique Feasts: and, when the Feast was Commaunds Mee leavie a huge Hoast, anon, Of chiefest Men; to goe & chastise Those That had disdaignd him Aide against his Foes: And that, on All that dar'd His Hests infrenge, With Fire & Sword his Honor I avenge; And that with speed. But, Madam, see (alas!) How farre I am from bringing This too-passe: For, comming heere, your Nation to subdue, My Selfe am conquer'd and subdu'd by You: So that (alas!) Death's draddest Tyrannies In end-lesse Night will soon siel-vp mine eyes,
t the powerfull sole Preservatiue y sweet Kisses keepe mee yet aliue. good My Lord, said Shee, Tell-on (I pray) good Successe and Service, by the Way. en HOLOFERNES, where he left, began g Naration how He playd the Man; Truth, halfe Tales: For, tis great Souldiers guise ibast oft their Own Exploits with Lyes. e Hoast all mustered & together brought, lame their harts with martial Heat I sought: es (said I) if euer Your Desires thirsted Fame, to liue when Life expires; ' now, to punish that presumptuous Crew h rudely (late) our sacred Legats slew: ', to avenge our drad-deer Soverain Liege at fel Outrage, nay, foule Sacrilege nst the Greatest GOD came eues downe Heav'nly Spheares to sway an Earthly Crown: , arm you, braue Blouds, arm your either hand; , with a Blade; That, with a Fier-brand, Fire and Sword to over-run the West, ay it waste, to bear away the best: nk it all vnder a Crimsin Flood; ake (at least) your Horses swim in blood:
Gow', take possession of Your Valors due, The whole Worlds Crown, which yeelds it all to you▪ Take you This Honor; which, in Time-to-come, Shall keep your braue Names from th' obliuious Tomb: Take, take your pleasures of the richest spoils Of richest Cities in a hundred Soiles Which you shal sack. So, may you once in Health Come laden home with Honor & with Wealth. I ceast: and soon they second, All, my voice With Caps cast-vp, with clapped hands; & noyse Of generall Ioy, to haue Me GENERALL. Some six-score Thousand was Mine Hoast in all, Or som-what-more: with which from NINIVE, But three-dayes march I made to Bectileh; Thence past I forward by Hierapolis, Then by Amida, then by Nisibis. And thence to Charan (at the length) I came, Once happy seat of your great Abraham. Then wan th' Hill, whose oblique Horns divide All Asia neer, and limite farre and wide Many large Empires: Where, I sack, I slay, I burn, I raze, what-euer in my way: My Souldiers seem so many Mowers, right, Which in a Mead leaue not a blade vpright;
t, by long Swathes of their degraded Grasse, ell showe the way their sweeping Sythes did passe: his, Phul, and Tharsis, and all Lydia knowes, whose waste Fields now only Bramble growes. Com'n neer the Straight which serues for Wall & Fort o soft Phoenicians, and Thiefe Issians Port: he Rosians, Soleans, Mopsians, Tharsians, Issia, nchials, Aegoeans; briefely, all Cilicia; ake-vp this Gate, with all their Power; in hope o stay my Passage, and my Course to stop. Should I heer tell the dangerous Enterprises raue Charges, Rescues, Sallyes, Shocks, Surprises, hich there befell, the day would faile (I feare) efore my Speech: for, the Cilicians were o fortifi'd by fauour of the Place, That little could wee there prouaile, a space: Nay, all mine Hoast, which had so often chas't So many greater Hoasts; now stood agast; Till in despight, and full of desperate rage, In thickest dangers, I my Selfe ingage; Where, round assaild, and wounded in all parts, My Shield thick bristled with a Groue of Darts, I neuer shrunk: but so be-stirr'd mee round, That I alone made All their Hoast giue ground.
Mine Army then, followes the way amain Mine Arm had made, and paved thick with Slain: Now our most Cowards (late) for Fear, adying; Wound most, kil most, and most pursue them flyin Cydnus▪ yer while, for his pure silver Flood, Cald King of Waters, wallowes now in blood: And rapid Pyrm (past his wonted Toule) To Neptune, Shields, Helms, Horse & Men doth ro In brief, as heer your Momur, stopt a while By some new Bridge, or some vnusuall Pile; Roars, rises, foams, fumes, threats, beats, rages, Against his new Bank; and with waighty Waves, Waighty and strong, beares down at last the By, And, for a time, out-lashing every-way▪ Tears, over-turns, and vndermines, much worse Then when he freely hath his natiue Course: Even so, my Force, having the Force repeld, Which in these Straights the struggling Passage held Burns, kils, confounds, what meets it most and least. ASIA▪ laid wase: returning to the East, I conqu'd Coelé, spoyling, pityless, The fruitfull Verge of famous Euphrates: Rapsis az'd; and Agraea▪ overthrow'n, The Vertue of my mighty Arm hath know'n.
Thence, keeping still by the Sea coast, I spoile, e Madianites: then, marching North a-while; wards double Liban, I Damascus race, h her neer Towns, Gane, Abyl, Hypaepas: ence came I (curious) to that Hill, from whence e Sun, by Night, is seen; and seen from thence o to Rse: Thence, towards the Western Realms ontinual beaten with Phoenician Streams. Then, Those of Gaze, Tyre, Sydon, Ascalon, otus, Byblus, Ioppa, every-one, r'd with my Fame; in greatest humblenes, spatch their Legates to My Mightines. e come not heer with Force and Arms (say They) o bid thee Battail, or to barre thy Way: t rather, Mightiest Price, in humblest awe, o yeeld vs Thine, to accept Thy Will for Law; f Life, or Death. Thine are our Fields & Forts; hine are our Cities; Thine our Ships, our Ports, Our Lands, our Goods▪ our Cattail, Corn, & Wine; Thine are our Children, and our Selves are Thine: Only be pleas'd (Sir) to accept vs so▪ And so esteem vs: and right happy th hall we esteem our Selves, to haue a Lord Can wield so well the Sceptre and the Sword,
The Lance and Balance; and, besides, excels Men, equals Gods in euery Vertue else. Nor did their People, nor their States disproue Their Embassies; but by all signes of Loue Both Yong and Old, crown'd all with Flora's Fauo▪ Of hundred Colours and of hundred Sauors; Came Dauncing out with Musiks cheerfull Moods, To offer Me their Bodies and their Goods. Nor did I then a Victor's Right abuse; But with all Kindness them as Friends I vse: Leaue them their Land: but first, their Forts I mao With some of Mine; with some of Theirs, my Band. For (Madame) still the farther that I go, My Camp, in Bands; my Bands in Soldiers growe: Euen as Danubius, first, beginning small Throgh Raurak Plains with shallow course to craule, Still swelling more & more, with three-score Riuers, To th' Exie Sea his Sea-like Self deliuers. I hop't, as These, so also Israel Would yeeld themselues; & not at all compel My iust Reuenge to threat Extreamities: But, when I came heer to Sythopolis (The Toomb of Her whose happy Milk had yrst The twice-born Dennis in his Cradle nourc't)
as aduertis'd of this stubborn Folly; hich will, no doubt, vndoo the Hebrews wholly. The end of the fift Booke.
BETHVLIANS Rescue. THE SIXT BOOKE. YEr that the Pagan could his Story end, Frō highest Hils did dusky Night descend: And now the Steward full the Table faights With all, most pretious, most delicious Meats; As if the Vice-Roy, to This Iouial Feast, Had bid the Kings both of the West and East. O greedy-guts! O Gulphes insatiate! A thousand Worlds, with all their delicate And various Cates deuis'd by th' Abderite, Cannot suize your bound-less Appetite. O Belly-gods! for You (at any price) To the Moluques, must we trudge for Spice; To the Canaries, for your Sugars fine; To (Ioes-Crete) Candy for your choysest Wine. To please your Tasts, your Palats to content, Seas sacred Bosome is profanely rent; Aieris dispeopled; yea, right hardly can The only Phoenix scape the Iawes of Man.
O Poison! worse then Plague to Martiall states, Which brauest mindes basely effeminates. While Rome, for Heads, had Curios and Fabricios, Whom Roots suffiz'd for dainties most delicious: While Persia was with Sallets sole content; They flourisht Both, admir'd and Eminent; And Eithers Arms triumphing euery-where, Fill'd all the Earth with Tropheis and with Fear: But, since that This, from soft Assyrians took His vast Excesse of Kitchin and of Cook; And, since that That fel vnder the Dispose Of Galba's, Neros, and Vitellios (More glorying to exceed Others Excess, Then conquer Pyrrhus or Mithridates) Both haue bin oft and iustly sackt and spoil'd By pettie Nations, whom they oft had foil'd. Natur 's suffiz'd with Little: Ouer-ful Deadeth the Courage, & the Wits doth dull. Each being set; anon, full filled-out In massie Boules the Malmsey walks about: One drinks deuoutly in an Estridge Egge; One in a Lute, another in a Legge; One in a Ship, another in a Shell; Another takes a broad deep siluer Bell,
To ring his Pea but so his hand doth sway And shake, that half he sheds it, by the way. But, aboue all, the Prince him so behau'd, That, now, the more he drank the more he crau'd: Much like the Sea; which, though it take this-while Twin-named Ister, and Seauen-mouthed Nile; Neuer increases, nor is full therefore; But euer ready for as many more. Cup calls for Cup; and when the Skinker ween T' haue done his Seruice, he afresh begins To fill them Liquor: for, till Midnight past, Among the Guests this Tippling game did last. And then away, with much adoo, they went (Feeling, and reeling) Each vnto his Tent; By th▪ amorous Tyrant often vrg'd before, Who thought each minute now a yeare and more. When they were gon, Hee 'gan embrace and busse The trembling Lady; who besoothes him Thus: Nay: leaue (my Lord): such hast what need you make To reap the Fruit which from you none can take? Get you to bed: and, if you leaue me roome, I will not faile you by and by to come, So soon as I haue but disburthened My Load of Cloathes, and made me fit for Bed.
If suttlest Wits, and if the sobrest Brains, ue hardly scaped Womens wylie Trains, aruaile not, Reader, if One, fool'd at-once Semele's and Cytheréa's Sonnes, thus beguil'd: sith Either of the Two reaues the Bodie's and the Mindes Force, too. Then, letting her slide from his arms away, e goes about himselfe to dis-aray: ow he vnbuttons, now pulls-off his hose; ut, his heat hinders, and his hast foreslowes; or (sleep-awake, blinde-seeing) while he plyes ' vntrusse his Points, them (fumbling) faster ties: ill, ouercome with Rage, and Longing, more, He cuts his knots, and off his Cloathes he tore; And then to Bed. Where (as the Crosse-bow-man, Who, for his pleasure, watcheth now and than By some Cross-path, some Coney, or some Hare; At euery Noise, on euery side doth stare Where stirs a Leaf; and leuels thither-ward, At the least Wren, or the least Worm that stird Neer where he stands, still in a Hopefull-Doubt Turning his Body and his Bowe about) The lustfull Tyrant, if he hear a Mouse Neuer so little stir about the house;
Shivering for Ioy, he thinks his Mistresse there: Nay, though he nothing hear, his flattring Eare Thinks it hears something, which can nothing be But his admired most desired Shee: Lifts-vp, layes-down, and vp again re-lifts His heauie Noule: from side to side he shifts; Casting the Distance, counting, in his head, How-many steps will bring her to his Bed, The which the-while he full of Thorns doth think. But, now the Fume of his aboundant Drink, Drouzing his Brain, beginneth to deface The sweet Remembrance of her louely Face: Alreadie wheels his Bed, alreadie shine A thousand Rayes before his slumbring Eyne: Alreadie in his Eares (now waxen numme) A thousand Drones with buzzing Noise do humme: He sees Chiméras, Gorgons, Mino-Taures. Medusas, Haggs, Alectos, Semi-Taures. But IVDITH's heart still beating thick with-in, Felt a fell Combat in it self begin: Now, causing Fear her sacred Fervour quash; Anon, her Fervour her faint Fear to dash. IVDITH, said She, Thy Iacob to deliuer, Now, is the Time; Now to-it. Do-it neuer.
O! Yes. O! No. I will. I will not, I: Shall I profane kinde Hospitality? ay, rather shall I sanctifie't the more, hen by the same I shall the Saints restore. But, Traitors euer bear Dishonors brand. raitors be Those betray; not save, their Land. But, Murderers Heaun's righteous Iudge abhors. Why? all Man-killers are not Murtherers. But, Hee's a Murderer who his Prince hath slain. his is a Tyrant; not My Soverain. But, GOD hath now bequeath'd Him vs for Lord. ee's not of GOD that wars against his Word. Why, then, may All, their Tyrants kill and rid? o Ahod, Iahel, and so Iehu did. Yea, but from Heau'n had They autentik Warrant. o hath my Soule (approued and apparant.) But, ah! how weak art Thou, this Work to act! Whom GOD assisted, neuer strength hath lackt. But, hadst thou done; the Sequel's more to doubt. GOD brought me in: & GOD will bring me out. What, if He please leaue thee in Heathens hands? Their Chieftain dead, I fear nor Death, nor Bands. But, to their Lust thou shalt be left a Prey. Neuer my Minde; my Body force they may.
Then, in this point thus sacredly confirm'd; With hands heav'd vp, her eies on Heav'n she firm'd▪ And softly, Thus poures to the Lord her Prayer: O gracious GOD, who with paternal Care Hast euer kept thine Israel, strengthen Thou Mine Arm with Thine, that it may nimbly now Cut-off this Tyrant, who thus dares presume, To scale the Heav'ns; Thy Sceptre to assume. And, sith thy grace, through thousand storms & more▪ Hath brought my Bark in sight of wished shore, O, let it land: with Poppie's sleepiest sap This Tyrant's sense benum in end-less Nap; That I may raise this Siege, Thy Thralls release; Return Thee Praise; and, to thy SION, Peace. Her Praier done, the Drunken Prince she heares Snoting aloud. Then faire and soft She neeres His Pallets side, and quickly takes the Sword Which had so oft the groaning Earth begor'd. But, euen about the fatal Blowe to giue; Fear, from her hand did the fel Weapon reaue: Her hat did faint, her strength did faile her quite. O GOD (then said She) strengthen by Thy Migh My timerous heart's, and trembling hand's Consent▪ Then on the Duke so stiffe a stroake she lent,
happily, tri-parted (at the poule) ' Head from the Body, Body from the Soule. Soule to Hell: his Body on the Bed: IVDITH's hand his grim and ghastly Head; ich soon her Handmaid in her Night-bag hid. Then speeding thence, suspect-less, or vnspi'd; thout Impeach the Pagan Hoste they past. r, if that any saw them trip so fast, av'n-blinde, they thought She went but (as before) o the Vale, bright Diane to adore. Now, when chaste IVDITH came to th' Hebrews Tower, e, open (said She): for the GOD of Power, ' Assyrian Forces hath this Night forlorn, d lifted vp his chosen Iacob's Horn. The Town, amaz'd at her Return vn-hop't, esse to the Port; which instantly they op't, ronging about her: who a Tarras mounts, d her Exploit from point to point recounts. en, from her Bag, for Proof of what she said, e pulls the-while the dreadfull Pagans Head. The Citizens, when in her hand they sawe h' Assyrian's Head's Head; full of humble Awe, toll th' Almighty, who so mighty Foe a weak Woman had subdewed so.
But, most of all did Ammons Prince admire GOD's dreadfull Iudgement: and to scape His ire, Who Israel thus, of vanquisht, victoriz'd; His Flesh and Heart he sodain circumciz'd. How sweetly, Lord, Thy sacred Prouidence, Mens suttlest Wisdome, in their Plots, preuents! For, thine Elected vnto Life, to guide Into thy Fold (when most they seem beside) Good out of Ill thou draw'st: making their Sin, Means ('gainst their minds) their Goodnes to bgi Lord! foule Desire of Murther and of Spoile Brought this (late) Pagan to th' Isacian Soile; Where, meaning (first) Thy Peoples bloud to spi Now, spend his Owne for their deer sakes he wil: Thy mercy so from his maligne Affect, Maugre his minde, brought forth a good Effect. So, neer Damascus, mad'st thou, by thy Call, Of Wolf a Shepheard, of a Saule a Paule; Of Persecutor, an Apostle; (brief) Of Chief of Sinners, among Saints the Chief: So sodainly, that all the Saints about Admir'd his Doctrine; Yet, his Deeds did doubt. So, the Saint-Thief, which suffered with our Sa Was led to Life by his Death-dew Behauior:
, when no longer Earth could bear his Sin, , in a Moment, made Heau'ns Citizen. eareful-hopeful Precedent of Grace! as, but One, GOD's holy Books imbrace: that None (humbled) should despaire of Pardon: One, that None presume in Sin to harden.) o, turn, good Lord, O turn the hearts of Princes, ose Rage their realms wth S••. deer bloud berinses: let the Sword, Thou in their hand hast put, ne but Thy Foes, none but Those Tyrants cut, o cursedly Thee, or Thy CHRIST blaspheme surping IVDA and IERVSALEM, d all Thy Golden Candlesticks beside; reating the West, too, with their Power & Pride): t Those, who humbly, only, euermore, e, TRINITY in VNITY, adore. Then, as the braue Virago ordered, Soldier takes th' Assyrian Tyrants Head; d, for the Hebrews more Encouragement, ad sets it vp vpon the Battlement. There, Parents, Children, Maids, & Widowes sad, hom Pagan Swords but new bereaued had f Children, Parents, Louers, Husbands deer, ixt Grief and Anger, as distracted neer,
Pull-off his Beard, pull out his hatefull Tongue, (Which had blasphemed Heau'n & Earth so long) Spit in his Face, scratch & poach-out his Eyes; And all, that Hate and Fury can deuise. For, lyue Remembrings of their wrongs, them On his dead Head, this dead Reuenge to take. Aurora, weary of the cold Embrace Of her old Spouse, began in Inde apace To paint her Portal of an Opal hew; When, of Bethulians all the brauest Crew Issue in Arms: and such a Noise withall, (Such Shouts and Cries) as if, in th' antike Braule, All th' Elements, breaking the bands of Order, Were by the Eares; and in their old Disorder. The Court of Gard (that night vnusuall strong, Towards the Town) hearing such Noise, so long, Start from their Sleep▪and crying Arm, arm, arm, Giue sodainly to all their Hoast Alarm. One, for his owne, his Fellowes Helm puts-on: One, his right Vantbras on left arm doth don: One, on his neck, for Launce, a Libbet takes: One speeds him quick: another scarce awakes: One mounts his Horse, yer he be curb'd, or girt; And, without Spurs: Others, to shew more heart,
ld make a Stand: some neither wake nor sleep: e, braue in Word; in Deed, as faint as Sheep. ow, by degrees, this Noise comes to the Eares Holosernez Houshold Officers: hat sad Bagos hies him in all hast o the Tent where th' Ethnick slept his last. h trembling hand, once, twice, or thrice he knockt: an eternall Sleep the Doors had lockt his Lord's eares; who had already crost e Stygian Ferry, not to be re-crost. hen, hearing still th' Isacians lowder shout, makes the Doore fly-open with his Foot; d, entring, findes, in gorie Bed, lowe shrunk, t Holofernez, but his Head-less Trunk. en did he teare his haire, and rent his Clothes▪ d to the Clowds roars out in yelling Oathes: ecially, when IVDITH there he mist, om now the Murdress of his Lord he wist. en, ragefull rushing from the bloody Tent, is hideous Cry through all the Camp he sent: Woe, woe to vs! Alas! this cursed Night ursed Captiue hath confounded quight r awefull Army, and vndone vs All, treacherous slaughter of our GENERAL.
This new Affright redoubled on the first, The stoutest harts doth so dis-hart and burst; That All (at-once abandoning their Armes, Pikes, Swords, & Shields, Darts, Arrowes, all) by swa Be take them to their heels; o'r Hill & Dale, Flying from one death, on a worse to fall. Then the Besieged, in great Troops descend, And on their backs revenging Bowes they bend. Both run apace: Those fly; These follow fast: But those that fly, make lesse good speed then haste. For, without losse of Man, th' Hebrews, at will, The flying Pagans slaughter, thrash, and thrill: Euen as a Lyon, in Getulian Lawnes, Bestreawes the soile with fearfull Kids and Fawnes▪ Where, not a Beast his Furie dares abide, Nor lift a horne against his awefull pride. One, from a Rock himselfe doth headlong dash, And all to peeces all his parts doth pash: Other, forgetting that in deepest depth Fate findes vs out, into a Riuer leap'th. But, if by speed, or some good hap, perhaps This Mornings first fel Fury any scapes, He scapes not though those Hebrews outrages, Who kept (about) the Straits & Passages:
hat at scarce one of such a Rout could bring, Niniué, the Newes vnto the King. The Battaile (rather, th' Execution) don, t of the Citie flocked euery-one om Sex or Age had hitherto restrain'd; see the drad Revenge the Lord had rain'd suddainly, and past all Expectation, those fell Foes of His deer Holy Nation. One, full of Wounds, yet gasping, calls in vain lazie Death, to end his lingering pain: e, grinning gastly, in his visage grim, owes, dead, the Rage that liuing sweld in him: me mangled heer, some there, some round about: d euery Soule a sundry way went out: cordingly as Valor, Sleight, or Chance, d the dead-doing Sword, or Dart, or Launce. short, This sight so truly tragick was, at euen the Victors would haue sigh't, alas, d they so vanquisht any Foe but This. But rifling long, among the Carcases, last the Body of the Duke they found hogh head-less, known best, by that only wound). hither they throng; That, euery blade must thrill, nd euery one that Corps againe would kill:
A hundred Swords, a hundred Pikes, and Darts, Are euery moment goring all his parts; And euery Nerue, Vein, Muscle, Ioynt they hack; Till room (at last) their Vulgar Rage doth lack. For, were his Bulk as big as Atlasses, His Limbes as many as Encélades, And strong Briarus; yet, yet think I, all, Their dire Revenge would still, still think too small For, of the Iewes, none so base Clown there is But would a Gobbet of that Flesh of His. Giue, Tyrant, giue thy Right hand to Cilicians, Thy Left to Medes: giue one Arm to Pnicians, Th' other to Ismael: and divide thy Feet Between th' Egyptian and the Coelianit: That euery Nation, whom Thine Arms offenc't, May, by some Part, be partly recompenc't. Alas! I erre: for, all in Atomies Wert Thou divided, all would not suffise. But IVDITH, nor forgetful, nor ingrate, Would neither bury, nor Selfe-arrogate The sacred honor for Assistance given In This great Work, by th' All-work hand of Heav' But, tyming meet her Feet to Timbrells noise, This Hymn she sings with glad-sad warbling voice;
low'd by all the Flower of Hebrew Dames aids, Widowes, Wiues) of faultless Forms & Fames. ude, laude we, lowd, with verse, with voice & strings, GOD of GODs, the glorious King of Kings: ese Power alone, pulls Tyrants down, & reareth ek in their Room, who HIM ay-faithfull feareth. or, who would thinke, one Citie, in one Day, suddainly could such an Hoast dismay, ose high Exploits had all the World astounded, d, from the Indes, to Iapheths Inns resounded? Lord! who wold think, that HOLOFERNES, late ud Conqueror of many a Potentate, uld lose his Life (for all his Selfe-affiance) one weak Woman, not a Troop of Giants? Who, who would thinke, that HE, who late possest t least, had power) from farthest East to West; om Pole to Pole stretching his arms all-over, uld not haue, left, one Inch of Turfe, for Cover? That stately Prince, so thick attended-on, w dead, (alas!) lyes, aboue ground, alone. t, not alone: for, Those that seru'd him, living; nsort him, dead; Proose of their Duties giving:
Nor yet, aboue ground; for, the Ravens become His mangled Bodie's better-worthy Toomb, Then pretious Marble, let, and Iacynth gilded; Which, for his Bones Himselfe had proudly builded. So, so (good Lord) from Hence-forth, let vs finde Thee, not our Iudge, but as our Father kinde; And so, Hence-forth, the Foes of SION rather Feele Thee their Iudge, then their propitious Father. Heer IVDITH ends: Heer also end will I, With thanks to GOD; and to Your Maiestie. To GOD, for bringing This my Work about: To You, for daigning to haue read it out. FINIS.
LITTLE BARTAS: OR Brief Meditations, ON The Power, Providence, Greatnes, & Goodnes of GOD, In the CREATION; of the World, for Man: Of Man, For HIM-SELFE. Translated; & Dedicated To the most Royal Lady ELIZABETH. by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
TO The most Royal Lady ELIZABETH, Infanta of England; Princess PALATINE of Rhine. Sweet Grace of GRACES, Glory of Your Age, Lustre of VERTVES (Moral and Diuine) Whose Sacred Rayes (already) far out-shine Your Princely State, Your Royall Parentage; eer, to your HIGHNES (with all Good-Presage, Congratuling Your little PALATINE) I consecrate This LITTLE-One of Mine To serue Your Self, first; then, Your Son, for Page. ur gracious Favours to my former Brood, So binde my Thoughts, so bolden my Desires, To showe Mee gratefull, as I know You good; hat Thus to YOV, This LITTLE Mine aspires: Little in Growth; yet of so great a Spirit, As (happily) Your Graces grace may merit. To Your Highnes Seruice, Dulie and Trulie devoted, Iosuah Sylvester.
Souhaits Royaux & Loyaux. Au Roy. Insi, l' Ancien des Temps, d' Ans, d'Honneurs, & Bonhe Comblant ce Chef Royal; couronne voz Labeurs: Qui. pour le Droict des Roys, d'vn Glaiue tout divin, Combattez l' Antichrist, & son grand BELLARMIN. Au Prince Charles. sile Tout-puissant, de sa main de PANDORE, Face d'vn Charle-moindre, vn Charle-magne encore; Qui, suivant Voz Vertuz, deriue, perennel, Saincts-Sages-Preux STVARTS au Sceptre paternel. Aux Princes Palatins. nsi, le Ciel benin de ses Tresors benisse, L'Hymen heureux & sainct de FREDRIC & d'ELIZE▪ De sorte, que d'Iceux, leurs Filz, & leurs Neveuz, Nous naissent desormais des EMPEREVRS heureux. Aux Anglois & Allemans. insi, Lions ANGLOIS & Aigles d'ALLEMAGNE (Triumphants, pour la Foy, de ROME & de l'ESPAGN Terrassent coup a coup les Lunes du TVRQVOIS, Pour planter tour par tout les Lauriers de la CROIX.
LITTLE BARTAS. wanton Lovers so delight to gaze n mortall Beauties brittle little Blaze; t not content, with (almost) daily sight Those deere Idols of their Appetite; r, with th' Idëas which th' Idalian Dart h deepe imprinted in their yielding heart; , with Their Pictures (with precisest charge) e by De-Creets, Marcus, or Peake, at large nd hangd of purpose, where they most frequent, some faire Chamber's choicest Ornament) ey must haue Heliard, Isaac, or His Sonne, doe in Little, what in Large was done; at they may ever, ever beare about Pictures Picture (for the most, I doubt). Much more shold Those, whose Soules, in Sacred Loue, re rapt with Beautie's-Proto-Type aboue
(Sith, heere, they cannot see th' ORIGINAL; Nor, in themselues, now, finde His Principal) Thirst for Their Obiect; and [much lesse content With th' ample Table of the Firmament, And various Visage of this goodly Globe, Wherein, they see but (as it were) His Robe, Embrodered rich, and with Great Works embost, Of Power, of Prudence, & of Goodnes, most; Yet, so farre-off, so massie, so immense, As over-swaies Their weake Intelligence: Or with that lesser Tablet of their Owne (The Little-World, wherein the Great is show'n) Which, neer & deer, though still about they beare, Such Cloudes of Passion are still crowding there, That seld or neuer can they ought perceiue Of those pure Rayes it did at first receiue] Long for Their Long-Home, past the Gates of Grace, To see Their Loue, in Glory, face to face. Till when; awhile to entertaine them heere With Prospects fittest Their faint Thoughts to cheere (Insted of That Great Vniversal Table, Made in Six Dayes, with Art so admirable; And, by My BARTAS, in His Weekes divine, So large and liuely draw'n in every line)
VAL, and I (too short of Isaac's Art) e Thus Essaid to play the Limners part, d drawe in little (like a Quintessence) t goodly Labours glorious Excellence; ease of Such, whom Publique Charge denies sure to view so large Varieties: d Such, whose Meanes may not affoord their Mindes otly Pleasures, of so Gain-less kindes: d (lastly) Such, as, loving BARTAS best, uld glad and faine still beare Him in their brest, in their Bosome, were He Pocket-fit, well He might; would Printers Gain permit: Now therfore, Thou, All-forming ONLY-TRINE, , in the Large, Thou ledst His hand & Mine; nd likewise heere Thy gracious Help agen, guide aright my Pencil and my Pen; sute my Colours, sweet my Shadowes, so, at This my Little, Thy Great Works may showe. And, grant, the-while, I be not like the Hand hich at S. Albons, in the Street doth stand irecting Others in the ready Way; ut, void of minde, it Selfe behinde doth stay: or, like a Buoy, which warneth from a Shelfe; ut lyes still wallowing in the Sea, it Selfe.
SVpernall Lord, eternall King of Kings; Maker, Maintainer, Mover of all things: How infinite! how excellently-rare! How absolute Thy wondrous Works they are! How much their Knowledge is to be desir'd! And Thou, in All, to be of All admir'd! Thy glorious Power so suites thy gracious Will: Thy soveraine Wisdom meets thy Goodnes still: Thy Word effects thy Work; and, void of Paine, Turns round the Heav'ns, & doth the Earth sustaine Thy Spirit, infallible and infinite, Filling the World (yet not containd in it) By Power and Presence, all, in All things dwells; In Essence though, the Heav'n of Heav'ns excells. Eternally, before All Forme began, Thou, onely GOD, wert in Thy-selfe, even than, As absolute, as after all the Tearm Of All thy Works: They, Changefull All; Tho firm. The Revolution of This ample All, Heav'ns height, Starr's light, the Ocean's flood & f To all Man-kinde, in som kinde, make Thee kno But adde not Thee more Glory to Thine Owne.
o make a World, or marr it, Thou art free. omes & goes, by Thy divine Decree. u, at Thy pleasure, hast made All of Nought: at Thy pleasure, shall to Nought be brought. hy Name is (right) I AM: for, without Thee, one: all Beeings of Thy BEEING bee. erfect Vnitie, proper Existence, nely found in Thine owne sacred Essence. lthough the World a goodly Peece appeere, hath, to Thy Greatnes, no Proportion neer: but a Point, to Thine immense Infinitie. en, what (alas!) is Man, to Thy DIVINITY? Yet, hast thou Him a Tongue & Reason giuen; d Eyes erected towards Thy glittering Heav'n, read & ruminate Thy Wonders there; d afterwards proclaime them every-where. The Heav'ns declare thy Glory, & they preach o Man, Thy Works, Thine Excellence in Each: he Elements accorded Discords sound ow good for vs thy goodly Works are found. The radiant Starrs, in their eternall Sway, h' alternate Changes of the Night & Day, he birth of Beasts, the growth of Plants, each houre, each every-where Thy Providence & Power.
From THEE, the Sun receiues his Beauty brig And Soverain Rule of Each celestiall Light; Whose Yearly Course, in certain Circuiting, Makes Winter, Sommer, Autumne, & the Spring. Bee't clowdy, cleer, Eclipse, or Night, or Day; Hi louely browes are equi-lucent ay: And, whether swift or soft Hee seem to wend, His Speed is such, We cannot comprehend. Though vs Hee Warm, yet is Him-selfe not hot: Though red, or pale, Hee seem, yet is He not: Though small to vs; His Orb is eight-score times And sixe, as big as All our Earthly Clymes. Did not Hee drawe moist Vapours from belowe To drench our Fields; heer, nothing green would grow Did not Hee dry excessiue Showers again, We could not sowe, nor mowe; our grass, nor Grai Thou Lord, by Him, work'st all this Alteration; And causest so All Creatures generation: Prankest the Earth in diverse-Flowred hew; And Yearly, almost, mak'st the World anew. Thou hast dispos'd His oblique Body so, That Rise he, Set he; be he High, or Lowe; His Noon's perpetual: & hee makes at-once Day, Night; Sūmer; Winter; frying, freezing Zones.
hen lowe to Vs, he is to Others high; n Others see not, Wee behold his Eye; n heer he Sets, he Rises other-where; n heer direct, he looketh glancing there. hen some, in Summer, hear sweet Nightingales, n some, in Winter, hear but blustring Gales: e, see but Buds, when som supply their Granges, h-where, the Sun thus Seasons conter-changes. hen heer, there springs both leaf & grass together, where the Meads do hang their heads & wither: in their turns, so in their times, he measures Gifts to all; and all partake his Treasures. n brief: each change of short, long; Day & Night; Seasons, Times, Turns, & returns of Light; hich, in a whole Yeer, everie-where he formes; hat, in the whole World, daily He performs. So that, drad Lord, were not Thy sacred Lore, an, aboue All, would likely Him adore As some haue don); but Supreme Reason showes hat all His Glorie vnto Thine hee owes. Things finite haue Beginning, & Beginner: hings mov'd, a Mover (as the wheele, the Spinner) ffects, their Cause final; and (formallie) lder then Time, Nature, or Facultie.
Even THEE, the Cause of Causes: Sourse of First, and Last, Moover; Prime, and Principal. Infallible, involuble, insensible; All Selfe-comprising, else incomprehensible: Immense, Immortall, absolute Infinitie, Omnipotent, Omniscient DIVINITIE. Euen THEE, in Whom only begins all Good, And all returns into Thy bound-lesse Flood. By Order then of thy Decrees divine, Th' hast set the Sun o're All the World to shine; And (as the Subiects lightly suit their King) With His faire Light, t' enlighten every thing. His goodly Face, th' vngodly ever fly, Seeking for Night's black horrid Canapie, To cover Theft, Rape, Incest, Murder too, And all foule Sinnes; which in the Dark, they do By Him, Wee see Thy Works, in their Proprietie; Discerne their Beauties, learn their vast varietie: Where, without Him, the World would all return To th' old first CHAOS, or in Blindnes mourn. By Him, We calculate our Grandsires Dates, Th' Increase of Kingdoms, & Decay of States: By Him, Thou measur'st, Lord, to Vs & Ours, Years, Ages, Seasons, Months, Daies, Minuts, Ho
l Wits admire th' immense and wondrous way great bright Body circuits euery Day: more his Orbe is from the Centre far, longer Daily his great Iournies are. esides his Daily Course, his Coursers driue e of three hundred threescore Daies and siue, e Houres, three-quarters: of which Ouer-plus, uery fourth Year, growes a Day with vs. Yet, whoso would the Yeer exactly rate, iue-score-fiue Years, must one Leap abate; d, in threescore, for th' Error ready past, ould no Bissextile in our Books be plac't. But, though Wee erre, Hee neuer errs at all: or, since Thou didst Him in his State install, th Hee misst Moment of the Task he ought; hough he haue seen Men faile and fall so oft. Aboue all Creatures, Hee retains, of Thee, me-thing conform to Thine Eternitie: r, though Hee see our hourely Changes heer, is Light and Beauty still the same appear. How many Changes hath Hee seen on Earth! ings, Kingdoms, States; their Burial & their Birth; ising and Falling of triumphant Races; aising and razing of renowned Places.
How often hath Heseen Empres reverst? Rich Cities sackt? Rare Common-weals disperst Fields turnd to Flouds, & Seas returnd to Sands? While stedfast He between his Tropiks stands? Him, iust betwixt Six Wanderers hast thou pla Which prance about Him with vnequall hast: All which, without Him, could no Light reflect, As is apparant by the Moones Defect. By His Aspect, her Own shee daily makes; She, Wax-less, Waen-less, doth both waen & wa And though to Vs, Shee seem a Semi-Ray, Her Full round Face doth neuer fall away. By His faire Beames, as well by Day as Night, The full whole Half of Her thick Orb is bright: And, as She drawes neer, or far off from Him; So, more, or lesse Our Halfe is cleer or dim. Her vpper Halfe is full, in her Coition, Her lower Halfe is in her Opposition: Her other Quarters, other Formes expresse; And vp, or down-ward, showe Her, more or lesse. When We see little, then the Heav'ns haue store When Heav'ns see little, then haue We thee more Neerer the Sun, the lesse Shee seems in sight; Turning her Horn still to her Opposite.
At Even Increasing, She the Sun succeeds; Morn, Decreasing, She his Car preceeds: that, each Month, the Sun environs Her, every side His Splendor to confer. Her siluer Light then onely faileth her hen th' Earth's between Them (in Diameter) hich Masks her Beauty with a sable Clowd, om Sight of Him, her Brother Golden-browd. Good Lord, what changes dost Thou worke by These ieties; in Aire, in Earth, & Seas! re, or foule Weather; Wind, or Wet, or Thunder; dry, or drip; or coole, or warm Heer-vnder. f Shee but smile the fourth day, 't will be faire: hen She blush, we shall haue blustring aire: hen her browes be muffled with a Frowne, ost of that Month shall sad Tears trickle downe. Thus doth the Vigor of the Signes superiour le in the Vertues of these things inferiour: t All are governd by Thy souerain Might: ! happy He who vnderstands it right. Thrice happy Hee, who sees Thee every-where, Heauen & Earth, in Water, Fire, and Aire: ho, due admiring Thy wise Works (of Yore) hee aboue All, Thee onely, doth adore.
Who knows Thee so, so needs must loue Thee And, with his Will, Thy sacred Will would doo▪ Still lifts his Eyes to Heav'n-ward, to contemp The stately Wonders of Thy starry Temple. Admires the set & measur'd Dance of Thin All-clasping Palace, azure-crystalline, Rare-rich-imbost with glittering studs of Gold; And, more admires, the more hee doth behold. 'T's a wondrous thing to see That mighty M Hindge-less & Ax-less, turn so swiftly round; ( And th'heauie Earth, propless (thogh downward Selfe-counter-poiz'd, mid the soft Aire suspending On th'ample Surface of whose massie Ball, Men (round about) doe trample over-all, Foot against Foot, though still (ô strange Effect) Their Faces all be towards Heav'n erect. Those dwelling vnder th' Equinoctiall, they Haue, all the Year long, equal Night and Day: Those neer the Tropiks, haue them more vn-eue The more, the more that they are Nor-ward dri But Those, whose Tents to either Pole are ne Haue but One Night, & One Day in a yeer. Yet All well compast by due ruled Rite, Neither then other, hath more Darke, or Light.
Thus haue thy Works, ô All-Disposing Deitie, me-what conforme, for all their great varietie: ich Harmony, amid so diverse things, All, aloud Thy wondrous Wisedom rings. But, specially, wee wonder at the Place hich heer thou hast bestow'd on Adams race: see our selues set on so Round a Ball, firmly hangd iust in the midst of All. or, This our Globe hangs Prop-less in the Aire; , but thy Selfe, can nothing shake or sway-her: roaring Storm, nor rumbling violence, moue the Centre's sad Circumference. Which, who-so should oppose in Disputation, ght be convinc't by easie Demonstration; evident, from Sense and Reason erre, o think the Heav'ns stand, & the Earth doth stir. The Parts & Whole, of same-kind bodies, haue me or like Motions; be they light, or graue; -ward or down-ward; round, or overthwart: eds must the Total moue as doth his Part. So, if wee see the Sunne & Moon to veere; eir ample Heav'ns haue even the like Cariere: t, who hath seene a Selflie-turning Stone? w then should Earth turn her whole lump alone?
Let's therefore, boldly, with old Truth, affirme, That th' Earth remaines vnmoueable & firme: And (if wee credit the Geometer) Three thousand leagues is her Diameter: This Measure of her vast thick Depth, is found By th' admirable Compasse of her Round; Which hath, by test of Arts Experiments, More then nine thousand leagues Circumference. Yet, learned Mappists, on a Paper small, Draw (in Abridgement) the whole Type of All; And in their Chamber (paineless, peril-less) See, in an houre, & circuit, Land and Seas. This mighty Globe is but a Point, compar'd With th' vpper Globe: yet on This Point are sh Millions of millions of Man-kinde, which plow With Keel & Coultar its Twin Back and Brow. Man, placed thus, in This Mid-Point, so even, Sees alwaies Half of God's great Hall of Heav'n: Th' other's beneath him; yet abides not there, But in a Day doth to him all appeare. Ah, Soverain Artist! ô how few of vs Knowe right the Place where Thou hast plac't vs th Alas! how-many know not, to What end Thy gracious Wisdom did them hither send!
t, giving Man a quick Intelligence, u sett'st him iust in the World's Midst; that thence g thy Wonders round about him so, wing himselfe, he might Thee better know. th' vsual Circuit of the Heav'nly Ball, Starres appeare vnto vs (almost) all: We, in time, obseruing all their Figures, ht contemplate their Courses, Natures, Vigors. o view the Stars, is honest Recreation: earch their Course, deserveth Commendation; ee beware, with some presuming Sects ick things future out of their Aspects. e must renounce That Errors patronage, t what some Dreamers, by our Births, presage, t needs betide vs: tying to their Lawes nature; governd by a Higher Cause. erhaps the Signes some inclination bring, cing hearts to some Affectioning: by Gods grace, well may wee varie that; neuer forc't by necessary Fate. or, sure if Man, by strong Necessitie, o any Ill, ill meriteth not Hee: Starres constraine vs; neither Vertue, then, Vice, were worth Praise, or Reproofe, in Men.
If any way the Will of Man be free, On These Effects what Iudgemēts ground can b What Certaintie can from the Starres be knowne, Of Weal or Woe; Life, Death; or Thrall, or Thre When Kings are born, be many born beside: Must all be Destin'd to be Kings, that tide? Oft, many at-once are hangd, or drownd, or slaine: Did all, at-once, their groaning Mothers paine? Who can conceiue, that such or such Aspect, Is good, or bad; boads Life, or Deaths Effect? Who can produce so sure Prognostications Of our fraile Life, so full of Alterations? Certain 's that Art, which shewes the daily Cours Of restlesse Starres, their influence & force: But, Divination 's an vncertaine Skill, Full of fond Error, false, and fayling still. What booted, Lord, our hūblest Vowes to Thee, Were their Conclusions certaine Veritie? Disastrous Fate would mate vs with Despaire, And frustrate all religious Faith and Prayer. Were it their Sayings were right certain true, Then, of necessity must all ensue: But, if Events their Verdicts often thwart, False is their Aime, & fallible their Art.
Obserue the Works those subtle Authors write, re so ambiguous, or so false out-right; if, somtimes, some Truth they chance to hit, y'll counterpoize a hundred lyes for it. o-busie-bold, with Thee, they, Lord, presume; to themselues Thine Office they assume, , by Star-gazing, or ought else belowe, arrogate the Future to fore-knowe. ee hardly see what hangeth at our Eyes: should we read the Secrets of the Skyes? e knowes, To-morrow what betide him shall: then fore-tell Years Fortunes yer they fall? hen leaue we All to GOD's high Prouidence; list'ning for To-morrow-Dayes Events: er then We, Hee knowes what's meet to send. en, feare we nothing, but Him to offend. O! Thou All-knower! Nothing more hath thrust ud Man from Thee, then This Ambitious-lust knowing All: for, by that Arrogance, tead of Knowledge, got He Ignorance: Man nothing knowes, nor nothing comprehends, by the Power which Thy pure Spirit him lends: then, Thy Wisedom haue so bounded His; hy would He hold more then His Measure is?
Let's humbly stoop our Wits, with all Sinceritie, Vnto Thy Word: there let vs seek the Veritie. And all Predictions that arise not Thence, Let vs reiect for impious Insolence. Let vs repute all Divination vaine Which is derived from man's fuming braine, By Lots, by Characters, or Chyromancie; By Birds, or Beasts; or damned Necromancie. Let's also fly the furious-curious Spel Of those Black-Artists that consult with Hel To finde things lost; and Pluto's helpe invoke For hoorded Gold, where oft they find but smoake. He's fond that thinks Fiends in his Ring to coop, Or in a knife them by a Charm to hoop. Such as haue try'd those Courses, for the most, Haue felt in fine Their malice, to their cost. Woe, woe to Them that leaue the living GOD, To follow Fiends, and Montibanks abroad; Seeking, for Light, dark, dreaming Sorceries; And, for the Truth, th' erronious Prince of Lyes. Condemning therefore all pernitious Arts, Let's be contented with our proper Parts: Let's meekly seeke what may be safely known; Without vsurping GOD's peculiar own.
' haue Stuffynough (besides) our time to spend; Our short life can hardly comprehend halfe of halfe the Wonders, licenst vs search, & knowe, and soberly discusse. he smallest Garden vsually containes ts, Fruits, & Flowres, sufficient for the paines one man's life, their natures to descry: en will he know all Creatures propertie? arth's but a Point, compard to th' vpper Globe: who hath seen, but halfe her vtter Robe, itting All her Inwards, All her Water? en shall we then see All this vast Theater? What heer wee see, weesee is Exquisite: at's This, to That so far aboue our Sight? elling faire, what to our Eye is sensible: n to our Soule, the rest's incomprehensible. ho then can vaunt himselfe Omni-scient, re, then All-sin-less, pure, and Innocent? one's all-guiltlesse, in thy glorious Eyes, ere's none all-knowing thy high Mysteries. Yet must we praise & glorifie thee fit, that wee knowe; and for our good by it: ere is no Pleasure can be comparable Contemplation of Thy Wondrous Table.
There-on the more wee muse, the more we So our Delight Desire increases ay Of finding Thee: and that divine Desire, Calming our Cares, quencheth our fleshly Fire. All other Pleasures haue displeasures mixt: Ioyes meet Annoyes, & Smiles haue Tears betwi Yea, all Delights of Earth haue ever been Fellow'd, or follow'd, with some tragike Teen. But, Who of Thee, & Thine, contemplates ever Scapes all the Fits of th' hot-cold, cruell Fever Of Fear, of Loue, of Avarice, Ambition, Which haunts all others, with small Intermission. Man, laborlesse, receiues a rare Delight, When he obserues the settled Order right, Whereby all Creatures (with, or wanting, Sense) Subsist, through thine Vnchanging Prouidence. What more Content can We haue heer belowe, More high, more happy; then, but This to knowe (This certain Sum) That when This World beg Thou mad'st Man for Thy-selfe; & All for Man. Th' Horse was not made to glorify thy Name, Nor th' Elephant to magnifie the same: Man onely hath voice, memory, and wit To sing thy Praise, & sound thy Glory, fit.
nd, to serue Thee, as He is sole ordain'd; o serue Him, thou hast the rest darraind: hings that fly, that walk, that craule, or swim, Heav'n & Earth, & All are vowd to Him. r Him, the Earth yields Herbs, Trees, Fruits, and Flowers, sundry purpose, & of sundry powers) e of all kindes, in Valleys far and wide Bread & Drink) & dainty Vines beside. or Him the Rocks a thousand Rivers gush: r rowling Brooks, There silver Torrents rush; nting Meads & Pastures, a they passe, ose smyling Pride peeps in their liquid Glasse. or Him, the Mountains, Downes & Forests breed s, Biefes, Sheep, Venzon; & the lusty Steed beare him brauely thorough thick and thin; d silly Worms, his Silken Robes to spin. or Him, the Bullock bears his painfull Yoak: Him, the Weather weares his cursed Cloak: Him, the Birds their brooding chambers build: or Him, the Bees their Wax and Hony yield. For Him, the Sea doth many millions nurse; th whom, the Aire helps both his panel & purse: e Fire's his Cook, to dresse th' aboundant Cheer hich Aire, & Sea, and Earth, do furnish heer.
Yea, Dragons, Serpents, Vipers venemous, Haue Fel, Fat, Bloud; or som-what good for vs; In Leprosie, or Lunacie, apply'd: And Triacle is also hence supply'd. Hee (briefly) Hee hath vse of all that is; Winnes the most savage of the Savages: None so fierce Lion, but to tame hee wonts, Nor Elephant so high but that hee mounts; And makes, besides, of his huge Bones, & Teeth Hafts, Boxes, Combes; & more then many see 'th Nay, more: for Him, the fell Monocerote, Beares on his Brow a soveraine Antidote. Yea, many soveraine Remedies Hee findes, For sundry Griefes, in Creatures of All kindes. All (in a word) Wilde & Domestick too, Some way or other, Him some service doo. For Food, He hath the Flesh of Beasts & Birds: For Clothes, the Fleece, the Haire & Hyde of Hea For House, each Quarr, & every Forrest, offers: For Metall, Mines furnish his Camp & Coffers. For Him, the jarring Elements agree: Fire cleers the Aire; Aire sweeps the Earth, we see; Earth bears the Water; Water (moistly milde) Cooles Fire, calms Aire, & gets the Earth with-child
, All is made for Man; and Man, for Thee: oue, and serue, and laude Thy Maiestie; e aboue All: Thee onely to obay; Thankful Soule walking Thy sacred Way. his doth He well, that yields his Wil to Thine; of Desires, if not of Deeds, divine: ing to stoope vnder the Spirits Awe, members stubborn & rebellious Lawe. or, Man consists of discordant accords at the great World, the little-World affords. ere Heav'n & Earth; Heer Heav'n & Earth there (are; ere War & Peace; Heer also Peace & War). He hath a Heav'nly Soule, an Earthly Sheath: at soares aboue: This ever pores beneath: at, lightly-wingd, All Creatures comprehends; is, leaden heel'd, but to Corruption tends. The Spirit, oft against the Flesh doth fight; d some-times, vanquisht by his Opposite, arried Captiue with the most Dishonor, rer his Foe; & forc't to waite vpon-her; Till rouz'd again, & raysed by Thy Grace, s striving Will recovers wonted place: ith better Watch, & brauer Resolution, o stand it out, vntill His Dissolution.
Surveying then both Heav'n & Earth about, He bringeth in, what he hath seen with-out; And, marking well th' Effects of natures visible, Ascends by those vnto their Cause invisible. For, but two Organs hath our Soule, whereby To finde and knowe th' eternall Maiestie: Faith, which belieues the sacred Word of GOD; And Reason, reading all His Works abroad. Those Wonders send vs, to their Author, over▪ Those certain Motions, to their certain Mover: Then Faith conducts vs, where our Reason leaues And what th' Eye sees not, That our Faith conce Faith, firm and liuely, doth our Soules perswad That, Thy high Power, of Nothing, All hath ma Thine ESSENCE is Eternally-Divine: The World Beginning had, & shall haue Fine. We must not say, Of Nought, is formed Nought (Although to Man it may be iustly brought). Th' eternall Spirit can All of Nought produce; And instantly, to Nothing All reduce. Nor may we ask, What th' Eiternall-One, That space-lesse Space, could finde to doe alone. His THREE-ONE-Selfe to know & to partake, Is (Countless) more then Thousand Worlds to ma
passing Artist is no lesse Compleat, n in Composure, in his rare Conceat: in the Knowledge Art's perfection lyes; , Works deferrd, vaile not the Work-man's Prize. he Mind's not idle, though the hand awhile neither Pen, Pencil, nor Gouge, nor File. e Mind's before the Work; & works with-in, n th' Idaea, yer the Deed begin. ould we not say, the World were God indeed, om no other it did first proceed? nal, onely is GOD's proper tearm; ne preceeding Time, exceeding Tearm. he World supports not Thee, nor Thee supplies: ou doost Thy-Selfe sustain, Thy-Selfe suffise: d grosly erres who-euer shall suppose, ee, Infinite, within a World to close. And, as we may not match the Heav'ns Extense to Thy Circle, infinite, immense: o more may Wee, to Thine Eternal-Age, ompare the Worlds short, brittle Little-Age. Before All Time, Thou, Everlasting-One, ecreedst in time, to make the Sun & Moone. he Worlds few Dayes & ill (with little comber) hy sacred Book will teach vs soon to number.
What Book, what Brass, what Marble, ought But of an hundred-thousand yeers ago? Had Man been Heer, from an eternall Ligne, Heer must haue been (sure) some perpetuall Millions of Millions of Yeares must haue p From th'endlesse Clue of th'eviternal-Vast: In all these Years, of all that did surviue, Of all their Acts, could None to Vs arriue? Wee heare (and often) of the Babylonians, Medes, Persians, Grecians, Romans, Macedonians: But, Where's the Nation, Whose Renowned G Hath liv'd a hundred-thousand years in Story? Seek All (Greeke, Latin, Hebrew) Authors, Of All, will MOSES be the Senior found. Who (to His Times) in express tearms hath ca Th'age of the World, with the Descents that past, Now, frō His Daies to Ours, what years amo We may with ease with-in few Houres account; And adding Both, soon by the Total, finde Th'age of the WORLD, & of Our crooked Fiue thousand years, fiue hundred, forty One, This year are past; since This vast World began.1613. Since all the Heav'ns; Fire, Water, Aire, & Earth, Had, by thy WORD, their being, & their Birth.
n was the Heau'ns azure Panilion spred, ith Spur-Royalls spangled over head: those Twin-Princes with their Train of Light, their Kingdoms, ouer Day, and Night. n was the Aire, the Earth, and Sea, repleat Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes; small & great: Plants, and Trees, & Fruits; each yeelding seed, opagate their Kinds that should succeed. en (lastly) Man, thy Master-Piece of Art, didst appoint to His Imperiall Part: ling Him with Sense and Reason's Light, n his Soule, grauing Thine Image right: 'st Him Possession of this Earthly Throne, gracious Promise of the Heau'nly one: ortall Soule, thou daign'dst him to inspire, l (almost) to thine Owne Heau'oly-Quire. d, as Thy Spirit, all other Spirits excels gel, or other that in Body dwels): oth His Body all else Bodies passe, comely Form, and for maiestik Face. l Creatures else, lowe on the ground do pore, groueling feed: but (as was toucht before) hath an Vpright and a stately Stature, h head aloft, agreeing to his nature;
Which, properly, is to behold the Skyes, To lift to Thee, his heart, his hand, and Eyes: And by his Soule's discursiue power to peize Things past, and present, and of future daies. For, only Man can measure, number, waigh; True, False, Good, Euill; knowe, cast, sound, Man only, hath an in-reflecting Knowledge Of his owne Self (from Natures only Colledge) Knows his own fact, his form, his load, his streng Knows that he liues, knows he must dy at leng And, that a ruled sober life, and sage, Preserues his Health, and may prolong his Age▪ Knowes how to finde ase in his owne Disease▪ And, if need be, his Neighbour to appease: And for him-self and others, make, of Flowers Fruits, Hearbs, & Roots, Vnguents of passing But, none so powerfull (when their Term is sp As can his Owne or others Death preuent: For, Our short Date; Childe-age, or Wilde-age, And now but seldome to Old-age extends. Yet, What is Old-Age to ETERNITIE? To Man, expecting IMMORTALITIE, What ist to live some Three, or Foure score Year Or, Yet Ten more (in Languor) linger heer?
all our Time-Past, vnderneath the Sun, ng remaines, saue Good or Euill done: reds of Yeers, once past, are less (in Sum) a few Daies, or a few Houres to-come. , to say Truth, of Times three-pointed Powers, the Present (instant) Point is ours. ue, of the Past, but vaine Imagination; at To-come, but doubtfull Expectation. t, to th'Eternall, are All Times, alike ot; and present, Dead as well as Quick: s To-day with Thee: Lord, in Thy Sight, Past and Future are euen equal bright. hogh, in Times Terms the Heav'ns reuolued be; housand Yeers are but One Day with Thee: shortest Moment of one only Day Thee is as a Thousand Yeers (for ay). ut, Our set Daies, to vs, are long, or short; hem, good Accidents, or bad, consort: rietie and Peace prolong our Life: ich is abridg'd by Surfait and by Strife. xcess, or Cares, now, so cut-off our liues, at of a thousand not a man arriues er to the Tythe of the admired Age those that liv'd in Nature's Pupillage;
Eight hundred Yeers, 9. hundred som, some more; In Minde and Body, full of Natures store; To stock the Earth with Issue rational, And learn the Course of Heau'ns Star-spangled Ball: Which, first of all, Their long obseruance found, Then, by degrees, they taught their Heirs the ground; And We, from Them (so eas'd of endless pain) Deriue that Art, We could not else attain. In Their long Age they learn'd Heav'ns ful Careers (Not to be compast, in our Span of Yeers) Whence, One of them might in his life know more, Then, in our Dayes, successiuely, a Score. Of Their so long age, who-so doubtfull is, Let him but look in sacred Genesis; Where Moses mentions diuers famous men So old; and showes their Yeers as ours were then. Th' All-drowning Flood-year did 12. Months con∣tain, And euery Month did his due Dayes retain: Which made vp one Yeer of that Patriarch, Who liv'd seav'n fifties, hauing left the Arke; And was Sixe hundred when he came aboord: Teaching his Sons his wondrous Skill, by word. See, see, alas! how our vnhappy Life Is now abridg'd, and charg'd with Mis-chiefs rife.
Had we not pleasure in thy Works, ô GOD, Soon must we sink vnder the heauy Load Of Cares and Crosses (in a thousand things) Which this, our wretched, sad, short, Way-fare brings. O! let vs therefore bend our best and most To magnifie Thee, Lord, in All thine Host: And so, contempling all thy Goodnes giv'n, With true Content, begin (in Earth) our Heav'n. Man, knowing Thee, knowes al that can be known: And hauing Thee, hath all that is, his Owne: To long for Thee, is endlesse Ioy, internall; Dispos'd to Thee, to Die, is Life Eternall. Not knowing Thee; to liue, is daily Dying: To rest, with-out Thee, is continual Flying: But all extreames of Torments passing measure, In Thee, and for Thee, are exceeding Pleasure. Yet, no man ought to offr wlfull Force To his owne Self; nor his owne Soule diuorce: But patiently attend Thy cheerfull Cal; Then, to Thy hands gladly surrender all. Nor may We ween our Soules (as Beasts) to Die; And with our Bodies Vanish vtterlie: Death's but a Passage from a Life of Pains, Vnto a Life where death-loss Ioy remains.
W' haue, after Death, another Life to see: As, after Storms, a calm & quiet Lee: As, after Sicknes, Health: as after Durance, Sweet Libertie; with Safetie and Assurance. Two Contraries, oppos'd, in their Extream, Haue This vnfailing Propertie in them; That th' One's Privation is the others Ens: So, Death, concluding, doth our Life commence. For, on each-other Contraries depend, Chain'd (as it were) vnto each others End: Day after Night: Attonement after Srife: And after mortall Death, immortall Life, Our Soule's immortall then (we must infer it) Hauing beginning of th' Immortall Spirit: And they are brute (as Beasts) that doo contend, That with our Bodies, Soules for euer end. If there be GOD immortall, All-scient, All-mighty, iust, benign, benevolent; Where were his Wisdom, Goodnes, Iustice, Power, If Vice He damn not, nor giue Vertue Dower? Heere, for the most, the Godly suffer still: Th' Vngodly, heere haue most the Winde at Will: Shall they not, one-day, change their Difference; And one▪ day look for Diuerse Recompence?
Heer, Proud, Rich, Mighty; Meek, Poor, Weak, op∣press ons kill Lambes; Fox strips the Fatherless: ! is there not another Life imperible, eet, to the Guiltless; to the Guilty, Terrible? Who, for Thy sake, their Lyues haue sacrifix'd, all the Torments Tyrants haue deuiz'd; ! how vnhappy were They, were there not rownes kept with Thee, for their Eternal Lot! Then were We Beasts, or worse then Beasts, indeed: or He were best that could the worst exceed. hen, Let vs eat, drinke, dally, might We say: f, after This, there were no Shot to pay. But leauing now that Song of Sensuality, elieue we firm our blessed Immortality; lessed for Those, that, in Perseuerance, o Thee alone (Lord) their whole Hopes aduance. Blessed for Those, who, in sincere Humility, Acknowledging, as knowing their Debilitie; Through th'old Corruption of all Adams race: Them-selues distrusting, only trust Thy Grace. Thou, Lord (alas!) know'st all our Imperfections, Our vain Desires, our mutable Affections, How prone we are to fall; how Wilde, how Wood, Pursuing Euill, and eschewing Good.
Th' incessant Sway of our continuall Ill, Requires the Grace of thy preuention still; And th' odious Fruits our Nature wonts to breed, Lord, of Thy Mercies haue continuall need. Of frailtie therefore, when our foot shall slip, Or sway, or stray, or turne-awry, or trip; Yer flat Wee fall, vouchsafe thy helping hand, To raise vs then; and make vs, after, stand. For, without Thee, our Force is Feebleness; Our Wisdome Folly; Will is Waywardness: Our Knowledge, Ignorance; our Hope Despaire? Our Faith but Phansie, and our All but Aire. Without Thee, Lord, meer Idols are we all: W' haue Eies, but see not: feet, but cannot craule: Eares, but we heare not: Senses with-out Sense: Soules with-out Soule, with-out Intelligence. Without Thee, all our Counsails & Deseigns Are but as Chaffe before the boysterous Windes; Our Preparations quickly come to nought; Our Enterprises vanish with a Thought. With-out Thee, boot neither our Foot, nor Horse; From Thee alone all things deriue their Force; Thou only givest Vertue, Wisdome, Wealth, Peace, Honour, Courage, Victory, and Health.
Thou holdst the hearts of Princes in thy hand: Their Strength and State is all at thy Command: No Chance of Warre, no Power, no Policy; But, Changeless, Thou giv'st Losse, or Victory. By Thee Kings raign; bound, equally to all To waigh iust Iustice, both to Great and Small; To reach the good their Sceptre's helpfull Vigour; And teach the Lewd their Swords seuerest Rigour. Who Them reiect, or Their iust Lawes repugne; Thine Honor, and Thine Ordinance impugne. They owe their Subiects, Iustice and Defence; Their Subiects Them, Honor, Obedience. Each ought to pay Them (in degree, & manner) Tribute, where Tribute; Honor, to whom Honor; And, to their People, They their best Protection, And Each his Owne; without mis-fond Affection: And think themselues (the while) Thy subiects too, And bound the more thy sacred Lore to doo: To shew the more Their Vertues Excellence, The more their Charge is, & their Eminence. Iustice due Dooms slackly to execute, Makes some Disloyal, others Dissolute: Some too-outrageous, in Wrongs greediness, Others (on th' other side) in all Excess
T' hath oft bin seen (& in Our Times & Climes) Good Princes smart for wicked Peoples Crimes: And sometimes also for their Princes Sin, Subiects are plagued outward and within. But, O! how highly happy is the Land Where a iust Prince doth prudently command! And where the People in a Loue-bred Awe, Pay willing Seruice, and Obey the Law. O happy! both, People and Prince (in fine) Where both obey Thy sacred Lawes diuine: Who grately vsing Blessings great and small; Acknowledge Thee Owner and Lord of All. Of Thee, in Fee, all Princes of the Earth Hold their Estates, Goods, Honors, Being, Birth: And, without Thee, can neither keep, nor get, Least point of Honor, nor of Earth least bit. Their Arcenals, without Thee are but vai, Thir Hoords of Treasure, and their Heaps of Grain: 'Tis vainr, without Thee, to ae in Force Of Men, Munition, Champions, Charrets, Horse. Without Thee Order is dis-orderd soon, Valour soon vaquisht, Policy vndone: Num  Cumber: and a Multitude Of beaten Soldiers, ben by few rude.
Thou, at thy pleasure, mak'st the deepest Sea Diuide it Self, to giue Thy Seruants Way: And sodainly, again itself to close, To ouer-whelm Thine and Their stubborn Foes. Thou, frō the Rock mak'st plentious Riuers spout. For Thine to drink, in sandy Desarts drought. And, there, from Heav'n send'st them exceeding store Of Quailes, for meat, till they can eate no more. Thou fedst them there, with Angels bread (a while) And gav'st them then a Milk-&-Hony Soile. There, without stroak to conquer in the Field; And, Mine-less make their tumbling Walls to yeeld. To shew the vse and power of humble Prayer; And How to Thee behooues vs still repaire: While heart and hands Moses to Heav'n doth strain, Renowned IOSVAH Conquers in the Plain. Thou, at thy pleasure, mak'st the Sun to stay; And, without Night, to make one Double Day: To giue thy Seruants complete Victory; And euer-raze their Foes foule memory. Thou, to expresse thy Power (in Gedeons Raign) Hast by Three hundred, Six-Sore Thousand slain: And, by One man, one Goad-groom (Sillie Sangar) Destroy'd Six hundred, in religious anger.
Thou canst in One a Thousands strength compress And place it strangely in his slender Tress: Which, cut, he lost; and then re-grown, regain'd; And dying, more then liuing, Foes he brain'd. Thou turn'dst to grasse, a King of Babylon: And setst a Shepheard on a Regal Throne. Thou slew'st a Giant, by a gentle Lad, Who, for a Pistol, but a Pebble had. How-many Troubles had that Prophet-Prince! For happy Seruice, hatefull Recompence; Through Hill & Dale, hunted from place to place: Yet, still preserv'd by Thine assisting grace; And set, at last, vpon his Masters Throne, Subduing all ciuill and forrain Foen: Then, in Thine Honor warbles many a Psalm; And, hoary, leaues his Sonne, his Kingdome calm. By Thee, His Sonne, renowned Salomon, Obtain'd the Name of Wisedoms Paragon: For, asking only That; Thou gau'st Him VVealth, Honor and Peace withall, and Power and Health. And, as good Princes thus Thou doost aduance; So bringst thou down fel Tyrants Arrogance; Such as, transported in their Pride extreame, Dare wrong Thy Saints, or Thy drad Self blaspheme.
Sencherib must This confesse, and new, ith nine-score-Thousand which Thine Angel slew, f His proud Hoste; besides th'vnkindly Slaughter f his owne Self, by his owne Sonnes, soon after, So, That Baal-blinded, blood-soild, Sin-sold Paier, n whose sad Dayes the Zealful Thesbits Praier, or Seav'n Six-Months, seald-vp thy heav'nly deaws) hy Power, Truth, Iustice, in Their Iudgemēt shews. ft-times thy Hook hales moody Tyrants back; ft-times themselues by their own Swords to wrack: ometimes, by Womens weak vnwarlike hands, hou conquer'st Captains, & confoundst their Bands. Yea, Lord, at all times, in extreamest Straights, hy sacred Arme, or Secret Army, waits, o succour Thine (from Famine, Sword, and Fire; nd all the Plots that Foes, or Fiends, conspire) And them, so daily, to supply, support Their Wants, their Weaknes) in so various sort, hat, all thy Wonders of this kinde, to count, uen past Examples, past all Numbers mount. But, All thy Mercies, vnto All, and Each Of thine Elect; What Words, what Thoughts can reach! hat Thou hast said, and dont vnto Thy Vine, hy Loue, Thy Doue, that little Flock of Thine!
To whom Thou spakest diuers waies of old In Visions, Dreames, Types, Figures manifold; By Priests and Prophets; sealing oft thine Oracles Of Wrath, or Mercy; with respectiue Miracles. And last of all, when Times full Term was un, Sent'st vs from Heav'n Thine Owne and only SON; Whom coteroal GOD Thou didst ingendor, Thine own grauē Image, Thine own Glories splēder. Th' Eternal Word, by Whom, when All began, Thou madest All; and since, re-madest Man: The Mediatour, and the Vmpire, giv'n. To reconcile reuolted Earth to Heav'n. Who, to impart to vs His Immortalitie, Took part with Vs in this our fraile Mortalitie; And, in all things (except all Sinne alone) A perfect Man, put all our Nature on. Born in the World, to make Vs Born-anew: In pouertie, Vs richly to endew: Humbling himself, that we might raised be: In Seruant's Form, to make vs euer Free. Came down to Earth, Vs vp to Heav'n to mount: Was tempted heer; our Tempter to surmount: Dy'd to destroy the Strenght of Death and Sin: And Rose again, our Righteousnes to win.
How oft did He visite the Poore and Sick? Cure the Distracted, and Paralitique; Restore the Blinde, Deaf, Dumb; and Dead reuiue; And Satans Captiues from his rage repriue! How many Idiots did He make excell The Wisest Masters in all Israel! How many rude, plain, silly Fisher-men, Rare power-full Preachers; Fishers (then) of Men. How-many Sin-sick did he inly cure; And deep Soule-wounded binde-vp, and assure! How-many Proud, Loose, Cruell, Couetous, Made Hee Meek, Modest, Gentle, Bountious. By Him, deer Father, come we Thee to know, Thy Word, thy Will; to frame our owne Wils so: By Him alone Wisedome we seek and finde; In Cares and Crosses, to confirm our minde. By Him alone Thy sacred Truth we learn From suttlest Errors cleerly to discern: By Him all Cloudes of Darknes are dispell'd; Idolatry and Heresie refell'd. By Him, We pray to Thee; and what we craue In liuely Faith, we are assur'd to haue: Heav'ns Kingdom first, Soules Feast, & Bodies Food, Grace, Comfort, Peace, & euery needfull Good.
By Him, be We Thy Children of Adoption, Coheires of Heav'n, and Vessels of Election: Becomming Man, He is become our Brother; So, happy VVe haue also Thee our Father. By Him, of Thee, Thine Holy Spirit we haue; Which in our hearts thy Law doth lyuelie graue; The Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, of Loue, Of Power, of Peace, of Wisedome from aboue: The Spirit, which staies vs, when in Storms we ride; And steers vs steddie, in our Calmer Tide: VVhich kills the Flesh, and chills infatuate Fires; To quicken Soules, and kindle Heav'ns-Desires: Which brings the Strays home to Thy holy Fold, Giues Stutters Tongues, and makes the bashful bold; Opens the Sense of Sacred Mysteries; Giues Form, or Life to euerie thing that is. In Him, Thou built'st Thy Heav'n of Heav'ns ex∣celling Thy Court prepar'd for Saints eternall Dwelling: In Him, Thou mad'st the VVorld and All to moue In euery Part as doth it best behoue. Hee, to the fainting heart new heart procures, Confirmes the feeble, fearefull Soules assures: Giues Faith, and Hope, Loue, Grace & godly zeal. Happy the Soules where He delights to dwel.
For, Those Hee fills with his aboundant Treasures, n diuers manners, and in diuers measures; s diuersly befits Thy Churches state, To Plant, or Prne, or Prop, or Propagate. To some he gies a cleer, quick Apprehension; To some, deep Iudgement; some, Diuine Inuention: To some, the doore of gracefull Eloquence; To some, the store of Wisedoms Excellence: Some, to interpret with Diuine Dexterity The sacred Secrets of th'eternall Verity: ome (School-less Scholars; Learned, study-less) o vnderstand and speak all Languages. Som (to confirm their Office, and Thine Oracles) To work strange Wonders, great & many Miracles; Reuiue the dead, recouer natiue Euils, Cure all Diseases; and euen cast out Diuels. Such are th'Effects, Works, Vertues, gifts & graces, Which, by degrees, in diuers times and places, Thy Holy Spirit to sillie Men hath giv'n; From Them, to Thee, to raise our hearts to Heav'n. And, as in our fraile Bodies (through varietie Of Members, fitted into One Societie) One very Soule doth actions different, ome more, Some lesse, Noble, or Excellent:
So, in the mystick Body of Thy Son (Where many Members Loue vnites in One) Thine Owne, One Spirit, works actions admirable Among themselues more or lesse honorable. Yet, orderly, Each his owne Rank obserues; And properly, Each his owne Office serues: Nor boasteth any, other not to need: For oft the least, the most of all doth steed. Therefore the stronger must the weak support: The safe and sound, cheer the afflicted sort: The Rich and mighty, not despise Inferiours; Neither the mean enuie or hate Superiours. Were All a Head, in This faire Frame of Man; Where were the Foot, the Hand, the Stomack than▪ Were All a Tongue, where should the Eye become▪ Were All an Eye, where should the Eare haue room, O Spirit Eternall! which hast All compos'd; In number, measure, Order, All dispos'd; Make Charity Vs (mutuall Members) moue; Vnite our Spirits in thy perpetuall Loue. Quench all Contentions, Errors, Heresies, Which, both our Mindes and Bodies tyranize: Quench all Concupiscence, and foule Desire, Which, both our Bodies and Soules Death conspire.
Vouchsafe our Souls, Rest; wthout Schismik strife; Our Bodies Health, through chaste and sober Life. What could we ask? what should wee rather craue, Then in sound Bodies as sound Soules to haue? Sound is the Body kept, by keeping Chaste, With moderate Exercise, and mean repast: Sound is the Soule, which resteth (sober-wise) Content in Thee; vn-vext in Vanities. Sound is the Soule, free from all Self-Sedition Of Pride, Hate, Enuie, Auarice, Ambition, And all the Crowd of Mans Concupiscence; Binding His Will, to Thy Obedience. Who is so bound (Thy Seruant) is most Free: Most Rich, who leaues all Riches else, for Thee: Most easie rests, who most for Thee endures: Most Self-distrusting, most Thy Strength assures. So Thee to Serue, is euen to Raign: in brief, So to Obey, is to Command in Chief. To walke Thy Wayes, in only Libertie. To learn Thy Learning, ENCYCLOPAEDIE: O! happy Those that stand in such a state; And in Thy Statutes alwaies meditate: Or, if they slip, or trip, or faile, or fall, Return betimes, and for Thy Mercy call.
For, though thy Law, in Firie Thunder-giv'n, Threat still the Stubborn, with Reuenge frō Heav'n, Thy gracious Gospell offers Pardon free, To humbled Soules that Sigh, in Faith, to Thee. And Thou, who wilt not, Sinners die, but liue; Hast promis'd, All, so suing, to forgiue. Thy Word is Truth: Thy Promise to fulfill, Thou (God of Truth) hast euer Power and Will. O! bountious Thou, which doost so oft repaire Our broken Soules, and keep'st them from Despaire▪ And, blessed Wee, whose Faith in Love's Physicion, Assures our Hope, of all our Sins Remission. Who-so hath Sorrow for his Sinfulnes, Purpose to mend, Desire of Holiness, Trust in Thy Mercy; hath no need to doubt But, by Thy Grace, his Sins are wyped out. O Cordial Word! O Comfortable breath! Reuiuing Soules, euen in the Gates of Death! From Iawes of Hell, raising our Hopes to Heav'n! Therefore, deer Lord, To Thee all Praise be giv'n. Who shall accuse vs now, if Thou acquight? God being with vs, what can vs affright? Our Faith in Thee (ô!) What can shake, or shock; So surely fixt vpon so firm a Rock?
What shall diuide vs, Lord, from Loue of Thee? Shall Shame? shall Sorrow? shall Aduersity? hal Famine? Plague? War? Wealth, or Want? (In sum) hall Life? shall Death? things Present, or to-Come? Stay, stay, vs Lord, and steel our feeble hearts, Against the sting of temporarie Smarts: Draw, draw our Soules neer to thy Self, ô Lord, With powerfull Touches of Thy Spirit & Word. Guide, guide our Steps still in thy Gracious Way, During our Durance in This house of Clay: That, when This Prison shall be broken down, Wee may with Thee receiue a Glorious Crown. So shall Wee euer, with a voice Diuine, ing Haleluiahs to th'ETERNAL TRINE; Record thy Mercies, which all Thoughts Surmount; And Thus the Glory of Thy Deeds recount: SVpernall Lord, Eternall King of Kings, Maker, Maintainer, Mouer of All things, How infinite! How excellently-rare! How absolute! Thy Works, Thy Wonder are! How-much Their Knowledge is to be desir'd! How, THOV, in All, to be of All admir'd! FINIS.
MICRO-COSMO-GRAPHIA; The Little-Worlds Description: OR, THE MAP OF MAN (From Latin Saphiks of that Famous, late, Preacher in London, Mr. HEN. SMITH) Translated; & Dedicated To the Right Honourable, HONORIA, Lady HAY. By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
To the right-Right Honourable, HONORIA, Wife of IAMES, Lord HAY, Sole Daughter and Heire of EDVVARD Lord DENNY. EQually bound, in humble Gratitude, To Two deer Equals (to You equall Deer); Vnable (yet) with Both at once to cleer, Vnwilling yet, with Eyther to be rude: ine would I craue to haue my Bond renewd, For a more Happy, or more Hopefull Year, When gratious Heav'n shall daign to set me freer From old cold Cares, which keep my Muse vnmew'd. uld You be pleas'd (Madame) to interpose Your gentle breath, I would not doubt to speed: Such vertue hath Your Vertue stil with Those. erefore in Hope of Your kinde Help (at need) This simple Pledge I Offer at Your Feet; Altar of Loue, Where both Their Vowes doe meet. Yo•. Honorable Vertue's humble Votarie, Iosuah Syluester.
THE MAP OF MAN. ing not, but (in Sighes abrupt) ob the State of MAN, corrupt y th' olde Serpent's banefull Breath; se strong Contagion still extends uery Creature that descends rom th' old Little World of Death. d-deer Creator, new-create Creature: Sauiour, expiate Th, and all our Owne Addition: acred Spirit, Our Spirits renew: orme, reforme, and tune Mee trew, o condole Our sad Condition. Earth, Man wanders (Pilgrim-wise) pes, doubts; desires, faints, freexes, fryes; Crossed, tossed to and fro: turns, he windes; he findes no good: ay complains that Euill's Flood (Farre and wide) doth ouer-flowe. Birth (in Sinne) beginnes in Teares: Life is rife in Pains and Fears; Will-He, nill-He, spoyling sport: Death with groans, in doubtfull case, ds him, God knowes, vnto what place: Blest none rest, but in the Port.
The Flesh against the Spirit rebells: The Spirit againe the Flesh repells; Euer striuing, neuer still: And sodainly, while these contend, Their common Foe, the cursed Fiend, Findes aduantage Both to kill. Earth (Step-dam-like) sharp Rodds doth yield, To scourge her Sonns: the Sea is filld (Both aboue and vnder too) With hideous Horrors, past report: Th'Aier, whirling in Tempestuous sort, Beats, and threats All to vndoo. The Countrey's rude, and foe to Fame; The Courtmore braue, and more to blame; Painted Faces, graces fain'd: The Cittie (There, O! bad's the best) Seat of Deceit, and Misers nest; Gold their God, vngodly gain'd. Iarrat the Barr: Stewes at the Stage; In Way-fare, Thieues: in War-fare, Rage: Noyse abroad: Annoyes at home: In Churches, Purchase, Profanation, Fiends seeming Saints; Abhomination: Euery-where, no Feare of Doome.
e Throne's not giuen vnto the Iust: Faithfull is not put in Trust: rophets are not held for true: r loyall lov'd, nor learned grac't, r weary eas'd, nor Worthy plac't: or hath any heer his dew. impudent, the insolent, e Foole, the Friend in complement, And the sly, we see (by proof) d eloquent, magnanimous, ht pleasant, kinde, ingenious; And the Wealthy, wise ynough. ward is heard: words are but winde: h Art is long; Life short confin'd: Might makes Right in euery Cause. sicke is vile, and vilely vs'd; inity, disdain'd, abus'd: Vnder foot men tread the Lawes. e Rich with rage, the Poore with plaints, th hate the Wise, with scorne the Saints, Euermore are curstly crost: th painfull toyle the Priuate-man, e Nobler states with Fy wan, Without end are torne and tost.
If good, he fares no better for 't; If bad, no worse they him support; Fortune serueth all alike: Though she simper, though she smile, Though she laugh outright awhile, She is alwaies slippery-sleeke. Who lately serued, Lords-it now: Who lately becked, now doth bow: Valleyes swell, and Mountains sink: Who lately flourisht, now doth fade: Who late was strong, now feeble made, Feeding Wormes, in Dust doth stink. So, Lowly rests: so, Lofty rues. Say that one might his fortune chuse, Vnder Heauen to haue his will; 'Twould be a Doubt, among the Wise, Whether it better were to Rise To High state, or to Sit still. Phant'sie conceiues, Reason receiues, Passion repugns (and Patience reaues). What I wish, What I desire, I see: and Sense importunes so, I couer, I commend it too: Then againe it doth retire.
se, whither now? Tis griefe to see at flits so fast, so sodainly. Reason, whither roams thy reach? at hurts, were better still be hid, d still vnknowne: O! ill-bestid! Poor in store, in Wealth a wretch. en Fortune comes, she means our Wrack; d when she goes, she breaks our back: Comming, going, all is one. , What she giues she takes away, kinde, and blinde, inconstant ay; Frank to few, and firme to none. t haue I canvas'd, whethers Case Worst; the Fall'n, or th'euer-Base: Yet, scarce can I it decide. e Fall proues plainly for the first: ant Pleads, that euer-Want is Worst; Partiall to their proper side. rks the Fall'n to haue been High: h' ay-Poor could wish he had been By: Either others state would glad. euen in gladnes sadnes growe, ere not I somewhat glad also, How extreame should I be sad!
If Care Wee take, i Health impaires: If not, it takes Vs vn-awares: Whether should we seek or shun? Whether (to passe vnto the next) The good or bad be most perplext, Is another Question. The Guiltie suffers for his Fault: The Guilt-less doubts no less assault By Miss-Fortune: both desire To liue on Earth, to draw this breath: Both feare to Die; and, after Death, Torment of eternall Fire. Hence, slowe Dayes labour wears vs thin: Hence, lightly, Nightly fears begin: Hence, rathe Rising and late Rest: Hence, toughest storms, and roughest streams: Hence, griping Cares, and ghastly Dreams, Waking, sleeping, do molest. Winter's too-colde: Summer's too-hot; Autumne too-moist (which breeds the Rot) All the hope is in the Spring. The liuely Spring is louely faire: Bt, if keen Ice then chill the Aier, Little pleasure doth it bring.
as drowne the Vales: the Windes doe heaue he Hills to Heav'n; the Rocks they cleaue. Bold Ambition stands amaz'd, pecting where to build a Fort strong, and rampyr'd in such sort, That it neuer may be raz'd. ace is too-drown'd in Lust and Sloath: arre is too-drunk with Blood and Wrath: That, too-gawdie; this, too-grim. ens mindes are all so delicate, soft, and so effeminate, Small things, all things, grieuous seem. her the Head doth alwayes ake, Palat sleep, or Palsey shake, Or our Belly roars within: else with Choler wee abound, else with Phlegm, or else (vnsound) Tumour's humours scald our skin. hat dread of Death, What greedy Lust, at Surfait, Sloath, and Deeds vniust, Daily plunge in Perills rife; hat Sword consumeth every houre, d what the Plague doth quick deuoure, Lengthens Physick, shortens Life.
Where's now AEneas? where's his Sonne? Where's Hercules? Where's Salomon? Where is Dauid? Where is Saule? Where's Cyrus, Caesar, and the rest? Ah! Hee and They are all deceast: I must follow: so must all. Hark: Thou, whom most the People hailes; The wisest errs: the iustest failes: Strongest limpeth now nd than: The humblest swels: the sobrest sips: The holiest sins: the wariest slips: God is fault-lesse: neuer, Man. Too-curious or too-carelesly, Too-lauish or too-slauishly, By the Foole or by the Knaue; Too-craking, or too-crauenly, Too-hatefull, or too-gratefully, Haste or waste marrs all we haue. Ambition's end is Rule and Raign: Crueltie's, Conquest: Guile's, is Gain, To growe Rich by hook or crook: Iuggling, and struggling, strife in all: No Triumph without Fight will fall; Warr-less, none for Peace may look.
e think, but neuer can intend, od thoughts well to begin; or end perhaps they be begun: if wee end them, neuer finde w-euer rare, in any kinde) ecompence when we haue done. heart it hath an in-borne Guest, Ill (it bight): it posteth prest o the Tongue, ill Words to vent: re, then, rushes to ill Deeds: geance anon the Fact succeeds. hus comes Ill to Punishment. e, this Snake we choak or charm; hin, again We hug it Warm: aring, doubting, vp and down; Lust, as lighter, vp doth surge; th' horror of the fearefull Scourge, ll, as heauier, to the ground. e Flesh, be frolike, take delight, revell now: 't will once be night: all a little Gout, or Cholick, odaine Qualm, or sullen Care, ddle Fit of idle Feare ar thy Mirth? Come Flesh, be frolik.
What seeks, we shun; What shuns, we seek: What helps, we loath; What hurts, we like: Bird in-hand we leaue, for bush. For, What we Want we panting craue; And loosely lauish what Wee haue: Brag, of that should make vs blush. With-childe with mirth, we bring-forth Scorn, We bring-vp Furie; over-born (Moov'd and mooving) either way; Too-sorrie, or too-merry-mad: The happy Meane is neuer had, While we Wretches heere doe stay. Wee reign and serue: we want and flowe: We ioy and mourne: we freez and glowe: Vowes we make and break (together): We build and batter; ioyne and iarr: We heap and scatter; make and marr: And we flourish, and we wither. Wee look to Heauen, and leap to Hell: Our Hope and Feare (by turnes) rebell; Plunging downe, or puffing-vp: Please would we faine, but finde demurr; Please might we well, did Will concurr: Sloath doth stay, and Lust doth stop.
still we stand, and whine the while; ught Labour boots, nor loue, nor wile: ll is lost, when 'tis too-late. lls to th▪euill and the good daily sent: and if with-stood, We but faster foster Fate. ll at once giue-over quight h to be VVicked and Vpright; o doe either Right, or Wrong: , Goods well-gotten, growe but thin, hardly vp, come slowely in: And th'ill-gotten last last not long. at shall I doe? If I forbear Cause-less Foe, I blush, I fear is Despight, and my Disparage. o revenge me, I resolue; tisfies, when I revolue one's all-Fault-less, in all Cariage. en I haue spar'd, I wish t'haue spoke: d when I speak, I would revoke; etter pleas'd t'haue held my peace: uld God I could (as Wiser-ones) h speake and holde my peace at once; o to liue at Quietnes.
Deare Minde, how doost Thou? Fraile & sick, My Flesh implores thy Succour quick: Canst? O! canst Thou cure her griefe? O! daign (I pry-thee) then with speed To help thy Seruant now at need; Send her Reason for reliefe. For, Faithfull Minde's firm Resolution Cures often-times th'ill Constitution Of a Body sick-inclyn'd: But, then the Body (late deplored For weake estate) to Health restored, Growes a Burthen to the Minde. O Sin-bred Hurt! O in-bred Hell! Nor full, nor fasting, neuer well? Neuer sound? What shall I say? Once all was well, and would be now Better then euer, if that Thou Cursed Sin wert quight away. But Now (las!) all Mischiefelies In Ambush with all Miserics, Mans Confusion to conspire: Desire and Feare at-once torment: Feare is a Tyrant; Mal-Content, And insatite is Desire.
ho fears? who mourns? who wants? who wan∣ders? ! only Men (Wills ill-Commanders). Man alone abounds therein. wd Lamentations, lasting Terrors, rt-wounding Wants, and wilfull Errors, Had not been, had Man not been. eere Pestilence, there Hungers Iawe, eer Drink, there Duel, there the Lawe, Snatches one or other hence, er Crosse, there Care: or (better blest) ho hap These Haps to scape the best, Age deuoures with-out Dispense. rpending This in minde perplext, e Miserable (Envie-vext) Cryes, O Beasts, O Foules, O Fish! u happy, harm-less, storm-less things, ecise in Natures Lessonings, Liue You long: You Life may wish. , I think, better not be born; , born, hence quickly to return To our Mothers dusty Lap; en liuing, daily heere to die, Cates, and Fears, and Misery, By Miss-heed, or by Miss-hap.
While Hunger gripes mee gut and gall, While burning Thirst for Drinke doth call, While for Cold I quake: alas! In languor long I linger-on. O! happy Those, whose Woes, whose Mone, Ridding quick doth quickly passe. The Stout, the Coward, and the Meek, All skirmish vnder Fortune like, Stryking all with Mischiefs aye; The Stout repugnes, the Patient prayes, The Hare-like Coward runnes his wayes; Fortune differs not, but They. oo-peeuish This, too-pleasant That, (Too-sierce, or too-effeminate) Golden Mean can hardly stand Betwixt these Two Extreames, vpright, 'Tis worne so weak, and waigh'd so light: Error playes on either hand. Wedlock, with Wife and Children cloggs: The Single-Life, Lusts heauier Loggs, (Rare's the Gift of Continence). The Young-man stalks, the Old-man stoops, That over-dares, This euer droops: Th' Infant craules through Impotence.
isters taxe Seruants, proud, slutt, slowe; uants, Churle Maister, Mistress Shrowe: Either Others Fault can finde. e Daughter thinks her Mother froward; other her Daughter deems vn-toward: Kit (they say) will after Kinde. nces doe enuy Subiects Wealth: biects doe enuy Princes Health: Each doth enuie Others Good: all doe envy Learnings Honour any be conferrd vpon her) O! ô wicked, wretched Mood! e Souldier likes the Rusticks Calm; e Clowne affects the Souldiers Palm; Thus doth Envy inly fret-her: r Pastures parch, our Heards be poore▪ r Neighbour thriues in every store: Others Crop is ever better. d Louers languish at their Eyes: e Wrathfull fosters and defies renzies, Furies, (wayward Elues): at need we call for Whip or Scourge? eir punishment what need we vrge? heir Selfs Errors scourge themselues.
Feare hunts the Coward at the heel; The Cruell, still Revenging steel; Ruine Him that Ruine seeks; Heauy Revenge on hainous Crimes: Yea, in the Sin, the Plague some-times; Heauens iust hand so iustly strikes. Sorrow and Shame, for what is past; Care, of the present; Feare (fore-cast) Of the danger yet to-come; Make all false Pleasures shorter seem, And sharper too in pain extreme, Then euen Paine it selfe to some. If I be merry, I am mad (Say the Severe): if Sober-sad, Merry Greeks me Meacock call. Is't possible for any-Man, At-once to please (doe what he can) God, Himselfe, the World, and all? Who Greatnesse haultily affects, Who Great Things happily effects; That is hated, This envy'd: But, hoping Greatnesse, who so haps To faile (or fall in After-Claps) Him the Vulgar dare deride.
RTVE is vanquisht by her Foes, hose Tryumph euen their Fore-head showes, 'Tis a shame to be ashamed. t shall I tell (and tell thee trew) y Fate (the Fruit that shall ensew Shame-less shame-full life vntamed)? is Fate then falls to bee Thine owne, th shalt thou reap as thou hast sown: Wages like thy Worke expect. ho heere their Dayes in Euill spend, ll suffer Euills, with-out End; Such is Mines Doom direct. en, swagger, stagger, spend and spoyle; ale and conceale, and keep a coyle; Quickly shalt thou all forgoe: l, conquer, triumph; down again lt thou bee cast: bouz, beat, disdaign; Th' End's at hand, and comes not slowe. e Wise bewaile Mens Follies rife, d faine would cure their Vitious life ith Receits of heauenly Skill: Sin-sick Fooles (what-ever prick, umbd by Custome) lethargike, Care not, feare not, feele no ill.
Who knoweth much, much ill he knowes: Who little reaks, much good forgoes. Hence, perplexed Doubts hee casts; What is great Knowledge? What so much Of Learning? or of Book-Skill such? But great Blazes, and light Blasts? While Plato, sportiue, doth despise, The sullen Cyniks Slouen-guise; Hee, as fast (on th' other side) Doth Plato's Pomp as much condemn And trample-on: Were both of them (Who can tell me?) Wise, or Wide? Democritus heere laughes a-good: Heraclitus there weepes a Flood. Glad and sad would mend vs faine: But now, so stubborn-stiffe is Man, That Teares, nor Tunes, nor Ought else can Faults restore, nor Fates restraine. Sloath neuer wanteth Want, for Mate; Thrift, Sweat and Labour macerate; Eyther in their issue languish: So, Health is neuer without Sin, Nor Sicknes without Paine with-in: Outward Ache, or inward Anguish.
Service is to the Lofty minde Curb, a Spur to th' abiect Hinde; Seld or neuer stoopes the Will: he Vulgar voice, the Common Cry , Welcome, Welcome LIBERTY: Good for good, but ill for ill. Griefe it is alone to bee; ut more, to haue ill company: More or lesse (alas!) by This, ppeareth plain, when all is donne, As Proof hath found) that vnder Sunne, Heer's no full, no perfect Blisse. ho neuer yet himselfe could please, hat can content? Whatvse? What Ease? What availeth Wealth at will? eedy and naked heere I liue: o die, it doth me nothing gricue; But to perish, and liue still. look to Heaven, and there (alas!) ith Fear I see my Iudges Face, Auditing my Summes of Sin: thinke of Hell, and then I burn ike AEtna: then to Earth return. Cares and Fears there neuer lin.
This eele I, thus I iustly fare: O Man! learn quickly, and haue care Sacred Duties to obserue. This Life is rife in Troubles sore: But yet (alas!) a Million more Our Rebellion doth deserue. Much like, or worse then former Age, The sutures Face wee may presage: Better seldome comes, they say. Now Right, now Wrong; now Good, now Ill; Now Fiend, now Frend; now God, now Will, Seem to haue alternate Sway. Nothing is gratis giuen nor got: Each labours more or lesse (God wot) With the hand or with the head: None without Art or Vertue thriue; Nor Art, nor Vertue all atchiue: Onely, These, not alwayes sped. What should I seeke or sue for much, To liue at Rest? Content is Rich. Fortune often is too-free, And often kills where shee's too-kinde: But, had we once an equall Minde, Wee should all Contented bee.
r, euery one is too-secure sunny Dayes; and in obscure, Too-deiected in Desire: nce, ouer-faint, or ouer-full; o-pyned, or too-plentifull, ry we all with inward Fire. w, Dust her dustie Brood expects: e, Earth to Earth (of either Sexe). leasure trembles at her Call; es-out of Haste, complaines of Heaven: Paine and Sorrow (narrow-driven) re well pleasd, and easd with-all. o giues me grace to gush-out Teares, lends me space to poure forth Prayers; et, both seeming to neglect? God the dreadfull, Sinners Scourge; gratious God, which oft doth purge s with Pills, in his Elect. old me, Thou that didst bestow Sonne on Mee: Forgiue me, Thou hat didst suffer for my Sin: t and stay me euermore u, Thou that heere so oft before, my brest a Guest hast bin.
Regard vs, Lord, vnworthy though; Thy Glory seek, thy Mercy showe; Enimies approach apace: We faile, we fall, we cannot stand, Our Foes will haue the vpper hand, But Thou help vs with thy Grace. Witnes my Selfe that heer lie slain, But, by Thy Touch reuiu'd again; Glad to hue, to liue to Thee: And yet desire to be dissolv'd (When my due Date shall be revolv'd) As more happy farre for Mee. Shew me the Holy Land, which flowes With Milke and Hony (Saints Repose). Traine mee in the new Commerce, In the New Art of Better Life: Then farewell Muses, fare-well Strife: In Thy Courts I will conuerse. I cannot strike Apollo's string, Study for Heav'n and timely ring Sacred Aaron's golden Bell; Nor sing at-once the Thespian Songs, And srue my Countrey, as belongs: Theresore, MVSES, beere Fare-well. FINIS.
CERTAIN EPIGRAMMS of the same Mr. H. S. Translated; & Dedicated To my deer-affected, due-respected, Dr. HALL, & Dr. HILL. Owe You Each a larger Summ: Why bring I then to Both a Crumm? shew you Both, My Shifts, to liue; en faine to Borrow what I giue: t better so, then (blushless) steal hers Conceipts; or Debts conceale. Til more my Might, diuide this Myte. Larke (they say) is worth a Kite: me Greater, greater things presént, lesser Worth, or worser meant. OD measures not our Work, but Will: o You the like: and loue me still. I. S.
EPIGRAMMS. 1. Of a King. EXtirp1, extoll2; knowe3, keep4; loue5, learne6 (from ) Bad1, Good2; Thy Self3, The Lawes4-path; Peace5, to Dy Liue iust (Iustinian) still: shield1, shun2, suppress3; Good-mens Good1 Cause, Bribes2, Brawling3-Pee 3. Of a Physician. He that can Cure the Sick, and Keep the Sound, Shall be My Leach (Whether He Kill, or Wound). 4. Of a Diuine. Knowe GOD; know'n, teach Him; as thou teachest So shall thy Flock be as well taught, as fed. 5. Of a Judge. Both blinde and lame Liudge Thee best to make; Least that thine Eyes miss-giue, thy Hands miss- 6. Of a Husbandman. Good-morrow bids the Cock, th'Owle bids Good-night To Countrie-Cares: I bid, GOD speed them right. 7. Of a Captaine. In War and Peace, CHRIST is the sole Command To lead to God-ward: follow still His Standard. Of all the Seauen. So Rule1, Plead2, Practise3, Preach4, Doom5, Delue6, Climes1, Causes2, Cures3, CHRIST4, Crimes5, Turnes6, FINIS.
ACHRYMAE LACHRYMARVM: or The Spirit of Teares, Distilled For the vn-timely Death of The incomparable PRINCE, HENRY (Late) PRINCE of WALES. By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A CHRYMAE LACHRYMARVM. A Funeral Elegie. The Argument, in an EPITAPH. Erelyes (Drie Eies, read not This EPITAPH.) Heer lyes Great-Britans Stay, Great Iacob's Staff: stately Top-bough of Imperial Stemme, d's richest Iewell, Nature's rarest Gemme, ror of Princes, Miracle of Youth, Vertues Pattern, Patron of all Truth; ge of Armes, ample Reward of Arts, rth's Comforter, milde Conquerer of Hearts: Churche's Tower, the Terror of the Pope, ik HENRY, Atlas of our Hope. HOw-euer, short of Others Art and Wit, I knowe my powers for such a Part vnfit; d shall but light my Candle in the Sun, doe a work shall be so better Doune: ld Teares and Feares giue my Distractions leaue, sobbing words a sable Webbe to weaue; uld Sorrow's Fulnes giue my voice a vent; w would, how should, my saddest Verse lament, deepest Sighes (in stead of sweetest Songs) Loss (alas!) which vnto All belongs!
To All, alas! though chiefly to the Chief; His royal Parents, Principalls in grief: To All the Peers, to all Confederate, To All the CHVRCH, to all the CHRISTIAN State: To all the Godly now, and future, farr: To all the WORLD; except S. P. Q. R. To All together, and to Each a-part, That liues, and loues Religion, Armes, or Art: To all abroad; but, to Vs most of all That neerest stood to my High Cedars fall: But, more then most, to Mee, that had no Prop But HENRY'S Hand; and, but in Him, no Hope: In Whom, with Nature, Grace and Fortune mett, To consummate a PRINCE, as Good as Great: In Whō, the Heavn's were pleas'd to shew the Earth, A richer Iewell then the World was worth, Or worthy of: therefore, no more to make So rare a Piece, His pretious Moulde they brake. O soudain Change! O sad Vicissitude! O! how the Heav'ns our Earthly Hopes delude! O! what is firm beneath the Firmament! O! what is constant heer that giues Content! What Trust in Princes! O! what Help in Man, Whose dying Life is but in length a spann!
Melting, as Snowe before the Mid-day Sunn; Past, as a Poste, that speedy by dooth runn; Swift, as the Current of the quickest Stream; Vain, as a Thought; forgotten, as a Dream. O Deerest HENRY, Heav'n and Earth's Delight! O cleerest Beame of Vertues, Rising bright! O purest Spark of Pious Princely Zeale! O surest Ark of Iustice sacred weale! O grauest Presage of a Prudent Kinde! O brauest Message of a Valiant Minde! O All-admired, Benign and Hountious! O All-desir'd (right) PANARETVS! PANARETVS (All-vertuous) was thy Name; Thy Nature such: such euer be thy Fame. O deerest! cleerest! purest! surest Prop! O grauest! bravest! highest! nighest Hope! O! how vntimely is this Sunne gonn down! This Spark put-out! This Ark (as) ouerthrown! This Presage crost! This Message lost and left! This Prop displac't! This Hope of All, bereft! O! How, vnkinde! How, graceless! How, ingrate! Haue Wee cut-off Thy likely longer Date! For, were This Stroak frō Heav'ns immediat hand; Or (by Heav'ns leaue) from Hell's suborned Band
Of ROMVLIDES (What dare not They presume? If this, That Sea a Sulphury Sea consume.) How-e'r it were, We were the Moouing Cause That sweet Prince HENRY breath no longer draws. Wee all (alas!) haue had our hands herein: And Each of vs hath, by some cord of Sinne, Hal'd down from Heav'n, from Iustice awfull Seat, This Heauy Iudgement (which yet more doth threat) Wee Clergie first, who too-too-oft haue stood More for the Church-goods, thē the Churches good▪ Wee Nobles next, whose Title, euer strong, Can hardly offer Right, or suffer Wrong: Wee Magistrates, who, mostly, weak of sight, Are rather faine to feele then see the Right: Wee Officers, whose Price of euery Place Keeps Vertue out, and bringeth Vice in grace: Wee Gentrie then, who rack, and sack, and sell, To swimme like Sea-Crabs, in a foure-wheeld Shell: Wee Courtiers, next, who French-Italianate, Change (with the Moon) our Fashion, Faith, & Fate. Wee Lawyers then, who Dedalizing LAVV, And deadding Conscience, like the Horse-leach drawe: Wee Cittizens, who seeming Pure and Plaine, Beguile our Brother, make our God our GAYNE:
Wee Country-men, who slander Heav'n and Earth As Authors of Our Artificial Dearth: Wee Pourueyors, last, who taking tenn for two, Rob both at once, our Prince and People too: All, briefly all; all Ages, Sexes, Sorts, In Countries, Citties, Benches, Churches, Courts, (All Epicures, Witt-Wantons, Atists, Mach'-Aretines, Momes, Tap-To-Bacchonists, Batts, Harps, Sirens, Centaures, Bib-all-nights, Sice-sink-ap-Asses, Hags, Hermaphrodites) And Wee poore Nothings (fixed in no Spheare, Right Wandring Tapers, Erring euery-where) Scorn of the Vulgar, Scandall of the Gowne, Haue pull'd this waight of Wrath, This Vengeance down. All, All are guilty, in a high Degree, Of This High-Treason and Conspiracie; More brute then Brutus▪ stabbing more then CAESAR, With Two-hand-SINNES, of Profit and of Pleasure: And (th' odious Engine, which doth all include) Our Many-pointed proud INGRATITVDE. For, for the Peoples Sinnes, for Subiects crymes, God takes-away good Princes oftentimes. So, good IOSIAH (HENRY'S parallel) Was soon bereft from Sinfull Israel:
So, our good EDVVARD (HENRY'S Pre-cedent) For ENGLAND'S Sinnes was hence vntimely hent. So, heer, good HENRY is new taken hence, For now Great BRITAN'S, great Sinnes Confluence. VVee see th' Effect: wee haue the Cause confest: O! Turn wee then, with speed, to Saue the rest: O! Turn vs, Lord; turn to vs, turn away Thy Frowns, our Fears, with humblest Tears we pray. O saue our SOVERAIN; saue his Royall seed; That still his Owne may on his Throne succeed. Let Each of vs make priuie Search within; And hauing found, bring forth the Traitor SIN: To Execution, with all Execration Henceforth renouncing such In-Sin-newation. Let Each of vs (as Each hath throw'n a Dart, A Dart of Sinne, at HENRY'S princely heart) Send-vp in Sighes our Soules deuoutest breath, To Shield our IAMES, ANNE, CHARLES, ELIZABETH, And HIM whose Loue shal render HER her Brother, And make Her soon a happy Princes Mother. Let Each of vs cease to lament (in vain) Prince HENRY'S Loss: Death is to HIM a Gain. For Sauoy' Dukelings, or the Florentine, He Wedds his Sauiour, of a Regal Ligne;
Glory, for Gold; for Hope, Possession (there) Of Crowns so Rich as neuer entred Eare, Eye neuer sawe, nor euer Heart conceav'd; So strong Assur'd, as cannot be beeav'd. Waile not his death: His Vertues cannot Dye; Immortall Issue of ETERNITY. His Soule in Bliss beholds her Makers Eyes: His goodly Body shall more glorious Rise. Weep not for HIM: weep for our selues, alas! (Not for our Priuate, or Peculiar case: As, for our Sonn's, Brother's, or Master's lack, Or Prince's loss (our Expectations wrack) Our Places, Graces, Profits, Pensions lost, Our present Fortunes cast, our future crost) Weep for our Sinnes, our Wicked-Prouocations, Our haynous, horrid, high ABHOMINATIONS; Both seen and secret; both in High and Lowe: Weep, weep for These; and stript, from Top to Toe, Of guiddie-Gaudes, Top-gallant Tires and Towers, Of Face-pride, Case-pride, Shin-pride, Shoo-pride, ours (Like NINIVITES so neer Their threatned Fall) In blackest Sack and Cinders shrowded All: Not like a Bul-rush, for a day or two, To stoop, and droop, and seem as others doo,
(AS ACHAB yerst, and PHARAO, in Distress) And then return vnto our old Excess (As Doggs vnto their Mewte, Hoggs to their Mire) But, day by day, vntill our last exspire, With bended Knees, but more with broken hearts, And th' inward rest of right Repentant Parts, Prostrate our Soules in Fasting and in Praier, Before the Foot-stool of th' Empyreal CHAIER: That So, What-euer bloody DELVGE float From th'old Red Dragon's wide-wide-yawning Thr, We, Humbled MOVRNERS may be Heav'nly , In MERCIE'S Vessell to be All imb ARKT. FINIS.
AN EPITAPH. WHen Great French HENRY Fates bereft, His Name & Fame to OVRS He left; As ablest ATLAS Then, to proppe The Waight of WORTH, the World of HOPE: But, ENGLAND's Sinnes (a heauier Load) So over-layd His Shoulders broad, That, crushed down, Heer lies HEE dead. So, HOPE is fall'n, and WORTH is fled. ANOTHER. WHom All admir'd, whō All (almost) ador'd, For all the Parts of all PANDORA's Treasure; The Hope of all, to haue all Good restor'd; HIM, All our Ills haue slain, by Heav'ns Dis∣pleasure. By HIS (late) HIGHNE'S First Worst & Poet Pension Iosuah Syluester.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
AN ELEGIAC-EPISTLE Consolatorie, Against Immoderate Sorrowe for th' immature Decease of St. WILLIAM SIDNEY Knight, Sonne and Heire apparant To The Right Honourable ROBERT, LORD SIDNEY, L. Vi-Count Lisle; L. Chamberlain to the Queen, & L. Gouernour of His Maiesties Cautionarie Town of VLVSHING. by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
To the right Honorable, the Lord Vi-count LISLE, and his most vertuous Lady: To Sir Robert SIDNEY, Knight, their Hopefull Sonne: To the most Worthy Lady WROTH, with the rest of their right vertuous Daughters: & To all the Noble SIDNEYS & SEMI-SIDNEYS. ALthough I know None, but a Sidney's Muse, Worthy to sing a Sidney's Worthyness: None but Your Own LA: WROTH. AL-WORTH, Sidnëides, In whom, Her Vncle's noble Vne renewes: And though I know (sad Nobles) to infuse My fore-spent Drops into the bound-lesse Seas Of Your deep Griefs, for your deer Ioy's Decease;Anagram. To Your full Ocean nought at-all accrues: Yet, as (the Floods Queen) Amphitrité daignes To take the Tribute of small Brooks and Bournes; Which to Her Bounty (that Their Streams maintains) The humble Homage of Their Thanks returnes; Accept These Sighes and these few Teares of Ours. Which haue their Course but from the Source of Yours. Yr Noble Name's & Vertue's most Observant, IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
An ELEGIAC EPISTLE. WHat Obiect, less thē our Great HENRY's Herse, Could so haue seiz'd the voice of euery Verse? What Subiect else could haue ingrossed so The publique Store and priuate Stock of Woe? What Sea, but th' Ocean of His Vertues Fame, Could drink all Teares, or drown a SIDNEY's Na (As buried quick) so quickly (though so yong) So vn-bewayled, so vn-sigh't, vn-sung? O, glorious HENRY! though alone to Thee, I owe my all, and more then all of Mee; And though (alas!) the best and most of mine Reach not the least, the lowest Dues of Thine: Yet, woldst thou, couldst Thou hear (as heer-to-fore) And grant a Boon; I onely would implore Thy leaue a little, for a SIDNEY's Death To sigh a little of my Mournfull breath: The rather, that, as Yerst Hee seru'd You heer, And, in His End attended Yours so neer; Through-out all Aes subsequent to Ours, His Name and Fame may ever waite on YOVRS: Sith ll the MVSES owe That Name alone, A Dia pason of each sad-sweet Groan:
But, more peculiar, and precisely, Mine; Lineally bound vnto That Noble Ligne. ARCADIANS know no Other, for APOLLO, No other MARS (in Arms or Arts to follow As DEMI-GODS, as well of Warre as Wit) Then SIDNEYS yerst, or SEMI-SIDNEYS, yet. Yet, fit I said: for, of This deer Descent, Nature (of late) too-lauishly hath spent. (Lke My Ill-Huswifes which at once doe burn Two or three lights, where One wold serue the turn) Not her Own only, but more orient Gemms, More rich, more rare; more fitting Diadems. As, first, th' old Father, famous-fortunate, The prime firme Founder of our IRISH State: Next, His Son PHILIP (More thē PHILIP's Son) Whose World of Worth, a World of Honor won: Then, His sole Heire (sole VENVS-IVNO-PALLAS) All Beauties Pattern, and All Vertues Palace; Whose memorie, on MVSES Fairest Hill s Canonized, by a Phoenix Quill). These Three, the which Three Ages might haue grac't, ll These and more in My short Age haue past: esides This new SWEET-WILLIAM now deceast Th' Epitomè and Summe of All the rest)
The Flower of Youth, of Honour, Beauty, Blood, Th' Apparant Heire of All the SIDNEYS Good; For Minde, for Mould, for Spirit, Strength, & Sta∣ture, A Miracle, a Master-piece of Nature. Alas! How grossely doe our Painters erre In drawing Death's grim Visage (euery-where) With hollow holes, as wholely dark and blind! Ah! See wee not, how still Hee sees to finde The fairest Mark, the rarest and the best Of Vertues Budds, and lets alone the rest? Ravens, Brambles, Bandogs, Sirens, heer he leaues; Swannes, Roses, Lions, Dians, hence he reaves: Nay; th' onely PHOENIX hath he newly slain (But, maugre Death, That Bird reuiues again). No maruaile then, if SIDNEYS fall so fast. So early ripe are seldome apt to last: So Eminent are imminent to die; Malicious Death doth Such so eas'ly spie. But, why of Death and Nature, raue I Thus; Another Stile (my LISLE) befitteth vs. Another Hand, another Eye, directs Both Death and Nature in These high Effects; The Eye of PROVIDENCE, the Hand of POVVER, Disposing All in Order and in Hower;
So working in, so waking over All, That but by Those doth Nothing heere befall. Then, not (as Currs) the stone or staff to bite, Vn-heeding why, or who doth hurl or smight; Vnto That Eye let vs erect our owne; And humble vs vnder That Hand alone, Which (as the Potter his own Work controules) Dissolueth Bodies, and absolueth Soules: Vn-partiall euer, Vn-preposterous; How-euer Other it may seem to vs. For, euer since first WOMAN teemed Twin, And at a Birth brought forth both Death & Sin (Sin, as her Heir; Death, as an Heritage ustly deriued down from Age to Age) It is Decreed (by a more Chang-lesse Lawe Then euer yet the Medes and Persians sawe) That All men once (as well as Lowe, the High. Of Either Sex, of Every Sort) must die. Yea, th' INNOCENT, for Our imputed ill Who came, not Lawes to break, but to ful-fill) The Son of GOD (The Son of MAN become) h' Immortal yielded to This mortal Doome. o that (for Sin) no Son of MAN hath breath ut once must dye. Wages of SIN is Death.
As for the reason, Why it comes to passe Somtimes, that Age seems to haue turn'd his Glasse▪ While oftentimes Youth's, yer it seem begun, Is crackt, or broken, or already run: Why Lillies, Roses, Gillie-flowers, be reft; When Nettles, Thistles, Hemlocks heere be left: Why Cedres, Okes, Vines, Oliues, rather fall, Then Brush and Bryars (good for nought at all) Let Flesh and Blood, let Dust, be rather mute, Then with His MAKER sawcily dispute. Yet heer (me thinks) but little Question needs. Doe not We rather gather Herbes then Weeds? Doe not We take the timber for our turn, And leaue the Dottrlls, in their time to burn? And, in the Shambles, who is it but would Be rather sped of yong Flesh then of old? And yet in Season, when we see it good, Wee weed our Gardens, fell our Vnder-wood; And kill old Cattell, least they goar the yong, Or fall away, or mix some Mange among. Much like the Lord: who knoweth best all Season, And best obserues. But, will we vrge his Reason? His Reason is His WIL: His Wil is iust, Or rather Iustice; which His Power must
In Wisedome execute (right vnderstood) To His Owne Glory, and His Childrens Good; Where in His Goodnes through His Mercy shines, To cleer and cheer devout and humble mindes. For, to the Godly (in despight of Hell) Hev'n maketh all things to re-issue well. Heer, heer's a Harbour; heer's a quiet Shore From Sorrowe's Surges, & all Storms that rore. This is Cap Comfort (a high Promontorie, Of richer Store then heer is roome to storie). Heer let vs bide, and ride-out all Events, With Anchor Hope, and Cable Patience; Vntill our Bark some happy Gale shall driue Home to the Haven where we would All arriue. Come, Noble Vi-Count, put into This Bay, Where (with a Light) our A'M'RAL leads the way, Though deepest laden, & the most distrest, The greatest Ship of Burthen, and the best. HIM boldly follow: & though heer, as CHIEF In Grief, as Greatnes, His must drown your Grief, Count it an Honour, to be call'd to try Your Vertue's Valour, in your Soveraine's eye. Wee All partake His Cross; His Losse is Ours: But His Affections (to the life) are Yours.
The neerer then You match His mournful fate, His royal Patience neerer imitate. And you, sad Lady, Mother of annoy For hauing lost the prime Sonne of your Ioy; Ah! see, the Soveraine of your Sex hath so. Some think it ease, to haue some peer in Woe: But, such a PEER, and such a Pattern too, Should much (me thinks) confirm & comfort You To beare-vp hard into this happy Road, And lighten somwhat of Your heauy Load: The rather, sith (besides the Happinesse, Which now, aboue, your Darling doth possesse; The Crown, the Kingdome, and the Companie, Of All the holy, heauenly HIERARCHIE: Besides your Mess of goodly GRACES left (Whose WORTH, frō Al, the Prize of Worth hath rest Foure louely Nymphs, foure Rivers, as it were, Your veines of Vertue through the Land to bear) You haue another Model of The same, To propagate renowned SIDNEY'S Name; Another, like in every part to proue As worthy of our Honor, and your Loue; In whom (if now, You, IOB-like, bear this Cross) Heav'n may restore you manifold, your Loss. FINIS.
THE SECOND SESSION of the PARLIAMENT of Vertues Reall (Continued by Prorogation) For better Propagation of all true Piëtie, & Viter Extirpation of ATHEISME, & HYPOCRISIE; AVARICE, & CRVELTIE; PRIDE, & LVXVRIE. (From th' Originall) Transcribed, & Inscribed To the High-Hopefull CHARLES, Prince of Great Britaine, By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
A DIVINE & TRVE TRAGI-COMEDY; IOB TRIVMPHANT in his Triall: OR THE HISTORIE OF His Heroicall Patience, In A measured METAPHRASE.
To AR∣THVRS CASTLE (call'd by ART'S CHAST LVRE) My Hope Heere Hasteth, For My HART'S LAST CVR. Sir, YOV haue seene In my PA∣NARETVS, A SVVEET IDEA Of—Our hopes in You: A REAL ACT of That Ideall VIEVV, In My St. LEVVI Roy-All Vertuou▪ Heer (more HEROIK and more HOLY-True) I bring Your Highness Yet A Higher Peece (Past all the Patterns of old Rome & Greece) Faith's PATIENT Champion, in His Triumph due Farre bee His Crosses Frō my Prince, I pray: Neer bee His Courses (As the most Complete In sacred GRACES that beseeme The GREAT) Towards God and Man; in Cleer or Clowdy Day; So much More needfull In This Sin-full Age, By How Much Satan (neer his end) doth rage: VVith VVhom and His, the better Aye to wrastle, Great Michael gard & strengthen ARTHVRS CASTLE; praies Prostrate Iosuah Sylvester.
To the Right Reuerend & Ho∣norable FAther, GEORGE ABBOT, Lord ARCH-Bishop OF CANTERBVRY. IN Grate-full HONOR Of Your MANY Giftes of GRACE & NATVRE (Apted to Your Place) This DORIKE Piller My DEVOTION liftes; To shewe Heere—After, what We owe your Grace: Both, for Your Prudence, And Your Pious Zeale; Learning, And Labour In Your Double Charge; Swaying The CHVRCH, Staying the cōmon-Weal; Most STVDIOVS Euer EITHER to Enlarge: And Last (not least) of all, For CONSTANT standing On Right's vveake Side, Against the tide of wrong: When PHILISTINES And Daliladies banding, With Armes or Charmes Would bind or blind the Strong: In Honor of these Honors, this I bring To Reuerend ABBOT, & His Second; KING. VESTER—SYL—VESTER Deditissim.
TO The Right Honourable, The Lord ELESMORE, L. High Chancelour of England. *THOMAS EGERTONVS: (Anagramma) *NESTOR THEOMAGVS. GRaue, * GOD-WISE NESTOR; Neuer did a Name (Saue A IVST MASTER) better speak a man (As Court & Councell, with Mee, witnes can) Than doth Your Owne, in This Your Anagram. Should I A Volume of Your Vertues frame, Broad as my Brest, & Thicker then my Span; Could I say More, more True, more Duly, than The Character concluded in This same? For, * PIOVS-Prudence cannot but be Just: And Iustice cannot but be Temperate: And Temperance from Courage issue must. So that Your Name doth Your whole Life relate, So NESTOR-Like, for grace-full, * Godly-Sage, That Nothing wants, but (what we wish) His Age. Ex Animo exoptat Iosuah Sylvester.
To the Right Honorable, Sir EDVVARD COKE, Knight; Lord Chief Iustice of Eng∣land, and one of his Ma∣iesties most Honorable Priuie Councell. * EDVARDVS COCVS: (Anagramma) * SVCCEDO, ARDVVS. HArdy and Happy may You long Succeed, In all the Courses of your Christian Zeale, To scourge Abuse; and purge the Publike-Weale, Of vicious Humors, with auspicious Speed. Hardy and Happy Neuer more did need, To meet with Malice, and with Might to deale; And sift the Drift the Serpent would conceale. How happy, Heav'n You for These times decreed! Hardy and Happy may you still proceed, Vntill You finde, confound, and suffocate, The Viperous Vermin that destroy the State. Hardy, and Happy, be your Minde, and Meed With GOD and Men: applauded and approou'd, Of Prince and People; of All Good, belou'd: Ex Animo Expot Iosuah Sylvester.
To The Right Honourable Lords Spirituall & Temporall; The Knights and Burgesses of the Lower-House; & To all generous and ingenuous Readers. YOur prest Assistence & Assistance, past, Vouchsafed, Heer, whē you were summond last, Binde & imbold mee once more to present My humble Briefs, in form of PARLIAMENT; Hoping no lesse Consent of Your Good-wills n passing These, then of Our former Bills; o-much more Need-full in this Weed-full Time, By How-much Vice doth ouer Vertue clime. An Act against Atheisme & Irreligion. Page. 4. 7 An Act of pious and humble PATIENCE. 7 An Act conformable to the former. 9 An Act confirming Both. 9. 67 An Act of humane Frailty, to teach the Best, Humility. 10. 18. 29 An Act of the Weaker Vessell. 9 An Act of Imitation, with better Application. 13
An Act (of many Branches) concerning the Iustice of GOD in his Iudgements 14 89 An Act of Exhortation to Repentance and Humiliati∣on. 16. 23. 31. 60. 90 An Act against Presumption of ourselues. 30. 40. 91 An Act touching GOD's Omipotence, Omniscience, Al-Regencie, Al-Sufficiencie. 33. 89. 93 An Act against rash and erroneous Censures. 35 An Act against Partiality in Iudgement, false Witnesse, Suborned Euidence. ibid. An Act, intimating the Comfort and Confidence of a good Conscience. 36. 67 An Act, auerring the Shortnes of Life, and vncertaine Certainty of Death. 37 An Act against Saduces and Epicures. 3 An Act against Puritisme. 41. 65 An Act intimating the effects of an euill Conscience. 41 An Act against the Security & Insolence of fat & Es∣full Epicures and Oppressors. 4 An Act against Hypocrites. 43. 67. 93 An Act against Bribrie, Brokerie, Vsurie. 4 An Act against vnciuil Indiscretiō in visiting of Frind Especially against Aggrauation of Griefs. 4 An Act for our Imitation. 45. 72. 76. 77. 82. 10 An Act against Plattery. 46. An Act of Terror to the Wicked in their sodain & ∣full Fall. 47. 64. (Anno. 16 15 An Act against Ambition conformable to the former. An Act against Vnkindenesse of Kinsmen, Neighbo Friends, Seruants, Wiues, &c.
An Act of liuely FAITH, against all Saduce, Epicures, Atheists. 51. An Act of Animaduersion, that wee stumble not at the Prosperity of the Wicked. 55 An Act, for the Last Assise, and finall Sentence and Ex∣ecution of the Vngodly. 57 An Act against Merit of Works. 58. 91. 98 An Act against Works of Supererogation. 58. 91 An Act against the Children of Darknesse; Murderers, Adulterers, Burglers, &c. 64 An Act against all greedie Wringers, Wrongers, Vsu∣rers, & Oppressors. 62. 68 An Act of Meditation on the manifold Manifest Works of GOD, mighty and maruelous 66. 96. 98 An Act of Inuincible Faith and PATIENCE. 67 An Act against Tyrants, Extortioners, Rackers, and all Vnrighteous and vnrelenting Rich. 62. 68 An Act, limitting Mans Wit and Industrie from th' illi∣mitable Wisdom & inimitable Works of GOD. 70. 83 An Act against loose and idle Education of Youth. 74 An Act against Wandring & Wanton Eyes. 77 An Act against Pride & Vanity of all kindes. 77 An Act against Cousenage, Concupiscence, Cruelty, Briberie. 77 An Act against Adulterie. 77 An Act against impious and imperious Masters & Mi∣stresses. 78 An Act against dilatorie Aners and solitarie Nabal. 78 An Act against th' Vncharitie of our Dayes, suffering so
many Poore to die without Doores. 78 An Act against all Iniurie, Inhumanity, &c. 79 An Act against Auarice & Infidelity, Superstition & Idolatry, Sacriledge & Surcuidry. 79 An Act against insulting ouer Miserie. 80 An Act against all maner of Extortion & Cruelty. 81 An Act touching the right vse and happy issue of Afflicti∣ons. 86. 92. 93. 109. An Act of the proueness of Mercy toward the Penitēt. 87 An Act against empty & idle FAITH. 88 An Act (by implication) against the Popes depriuing & deprauing of Princes. 89 An Act conteining a Diuine Lecture of Naturall Phi∣sophy. 98. To the last Chapter: which is the Last Act of This Holy PARLIAMENT: WHose seueral Acts, of sweet and souerain Vse To cherish Vertue, and to check Abuse (Too rough transcribed, by too rude a hand, For so high Statutes of the HOLY-LAND) Are heer presented, as sit Precedents Of sacred Rules for your High Parliaments; By (th' once, least Moat in th' Vpper-Houses Sun) Your Vader-Clarke, Vnworthily Vndon (By ouer-trusting to a starting Bow∣r while too-strong, to my poor Wrong & Woe) IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
IOB TRIƲMPHANT in his Triall. The Proëm. A Solid Rock, farre-seated in the Sea (Where many Vessels haue been cast away) Though blackest Storms of blustering Winds do threat, Though boistrous Rage of roaring Billowes beat; Though it be raakt with Lightning, & with Thunder; Though all at once assault, and Each asunder; With massie Bulk of it Selfes Marble Tower, till, still repells th' ineuitable Stower; And seemes still firmer, and more permanent, he more the Tempest hath been violent: ight so the Faithfull; in vvhose humble Brest eligious seare of GOD is deepe imprest; hat-euer Streak of Fortune threat his State, hat-euer Danger him discommodate, hat-euer Mischiefe that betide him shall, hat-euer Losse, what-euer Crosse befall; flexible, inuincible, pursues e sacred Footings he did euer vse:
And aye more constant, and confirm'd is He, The more extream that his Afflictions be. If any pirit, inspir'd with Holy-mood, Carefully-urious of the Publike Good, Would liuly limne th' immortall Excellence Of such a Pattern of such PATIENCE; As neither Elements diplaced quight, Nor enuious Starres, nor angry Foes despight, Nor all the Fiends insatiate Furie fell (By fraud or force) could euer quail or quell: Twere labour lost, to fable (Homer-like) The strange long Voyage of a wily Greek; The Paines, the Perills, and extream Disease That he endured, both by Land and Seas; Sith sacred Truthe's Heav'n prompted Books present In Constant OB a worthier Argument. Thou then, Vrania, to whom right belongs The sacred Consort of Celestiall Songs, Tune Thou my Voyce. Thou teach me to record Wh did inite, what did inuite the Lord, With Mseres so rewfull and so rife, So to disturb his quiet happy Life; What haynous Sin, what orrid high Offence. The Almightie's Vengeance mought so deep incense:
or else what Cause, what Obiect ele might stir-it. Boiles there such Wrath in an impasiue Spirit? But, ô Presumption! Why haue I begun (Alas! no Prophet, neither Prophet's Sonne; No Priest, no Leuite; ndy, no Israelite (Such as Nathanael) but a Cananite Full of Corruption, foule of hand and hart) To touch the ARK to vnder-take This Part? Ah! pardon Lord; O! purifie me all From all Prophanenesse; from Sinne's bitter Gall: And as yer-while it pleasd thee to infuse n mine vnschooled and vnskilfull Muse By vertue of Thine All-sufficing Grac) mmediat power du-BARTAS Track to trac; o as (how-euer weake and Art-lss, I,) That Work finds Welcoe with the graisst Eyes Now more, good Lord, my Wies & Words refine, treat diuinely Matter o Diuine: ! sacred Sirit now anctifie my Stile; t not my Snsuall thy pure Sense defile: ut tune mee, right, to Eccho, as belongs. HVSSIAN'S Sgh & then Thy nd to that end, vouchsafe me at Thy esse Need-full Life, in a lessCare-full leasure
Cap. 1. NEere where Idumè's dry and sandy Soile Spreads Palmful Forests, dwelt a Man yer-while, Of life vnblotted, and vnspotted Fame; God-fearing, Iust, Sin-flying, IOB by Name. With due respect to Heauen's & Nature's Law, In Wedlocks sweet Yoake did he seemly draw: Whence, by that Bountie, whose all Blessings bee, Seavn Sonnes he had, and louely Daughters Three. Great was his Substance: for of fleecie Sheep Vpon the Downes seavn Thousand did he keep; Fiue hundred yoak of Oxen did he owe; Fiue hundred Ass-shees, Camels six times so: Great Train within doores, & great Train with-ou, Made him esteem'd through all the East about. His Sons, by turns, their Sisters did inuite And feast each other, in a Daily Rite: IOB blest them euery Even; and euery Morn When first Aurora's rosie beames return, The good Old-man, to GOD, in humble-wise, For each of them did offer Sacrifice: Lest They might haue msdon, mis-said, mis-thought, Or (in their Feasts) offended GOD by ought. While happy IOB thus brought the yeere about, It came to pass one day when all the Rout
Of Light-full Angels did themselues present Before the Foot-stoole of th'Omnipotent, There also came the Executioner, Th'ambitious Prince, Malicious Lucifer: With whom the LORD expostulating, Thus aid; Sathan, say, Whence comest Thou to vs? come, said Hee, from walking in and out, nd compassing the Earthlie Ball about. ast thou not then suruey'd my Seruant IOB Reply'd the LORD) whose like in all the Globe here is not found; so full of louing-feare, o faithfull, fruitfull, rightfull, and sincere? Is it for Nothing, said the subtle Foe, hat IOB adores, and loues, and feares Thee so? ast thou not hedg'd him safe on euery side? ast thou not heapt him Blessings far and wide? t, for a while with-hold thy Fauour's stream, ith-draw thy hand, and hide thy Bounties beam, hen shalt thou see (or double my Disgrace) e will anon blaspheme thee to thy Face. Lo, said th'Eternall, from this instant hower l that he hath is in thy hand and power; , but Himselfe, Himselfe I sole exempt. han eftsoones assumes his bold Attempt.
As all his Children were together met, Th elder Brothers hartie Cheere to eat, Came one to OB▪ running, & breathless nigh, Scace could he speak, yet weakly thus did cry, Ah! woe  me to be the Messenger Of so sad Newes as now I bring you, Sir: As all your Oxen vnder painfull yoak, Their pointed Iourneyes in your Fallowes broke; And s your Asses in the Meads did feed, Sabéan hieues came forth with furious speed And tooke them all, and all your Seruants slew, I onely cap't, to come and tell it you. While He yet spake, there came Another in, Hared and hot, and Thus did He begin: Sir, from the Heav'ns a suddaine Fire did fall Among your Sheep, & hath consum'd them all, And staine your Seruants yer they could eschew; I onely scap't, to come and tell it You. While He yet spake, Another came, amaz'd, And sadly said; Sir, while your Camels graz'd In your owne Pastures vp and down the Lands, The proud Chaldéans, in three armed Bands, Surpriz'd them all, and all your Seruants slew; I onely scp't, to come and tell it you.
While He yet spake, Another came and cryde In pitious Fright (as if himselfe beside) O, Sir! your Sons & Daughters (all the rest) Were met to day at my young Masters Feast, Where, from beyond the Wilderness anon A suddain Whirle-wind rose, and rusht vpon The corners of the House, and shooke it so That instantly it fll from Top to Toe, And with the Fall them altogether slew; I onely scap't, to come and tell it you. Then starting vp, IOB gan his clothes to rent, Shues his hoare haire, his head with ashes sprent; As in a swoune falls to the ground with grones, And semi sighing Thus himselfe bemoes: Ah! Naked came I from my Mothers wombe, Naked I shall returne vnto my Tombe: The LORD hath taken what himselfe hath giuen: Blessed be GOD, th'Almighty LORD of Heauen. Yet did not IOB, for all that him mis-fell, Murmur at GOD, nor inly sink or swell; Nor sinne against th'eternall Prouidence, But suffred all with humble Patience. Cap. 2. ANother day, when all the sacred Bands Came all attending their high Kings cōmands,
Came also Hee, whose Enuie (since Hee fell Frō Heavn) hath striu'n to hale down Man to Hell; With whom the LORD expostulateth Thus: Now Sathan, say, Whence comest Thou to Vs? I come aid He, from walking in and out, And compassing the Earthlie Ball about. Then, Hast thou found, replyes th' Omnipotent, In all thy Circuit, Man more confident, Or minde more Constant, or more faithfull Soule, Then IOB my Seruant: whom thine Enuy foule, Late, vrg'd my Leaue by sharp Assaults to try? How hast thou sped? What hast thou got thereby? Alas, said Hee, I reft him but the things That flie from Men with transitory wings; And therefore he regards his losse the lesse: But would thy Power him somwhat neerer presse, Would'st thou permit me touch him to the quick, I yeeld me conquer'd, if he doe not kick; If more he serue, trust, pray, or praise thy Grace, If he, in fine, blaspheme not to thy Face. Pinch but his Body, and then, Skin for Skin, Hee'l wince without, and sodain flinch within. Go Fiend, said GOD; sith th' art so obstinate, Fall on my IOB, him felly cruciate:
Touch not his Soule; his Body only touch. Hence Satan hyes, glad that he might so much. Without Delay then, with the most Despight, He sets on IOB; and in most pitious Plight, With vlcerous Anguish fils his body so, That crusted all in Scabs from top to toe, Amid the Ashes, sad and desolate, Scraping his Sores with shels (or sherds) he sate; Yet Constant still, still calmely Patient, Without a word of grudging Discontent. Then said his Wife, What helps Integrity? What boots it, Man? alas! curse GOD, and die. Go, foolish Woman, the good man reply'd, Thy rebell heart doth thy rash tongue mis-guide: Shall we, from GOD, of Good receiue our Fill; And, at his pleasure, not partake of Ill? So IOB as yet, for all that him mis-fell, Displeas'd not GOD, but bore it wondrous well. By This, the light-foot, fether-tongued Dame Had farre and wide spred and disperst the fame Of IOB's Mis-fortunes (from the first begun) That He was halfe dead, and was whole vndone. His Friends then, Eliphas the Themanite, ildad the Shuite, the Naamathite▪
Zophar (as others) hearing this report, As soone as might be towards him resort; Resolu'd with Comforts, to relieue in part Their Friends Affliction, & asswage his Smart. But, there arriued, at the very sight Of his so wofull and so wretched Plight. They all amaz'd, their Garments sadly tore, Their heads with Ashes all besprinkled o're; And for seavn dayes and nights in Sorow drown'd, Lay grieuing, by him, groueling on the ground, Without word speaking, lest vntimely trouble Amid his Anguish should his Dolors double. ap. 3. IOB therefore straining his obstructed voice, Began Thus, sadly with a shiuering noise: O! VVo be to the Day when I was born: O! be it euer of the Light forlorn: O! may it euer vnder Darknes lie, And neuer Sun vouchsafe it cheerfull eye; No GOD regard it: let a deadly Shade O'-clowde it aye, as euer Dismall made. O! wo be also to the Night wherein My Mother my Conception did begin: Lightning & Thunder thrill it euermore, Whirle-wind & Tempest may it euer roare:
Of Fogs, of Frosts, of Showers, of Snowes, of Haile, Of Mists▪ of Mil-deawes may it neuer faile: May it no more in Calendar be plac't, But, from the Role of Months and Yeares be rac't: May th' Euening Stars be dark: No light returning: May it no more see th' Eye-lids of the Morning, Because it clos'd not, at my wretched Birth, The fruitfull Doore that brought me weeping forth; But let me passe into this woefull Light, To vndergoe so miserable Plight. O! Why, when shapelesse in my Mothers Womb I lay as dead, Why did not Death strike home? VVhy not (alas!) amid the bearing Throes, VVhen I began to feele Mans feeble Woes? VVhy did the knees support me? Why the Brest Supply me suck? Why was I swath'd and drest? Sith else (alas!) I had now lien at ease, Had been at rest, hd slept in quietnesse, Among the high and mighty Potentates, King, Counsellors, gret Lords, and Magistrates, VVho in the VVorld to leaue their Names Renowne, Haue built thē Bowers which others shall pul-downe: And those rich Princes that haue heapt of-old Their houses full of Siluer and of Gold.
Or, Why (alas!) as an Abortiue Birth, Was I not hid and buried in the Earth? There, Tyrants cease from their imperious Pride: There, Vertuous Workers at their rest abide: There, Prisoners rest from their Oppressors Braule: There, Slaues are free from their fell Masters Thrall: There, High and Lowe (without Disdain, or Dread) Rest all together in one Common bed. O! wished Death (more to be wisht then Life) Thou breakst the Force of Enuies Engines rife: Thou cuttest-off our Trauails Tediousnesse: Thou kilst our Cares, Thou calm'st our most Distress O! to the wretched why is Light imparted? Why Life (alas!) vnto the heauie-hearted? [Who longs for Death: and if it linger long, Would fainer seek it then euen Gold (among) And gladder find it (as of Ioys the Chiefe) Within their Graue to burie all their Griefe] Especially, to Him whose Way is hid: Whom GOD hath shut-vp, stopt & streightened? Sith, yer I eat, My Sighes refll my Food, My Roarings gush out like a raging Flood. For (though my Plenty, neuer made me proud; My Power, imperious; nor to pleasure bow'd:)
What most I doubted I endure, (alas!) And what I feared is euen comn to passe. For Care and Feare, I had no rest before; Yet Trouble's come, and trebbles more and more. Cap. IOB ceasing so; began the Themanit, Iuly perplext, an Answer thus to dight: If We presume to comfort thee, deer Friend, Wil our Discourse (I feare it will.) offend? Will thy Disease our kinde Good-wills disdain? But, in this Case (alas!) Who can refrain? Who so hard-hearted, or vnciuill-bred, That can vnmoued see thee thus bested? To see and heare Thee in this deep Distresse, Who can keep silence? Who can hold his peace? Why! Thou wert wont, in thy Prosperities, To stay weak hands, and strengthen feeble knees; To counsell those that in their Course had stray'd, To comfort those whom Crosses ouer-lay'd: Now that Mis-hap on thine owne head hath hit, Now that the Storm hath thine owne vessell smit, Now that the Case is Thine, How art thou sunk From thine owne Succor! From thy self how shrunk! Where is, alas! Where is thy Confidence, Thy Constancy, thy Hope, thy Patience,
Thy Piety, thy Faith, thy Feare of God, And th' vpright Path which Thou hast euer trod? O! ponder this: Who euer Innocent Hath perished? Hath the Omnipotent Eternall Iustice euer plagu'd the Iust; Destroyd the Righteous who Him only trust: As I haue seen Those that haue plough'd and sow'n Iniquity, reap sodenly their owne; When with the Blast of GOD they blasted fall, And with his Breath are quick consumed all? GOD, in his Fury starueth in distresse The roaring Lion and the Lionesse; Their rauening Whelps are scattered farre away, Their Teeth are broken, and they pine for Prey. I'll tel! thee more: Once, in a certain Night, Silent, I heard a Voyce, and saw a Sight, (About the time when Sleep begins to seze Our drouzie Lids, our Dayly Loads to ease) Amaz'd with Feare my haire began to heaue, My heart to tremble, euery part to leaue His proper Part; When to mine eyes a-space Appeerd the Image of an vnknowne Face: One stood before me, Whence (yet more dismaid) I heard a Voyce, and Thus (me thought) it said:
Shall Man be iuster then his GOD (said He)? The Creature purer then his Maker be? Behold, he found not in his Angels bright Firme Fealty, but Folly in his sight: How much more then, in Those whose habitation Is but of Clay, but Dust their best Foundation? Whose brittle Vessels heer so little last, That yer they know them they are often past: Whose fickle Garment (how-so-euer loath) hall be destroy'd and done, before the Moth: Whose doubtfull Daies, yer they begin, be gon▪: ut downe by Death, when least they think thereon: Whose Dignities (how-euer grac't, or Great) hall die with them, and Them the Wormes shall eat. Cap. NOw call thou lowd, if any will reply: Among the Saints where wilt thou turne thine eye? wo sorts of Fools (th' Idiot and Enuious) die; Anger th' one, th' other of Iealousie. beheld the Foole faire rooted yerst: t haue I soon his Habitation curst; ecause his Children succour-less shall suffer Iustice Doom, and none shall Pittie offer: m Selfe withall confounded▪ void of Hope, o gather-in his long expected Crop,
Which th'hunger-starued frō the Thorns shal snatch; The Thirstie shall his substance all dispatch; A Misery, which GOD doth oft permit: For, th'Earth it selfe is not the Cause of it; Sith, were not Sin, it should not barren be: But, Man, for Sin, must toile him seruilelie, In Sweatfull Labour, borne for Labour's end As properly as Sparkles to ascend. But were My Case, as Thine; in this Distresse, Rather to GOD would I my selfe addresse: Him would I seek, of Him would I enquire, Whose Works are great, whose Wonders all admire Vnspiable, Vnspeakeable by Man; Immutable, Inscrutable to scan: Who on the Earth the raine at pleasure poures, And in the Streets distills the liquid Showers: Who lifts the Lowly vp, brings downe the Lofty; And reares sad Mourners vnto Health and Safety: Who dissipates the craftiest Policies; And dis-appoints the Counsells of the Wise: Who takes the wariest in their proper Wiles; And Wicked ones in their owne Guile beguiles; So that they meet with Darknes in the Day, And, as at Midnight, groap at Noon their way:
But, He preserues the Poore, from sword & tongue, And cruell hands of Tyrants, prone to wrong: So that the Poore shall haue their blessed Hope: But Wicked ones their cursed mouthes ha stop. Lo, then, how happy he whō GOD correcteth! Repine not therefore that he Thee afflicteth. He wounds, & heales; he strikes, & he restores: He sendeth Plagues, & Plaisters for the Sores: Hee, in six Troubles, shall deliuer thee; nd in the seauenth, thou shalt be danger free. e will preserue thee from fel Famines rage; nd from the Sword of War thee dis-ingage: hou shalt be safe frō scourging ungs of Momes, or shalt thou fear Destruction when it comes: ay, thou shalt laugh at it, and Dearth derde; ot dreading Beasts of fellest Pawes and Pride. ones, thorns, & thistles shal be friends with thee: ith thee the Beasts in constant league shall be. od, as without, thou shalt haue Peace within hy house; thou shalt be hold it, and not sin. hou shalt perceiue thy Seeds seeds seed to spred Grass in Fields, & Flowers in euery Med. a full Age to thine own Graue shalt Thou, in due time, Corne to the Barne or Mow.
Lo, This is Truth; and Thus we daily try-it: Consider it, and to thy Selfe apply-it. Cap. 6. IOB then reply'd: ô! were my Sorows waigh'd, And with my Suffrings in iust Balance layd, They would exceed the Sea wet Sands in poize: Therefore (alas!) they swallow vp my voice: For th'Arrowes of th'Almightie, keen and quick, Haue thrilled me, & still within mee stick; Their Anguish makes my spirits faint & quaile me. Alas! the Terrors of the LORD assaile me. Braies the wilde Asse if he haue grass his fill? Or lowes the Oxe if he haue fodder still? Vnsauory things who without Salt can eat? In whites of Eggs is there a taste of meat? Yet am I faine, alas! and forc't (indeed) Of what my Soule abhorred most to feed. O! that the LORD would daign me my desire, Grant me my Loging, grant what I require: Which is but This; that He would end my dayes, Let goe his hand, and let me goe my waies. So should I yet haue Comfort (though I burn In bitter pangs of Death, I will not spurn. Let him not spare me) for yet do not I The holy Word of th'Holy-One denie.
ut, ô! What Power haue I to persist? hat may ensue, if I shall long subsist? m I as hard, as tough, as strong (alas!) strongest Stones? or is my Flesh of Brass? y, am I not already Impotent, y spirits consumed, & my strength all spent? n Crosses, Comforts should Friends most afford: men (alas!) haue left to feare the LORD. Brethren haue deceiu'd mee, as a Brooke. rising Flouds, they haue me soone forsook; ich, foule and deep, in Winter all o're flow, crusted thick with Ice, no moisture show; else, in Summer, by Sol's thirsty Ray licked-vp, and quicklie dry'd away, le Trauailers to Thaema, and Saba thought ater there, & for their succour sought; failing quite, and frustrate of the same, y are confounded, & they blush for shame: such are you, you see me ill appaid small Plight, and ou are all dismaid: are yee so? When haue I bid you bring, ut of yours supply me any thing? av'd of you auxiliarie Bands skue me from Foes, or Tyrants hands?
Shew me mine Error, where I haue gone wrong: Tell me my Fault, and I will hold my tongue. But, bold and free's the speech of Innocence: Which of you can reproue; and what Offence? Thinke You aduantage of my words to haue, As if Affliction made me wildely raue? Then on the Orphan doth your furie fall; You dig a Pit to catch your Friend withall. Therefore, vouchsafe me better to revise; Wrong me no more: My words be neither lyes. Neither my deeds (as you shall find, I trust, If you returne) in that behalfe vniust. Complain I causeless? Do I counterfait? Is not my mouth with Anguish all repleat? Cap. 7. HAth not Man's warfare his set limits heere, As hath the Hireling (by the day, or yeere)▪ As toyled Seruants for the Night attend; And weary Taskers for their Labors end; So haue I looked, but (alas!) in vain, For end of Sorrowes, & for ease of Pain. Perpetually my fruitless Months proceed; My tedious Nights incessantly succeed: No sooner layd down but I long to rse, Tired with toffing, till the Morning spies.
y Flesh is clad with Worms; with excrement f lothsom dust, my Skin doth rot and rent: y Dayes flit faster then the Shuttles slide om Weauers hands, whipping frō side to side. Consider, Lord, my Life is but a Blast: ne eye no more shall see the Goodnes past: o now beholds me, shall no more, anon: Thou look-on Mee, I et-soones am gon. Clowdes do passe, & quite away do flit, oso descends, ascends not from the Pit; ither returnes vnto his wonted owne; t of his place is any more be-known. Therefore (alas!) I will not spare to speake; annot hold, needs must I silence break, id the anguish of my Spirits distresse, d in the depth of my Soules bitternesse. m I a Sea? or Whale? that with a Gard ou grtest me, & keep'st me in so hard? haue said; In silence of the Night hen drousie Humor siels-vp euery Sight; en All, aboue, in, vnder, Aire; Earth, Seas; uiet Slumber seem to take their Ease) ay be that my painfull Pangs shall cease: ay be that my Passions shall haue peace:
With fearefull Visions then thou doost affray me, With Dreames & Fansies dreadfully dismay me: So that my Soule had rather chuse (at once) To die then liue in Durance of my Bones. Wearie of life, liue alwaies shall I not; Then leaue me, Lord, alas! my dayes are nought. O! What is Man that thou extoll'st him so? That Thou on Him doost euen thy heart bestow? That euery Morning Him thou visitest? And euery Moment Him examinest? How is it that Thou leau'st me not a little? Alas! nor lett'st me swallow-in my spettle? O! Thou Preseruer of Mankind, I knowe, And I acknowledge I haue sinn'd: but, O! What shall I say? What shall I do to Thee? Why, in thy Wrath doost Thou incounter Mee? Why mak'st Thou Me (alas!) the Mark & White To thy Displeasure, in my Selfe's despight? Remit, O Lord, what I haue ill omitted: Remoue (alas!) what I haue miss-committed. For, now I goe down to the dust, to lie: And, if Thou seek, to morrow, none am I. Cap. 8. BVt Bildad then (loth longer to refrain) Said: IOB, How long wilt thou this Plea mai
VVith words, as high, as Tempests vehemence, Blow'n by the breath of thine Impatience? Dar'st Thou, avert, that GOD doth Right subuert? Or that th'Almighty, Iudgement doth peruert? Though, sith thy Sons had sinned, them he sent To the due Place of their sinnes punishment; Yet, if Thou early vnto GOD repaire, nd to th'Almighty make thie humble Prayer, f Thou be pure, and in his sight sincere; e will again awake to Thee: and reare hy ruin'd State; thy righteous House restore ith Peace & Plentie, manifoldly more. Arke of the Ages past: inquire (I pray) f th'Ancient Fathers (for, of yesterday e Nouices knowe nothing in effect; ur dayes are but a Shadow in respect) ill not They teach thee (without wiles of Art) d truly speak the language of their hart? Can Rushes spring? are Sedges seen to grow, here is no moisture; where no waters flow? y that they should: yet would they sooner wither, hough neuer cut, then all else grasse together. ch is the way of all that GOD forget: failes the Hope of th'Holy-Counterfait:
His Hope shall be cut off: his Confidence Like busie Spider's brittle Residence: He shall be leaning on his House, but it Shall not be able to support him; yet He shall hold fast, & theron fix him sure; But that (alas!) shall neuer long endure: As dth the Tree, which growing in the Sun, O're-spreads an Orchard with fresh Boughes, anon, His happy Roots among the Fountaines winding, And round about the rockie banks them binding: If from his Place to pluck it any ween, It will denie; as safe, as if not seen: Lo, by this meanes it will reioyce, the while That it may prosper in another Soile: So, GOD will neuer the Sincere reiect. Neither the vvicked by the hand erect. Till he haue filld thy mouth with meriment, Thy hps with tryumph (in intire content) Thy Foes shal all be with confusion clothed, Wrapped in shame, disperst, despisd & loathed; Th' vngodly shal be razed to the ground, Their Tabernacle shal no more be found. Cap. 9 IOB then reply'd: I know, I grant you This; In GOD'S respect, that No Man righteous is.
No: if He argue, if He question; O! VVho can answer of a Thousand, one? What heart so constant! O! what soule so clear, That dares dares for Iust before that Iudge appear? He is All-prudent, and All-powerfull too: VVho thriues, that striues with what he minds to doo? He mounts the Vallies, and he vailes the Mountains: He shakes the Earth; he opes & stops the Fountains: He bids the Sun shine, and forbids it soon: He seals the Starres vp; he conceales the Moon: He spreads alone the Heauens large Canapey: He treads vpon the bound-lesse ground-lesse Sea: He makes Arcturus Starre, the Or Stormy youth, The Pleiadés, and Climits of the South: He worketh mighty things and manifold, Miraculous, and more then can be told: He passeth by me, and repasseth so, nseen of me, and vnperceiued tho: He, when him pleaseth, if a Prey he take, Who can compell him to restore it back? Nay: who so bold into his Acts to pry? Or, Who dares question What he doth, or Why? His Anger is not stopt, nor stoopt a whit; But strongest helps are fain to stoop to it.
Then, how-much-less; O! how-much-less am I Able (alas!) with Him my Case to try? No: were I iust, I were not absolute; But, to my Indge would I make humble Sute; And, to my Cry if he reply, yet hard Can I beleeue that He my voyce hath heard. For, with a Tempest he destroyes me sterne; And wounds me Cause lesse (for ought I discerne); Nor suffers me so much as breathe at all; But fills me still with Bitternesse and Gall. If Srength we speak of; Who is strong but He? If Iudgement; then, Who shall mine Vmpire be? If I would iustifie my Selfe (with Him) He by mine owne Mouth will me soon condemn; If I would plead me perfect and vpright, He, He would iudge me wicked, in his sight; Though I were perfect (to my Selfe) from Sin; Alas! I know not mine owne Soule within. Therefore (Thus vexed and perplexed rife) I loath alas! and I abhorre my life. Yet, grant I not; but that the Lord doth smight (Which you deny) both Wicked and Vpright. Else, when He strikes a People (old and young) Would He seem smile at Good mens Stripes emong?
Would He bestowe vpon th' Vogodly-most Earth's Soueraintie, and let them rule the Rost? Would He permit profane Bribe-blinded ones With blunted Sword to fit on Iustice Thrones? While that the Vertuous to the wall are thrust? While th' Innocent are troden in the Dust? For, Who, but He, directs, acts, orders All In all the World, what euer doth befall? My Daies far swifter then a Poste haue past; Past without sight of any Good (to-last): As swiftest Ships, so haue they flid-away; Or as the Eagle basting to her Prey. If that I say, I will forget my Griefe, Forgoe my Wrath, and yet re-hope Reliefe: Ah! then my Torments all afresh affright, With Terrours, least Thou wilt not quit me quight. For, if I be Vngodly all in vaine I cry to Thee, and to no end I plaine: Or, if Vnguilty, Cleane, and White as Snowe (In mine owne sight) in Thine I am not so; But in the sight of Thy pure Eyes, as soild, And with the Garment that I weare defild. GOD is not Man, as I (in equall Sute) That I with Him should argue or dispute:
Nor is there (should we meet) a Moderator, TWIXT Him and Me to arbitrate the Matter. Let him leaue-off his hold, take-off his Rod, Lay-ost his Awefull Maiesty, as GOD; Then will I speak, and freely, voyd of Feare: But, as it is, I must, I will forbeare. AS dead aue; vpon my Selfe I'll lay My sad Complaint; and in mine Anguish pray Thus to the Lord: O Lord, condemne me not; But show me, why thou huntest me so hot. Lord! art Thou pleased to oppresse me Thus? O! dost Thou iudge as doth' Vrighteous (Vnheard, vntry'd, and vnsuspect) to trip And cast-away thine owne hands Workmanship? Scest Thou, as Man? or hast Thou carnall Eyes? Years as Mans Years? Daies as Mans Daies, who dies; That thus Thou rack'st Me, and protractst Me still, Searching and sifting to find out mine Ill? I cannot sin, Thou know'st, but Thou must see: For, from Thine hands can None deliuer Me. Thy hands haue made Me, all, and euery part: And wilt I hou now thine owne hands Work subuert? Remember, Lord, how fraile and brittle stuff Thou mad'st me of (then vse me not so rough)
Euen of the Clay, as is the Potters Crust: And wilt Thou then re-crush me into Dust? Thou pourd'st me out as Milk (within the womb) Thou mad'st me there, as Cheese, a Crud becom; With Skin and Flesh Thou cloth'dst me fair and fit, With Bones and Sinewes fast together knit: Inspir'dst me Life and Soule, Reason and Sense; And still preseru'dst me by thy Prouidence. These Things as hidden in thy Bosome bee: But well I know, that it is so with Thee. If I haue sinned, Thou wilt sift me neer; And of my Guilt Thou wilt not hold me cleer. If Wicked I haue been; then Woe to Me: If Righteous; Yet still will I humble be; Though deep confounded, and amazed much, To see, and feele, my sad Affliction Such. But, be it more: come, Lion-like set on-me▪ Returne and show Thee maruclous vpon-me: And so (indeed) Thou doost: for, Thou renewest Thy plagues on me; and me more fierce pursewest: Changes of Woes, Armies of Paines extreame, Afresh iuuade me, and me round behem. Then, Why (alas!) Why didst thou bring me forth From fruitfull Womb (being no better worth)?
O! that I there had perished, vnseen: And that I were as if I had not been, Brought from the Womb (one Tomb, vnto Another) To Earth my Mother from my Earthly Mother. Is not my Glasse neer out? My Date neer done? O! let him cease, and leaue-off laying-on; That I may take a little Comforts breath, Yer quite I goe to the dark Land of Death; A Land of Darkness, Darkness Selfe (I say) And Shade of Death: where is no Light, no Day. 11 THen answered Zophar, the Naamathite; Should words preuail? Shal prating pass for right? Should all be mute? Shall no man dare reply, To mock thy Mocks, and giue thy Lie the Lie? For, Thou hast said (and that, too-vehment) My Words, and Deeds, and thoughts, are innocent; Pure in Thine eyes. But O! that GOD would speak; That He would once His sacred Silence break; To shew thee Wisdome's Secrets: Thou might'st see, Thou meit'st double what he layes on Thee; And surely know that (in his Iustice strict) After thy Sins, He doth not Sores inflict▪ But seems to haue forgoten, or forgiuen Thy Trespasses against Him Selfe and heauen.
Canst Thou, by searching, GOD's deep Counsel find? Conceaue th' Almighty? Comprehend His mind? Reach His perfection? It doth Heauen excell In Height; in Depth exceeds the lowest Hell: Longer then Earth: larger then all the Seas. O! What? When? Where? How wilt Thou measure These? If He cut-off, shut-vp, collect, reiect; Who can diuert Him? Who his Course correct? He knows vain Men: He sees their harts that hard thē In Guiles and Wiles; and will not He regard them? That foolish man, made wise, may be reclaimed; Borne bruit and dull, as an Asse Colt, vntamed. If therefore, by Repentance, thou prepare Thine humbled heart. if that, in hearty Prayer, Thou stretch thine hands vnto his Throne aboue: Though thou haue sinn'd; if Thou thy Sin remoue: If Thou remoue it, and permit no more Iniquity to dwell within thy Doore: Then shalt Thou, doubtlesse, free from Fault & Fear, Settled and safe, thy Face againe vprear: Then shalt thon sure forget thy Miscry; Or, but esteem is as a Streame past by: Then shall thy Daies be, then the Noon more bright; And Thou shall shine, as Morning after Night:
Then shalt thou rest secure and confident, Hopefull, and Happy, in thy proper Tent, In thine owne Dwelling: where, for Eminence, Sutors shall flock, with seemly Reuerence. But, as for stubborne, wilfull Wicked-ones, That still run-on in their Rebellions, Their Helps shall faile, and all their Hap shall fall; And as a Ghasp, their Hopes shall vanish all. p. 12 THen said the Hussian: You, vndoubtedly, You are the Men: Wisdom with you must dy: Yet (would yee knew it) somwhat know I, too; I vnderstand perhaps as well as you.11 Nor will I yeeld you in this larre a lot: VVhat you haue vrg'd I know: and Who doth not? Yee say, I lie; yee tell me, that I mock: But I am made my Fellowes Laughing-stock: Who calls on GOD, and whom He heareth prest, Th' Vpright and Iust (indeed) is made a lest: And He that's going downe (in state forlorne) Like dying Lamp, is to the Rich a Scorne; VVhile (for the most) Oppressors prosper, sure; And God-prouokers, safely and secure, Haue in their hand (GOD in their hand hath put) The Horne of Plenty, them at will to glut.
Aske but the Beasts: inqure of Earth, or Seas; Or Fowles, or Fish: for, which is it of These, But knowes, and showes, & plainly tells thee This; That GOD's their Maker: and of All that is: That in His hand's the Life of all that liues▪ That He alone, to All Men, athing giues. Doth not the Eare try Speeches (bad o good)▪ And, for it Selfe, the Palate taste the food? So, Wisedom should be to the Many-year'd; And Vnderstanding to the Hoary-bait'd. With Him it is (with th' Ancient of Dayes) With Him is Counsaile, Wisedom, Power, & Prai▪ Lo, He destroyes, and no man can restore: Whom He shuts-vp, can be les our no more: He stops the Streams; then dry they vp and shrink; He sends them forth; then all the Earth they sink. With Him is Strength: with Him is All that is: Who erreth, & Who maketh erre, are His: He doth distract the Counsailors of State: He makes the Iudges as infatuate: He breaks the Bonds of Kings Imporiall Awe; And brings Them bounden vnder Others Law: He leads the Princes as a Captiue pray: Dismounts the Mightie; and, with strange distay,
He dulls the Learned, dumbs the Eloquent, And reaues the Iudgement of the Ancient: He poures contempt vpon the Noble-born: He strips the Strong: He leaues the Stout forlorn: He deepest Secrets soone discouereth: He brings to light the darkest shades of Death: He multiplieth People; and He mowes Them down again (by Famin, Plague, or Blowes): He sends them forth in Colonies to spread; And brings them back (by wrack, lack, sack, or dread): He reaues the hearts of those that rule the Earth, And makes thē roam throgh Desert sands of Dearth,11 Where None go by; They grope as in the Dark; They haue no Light, no Sight; no certain Mark; They stray; they stumble; to & fro they wheel: And He▪ He makes Them, Drunkard-like, to reel. p. 13. AL This mine eies haue sen, mine ears haue heard: All This my heart hath weigh'd, & wel conferd. So that, in This, what you haue known, I knew; And am not Heerein to gie place to You. But, as You wish, I also wish: O! would Th' Almighty pleas'd that I might be so bold (In his own Presence, at  Bar to stand) To plead with Him the Cause I haue in hand.
or, You, indeed, are too Sophisticall: ly Physicians, for my Sicknes, all. ! that you therefore had still held you mute: o might you still haue held a wise Repute. t, list you now vnto my Arguing: ark well my Reasons, & the Proofes I bring. Will You speak falsly for th' Almighty Lord? ill you for Him pronounce a Guileful word? Vill you be partiall for His persons sake? ill you for Him, with Cauils vnder-take? all it auaile you? will He con you Thank t his great Audit, for this double Prank? Or, wen you, smoothing, these Deceits to smother? r, bu to mock Him, as one Man another)? No you shal know, He wil not brook, nor bear it, t chide you sharp; how-euer secret were it. all not the brightnes of His Face affray you? is Maiestie with awefull Rayes dismay you, eer Erth & Ashes (daring thus to play) our Best but Dust: your rest but Durt & Clay? old you your tongues: no more your silence break: ut (at my Peill) giue Meleaue to speak. Why should I teare me (as one out of Sense) ith mine own Teeth? or doe Selfe-Violence?
No: should He slay me, I would hope againe (Though in his sight I still my right maintaine) For, He himselfe will saue and doe me right; And cleere mee from your doome of Hypocrite: Sith, in His presence Such can haue no place, Nor hope such help of His assisting Grace. Giue therefore eare vnto my words; & waigh VVith due regard what I shall truly say. Lo, heere I stand, as ready to be try'd (And well I knowe I shall be iustifi'd) Come, who will charge me, & oppose my Pleas11 (Alas! I die, if now I hold my peace) Onely, but spare me in Two things: with-drawe Thy heauie hand; vvith-hold thy glorious Awe From frighting me: then, from before thy face I shall not hide me; nor betray my Case: Then, at thy choise, be in this Cause dependant (I am indifferent) Plaintif, or Defendant. What? and How-many are my Sins (pretended)? Shew me Wherein, and How, I haue offended, That Thou should'st shun, & turn thee from me so; And handle me as thy most hated Foe. Doost Thou vouchsafe a witherd Leafe to crush? Against dry Stubble doost Thou daign to rush?
That in so bitter and seuere a stile Thou doost indight mee: and recite (the while) My sinnes of Youth (them re-recording fresh, VVith th' Heritage inherent vnto Flesh): And putt'st my feet into the Stocks so strait; VVatchest my Waies, and at my heeles doost wait, To finde some hole in my fore-acted Life (Scourging mine Errors with thy Terrors rife) VVhile, rotten-like, it wasteth, as a Cloth rown full of holes, & eaten by the Moth. Cap. 14. MAn, born of Man's & Womans loynes, alas! Hath but few dayes, & those ful sad, to pass: Much like a Flower he shooteth vp; and fades, Quickly cut downe: he vanisheth, as Shades; Of no continuance [here]. Yet, dost Thou daign To frowne at Such? & striue with Me, so vaine? Who, from Pollution, can pure thing extract? ! there is None; none that is so exact. ith then his dayes Thou hast determined; ith that his Months with thee be numbered; ith Thou hast set the certain Time he has To Him vncertain) which He cannot pass: orbeare a while, & from him looke away, Till (as the Hireling) he hath done his Day.
For, though a Tree be felled; from the Root, Yet is there hope that Branches will re-shoot; Though in the Earth the Root be old and dry, Though on the Earth the Trunk as dead do lie; Yet by the Sent of the neer-winding Flood, It will reuiue, and as a Plant, re-bud: But Man (man's Body from his Soule bereft) Man down & dead; O! what of Him is left? Sith, as Sea-waters past, re-passe no more; As Riuers, dry'd, return not to their Shore: Man, Dead-asleep, shall neuer wake again; Nor neuer rise, till Heav'n no more remain.11 O! wert thou pleas'd, me in my Graue to hide, Vntill thy Wrath were past and pacifi'd! Or that there were some Time, or Term assign'd When Thou wilt cease; & in thy Mercy mind me! Or, shall a Man neer dead, heer liue again; Still liuing-dying in continuall Pain? And shall I still, in this distressed state, Wait, all the Dayes of mine appointed Date, Vntill my Change (my Renouation) come? When Thou shalt call me: nor shal I be dumb, But answer thee: Then, then Thou wilt approue That Thou the Works of thine own hands doost lou
Though now my steps thou numbrest so exact; Not'st all my Sins, & seem'st them to haue packt As in a Bagge, safe sealed; yea, to add New Trespasses vnto the old, I had. So that, as Mountains, mouldring, down do sink; As from their places shiuer'd Rocks do shrink: As waters break the Stones; as Showres surround The dusty Earth; Thou doost Man's hope cōfound; And tryumph'st euer ouer Him, deiected; Transform'd in Face, as from thy Face reiected. Nor knoweth He, whether his deer Posteritie Shall poorely fare, or flourish in Prosperitie: But, while his Soule his Body beares about, That, shall haue Woe within; & This, without.
The second Booke. p. 15. TO This of His (so hot and vehement) Thus Eliphas (in the same Element): Should one so wise (as thou doost vant thee here) Discourse so vainly? bring such idle geare? Vent from the Centre of a swelling brest As noysome Gales as the vnholsome East? Trifle the Time [about I vvot not what] In idle and vnprofitable chat? Nay: nullifie Religious Feare and Pietie, Not praying to, but pleading with the Deitie?11 VVhich thine own mouth hath witnest too-too-far, VVith subtile Cauils of a Sophister. Yea, thine own mouth (not mine) shall thee cōuince: Against thy Selfe thy lippes giue Euidence. Why Man! wert Thou the first man on the earth? Or, wert Thou born before the Hills had birth? Hast Thou alone GOD's Secret vnderstood? And hast Thou onely VVisedom, in thy Hood? VVhat is't Thou knowest, that We haue not kend? VVhat vnderstand'st Thou, but VVe comprehend? There are of Vs as old as Thou; or rather, Some (I suppose) more antient then Thy Father:
And doost Thou slight our Comforts (godly sent)? Or hast Thou of thine Owne more excellent? Why doth thy heart, and whither, thee transport? Why doost thou close thine eyes? that in this sort Thy Spirit turnes (shall I say spurns?) at GOD: And from thy Lips spets words so bold and broad? O! What is Man, that He should clean exist? Or Womans Son, that He should Iust persist? Behold, He found, his Angels stood not sure: Neither, the Heauens, in His pure sight, are pure: Then, How-much-more, before Him, filthy stinks Stock-stained Man, who Sin, as Water, drinks? I'll therfore shew the (hark, and marke me well) What I haue seen; I will declare and ell What, from their Elders, Sages yerst haue know'n, And to their Heires successiuely haue show'n. Such as, indeed, haue had the Helm in hand, To steer their Owne, and Strangers to with-stand. The Wicked Man's in-labour, all his Life; In bitter Pains, in Pangs, and Passions rife: Number of yeares are seldome His, to summe: A Sound of Feares still in His ares doth humme: Or, if at all He sm in ease to swim; The swift Destroyer shall soon seaze on him,
Hap-less, and Hope-less euer to recouer: Seeing the Sword, him euer hanging ouer. Needy, indeed; or greedy still of more (Pining in Plenty, staruing in his Store) He wanders, seeking of his Bread about; In dread of Want; of a Black Day, in doubt: Trouble and Anguish shall him deep affright; As royall Armies ready for the Fight. For, He hath stretched his proud hand at Heav'n; And stubbornly hath with th' Almighty striv'n, Running at Him, ushing vpon his Neck; Yea, on the Bosses of his Shield so thick:11 Because his Fat, his full broad Face doth couer; And lardie Collops on his sides hang ouer; And dwels in Houses, rather Townes of late, (By Him) dis-patron'd and depopulate; By Him, re-built, re-gilt, re-glost, re-glas'd; By Him, re-Named (ready to be ras'd). Yet, shall not He be Rich; nor in Prosperity Persist; nor leaue Possession to Posterity: Nor, out of Darknes euer get shall He; Nor euer other then inglorious e: His Branch shall wither, and with Flame be wasted: Him Self shal, sodain, with GOD's Breath be blasted
Then, let not (hard-beleeuing haut Humanity) O! let not the Deceiued trust in Vanity. For, Vanity shall be his Recompence: Before his Time shall he be snatched hence: His Spring shall neuer sprout, his Flowers shall fall, His Fruit, yer ripe, shall be off-shaken all (As Grapes and Oliues, with vntimely Frost) The Lord shal shake them, and they shall be lost. For, th' Hypocrites Dissembling Congregation, Shall be disperst, and brought to Desolation: And sodainly shal Fire consume the Tents Of Briberie, with all their Instruments. For, They conceiue but Mischiefe; breed but Guile, And bring forth vain Iniquitie the while. Cap. HE pausing heer, IOB Thus replies him, sad: Yet more of This? This haue we often had. You are indeed a sort of Visiters; A Crew of cold and wretched Comforters. Shall idle, addle, aiery, Words surcease? Or what doth make thee dare to dwel on these? Could I, as you, if you were in my Case, And I in yours; your Soule in my Soules place: Could I, against you, words haue multipl'ed? Insulted on you? at you, shook my head?
No: I should rather haue raught you Reliefe, And with my speeches haue asswag'd your Griefe. But, though I plain, my Griefe's not mitigated; Either, forbeare I, What is it abated? For, He hath wearied me: Yea, Lord, Thou hast Spoild me of All: and laid me wholly wast: The wrinkled Furrowes, on my Brow and Back (Bare skin and bone) bear witnesse of my Wrack. My Foe's fell wrath hath raakt and rent me sore: He striues against me; and still angry more, More eager still, gnasheth his Teeth vpon me; And with his eyes keen flashing frowneth on-me.11 My Friends (alas!) they laugh at me the while, They buffet me, and bitterly reuile; They gape vpon me, and together gather. Not to relieue me, but to grieue me, rather. Thus hath GOD hemm'd me with vngodly Bands, And turnd me ouer into Wicked hands. I was at ase; When by the Neck he took-me, Brake me a-sunder, and to shiuers shook me: And (whether for Disport or for Despite) Made me his Butte, and set me as his White. His cunning Archers do beset me round: He cleaues my Reines; and ruth less, on the ground
Poures-out my Gall: with doubled Blowes he crushes, And Giant-like, vpon me fiercely rushes. I haue in Sack-cloth sadly sow'd my Skin, n Dust and Ashes haue I humbled bin, I haue (alas!) besmeard my Face with Teares, On mine Eie-lids Death's Shade hath swom, in Fears: For no foule Sin; neither, for Fashions sake, To seem a Saint: pure Prayers did I make, Pure and Sincere: else, neuer may they come In Heau'n, to haue either regard or roome. Neither, O! Earth! if euer Blood I shed, O! let it not by Thee be couered. But, lo, my Witnesse is in Heav'n aboue; My Record there, my Conscience to approue. My Friends contemne me, and condemne me too: But, droun'd in Teares, to GOD appeal I doo. O! that one might (as Man with Man, in Sute) That Neighbor-like, one might with GOD dispute. For, the few Daies of my set Number gone, goe the Way, from whence Returne is none. Cap. 1 MY Spirit's spent: my Daies are don (& leaue me) The Graue's already ready to receiue me. Yet are there with me none but those that mock me: Doth not mine eye still see them still prouoke me▪
But, put me in a Surety, giue me Pledge, To answer me what I shall then alleadge. Who'll vndertake it? Who will giue his hand, That to the Triall Thou wilt daign to stand? Sith Thou, O Lord, Their hearts hast hidden quight, From Vnderstanding, and from iudging right; And therefore wilt not, for their Arrogance, Admit of them, nor them so high aduance. Not, that I would, they should haue sooth'd me nei∣ther: For such shal perish, and their Seed together. But, to the Vulgar I am made a Song,11 A Tale, a Tabret vnto euery Tongue (Through grief whereof, mine Eye decaies & dims; And as a Shadowe are my other Limbs): The better sort, amazed at my Plight, The Innocent, iudge me an Hypocrite. Yet, shall the Righteous still hold on his Course; Therefore, my Friends, returne, recant, re-call Your hard Opinions, and mis-Censures, all: For, of you all, not one Wise man I finde; Not fit Physician for a troubled minde. My Daies are past; and my Dessignes vndon; Yea, euen my Hopes (my hearts Possessions) gon:
y Noon (alas!) is changed into Night; allods there is twixt Darknesse and my Light. hat can I looke for, but among the Dead o make my House? to haue my Graue for Bed? r, to Corruption, thus aloud I call; hou art my Father: to the Worms that crawl, u are my Mother, and my Sisters, all. Where's then my Hope? How shal that Hap appeer, hich you yer-while did so re-promise, heer? hose things, with me, shall downe into the Deep; d, with my Dust, amid the Dust shall sleep. Cap. 18 Hen said the Shhite: Will you neuer cease Your tedious Talking? Neuer hold your peace? heare a while; giue eare a little now: bserue our Speech, and we will answer you. t, why, as Beasts are we vpbraided thus? d why so basely doe you count of vs? , rather seems to be besides his sense, at wounds him Selfe in his Impatience. Why? Shall the Earth, for hy sake be forsaken? e Rocks remou'd? and solid Hils be shaken? o, no: The Light of Wicked-ones shall out: s Firy Sparkle shall not shine about: thn his Doores shall Darknes be for Light: ith Him, his Candle shall be quenched quight:
His Strength shall faile him (or be fatall to-him)▪ His Counsels cast him; His owne Wit vndoo-him: For, his owne Feet shall bring him to the Net; And willingly vpon the Gin shall iet: Him, by the heele the subtill Snare shall catch: Him, shall the Theeues and Robbers ouer-match; For him are laid the Meshes of Mis-hap; Traines on the ground, and in his wayes a Trap: Him, on all sides, sad Terrors shall affright; And sudden driue him to his Feet, to flight: His plentious Store shall Famine soon deuoure:11 Destruction's Sword shall hunt-him euery-hower, Consume his Sinewes, and vn-bar his Skin: And Pestilence (Death's Heire) shall rage within. His Hope shall hop without his expectation: His Confidence shall from his Habitation Be rooted out, and razed (as it were) And bring him downe to the drad King of Feare; Who aye shall dwell within His Tabernacle, (Because not His, not his owne Habitacle): Some secret Flame, som Flash, som Sulphury showe, Shall sudden spred amid his cursed Bower: His Roots belowe shall ot amid the Clay; His Boughes aboue be cut and cast away:
His Memorie shall perish from the Earth; His Name heer nameless (as before his Birth) He shal be driv'n to Darknes, from the Light: And forth the World he shall be hunted quight. Nor Sonne, nor Nephew shall be leaue behind; Nor in his Houses any of his Kind. So that, the Ages, present, and to come, Shall stand amazed at his dismall Doome. And This is sure the Lot, the heauie Load Of VVicked-ones, that fear not, know not, GOD. Cap. 1 IOB then reply'd: Alas! how long will Yee Torment my Soule, with words; & torture Mee? en times ye haue, with too obdurate minde, proacht mee This: vnciuill and vnkind. But, put the Case, that I haue sinn'd, indeed: ust not I beare it? Then (alas!) what need ou load me more; and magnifie your wit, o amplifie my Guilt, and Griefe of it? eeing you see that GOD hath cast me downe, nd with his Net hath compassed me round. Lo, I cry-out of wrong & violence; oud I cry; yet haue no Audience, or Ease at all: He hath so hedg'd my VVay, annot passe: My Paths, in stead of Day,
Are Darke beset: He hath my glorie reft; And from my head He hath the Crowne bereft: He hath destroy'd me, euery-way vndone: My Hope, remoued (as a Tree) is gone: And more, His Wrath against me fiercely fryes; He reckons Me among his Enemies: His Troupes assembled, march against Me, egre; And, ound about, my feeble Tent beleguer: He hah disperst my Brethren from me farre; To Me, my Kindred as meer Stangers are; My Neighbors flie me; my Familiar Frend Hath now forgot me (as if neuer kend):11 Nay: mine own Household; Men, Maid-seruants, all▪ Count me a Stranger, care not for my Call, Nor will come at me; though I speak them faire: Nay: to mine own Wife (for the noisome aire) My Breath is strange, though I beseech her, sad, By thoe deer Pledges wee together had. The Balest sco me; and when vp I se, They pt their Spight in bitter Obloquies. most, Those that I loued best, Abhor mee All, and me the most molest. My Bns, in sted of Flsh, cleaue to my skin; And that not sound, saue what my Teeth grow in.
Then pitty me, ô pitty me, my Frends; Sith GOD on me his heauie hand extends: Ah! Why do you yet persecute me, rough. As GOD? Alas! hath not my Flesh enough? O! that my words (the words I now assuer) Were writ, were printed, & (to last for-euer) Were gav'n in Marble with an Iron pen With Lead in-yoated (to fill vp agen). I surely knowe that my Redeemer liueth: And that He shall (This firm my Faith belieueth.) In th' End of Time, return▪ & rise from Dust (The First & Last) to iudge and saue the Iust: And, that I shall when worms haue eat This Clod, I shal awake, & in my flesh see GOD: Yea: I shall see him with These yes of mine. And with none els: though Now in Paines I pine. The rather, therfore should you now , And Thus Your-selues diseetly now correct: Why persecute We Hm? Why hate Him, Wee? ith This Foundation is thus fix in Mee. Then, be you warn'd: beware, & fea the Sword: or Wickednes & Cruelty [in word] ncenseth Wrath: Know, there shal udgment come, To doom them right, who Other▪ (ash) misdoom.
20 SCarce had He done, when the Naamathite Replyes him Thus: Therefore my thoughts in-@@cie My suddain Answer: therfore, am I spurr'd (Regarding light thy sharp and shamefull Guird) VVith speed to speake vnto the Point in hand, VVhat I conceiue, & rightly vnderstand. Know'st thou not This of old, through euery Ag Since first on Earth began Man's Pilgrimage; That the tryumphing of the Wicked Sort, The Ioy of th' Hypocrite is euer short. Although to Heav'n hee mount his glorious Top11 Though to the Clowds his head be lifted vp; Yet shall he perish, as his dung, for aye: And who hath seen them, shal ask, VVhere are they? As Dreames forgotten, shall be take his flight; Yea, chas'd away, as Visions of the Night: Th' Eye that hath seen him, shal not see him twise, Nor shall his Places him againe reuise. His Children shall be fawning on the Poore; And His Extortions shall to them restore: His Bones are full of his Youth's sinnes (his Lust) VVhich shall not leaue him till he lie in dust: Though to his Taste his Sin be passing sweet, Though vnder-neath his Tongue he couer it,
Though there he spare it, and not spet it out, Though on his Palate still it roule about; Yet is his Meat turnd, in his Bowells, all; And is, within him, as the Aspic's Gall: H' hath swallow'd Wealth, but GOD shall make him fain To spue it out to cast it vp againe: He shall the Aspic's direfull Poison suck: VVith Vipers tongues he shall be deadly stuck: He shall not see the Oylie Riuers Currents, Nor Brooks of Butter, nor the Honny Torrents: His Labour neuer shall regain his Losse: He shal restore whom he before did crosse; The Restitution shal be all his state; He neuer shall digest, nor ioy thereat: Because the Poore he crushed, and forsook; And Others Houses violently took. Sure he shall haue no quiet Calm within; VVithout, no Store of what he ioyeth in. There shalbe no Remainder of his meat; And his Reuersions none shal wait to eat: Nay: in his Ruffe, and at his Greatest Height, He shal be stocked in full many a Strait: Continuall Hazards shal him round enring; Each spightfull hand shall haue at him a fling:
VVhen he is rai for his rich Repast, On Him will GOD his fierie Furie cast; Amid his Feasts his lead. Displeasure thrilling. In stead of Food, his best with horor filling. If he escape the Sword; from Bowes of steel Steel-headed Arrowes shal him thorough thrill: The naked Sword bright-shining terror shall Peep through his Bosom eep throgh guts & gall. Horrors shal haunt him: and so, hard-bestid, From iding him, all Darknes shall be hid. A Fire vnblow'n him suddain shall consume:11 And woe to them that tarry in his Roome: Heav'n shall discouer his Iniquities, And Earth for witnesse shall against him rise; All his Reuenewes, all his state, and stay, Shall flowe to Others, in his Wrathful Day. This i the Porion of the Wicked: This His Heritage by GOD appointed is. p. 2 SO, Zophar ceast. Then IOB reply'd: I pray Heare heedfully what Now I haue to say: B this the Comfort you vouchsafe, alone; Let Me but speak; and afterwards, mock on. Doe I complain, or make my moan to Man? Why doe you crosse, or interrupt me, than?
f I haue cause of Griefe, should not my spirit e moou'd withall? Can Flesh & Bloud forbear it? ehold me well; & be withall dismay'd: nd let your hand vpon your mouth be layd. Thought of the like (else-where) would me affright, And daunt my Flesh: How then, my present fight? How comes it, that the Wicked liue, liue long; Grow Rich, grow Great; wex Eminent, & Strong? They see their Children, & Grand-children, rife Setled about them: In their House, no Strife; No Feare; no Foe: They feele not any Rod, No stripe no stroak, of the drad hand of GOD. Their Bullock genders, and proues euer fit: Their Heifer calues, & neuer casteth it: Their Little ones, like Lambkins send they out; Their Stripplings play & skip, & dance about; They tune their Voice to sweetest Instruments, Harp, Pipe & Tabre; to delight their sense: In Wealth & Health They liue; scarce, euer, sick Of long Disease; but to their Graues go quick. Yet These are Those, that to th'Almighty say; Depart from vs; we will not learn thy Wy: Who is the Lord? that we should Him obay. What should we profit, if to Him we pray?
They haue not sure the power in their Own hand, To get and keep their Wealth at their Command. Be therefore fare, be euer farre from Mee, Their Works, & Words, & Thought's Impietie▪ Fare be their Counsailes: far be all their VVaies: And farre the Peace of their so prosperous Dayes. And yet, how often, is their Lamp put-out? How often, are They compassed about VVith swift Destruction? In his Furie strict, How oft, doth GOD Their Paiment here inflict? How oft, as Straw before the winde, are They, And as the Chaff with Tempest whift away?11 How oft, doth GOD, in the Vngodly's sight, For Their own Guilt their own deere Issue smite? Or, let Themselues heer see themselues vndone; Drinking the hot Wrath of th'Almighty-one? For, what is it to Them? or what care They (Their Months cut off; Their mouths once stopt with (clay) What hap their house, what hazard follow shal: VVhat Weale or Woe, vnto their Heires befall? But herein, who GOD'S Wisedom shall impeach? Or, who shall, Him, that rules the highest, teach? One dies at ease▪ in Strength's perfection growing; His Brests with Milk, his Bones with Marrow flowing
Another dies in Anguish of his Spirit; And neuer did good Day or Night inherit: Both, are, alike, laid in the Dust together; And Wormes, alike, doo case and couer Either. Lo, I conceiue your mis-conceipts, from hence; Your mis-collections, and your wrested Sense: For, Where (say ye) Where's now the Princes Court? And Where the Palace of the wicked sort? Haue ye not asked those that trauaile by? And doe ye yet, can ye, Their Marks deny? That (for the most) the Wicked most are spared, Repriued heer, till That dread Day prepared For dire Destruction: and then (for their Errors) Shall be brought-forth, in That great Day of Terrors. For, Heer so Mighty and so Great they are; Who, to their face shall their Offence declare? Who dares disclose it? Who shall prosecute? And their due Sentence Who shall execute? Nay (notwithstanding) to their Graue in peace They passe, with Pompe of solemne Obsequies; Accompany'd, attended (in their kinde) With Mourning Troupes, before them and behinde: Entomb'd among their Ancestors: and rest In gloomie Vales, as happy as the Best:
How do You, then, Me comfort, or confute; While vainly thus, and falsly you dispute? The third Book. p. 22 T old Thaemanite, as mou'd withall, replies: Can Man, to GOD ( to Him-selfe, the Wise) Be pofitale? Any pleure 't Vnto the Lord, if Righteous Thou persist? If Thou be iust, if perfect, and vpright; Is GOD the better? Gaines th'lmighty by't?1 For feare of Thee, will He reproue thee (strict) Enter in Iudgement, and thee thus afflict? Is not thy Sin great and thy Wickedness; And infinite thy foule Vnrighteousness? Yes: hou hast ta'en thy Brothers Pledge for no∣thing, And stripped euen the Naked of their Clothing: Thou hast not giuen the wearie Drink, at need; Nor to the Hungry, wherewith all to feed: The Eminent and Mighty had their fill: They held the Earth, and swayd thee at their will: But silly Widowes hast thou empty packt; And th' armes of Orphans haue bin crusht and crackt.
Thence is it, now, that Snares beset thee round, And sodain Feares thee trouble and confound: Or a black Darknes that thou canst not see; And a huge Deluge that ore-whelmeth thee. Is not the Lord in th'High Empyreal Blisse? ehold the Stars, how high their Distance is: And then (saist Thou) What can th' Almighty mark? How iudgeth He? What sees he through the Dark? Clowds couer Him from spying so far hence: He walketh in the Heav'ns Circumference. But, hast not Thou obseru'd the ancient Track The Wicked trod, to their vntimely Wrack; Who, quick cut downe, supplanted where they stood, Had their Foundations swallowed with the Flood? Who said to GOD, Depart from vs; and thought, What can th' Almighty doo to vs, in ought. et, with good things He fill'd their habitations. ut, farre from me be their Inmaginations. This see the Righteous; safe the while, and glad: nd laugh at them, in their Destruction sad. or. We shall stand; our Substance not decay: ut their Remainder shall the Fire destroy. Therefore, acquaint thee (and that quickly too) With GOD; make peace: & Thou right wel shalt doo
Receiue (I pray thee) from lais mouth Direction; And in thy heart, lay-vp his Words instruction. If, to th' Almighty, Thou at-once returne; Thou shalt be built-vp: and shalt brauely spurns Iniquity farre from thy Selfe away; And from thy Dwellings put it farre, for aye. Then, as the Dust thou shalt haue Gold, at will; Pure Ophyr Gold, as Pebbles of the Rill: Yea, the Almighty Thy defence shall be: And store of Siluer shall be still with Thee. For, in the Lord thy Pleasure shalt thou place▪ And vnto Him shalt thou lift vp thy Face:11 Him shalt Thou pray-to; He shall heare thy Layes, And grant thy Sute; and Thou return him Praise: Thou shalt decree, and He shall make it good, (So thy good Purpose shall not be withstood): And on Thy Wayes, and in all Works of Thine, His Light of Grace (and glory too) shall shine. Nay: when-as Others (as thy selfe art now) Shall be cast downe; re-comfort them shalt Thou, And Thus re-cheer them: Yet, yet may you rise; For, GOD will saue such as haue humbled eyes. Yea: on the Noxious will he pittie take, For th' Innocent; and spare them for thy sake.
Cap. THen answered IOB: Tho to this Day my mones Right bitter be, my Griefe exceeds my Grones: How is it then, that I, as yet, am held, For hauing plain'd, as if I had rebeld? O! that I knew, that some would shew me, Where might goe find my Souerain Arbitrer. hat I might speedy vnto him repaire; nd euen approach to His Tribunall Chaire. would before Him pled my iust Defence, nd fill my Mouth with pregnant Arguments. hen would I know what should His Answer be: nd vnderstand what He would say to me. ould He oppose me with His Power diuine? o: rather would He steele and strengthen mine. here might the Iust in his iust Plea proceed: nd I should euer from my Iudge be freed. But, Whether to the West I take my way; r, to the pearely Portall of the Day; r, to the Norward, where he worketh rife; r, to the South, the Cell of blustering-strifes hether I looke before me, or behind; On This, or That side: Him I cannot find. Yet, knowes He well my Way: and hath me try'd And I, like Gold, shall come forth purified.
My Foot hath walked in His steps: His Way Haue I obserued; and not gon astray: Nor haue I started from His Precepts set, But priz'd them more then my appointed Meat. Yet, He persisteth in one purpose still. Who can diuert him? He doth what he will; And will performe what is of me decreed. And many such things are with Him, indeed. Therefore, before Him, am I wonder-smit; Affraid of Him, when I consider it. For, GOD hath suppled and made soft my heart, And deep perplext me in my inward part;11 Because my Languors neither end, nor I: Nor can I see, not sound the Reason, Why. p. 24 BVt, can it be (How can it other be?) But that the Times of the Diuine Decree, (Concerning Iudgements more or lesse seuere; When, Why, and Who, and How, & What, & Where Hidden with GOD, and hidden from his Owne; Should to the World, and wicked be vnknowne? They shift the Land-marks from their ancient seat They take by force mens Flocks, to feed, or eat: They driue away the silly Orphans Asse: They take for Pledge the Widowes Oxe (alas!):
hey turn the Needy from their neerest Way: hey make the Poor together hide them aye: o, Like wilde Asses in the Wildernesse, hey ramp about their brutish Businesse: ising betimes for Boot (like Free-booters): he Desart Field yeelds Food for them and theirs. hey reap them Each a Crop, from Others Crop: hey gather Each a wicked Vintage vp: hey cause the Naked without Clothes to lie, uiuering for Cold, no Couering but the Skie; asht with the Showers that frō the Mountains shed; mbracing Clifts, for Shelter; Rocks for Bed: hey Pluck the Pupil from the tender Brest: hey take from Poor a Pawne of all their best: hey leaue them Naked; Nay, the Hungry soule en of his Sheaf, and gleaned handfuls poule: ea; Labourers that in Their seruice toile; hat tread thei Wine-presse, & that make their Oile, hat trudge and drudge in their Affairs; in fine hey let them starue, and euen for thirst to pine. The Citie grones vnder their Wicked Thrll: h' oppressed, slain, and wounded, cry, and call: et, 'tis apparant (as the Sun is cleer) OD doth not alwaies smite (nor cite) them eer.
Yet, These are Those that aye the Light abho: Know not her Way, nor keep, nor care it for: The Murd'rer risen (early) yet the Light; To kill the Poore: and robbeth (late) at Night: Th' Adulterer's Eye doth for the Twy-light wai; And, muffled, thinks, none sees my quaint Deceipt: They (Burglars) digge through houses in the Dar Which, in the Day, they for their owne did mark: But, Light they loath: Morning to Them is D▪ Death's Terror, Day; which all discouereth: On Waters swim they light and swift, for Fear: On Earth, as Vagrants, fly they heer and there,11 (Their cursed portion) euery-where vndon: By-waies they seek, and the High-waies they sh. As Heat and Drought, dissolue & drink the Sno The wicked-one the Graue shall swallow so. The Womb that bare him, shall him quite forget; And, to the Worme he shall be wel-com Meat. He shall with Men, no more remembred be: But broken-off, as is a withred Tree. He weds the Barren that brings neuer forth; And, if a Widowe, leaues her nothing-worth. Yet, by his power, He drags the Mighty downe; And none is safe, if He, in Fury frowne:
o; though, with Presents, they his Patience buy, nd build on it; on Them he casts an eye. Such, for a little, are aloft: Anon lowe as Others; as All others, gone: one taken hence, shut-vp, cut-off, & shorn (with the Haile) the tufted eares of Corn. Thus it be not: Who will (I desire) isproue my Speech; and proue me now a Lyer. Cap. 2 TO This, the Shuhit answered shortly Thus: He is Almighty, Dradly-Glorious; hose Power imperiall, & All-humbling Awe, ules his High Places in most peacefull Law. any number of His Armies known? hat Light so bright, but His hath ouer-shone? ow, then, may Man, with GOD, be iust defin'd? , He be Clean, that's born of Woman-kind? hold, the Moon, before Him, is not bright: arres are not pure in his (All-piercing) sight. hen, How-much-lesse? How-much-less Man (alas!) The Son of Man: a Worm, a VVorthlesse Mass? Cap. 26 OB, heervnto replyes incontinent: Well haue ye said; but, How impertinent! ow hast Thou holp the weak & feeble wight? ow fit desended him that hath no might?
How sweetly taught the simple and vnwise? How full declar'd the Matter, as it lyes? To Whom doost Thou this Speech of thine direct▪ VVhat mooues thee to it? & to what effect? For, I (for My part) know, that, Not alone, Th' Eternall rules, on his supernall Throne The things aboue, in their harmonious Course; But heere belowe, the Better and the Worse. Beneath the Waters, dead things formed bin; And, dumb (their owne Inhabitants) within: Hell is not hid from Him: Destructions Caue, From His inspection, can no Couering haue.11 He, th' ample Heav'ns ouer the Void extends: He, vpon Nothing the sad Earth suspends: Within his Clowdes He bottles vp the Rain, Which with it weight tears not the Clowds in twai He hath in-bowd the fore-front of his Throne, And spread his clowdy Canapey thereon: He hath begirt the VVaters with a List Shall euer last, till Day and Night desist. The massie Pillers of the Pole doe shake If He but chide; & at His check they quake. He, by his Powr, doth the deep Sea diuide: His Prudence smites her in her fellest pride:
, by his Spirit, the spangled Heav'ns hath drest th glittering Signes; the Serpent, & the rest. o, These are parcells of his VVaies suprem: , ô! How little doe VVe heare of Him! o can conceiue? Who vnderstands the Thundes His more secret, & most sacred VVonders? Cap. 27 VHile none repli'd, IOB grauely Thus goes on: As liues the Lord, th' Almighty Holy-One, ho seems a space my Verdict to suppress, ding my Soule with brunts of Bitterness; bile Breath is in me; till my Spirit, inspir'd GOD, be gon, & from me quite exspir'd; Lips shall speak no wickednes, no wile; r shall my Tongue deliuer any guile. No; GOD forbid that I should iustifie ur rash miss-Iudgement. Mine Integritie not abandon, to my Dying-day: ne Innocence I neuer will betray: Righteousnes still will I fast retain; d, my cleer Conscience while I liue, maintain. t, as the VVicked, be mine Enemies: ose, as Vnrighteous, that against me rise. For, what's the Hope of th' hollow Hypocrite hough He haue heaped Treasures infinite)
VVhen GOD shal take (in a disastrous Day) His Land (his Life) his Goods (his Gods) away? Will GOD regard, or heare his howling Cry, VVhen He is compast with Calamitie? Or, in th' Almighty can He comfort take? Will He to GOD continuall Prayer make? I'll show you, how th' Almighty hand doth deale: God's wonted Course I will not now conceale: Nay; you your Selues, you all haue seen it too. VVhy talk ye then thus vainly as yee doo? This is, with GOD, the Portion & the Part11 Of the Vngodly & the Cruell heart: This heritage shall impious Tyrants haue From the Almightie, This they shall receaue: If many Children he shall leaue behind, As many shall the Sword or Famine find: Or, if that any in Remain be left; Thy, by the Plague, shal, vnbewayl'd, be ret. If H hu heaped Siluer, as the Dust; And Clothes, as Clay; he may: but sure the Iust Shall ioy his Siluer, & his Treasures share; And weare his Ward-robe, how-so rich & rare. If braue he build; it is but like the Moth (On others ground, as that in others Cloth)
Soon dispossest: or, like a Watch-house, soon o be set vp, and suddainly pull'd-down. Such Rich, shall die; and lie without regard, ga her'd to his Fathers Toomb prepar'd: othing of Him remains in Memorie: e vanisheth in Twinkling of an eye. orrors shall seaze him, as a Floud, with Fright; d as a Tempest, hurry him in the night. n Eastern Storm him quite away shal chase; nd, as a Wile-wind, hurle him from his place. pittiless, in wrathfull Ielousie, Vhile glad & fain he would his fingers flie) GOD pursue him; & Good men shal smile, d clap their hands, & hiss at him, the while. Cap. 2 Vre, there are Mines & veiolings (vnder ground) Whence Silver's fetcht, & wherin Gold is found: on out of Earth, and out of Stone the Brass melted down (into a purer mass). Beyond the bounds of Darknes Man hath pry'd, nd th' Excellence of vnder-ground descry'd: he rarest Stones, & richest Mineralls, om deadly Damps & horrid Dark e hales: nd, if some Torrent come there rushing in uch as no Foot hath felt, no Eye hath seen)
He can reuert it, or diuert it, soon, Without Impeachment to his VVork begun. Earth's surface yeelds him Corn & Fruits, for food; Her vnder-folds, some burning Sulphury flood: Amid the Quarrs of Stone are Saphires store: Among the Dust, the precious Golden Ore (VVhere neuer Bird, before did Path discry, VVhere neuer Vultur cast her greedy Eye, VVhere sauage Whelps had neuer neuer trac't; Nor furious Lion euer by had past): On Cliffs of Adamant He layes his hands; Their height & hardnes He at will commands;11 Slents them with Sledges, crops their clowdy crow He, by the roots turns Mountains vp-side down: To let out Rills, He cleaueth Rocks insunder: His Eye perceiues all that is precious, vnder: He binds the VVaters, that they shal not weep; And diues for Riches in the deepest Deep. All This, & more, hath Man. But where is found That souerain VVisedom, sacred & profound? That Vnderstanding of the VVaies diuine, Of GOD'S supream and secret Discipline? Man knowes it not; nor kenns the worth of it: It is not found in any liuing VVit. The Deeps confess, the Sea acknowledgeth;
is not in Me; nor with Me; th'other saith. Nor Gold, nor Siluer, nor all Gems that are, n purchase it, nor equall it by farre: o wedge of Ophir, neuer so refin'd: o Aethiopian Topaze, Pearle of Inde, o precious Onyx, neither Saphire pure orall and Crystall passe I, as obscure) o Carbuncle, no Diamant so rare; o One, nor All, with VVisedom may compare. But, Whence is then, & Where is to be found hat sacred VVisedom, secret & profound? h it is hidden from all humane Eyes; d from the fight of euery Foule that flyes. each & Destruction; say; VVe of the same ue with our eares but onely heard the Fame? GOD, GOD alone, doth vnderstand it Way; d knowes the place where it abideth aye. r, He, at once beholdeth All that is all the VVorld: All vnder Heav'n he sees, poize the Winds, & portion (at his pleasure) to the Waters their due weight & measure. When for the Raine he stablisht a Decree, d for the Thunder's Lightning Mutinie; en did Hee see it, and fore-see it fit: e numbred, pondred, & prepared it:
And vnto Man This Maxime did apply; GOD's Feare is Wisedom & from Sin to flie. ap. 29 IOB yet proceeded, & said further more, O! were it with mee, as it was of yore, In my fore-passed Months, my former Dayes, When GOD preseru'd me; when with gracious ra His Lightfull Lamp reflected on my head, Whereby I walkt through Darknes, void of Dread: As in my younger times, when yet the Lord Vouchlaf't me Blessings of my Bed & Boord; When yet the Lord was with me in my Tents,11 And showred there his hidden Prouidence. Whē, where I went, my waies were bath'd in Butt, And Rocks about me Rills of Oile did gutter: VVhen I had gon vnto the publique Gate To take my place where all our Senate sate, At sight of Me, would Young men hide them thence And th'Elder sort stand vp, for reuerence: Nobles were silent, if I present were; And, if I spake, they turn'd their Tongue to Eare: And th'Eare that heard me blessed me: & the Eye That saw me, witnest mine Integritie. For, I deliuered euery Poore opprest, The Orphan & the Helpless I redrest:
He blessed me that was wel-neer vndon: The Widowes heart I cheered: I put-on, put-on Iustice, as a seemly Gowne; It was vnto me as a Robe and Crowne. I, as an Eye vnto the Blind became; And as a Foot, vnto the Halt and Lame: A Father was I to the Poore: and where The Case was Dark, I would discusse it Cleer. I also brake th' Oppressors greedy Iawes, And took the Prey out of his Teeth and Pawes. Then thought I, sure, to die at home, in rest: And said, I shall with long good Daies be blest. For, by the Waters was my Root out-spred: Vpon my Top Heav'ns nightly Deaw was shed: My Wealth increast, mine Honour daily grew, My Bowe of Health (my Strength) did still renew. When I had spoken, euery Eare was prest To giue me eare, and in my Counsels rest, Without Reply: and as the latter Rain The thirstie Earth, my Words they entertain. If I had laught, or smil'd on any, neer, They took no notice, nor would change my Cheer. I sate as Chief, I onely rul'd the roast, Dwelt as a King amid an armed Hoast;
And, as a Man, amid a mourning Rout, That, from his lips, pours liuely Comforts out. . 30 BVt now (alas!) My Puisnès Me deride: The meanest mock me; Yea, and Those (beside) Whose ragged Fathers I refus'd, to keep My Shepheards Curs (much more to cure my Sheep) For, to say truth, what Seruice could they doo, So idle bred (both Young and Elder too) Weakned with Sloath, and wicked Conuersation; And waxen old, in wretched Desolation: For Cold and Hunger wandring here and there, With Mallowes fed, and roots of Iuniper:11 Pursewd as Theeues, hunted from place to place With Hue and Cries; and euer had in Chase; And therefor fain, for Shelter's sake to creep In Clifts and Caues; in Rocks and Dungeons deep: Among the Thorns and Thickets roaring rife; Wild Out-lawes, leading a most Beastiall life: The Breed of Fooles, the Fry of basest birth, Of name-lesse Men: indeed the Scums of And yet, to Such am I now made a Song, A Ballad and a By-word on their tongue: Yea, These despise me, and despight me too: Spet in my Face, and make no more adoo.
ecause the Lord my Bowe-string hath vnbent, nd slackt my Cord, therefore these insolent nsulters Now loose and let-go the Raines f all Respect, vnto their lewd Disdaigns. Now, very Boyes do take the Wall of me, rip at my Feet; and (in their Iollitie) is-iudge my Life, and of me Rumors raise, fter their owne cruell and cursed Waies: hey mar my Path that I haue walked in, urther my Woes, and haue no help therein: s a wide Flood-breach they haue rushed on-me, nd with the Ruines haue roul'd-in vpon-me. errors are turn'd vpon me, and pursew ly Life as Winde; my Weale, as Vapours flew: herefore my Soule, in sore Afflictions vext, s poured out, and inly deep perplext. Daies dark and irksome haue vpon me seaz'd: nd in the Night (when Others most are cas'd) y very Bones within me are opprest, ay, pierced through; my Sinnewes take no rest: y strange Disease, with angry Violence Of th' hot Impostumes loathsome Virulence, Hath staind my Garments: &, with straining Dolor, About my Neck it gripes me as a Coller.
Laid in the Dust. I roule the Mire among, Becom'n, indeed, like Ashes, Durt, and Dung. To Thee I cry, to Thee the while I call; But, Lord, Thou hear'st not, nor doost heed at all. Nay, Thou art also Cruel turn'd, to me; With hot Aslaults, as on an Enemle: Thou lift'st me vp, (as in a Storm, the Stubble) To ride a Whirle-winde, while (with Fear & Trouble) I fint, and fall (dssoued, as it were) In deadly wound, hurry'd I wot not where: But well I wot. Thou soon wilt bring me home To Death, the House where all that liue shall come;11 Whither, thy Hnd thou wilt no longer strerch; And Whence, no Prayers boot, nor need, to fech. Did not I weep for Others Wofulnes? Was not my Soule grieu'd at the Poores Distresse? When Good I lookt for, Euill came: when Light, A dismall Darknes, worse then blackest Night. My bowels boiled with continull heat; A troublous Time vpon me sodain set: Not with the Sun, but Sorrow, black I turn'd: Amid th' Assembly lowd I cry'd and mournd. With hidious Noyse (for horrid Anguishes) As kin to Dragons and to Ostriges.
y Harp is tuned to a heauie Tone; y Musick turned to the voyce of Mone. Cap. Made a Couenant with my constant Eyes, From gazng out on blazing Vanities: Hauing my Choise, wheron my thoughts were staid) by should I once mis-think vpon  Maid? or, O! for such what Part, what Portion is ith GOD aboue in th'Heritage of Bise? ay: is there not Destruction still behinde, range Punishment, for Wicked (of this kinde)? Are not my Paths apparant vnto GOD? h not He see and sum the Steps I trod? It I haue walkt in Vanitie and Pride: vnto Fraud my Foot haue euer by'd: his iust Balance let him waigh me right, nd he shall find me by his Beam vpright. If that my Steps haue straid, or trod awry: f that my Heart haue harkened to mine Eye: f to my Hand haue cleaued any Spot: f Blood or Brihes the same did euer Blot; hen let me Sowe, and Others eat my Crop; ea, let my Plant be euer plucked-vp. If euer Woman haue my heart beguil'd; r I laid wait t'haue Others Wife defil'd:
Let mine again vnto Another grinde, And me be punisht in my Sins owne kinde. For This is sure a high and hainous Crime, To be condemn'd and punisht in the prime: Yea, 'tis a Fier, whose Fury would not cease, But ruine all, and root out my Increase. If euer I despis'd my Man, or Maid, Debating with me, and them ouer-waid; What shall I do? What Answer shall I make, When GOD, as Iudge, their Cause shall vndertake? Did not one Maker them and me create,11 Of Matter like, in Manner like, and Fate? If euer I delay'd the Poor's desire: Or let the Widowes longing Hopes to tire: Or euer eat my Morsells all alone, And gaue the Orphan and the needy none: (He hath been with me from my Child-hood bred As with a Father: She, in Husband's sted, Hath euer had my Counsell for her Guide, My Power for Guard; my Purse her Want suppli'd.) If I haue seen or suffered any Poore To lie and die, Naked, or out of Doore: Nay, if his Loynes be-blest not me from harm, Because my Fleece and Cottage kept them warm:
If euer I, against the Impotent, oore, Father-lesse, or Friend-lesse Innocent For Feare or Fauour, of a Friend or Foe, or Gain, or Grudge (that I did euer owe) aue lift my hand, or Him in right withstood; r, when I might haue, haue not don him good: hen let mine Arme off from my Shoulder fall, nd from the bone be pasht to powder all. or, GOD'S drad Iudgements did I alwaies feare: hose Highness Wrath I could nor balk nor beare. If I on Gold haue fixt my Hope, or Heart; r, to the Wedge haue said: My Trust thou art: f I haue ioy'd for being grow'n so Rich; Or for my Hands had gotten me so much: If, when I saw the Sun or Moon to shine, My heart (intic't) in secret did incline o th' idle Orgies of an idolist; Or (Heathen-like) my Mouth my Hand hath kist: Or, if, in Summer of my golden Dayes, Or siluer Nights shining with prosperous Rayes; y heart in priuate hath been puft too-high, scribing all to mine owne Industrie Which had been impious Sacrilege and Pride: or, then had I the GOD of Heav'n deny'd):
If I reioyc't at Ruine of my Foes, Or haue triumphed in their Ouerthrowes; Or haue so much as let my Tongue to roule, Or Heart to wish a curse vnto their Soule: Though oft, my Seruants, in their rage extream, Would fain haue beaten, nay, haue eaten them. If I haue shut the Stranger out of Doore; Or let-not in the wearie Pilgrim poore: If I (like ADAM) haue conceald my Sin, And closely cloakt my Wickednes with-in: (Although I could haue ouer-born, with Awe,11 Whole multitudes; the meanest Groom I sawe, I feared so, I durst not wring, nor wrong, Nor wrangle with: but kept my Tent and Tongue) O! that I had an equall Arbitrer, (To heare, and waigh, consider, and confer). Behold my Aime: th' Almighty I desire (A certain Signe of mine Intent intire) For, He, I know, would sentence on My side; And witnesse for me, that I haue not ly'd. Then, though against me, (in his fell Despie) Mine Aduersarie should a Volume write, It, as a Robe, I on my back would beare, And as a Garland on my head it weare:
would, by peece-meale, shew my Conuersation, l so vnlike to all his Accusation, hat clearing Me, it should him more conuince, o come and aske me Pardon, as a Prince, But, If my Land against me plead or plain; r, If my Furrowes cry-out, or complain: Tithe-lesse, Tax-lesse, Wage-lesse, Right-lesse, I aue eat the Crop; or caus'd the Owners die; sted of Barley, and the best of Corn, row nothing there, but Thistls, Weeds & Thorn. Heere IOB surceast.
The fourth Booke. 32 HEere also ceast the Three fore-named Friends From farther Speech (as hopeless of their ends) Sith IOB so stifly still maintain'd his right Of Righteousnes, in his own proper sight. Then angry Zeal began to swelt and swel In Elihú the sonne of Barachel, The Buzite borne, and of the Race of Ram: Both against IOB began his wrath to flame, (Because, as tenor of his words imply'd,11 Rather Himselfe, then GOD, he iustifi'd) And also Those his Foe-friends, for so strict Condemning IOB, vntry'd, and vnconvict. His modestie him itherto with-held, As giuing place to others of more Eld: But, seeing IOB to a full Period come; And th'other hree without Reply, as dumb; His Zeal burst out, and Thus in briefe began. I must confesse, I am too young a man T' haue interrupted you (so old) before In This Dispute; and therefore I forbore: I was in doubt; I durst not speak (till now) My weak Opinion, and present it you.
For, Dayes (thought I) & Yeers can farther reach: And long Experience Wisedom best can teach. Men haue a Soule, & Reason's light inherit: ut, Wisedom is inspir'd by th' Holy-Spirit Which bloweth where it will, & worketh free, Not ty'd to Age, not to Authoritie): or, Great men alwaies are not wisest found, Nor the most Ancient still the most profound. Therfore awhile to Me giue eare, I pray; nd let Me also mine Opinion say. I well obseru'd your words, with diligence scann'd your Reasons, markt your Arguments: ea, neer and narrow haue I watcht & waigh'd What Each of you, and All of you haue said: et is there None of you (apart, or ioynt) Conuinces IOB; or answers to the Point. est You should say; We Wisedom compass can, GOD will evince him; not the VVit of Man. or Me, Me yet he neuer did gain-say: Nor doe I mean to answer him, your way. Here-with amaz'd, they stil continuing mute Without Reply, or shew of more Dispute For I expected yet some Speech from some: waited still: and when as none would come)
I will, said I, now prosecute my Part. To giue my Censure from a single heart: For, I am full of matter to the top; My Spirit within me, straines me, stirres me vp: My Brest is like a Wine-Butt, wanting Vent, Ready to burst; or Bottles, like to slent. I'll therefore speak, that I may yet re-spire; And ope my mouth▪ to fanne mine inward fire. Yet None, I pray, from Me the while expect Smooth, soothing Titles; personall Respect: For, soothing Titles knowe not I to giue;11 Nor▪ should I, would my Maker let me liue. 33. NOw therfore, IOB, hark with attentiue heed To all the Words that from me shal proceed: For, what I speak, premeditated is; Not out of Passion, or of Preiudice: But most sincere, and from a single heart, Out of cleer Knowledge (without Clowds of Art). One & the same, of the same Mass of Mire, Made Me, as Thee; & did my Spirit inspire: Feare not therfore, if Thou haue ought to say; Oppose and answer: put thy Words in ray: I am (according to thy wish) to plead And parley with thee, in th'Almighties stead;
And yet, a Man: My Terrors shall not fright thee, Neither my hand with heauy Tortures smight thee. Lo, Thou hast said (I heard & markt it well) In Mee, there none Iniquitie doth dwell: I am Vpright, and Clean, and Innocent: Yet, as a Foe, Hee is against mee bent: Hee picks occasions to inflict mee Stroaks; Sifts all my Waies, and sets me in the Stocks. And lo, in This, euen in This saying so, Thou art not Iust: for (if thou know'st not) know, That GOD is Greater then All Men: then, Why Striu'st Thou with Him? whose supream Soueraignty Yields vs no Reason, nor Account at all, Of His high Counsailes; Why, or How, they fall. For once, yea twice, to Man th'Almighty speaks; Yet Man perceiues not (or it little reaks) By Dream, or Vision of the Night, in Sleep Vpon his Bed; or in some Slumber deep: Then opens He Mens cares, & him reuealeth, And sweetly there their meet Instruction sealeth; To turn a Man from his intended Ill, And hide the Pride of his ambitious Will: To keep his Soule back from the brink of Hell; And saue his Life from Death & Dangers fell.
Some-times, He's also chast'ned on his Bed, With grieuous Sicknes, from the foot to head; Incessant buning in his Bones and Bloud: So that he loatheth the most dainty Food. His Flesh consumed, & his Bones so high That they appeare (as an Anatomie): His Life and Soule draw neer vnto the Pit, (The Graue doth gape, & Worms doe wait for it). If with Him be a holy Messenger (One of a Thousand) an Interpreter, To shew to Man the Iustice of his GOD, In his Correction, with his sharpest Rod;11 And, rightly humbled, re-aduance the Meek, By Faith, aboue his Righteousnes to seek, And pray to Him; He will propitious stand, And to his Seruant He will Thus command, Deliuer him from going to the Graue, I am appea'd: a Ransome found I haue. Then, than a Child shall fresher be his Flesh, He shall return vnto his Youth afresh: Then shall he call on GOD, and GOD shal be Right gracious to him: He with ioy shall see His glorious Face. For, He will render than (He will impute) His Righteousnes to Ma.
He visits Men; and if that any say, haue offended: I haue gone astray: haue miss-done: I haue peruerted Right: h! I haue sinn'd, & had no profit by 't; e will deliuer, from Infernall Doom, is Soule; his Life from an vntimely Toomb▪ Lo, all These things doth GOD do twice or thricé Oft and again) to Man (too prone to Vice) o re-reduce his Soule from Death's dark Night; o be enlightned with the liuing Light. IOB, mark it well, And harken farther yet hat I shall speak: saue, when thou seest it fit, ought thou haue to answer, or obiect, eak on, in GOD's Name (for I much affect o iustifie and cleer thee (if I may): otherwise, if nought thou haue to say; st, and obserue with silence, I beseech; nd I shall teach thee Wisedom, by my Speech. Cap. 3 So, he proceeded, and said furthermore: Heare Me, ye Sages; Men of Skilfull lore: or, as the Palate doth discern of Food, h'Eare trieth Words (how they be bad, or good). t's then debate This Matter, among vs; xamine it, and what is right, discus.
For, IOB hath said: O! I am Iust, rig; And yet (saith He) GOD hath rst my ight. Should I blye my Cause? My thrilled Wound Is past all Cure; and yt  Crime is found. What man, like IOB, himselfe so ouer-think? VVho (wilfully) Contempt, like Water, drinks: VVho, with the Wicked & Vngodly walks, Iumps iust with Them, & in their language talks. For, he hath said; Man hath no profit by't To walke with GOD, nd in Him to delight. But, heare me now, all yee that vnderstand; O! be it farre from the All-ruling hand11 Of Iustice Selfe (th'Almighty GOD, most High) To doe Iiustice, or Iniquitie. No: He to Each man his own Work repayes; And makes him finde according to his Waies. Vndoubtedly, the Lord of Hosts, the Strong, Nor hath, nor doth, nor will, nor can, doe wrong. Who hath to Him charge of the Earth impos'd▪ And, Who but He, hath the whole World dispos'd▪ If He but please on Man to set his minde, To re-assume hi Spirit, his Breath, his Wind; All Flesh at once (if He but hold his breath) Shall turn to Dust; and perish all, in Death.
Now note Thou this, if so thou hast a heart o vnderstand; list what ny Words impart▪ al He haue Rule, that Iudgement loathes (& lacks)▪ nd for vniust, wilt Thou the Iustest taxe? seems it Any to a King to say, ! Thou art Wicked (in thy partial Sway)▪ r vnto Princes (to vpbraid them) Thus are Vngodly, you are Impious? hen, how-much lesse to Him that puts no Ods ouching the Persons of those Earthly Gods; or twixt the Rich and Poore, the Great and Small; r, they (alike) are his owne Hands-work, all. They (at His will) shall in a moment die; ea, euen at Mid-night (vnexpectedly) he People shall be troubled and transported; d euen the Princes, without hands subrted. r, euermore His eyes are open wide n all Mens Waies, on euery Step & Stride. here is no Darknes, nor no Shade of Death, r Wicked-ones to hide them vnder-neath: or, will he, though, Any▪so ouer-load, hat they may iustly grudge, or plead with GOD. By Heaps, will He to peeces grinde the Great, nd (in their std) set Others in their seat:
For, vnto Him, their Works are manifest; Night turn'd to Light: and they shall be supprest. Them, as most Wicked, smites he (as it were, In all mens sight, in open Theatre) Because from Him they did reuolt and swerue; And would not any of his Waies obserue: But caus'd the loud Cries of the Poore ascend To Him, who alwaies doth their Cryes attend. When He giues Quiet, who dares be so bold To cause Disturbance? And, if He with-hold His Countenance, who then behold Him can; Whether a People, or a Priuate man?11 That th' Hypocrite no more may Raign (as King) Nor, vnder him, the snared People wring. Vs therfore Thus beseems, to say to GOD: I beare with Patience thy correcting Rod: I will not murmur, nor burst out therefore; But sigh in silence, and offend no more: Shew me my Sins I see not, nor perceiue; And, Hence-forth will I all Iniustice leaue. Or, should it be after Thy pleasure ay? No: will-thou-nill, He will (not I) repay. Now, therefore speak thy Conscience seriously; And let the prudent mark and testifie,
at, void of Knowledge, IOB hath mis-auerr'd; d, wide of Wisdom, his Discourse hath err'd. Would therefore (Father) he might yet be try'd: h for the Wicked he hath so reply'd; r, to his Sin he doth Rebellion ad: ps hands at vs, as He the Better had: d (too-too-pure in his too-prudent Eyes) amst th' Almighty, Words he multiplies. Cap. 3 , proceeding▪ Thus moreouer said: Thinkst Thou this right (if it be rightly waid) ch thou hast spoken (or thy Speech imply'd) Righteousnes is more than GOD's (O Pride!). , Thou hast said, What will it vantage thee, shall I gain, if I from Sin be free? 'll answer thee; and with Thee, All so dreaming: ok-vp, and see the Heav'ns aboue thee gleaming▪ old, how high: if therefore thou transgresse, d multiply thy Sin and Wickednesse; at hurt doost Thou to GOD? What Detriment▪ th' other side, if Thou be nnocent, ust; What doost Thou to his Goodnes giue? from Thy hand, What, What doth He receiue? y Wickednes may hurt a Man (like thee): y righteousnes, to Man may helpfull be.
For manifold and frequent Tyranny, Oppressors make oppressed-ones to cry; Yea, to cry-out for cruell Violence Of Mightie-ones, of Men of Eminence: But, there is None that saith (as due belongs) Where's GOD, my Maker (Who by Night giues Song▪ Who teacheth vs, hath vs more Wisdom giuen, Than Beasts of Earth, or to the Fowles of Heauen)▪ There cry they oft; but none doth heare or heed, For th' Euils sake (who in all Ills exceed): For, Vanity, GOD doth not, hath not heard; Nor euer will th' Almighty it regard. Now, though Thou saist, thou seest Him not, Hee▪ Iust: With Him is Iudgement; therefore in Him trust: For want whereof, his Wrath hath visited; Yet not so hot as Thou hast merited. Therefore doth IOB open his Mouth in vain: And void of Knowledge, yet, yet, mis-complain. Cap. 36 ELih yet said: A little suffer me; For I haue yet more to alleadge to Thee, On GOD's behalf. I'll fetch mine Arguments From farre (confirm'd by long Experience) To iustifie my Maker's Holinesse, Giue Him his owne, and right his Righteousnesse.
I'll speak no Falshood, nor no Fraud propound: All my Discourse shall be sincere and sound. Lo, GOD is Mighty; yet doth none despise: Omnipotent, Omniscient▪ Strong and Wise. He spareth not the Life of Wicked wights; But, the Oppressed in their wrongs he rights. His Eyes are neuer off the Righteous sort: Them on the Throne He doth with Kings consort: Them He aduances; and beyond all Term Doth them establish, and them fast confirm. Or, if that euer Fetters them befall, Or, they be holden in Afflictions Thrall; He lets them see their Works, their Wickednes, Their wandring By-waies, and their bold Excesse; And opens then their Eare to Disciplin, Commanding quick, that they returne from Sin. If they return, to serue and Him obey, Their Daies & Years right happy spend shal They: If not; the Sword shall smite them sodaily: And in their wilfull Folly shall they die. But, Hypocrites, the Men of double heart, They heap-vp Wrath: they cry not when they smart. They die in Youth; their Life among th' , Most , most , .
He th' humble Poore in his Affliction frees: Their Eares he opens, in Calamities: So would He, Thee from thy Distresse haue freed, And brought thee forth far from the Streits of Need, To spacious Plentie; and thenceforth thy Boord, Should with the best and fairest haue been stor'd But, Thou, too-wicked-like, too-stifie hast stood; As their presumptions seeming to make good; Not stoopt, but strutted in Contesting Pride. Therefore, on Thee doth Iudgement yet abide. Sith wroth he is, beware to tempt him more; Lest with his Stroak, he sodain smite thee ore: Or hisse thee hence with his al-mighty Breath: Then can no Ransom thee redeem from Death. Will He regard thy Goods? or reak thy Gold? Thy Stat, or Srength (how much, or manifold)? Nor wish Thou (hope-less) for the (hap-less) Night, When from their place People are taken quight: Beware, regard not Thou Iniquitie; Neither (alas!) through faint Infirmitie, Chuse rather That, than thine Affliction's Part, With humble Patience of a Constant heart. Behold, the Lord is, for his Power, suprem: And, for his Prudence, Who doth teach like Him?
Who hath appointed vnto Him his way? Or, Who can tell him, Thou hast gon astray? Rather, remember that thou magnifie His publike Works, apparant to our eye; So visible, that both the young and old, Them from a farre do bright and brim behold. Lo, GOD is Greater then We comprehend: Nor can the Number of his years be kend. He makes the thick exhaled Vapours thin, That downe again in siluer Deaws they spin, From strouting Clowds abundantly distilling For th'vse of Man, the Plains with Plenty filling. Also, can Any vnderstand th' Extent Of Clouds, or know the Rattling of his Tent? Behol, He spreadeth out his Light there-ouer, And euen the bottom of the Sea doth couer. For, by the same He worketh diuers-waies, Both to his Iustice and his Mercie's Praise: That, through excesse causing a fearfull Flood; This, temperate, producing store of Food. He vailes the Light with Clowds that come between, Forbids it shine, and lets it not be seen: Boading a Shower, or Storms approaching rage; Which oft, euen Cattell of the Field presage.
p. 37 HEre-at, my Heart trembles for inward Fe, As if remou'd from it owne place it were: Hark, hark with heed vnto the hidious Noise, The horrid Rumbling of his dreadful Voyce, Which, with his Lightning, he directeth forth, Vnder whole Heav'n, and ouer all the Earth. After the Flash, a Clash there oareth high; He thunders-out his Voyce of Maiesty: And then no longer will He keep them back, When that is heard ouer our heads to crack. GOD▪ with his Voyce, doth thunder wondrously, And works great things that we cannot discry: He bids the Snow to couer Hill and Plain; So, drizling Showers; and so, his Mighty Rain; Wherby, From Field-works He seals-vp mens hands, That they may know His works; how He cōma. Then, to their De the Sauage Heards do hie; And for a season intheir Cocrt li. From Southern Chāber the hot Whirl-wind co From Northern Cel▪ That wch with Cold ▪ The rost is giuen vs, by the breath Duine; When Crusts of Crystall  Fld confine. The blcst Clowd He doth  of  (▪ And, his bright Cloud (the Lighigs shroud e) ▪
And (by the Counsaile of his Prouidence) All This, by Turnes, in round Circumference Is turnd about: and ready at his Call, Throughout the World, to do his will, in all. For, He commands them come, for Punishment; Or Loue to His; or else Indifferent. Harken to This,  IO; stand still, & ponder The Works of GOD, so full of waight & wonder. Know'st Thou (alas!) when He disposed them; Or caus'd the Light out of his Lūp to beam? Know'st Thou the Clowd's iust Poizes (the high or lower, And wondrous works of the All-perfect Knower? How, when He calms the Earth with Southern puff, Thy thinnest Clothes thou findest warm enough. Hast Thou, with Him, spred forth the spangled Sky▪ That (liquid Crystall-like) strong Canopie? If so; then shew vs, what to say to Him: For, what to say, wee are (alas!) too dim. Should I mis-speak, needs any Him inform? Nay, should I not be swallowed vp (in storm)? None fixly can (when clowds be clear'd away) Behold the bright & shining Lamp of Day: From out the North stream goodly Beams of gold: With GOD is Light more bright by manifold,
More pure, more piercing, past a mortall Eye; More dreadfull farre. His glorious Maiestie (Dwelling aboue, in Splendors inaccessible) For vs to find, out is a Point impossible. Hee's excellent in Prudence: passing Strong: Plentious in Iustice: and doth No man wrong. Therfore Men fear him: Yet, for Their desert, Regards not He those that are VVise of hart. 38. THen, drad IEHOVA from a Whirle-wind spake In sacred tearms; & Thus with IOB hee brake: Where? Who is He, that (to Himselfe so holy) Darkens my Counsails, with contentious Folly? Come, gird thy loynes, prepare thee, play the Man; I will oppose thee: answer, if thou can. Why! Where wert▪ Thou, tell (if thou know'st, dis∣maid When the Foundations of the Earth I layd? VVho marked first the Measure of it out? Or (canst Thou tell) Who stretcht the Line about? VVhat Bases had it; and fixt Where-upon? Or, Who, thereof layd the first Corner-stone, VVhen Morning-Starrs for loy together sang, And all GOD's Children cheerful eccho rang? Or, Who, with Doores, shut-in the Sea so streight; When from the Womb it rushed with such weight?
VVhen as I made the Clowd a Clowt for it, And blackest Darknes as a Swathe-band fit: And cradled it, in mine appointed place; With Barrs about, & Doores at euery pace: And said vnto it; Hitherto extend; And farther, not: Heer, thy proud Waues be pend. Hadst Thou the Morning from thy birth, at beck? Madst Thou the Dawn in his due place to break; That it might reach the Earth's Circumference, And that the Wicked might be shaken thence: To stamp it (various, as the Potters Clay) VVith many Formes, in manifold array, VVhen as th▪ Vngodly shall be all descry'd; That Iustice hand may break the armes of Pride? Hast Thou gon down into the Sea it selfe; Walkt in the Bottom; searched euery Shelfe; Survaid the Springs? Or haue the Gates of Death Been opened to Thee; and those Dores beneath Death's gastly shadows? Know'st Thou (to cōclude) (ell, if thou know'st) the Earth's iust Latitude? Which is the way where louely Light doth dwell? And as for Darknes, where hath She her Cell; That Thou shold'st Both, in both their boūd cōprise; And know their dwellings, & their Paths, precise?
Needs must Thou know them: Thou wert born yer than: No doubt Thou wert, Thou art so old a man. Hast Thou the Treasures of the Snow suruay'd? Or seen the Store-house of my Haile (vp-layd And hid in heaps, against a time of need) For War-like Battery, where I haue decreed? Which is the way whence Lightning flasheth out, Scattering th▪ vnhealthy Eastern Gales about? VVho hath dispos'd the vpper Spouts & Gutters, VVhereby the Aire his ouer-burthen vtters? Or giuen the Lightning & the Thunder way, To cause it rain on places parcht away; On thirstie Desarts, where no People passe; On barren Mountaines, to reuiue the Grasse? Had Rain a Father? Or, begot by whom Was pearly Deaw? Or, frō what pregnant Womb Came crystall Ice? Or, canst Thou rightly render, Who did the hard & hoary Frosts ingender, When Waters creep vnder a Stone-like couer, And th'Oceans surface is thick-glased ouer? Canst Thou restrain the pleasant Influing Of Pleiades (the Vshers of the Spring)? Or, canst Thou lose Orion's Icie Bands (Who rules the Winter with his chill Commands)?
Canst Thou bring forth (the soultry Sūmer Guide) Bright Mazaroth (or Dog-star) in his Tide? Or canst Thou lead Arcturus (& his Train, Th' Autumnall Signes) his Sons (or Charls his Wain)? Know'st Thou the Statutes of the Heav'ns aboue? Or canst Thou (here) them in their order moue? Wilt Thou command the Clowds, & Rain shal fall? VVill Lightning come, & answer, at thy call? VVho hath infus'd VVisedom in th'inner part? Or Vnderstanding who hath giuen the har? Who can sum-vp the Clowds, or cleer the Skye? Or ope Heav'ns bottles, when the Earth is dry? To steep the Dust, & knead the clotted Clay, Yerst ouer-baked with too-hot a Ray? WIlt Thou go hunt, th'old Lioness to help; Or fetch-in prey to fill her greedy whelp, VVhen they are couchant in their Den, or watch For passant Heards, their wonted Boot to catch? Who, for the Raven, prouideth timely Food; VVhen as her hungry greedy-gaping Brood, VVandring about, & wanting what to eat, Doe (croaking) call, & cry to Mee for meat. Know'st Thou the time whē moūtain Goats & Hinds Doe yean and calue (according to their Kinds)?
Canst Thou keep reckning of the Months they go, And how their Burdens to their Birth-time grow; When they but bow them, and forthwith let fall Their tender Fruit, and all their Paines withall. Who hath sent out the Wilde Ass, free to feed; Or let him loose (from seruing humane need) Whose house & haunt I haue ordaind expresse VVithin the brackie barren Wildernesse. He scornes the Cities multitude and noise: He reaks not of the yawning Driuers voice: The craggy Cliffs his shaggie Pastures been; Where, off he croppeth what he findeth green. VVill th' Vnicorne thee willingly obay? Or, will hee come vnto thy Cb, for Hay? VVill he be brought to harrow or to plow? Or, will hee bring thy Corn vnto thy Mow? Wilt Thou presume of Him, for strength in fight? Or leaue, to him, thy Labour to acquite? Didst Thou bestow the Peacoks goodly Fan? Or, gau'st Thou Feathers to the Stork (or Swan)? Or▪ to the Ostridge her delicious Tresse (Th'ambitious Badge as well of War as Peace) VVho layes her egges, & leaues them in the Dust, To hatch them there, with radiant Heat adust,
Without her help, or heed; lest Tread or Track, Of Man or Beast them all to peeces crack: Vnkindest Dam, the labour of her wombe That dares annull; while Hers not Hers become: So void I made her of Intelligence, And kind instinct of Natures Influence: Yet, with her Wings & Feet so fast she skippes, That She the Horse & Rider both out-strips. Hast Thou indew'd the Horse with strengthful won¦der And cloath'd his crest, & fild his brest with thunder? Canst Thou affright Him, as a Grass-hopper; Whose nostrills pride snorts Terrors euery where? He pawes the Plain, he stately stamps, & neighes, And glad goes-on against the arm'd Arraies, Disdaining Fear. For, for the Sword & Shield, Dart, Pke, & Lance, He'll not forsake the Field, Nor turn his back (how-euer thick they shiuer) Nor for the Cross-bow, & the rattling Quiuer. He swallowes-vp the Earth in furious heat; Nor will belieue the Sound of the Retreat. Among the Trumpets, sounds his cheerful Laugh, Ha-Ha ha ha: he smelleth a farre-off The wished Battaile; hears the thundring Call Of proud Commanders; & lowd Shouts of all.
Is't by thy wisedom that the Hawk doth mew, And to the Southward spreads her winged Clew? Doth th'Eagle mount so high at thy Behest, And build aloft (so neer the clowds) her Nest? She dwells vpon the Rock & ragged Cliffe, And craggy places the most steep & stiffe: From whence, about to seek her prey she flies; Which, from afar, her quick keen Sight espies: Her young ones also, onely Bloud do suck: And where the Slain are, thither doe they ruck. p. 40. MOreouer, yet, The LORD, proceeding, said To IOB: shal He that dares with GOD to plead, Teach Him His part? Let him (who GOD doth tax) Heer let me hear the Answer that he makes. IOB sadly then Thus humbly did reply: O! LORD, behold; ô! most-most Vile am I. What shal I answer Thee? What shall I say? Onely, my hand vpon my mouth I'll lay. Once haue I spoak, & twise; & too-too bold: But now, for euer I my Tongue will hold. Again, the LORD out of the Whirle-wind spake, And said to IOB: Yes, yes; thy Theam re-take: Gird vp thy loynes again, and play the Man: I'll question thee: now answer, if Thou can.
Wilt Thou make void my Iudgements (iust & hic) Condemning Me, thy Selfe to iustifie? Hast thou an Arme like to the Arme diuine? Or is Thy Voyce as Thunder-like as Mine? Put-on thy Robes of Maiestie and Might: Deck Thee with Glory, and with Bewty bright, Dart forth the Lightnings of thy wrathfull Frowne; Against the Proud, and bring them tumbling downe: Behould Thou all and euery one that's Proud, And downe with Them, and all the Wicked Croud: Trample vpon them, in their very Place: Hide them in Dust at once; there binde their Face: Then will I grant (what Thou hast vrg'd so braue) That thine owne Selfe thine owne right hand can saue. But, Now, behold (thy Fellow) BEHEMOTH, Thy fellow Creature; for, I made you Both. He, like an Oxe amid the Field doth graze: In's Loynes and Nauell his most Strength he has: He whisks his sinewie Taile, stiff as a Ceder; His Stones (within) with Nerues are wreathd together. His Bones and Ribs be strong as Brazen Bars, And as vnyeelding as the Iron-Spars: Hee's of the Master-peeces of the LORD, Who also arm'd him with a readie Sword.
The Mountains yeeld him meat; where night & day, All other Beasts do fear-lesse feed and play. Beneath the broad-leau'd shady Trees he lodges Amid the Fens, among the Reeds and Sedges, Compast with Willowes of the Brook about; Where, when he enters (in the time of Drought) The massie bulk of his huge bodie bayes The Torrents course, and euen the Current stayes: There, yer he go, the Riuer dry he drinks; And in his Thirst to swallow Iordan thinks. Dare any come, before him, Him to take, Or ore his Snowt, of Him a Slaue to make? . 41 CAnst Thou hale vp the huge LEVIATHAN, With hook and line amid the Ocean? Canst Thou his tongue with steely Crotchets thril; O with a Thorn his snuffing Nose, or Guil? Will He come sue, by Supplications, to-thee? Wil He with smooth & soothing Speeches woo-thee? Will He by Couenant, serue thee, at thy beck? Or be thy Slaue, for euer at thy Check? Wilt Thou with Him, as with a Sparrow, play; And giue him ty'd, vnto thy Girles, away? Shall Fisher-men of Him a Feast prepare? Shall They his flesh among the Marchants share?
Canst Thou his Skin with barbed pheons pierce? Or plant his Head with groues of Otter-speares? Lay hold on Him: set on him: but, before Think on the Battell, and come there no more. For, 'tis so farre from hope of Victory, That euen His sight would rather make thee fly. There's None so fierce that dares Him rouze or hunt. [Then, Who shall safely Me my Selfe affront? Who hath preuented Me? To Whom haue I Been first beholding for a Curtesie, Or bound at all for any Benefit Bestow'd on Me, that I should guerdon it? Why? is not All Earths ample arms confine, All vnder Heav'n, All in the Ocean, Mine?] I will not hide his Parts and Properties; Neither his Strength, nor seemly Symmetries. Who shall vnhood him? Who with double Rain Shall bridle him, with Snaffle, Trench, or Chain? Or put the Bit between his lawes (his Portall) Impal'd with Terror of his Teeth so mortall? His Shield-like Scales, he chiefly glories in, So close compact, glew'd, sealed; that, between, No Aire can enter, nor no Engin pierce, Nor any Point disioyne them or disperse.
His Sneesings cause a Light, as brightly burning; His Eyes are like the Eye-lids of the Morning; Out of his Mouth flowe blazing Lamps, and flie Quick Sparks of Fire, ascending (wift and hie: Out of his Nostrils, Smoak, as from a Pot, Kettle or Caldron when it boileth hot: His Breath doth kindle Coals, when with the same He whirleth-out a Storm of Fume and Flame: Strength dwelleth in his Neck; so that he ioyes In saddest Storms, and tryumphes of Annoics: His Flakes of Flesh are solid to his Bone; His Heart's as hard as Wind-mils neather-stone. To see Him rise, and how he breakes withall; The stoutest stoop, and to their Prayers fall. No Weapons of Defence, or of Offence, Can Him offend, or from Him be Defence: Iron and Brasse He waighes as Sticks and Straw: Sling-stones and Arrowes Him do neuer awe: Cap. Darts daunt him not, more then they Stubble were: He laugheth at the shaking of a Speare: Sharp ragged Stones, Keen-pointed Sherds & Shels, He resteth on, amid his muddy Cels. He makes the deep Sea like a Pot to boile, A Pot of Oyntment (casting scummie Soile):
Where He hath past, he leaues vpon the streams A shining Path, and th'Ocean hoarie seemes. In Earth is Nothing like Him to be seen; So Fear-lesse made, so full of hautie Spleen; Despising all High things, Him-selfe beside. He is the King of all the Sons of Pride. Cap. 43. IOB, prostrate then, Thus to the LORD profest: Drad GOD, I know, and I acknowledge prest, That All Thou canst; and All Thou kennest too: Our Thoughts not hid; Thine owne not hard to do. am the Man, Who (to my self too-Holy) arkned thy Counsells, with Contentious Folly. For, I haue spoken what I vnderstood not, Of wondrous things which comprehend I could not. Yet, LORD, vouchsafe, vouchsafe, I thee beseech, n Eare, and Answer to my humble Speech. Till now, mine Eare had only heard of Thee: ut, now, mine Eye thy Gratious Selfe doth see. Therefore, My Selfe I loath, as too-too-bad; nd heer repent in Dust and Ashes, sad. Now, after This with IOB; it came to passe, The LORD did also speake to Eliphaz The Thaemanite; and Thus to him said He: y wrath is kindled with thy Friends and Thee:
For None of You haue spoken of My Path, So right and iust as IOB my Seruant hath. Therefore, go take you Rams and Bullocks faire, Seav'n of a sort; and to my IOB repaire; Bring for your Selues your Burnt Oblations due, And IOB my Seruant He shall pray for you (For, Him will I accept) lest, Iustly-strict, After your Folly I reuenge inflict; Because You haue not spoken of my Path, So right and iust as IOB my Seruant hath. So Eliphaz, the ancient Thaemanite, Bildad the Shuhite, the Naamathite Zophar, (together) them prepar'd and went And did according GOD's Commandement. Also the LORD accepted IOB, and staid His Thral-full State (when for his Friends he praid) And turned it to Solace-full, from sad; And gaue him double all the Goods he had. Then all his Brethern, Sisters all, and Kin; And all that had of his acquaintance bin, Came flocking to his House, with him to feast; To wail his Woes, and comfort him their best, For all the Euill which the LORD (of late) Had brought vpon his Person and his state.
d Each man gaue him (as best beare they could) peece of Money and Er-ring of Gold. So, that the LORD blessed IOB's later Time, th more abundance then his flowry Prime. or, Fourteen Thousand Sheep were now his flock; mels six Thousand; Steers a Thousand yoak; ee-Asses twice fiue Hundred; Familie st as before: Seuen Sons, and Daughters Three. Th' Eldest Iemima, Kezia the Next. Keren-Happuch (saith my sacred Text) e Third he named (Names of gooly Sense, uding to some Gracefull Excellence: he first, as much as Lustre of the Morn; , the Next; last, Alabastrine Horn) In all the Countrey were no Women found fair as These. IOB, of his Goods and Ground, mong their Brethren gaue them Heritage. Yet, after This, IOB liv'd a goodly age, wice Seauenty yeers, & saw his Sons Sons Sons, cessiuely, Four Generations: nd then He dy'd, Ancient and Full of Dayes. GOD, for Him, and all his Saints, be Praise, nd for His Succour in These sacred Layes. AMEN.
EPITAPHIVM IOBI. Qui Se, qui Sêclum vicit; qui saeua Suorum Funera, Amicorum iurgia, Pauperiem; Vlcera qui carnis, qui Coniugis impia verba; Qui Coelum iratum, mente tulit placida: Inuictum virtute IOBVM, Patientia Virgo, Nunc vidua, hoc Sponsum condidit in Tumulo. Who, SELF, The World, & Satan, triumpht∣o're; Who, Wealth's, & Health's, & Children's ruefull▪ Losse; Who, Frends Rebuke, Foes rage, Wifes cursing Crosse; Hevn Frowne, Earth's force, Hels Furie, Calmely bore: Th' Inuincible in Vertue, IOB, Her Pheere, The Virgin Patience (Widow now) toomb'd Heer.
MEMORIALS of MORTALITIE: Written n Tablets, or Quatrains, BY By PIERE MATHIEV. The first Centurie. Translated, & Dedicated To the Right Honourable HENRY Earle of South-hampton. By Iosuah Sylvester.
TO The Right Honourable, HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, Earle of South-hampton, &c. Hall it be said (I shame, it should be thought) When After-Ages shall record Thy Worth; My sacred Muse hath left SOVTH-HAMPTON forth Of Her Record; to Whom so Much shee ought? h from Thy Town (where My Sarauia taught) Her slender Pinions had their tender Birth; And all, the little all shee hath of worth, Vnder Heav'ns Blessing, onely Thence shee brought. r lack, therefore, of fitter Argument; And lother Now, it longer to delay; Heer (while the Part of PHILIPS Page I play) onsecrate This little Monument Of gratefull Homage, to Thy noble Bounty; And Thankeful loue to (My deer Nurse) Thy County. Humbly deuoted Iosuah Sylvester.
MEMORIALS of Mortalitie. 1 LEt whoso list, thinke Death a dreadfull thing, And hold The Graue in horror & in hate: think them, I, most worth the wel-comming; Where, end our Woes; our Ioyes initiate. 2 Man, Death abhors, repines, & murmurs at-her, lind in that Law which made her, good, for Him: oth Birth & Death the daughters are of Nature; n Whom is nought imperfect, strange, or grim. 3 Death's vgliness is but imagined; nder foule Vizard a faire Face Shee weares: Her Vizard off, there is no more to dread; We laugh at Children whom a Vizard feares. 4 Death, in strange Postures daily is disguised, With Darts & Sythes in hand, Beers on her back: As Angels are with wings & locks denised; So, Her a Body of bare Bones they make. 5 Who feares this Death, is more then deadly fick; In midst of Life he seems euen dead for dreed; Death in his brest he beares, as buried Quick: For, feare of Death is worse then Death indeed.
6 Each fears this Death: & with an equall Dread, The Young as from a hideous Monster hie-them. Th' Old, at her sight shrink down into their Bed; All shun her aye, the more She draweth nigh-them. 7 What Good, or Bad, boads Life or Death, to giue; To be so fond of That, & This so flying? Thou would'st not die, yet know'st not how to lie; Not knowing, Life to be a liuing-dying. 8 One loues this Life, Another loathes it wholly: Som look for Ease, Promotion som, som Profit: To loue it, for the Pleasures heer, is Folly; Weaknes, to hate it, for the Troubles of-it. 9 The Storm at Sea vnder a Calm is bred: Within Good-hap, Ill-hap hath life included; Begun in Tears, in Toiles continued; And, without Dolour cannot be concluded. 10 Life, like a Taper, with the weakest Blasts Is waued, wasted, melted, puffed out: In some, somtimes, euen to the Snuff it lasts; In others hardly to the halfe holds-out.
11 Fruit on the Trees first blooms, thē buds, thē grows, Then ripes, then rots: Such Our condition iust; egot, born, bred, liue, die; so roundly goes imes Wheel, to whirl our Bodies back to Dust. 12 This Life's a Tree, whose goody Fruits are Men; ne falls, Himselfe; Another's beaten down: 's ftript at last of Leanes and Apples then, y Time's same hand which had them first bestown. 13 This Life's a Table, where, in earnest-iest oure Gamsters play: Time, eldest, vantage takes, nd biddeth Passe: Loue fondly sets his Rest: Man needs will see it; but, Death sweeps the stakes. 14 This Life (indeed) is but a Comdie, Where This, the Kaiser playes, & That, the Clown; But, Death stil ends it in a Tragaedie, Without distinction of the Lord from Lowne. 15 This Life's a Warre, ciuill, & forrain too; Within, without, Man hath his Enemies: To keep the Fort, Death doth the Twne vndoo; To saue the Soule, the Body Shee destroyes.
16 The World's a Sea, the Galley is this Life, The Master, Time; the Pole, Hope promiseth; Fortune the Wie; the stomie Tempest, Strife; And Man the Rowe-Slaue, to the Port of Death. 17 The World (mee thinks) is like our Parliaments, Where Right too oft is ouer-born by Wrong; Where Quirks & Quidits are of Consequence; Where lastly nought Death's Sentence can prolong. 18 The World is much of a faire Mistress mood, Which, wilie, makes more Fooles then Fauorites; Hugs These, hates Those; yet will of all be woo'd: But neuer keeps the Promise that she plights. 19 Life's smoothest glosse is like the Sphear of Glasse Archimedes framed, and fill'd with Starrs; As fraile as faire: for, the least storme (alas!) That raps it, snaps it; and the Pleasure marrs. 20 Th' Honor thou thirstest (as one Dropsie-sick) Weening to quaff it, often stops thy winde: 'T's a swelling Bladder; which whē Death shal prick, (Thou wilt confess) thou but a Puff didst finde.
21 And that Ambition which affords thee Wings, o seek new Seas beyond Our Ocean's Arms, or Mounts of Gold and Pearle, & pretious things; hal not preserue thy Carcass from the Worms. 22 That Pleasure too, which stops thy Reasons eares, esots thy Soule, intoxicates thy Sense; nd sad Repentance still behinde it beares; or moment Ioyes, leaues Sorrowes Monuments. 23 Pleasure which tires thee, but contents thee neuer, Thy Body wearing more, than wearying: ike Danaides Siue-like Tub, a-filling euer, ut neuer full, for all their bucketing. 24 Beauty, which makes the prowdest Kings to crouch, Which serues the Soule as Letters in her fauour; To see, delightfull; Dangerous, to touch; From Death's drad Fury, may not, cannot saue her. 25 But, Beauty, Grace-less, is a Saile-less Bark, A green-less Spring, a goodly light-less Room, A Sun-less Day, a Star-less Night and Dark; And yet this Grace cannot escape the Toomb.
26 When Bodie's Bewty with Soule's Bewty dwels, Ther's a Perfection passing all the rest: Without This, Bewty seems a Blemish els: Without That, Vertue seems not seemly drest. 27 That Bewty, which the Air, Age, Ague quailes; VVhich busies so our Eyes, Toungs, hands & harts; At fifteen, buds; at twenty, flowers; and failes, Or falls, at thirtie, and to Dust reuerts. 28 Gold, the Worlds God, the Sun of Pluto's Son; VVhom Fire and Sword incessant serue so fell; Gold, Vertue's Friend, and Vices Fort at-once, Serues oft for Bridge to passe in post to Hell. 29 Man's Knowledge heer, is but meer Ignorance: VVe see the wisest foulely stumble oft: Learning is puft with Doubt-full Arrogance: And Truth is lost while it is too-much sought. 30 With Mysteries the Idiot meddles most; Peeps into Heav'n, into Kings Counsels pries: In Pulpit Phormio doth darrain an Host: Therfites prates of Arms and Policies.
31 Th' Assyrian's Empire is now seen no more: he Medes and Persians did the Greeks intomb: reat Allexander's Kingdom kinged Foure: hose Crownes, in fine, stoopt to the State of Rome. 32 Where are Those Monarchs, mighty Conquerors, hose brows ere-while the whol Worlds Laurel drest, Vhen Sea & Land could show no Land but Theirs? ow, of it All, only Seauen Hils do rest. 33 VVhere are Those Cities (great & goodly States) f Niniue, with thrice fiue hundred Towers? reat Babylon? Thebes, with a hundred Gates? rthage (Rome's Riuall) Didoe's dearest Bowers? 34 All These huge Buildings, These proud Piles (alas!) Vhich seem'd to threaten, Heav'n it selfe to seale; aue now giuen place to Forrests, Groues, & Grass; nd Time hath chang'd their Names & Place withall. 35 Nay, wilt thou see, how-far Great Kings are foild? ee how somtime in Gold they swallow Poison: ee Ptolomeus Cross't, Boleslas boild, aiazeth in a Cage, Richard in Prison.
See, see a Prince, neer Cairo, flayed quick: See Sápores by his prowd Victor trod: See Monk-like shav'n our Cloistred Chilperick: See Denis beare, for Sceptre, Pedant's Rod. 37 See Gordian there in his owne Girdle hung: Se Phocas bones broken with furious Batts: See Dioméde to his owne Horses flung: To Wolues Licáon, Popiel to Rats. 36 See, see proud Salmon sodain Thunder-slain: See Theódorick with horrid Terror thrild: See Longuemare hangd in a golden Chain: See a fierce Courser dragging Brunechild. 39 See Attalus, hauing, for Court, a Forge: See Phalaris burnt in Perillus Bull: See Memprice left the greedy Wolues to gorge: Cambyses Sword sheath'd in Him-selfe too full. 40 Who but will feare amid the Frights of France; Seeing how Death Two Henries reft of Life? The Sire, in Paris, with a splinterd Lance; The Son, before i, with a poysoned Knife.
41 That Queen, whose Court was in a Castle coopt, A Prisoner, heer; aboue, a Princesse, hop't.) Whose royall Throne to a Tragick Seaffold stoopt, er Head she felt with whiffing steell off-chopt. 42 That King, who could within his Kingdoms drad, ee Sol still shine, when hence he vanisheth; Who, past Our Seas, another Empire had, or All he had, had but a louzie Death. 43 Who more his Garden of Salona priz'd Than ROME's great Empire & the Worlds Cōmand, Knew well the Cares from Corwnes insepariz'd; And Scepters sad Waight in the strongest hand. 44 Towards our End insensibly we lip: For, speaking, sporting, laughing, soringdeep. Death stil drawes on-wards: as at Sea the Ship Sailes to her Hav'n-ward, though the Master sleep. 45 Death Each-where kills: in hunting, ; In's Caue, Caligla; Aristobulus, In Bath; by th' Altar, Philip; , In Camp; in Councell, conquering IVLIVS.
46 Death seeks th• Aemathian; & from Nero flies: One in a Shallow drownes, who Seas did scape: An Emperour in eating Mushromes dies: A Holy-Father in a Harlots lap. 47 No hand but serues Death's turn: Edric by's Mo∣the Alboin by's Wife; Aristo by his Friends; By's owne Son, Baiazeth; Conrad, by's Brother; Mustapha, by his Sire; Self, Cato ends. 48 Death diuersly makes him familiar heer: Henry the Black, a bit of Bread could fine; A King of Goth's died, in a Tub of Beer; Thalis, of Thirst; of Hunger Antonine. 49 Death, euery-where, in euēry thing distils Her fell Despite; Fire, Aier, Earth, Ocean: Drusus, a Peare; a Fig Terpander kils; A Fly (in drinking) choaketh Adrian. 50 As soon, a Souerain, as a Shepheard's gon: Men dying heer haue but one equall Quality: By Birth and Death is Their Condition one; Their Stay, aud State, between, make th' Inequality.
51 There's no Death Sodain to the godly-Wise: is heart goes out to meet all haps before: Vhen he embarks, he casts Wracks Ieopardies; nd when Wind serues not, He will rowe no more. 52 Not knowing then, When, Where, thy Death will (snatch; t Sea, or Land; young, old; Morn, Noon, or Night: ook for it euer, euery-where keep watch. or, what we look-for, little can affright. 53 If Infants oft, no sooner breathe then die; Good-men little-last, and Wicked long: e not too-curious in that Secret's Why? h' are stroaks of that hand wch strook neuer wrong. 54 VVhy Good men go, and Why th'Vngodly stay, ispute it not; GOD hath permitted so. hose die, to liue: These liue, to die for aye: hese, liue at ease; Those in a World of VVo. 55 If from thy Dayes thou but thy Nights subtract; hy Sleep's, thy Care's, thy Mawe's, thy Muse's waste, Vhat thy Wife weareth, VVhat thy Friends exact, hy Griefs, thy Sutes: How short a Life thou hast!
56 The Head-ach, Tooth-ach, Gout, or Feuer ise. Or Vlcer in the Leg, Stone, in the Reines, By lingring Drops strains out the tedious Life; Yet art thou loth that Death should rid thy Paines. 57 Thy Term expir'd, Thou put'st-off Payment yet, And weenst to win much by some Months delay. Sith pay thou must, wer't not as good be quit? For, Death will be no gentler any Day. 58 Th' affaires of Parting poast not to to-Morn. For, on Delay, Repentance waits with Woe: The Wind and Tide will in a Moment turn: All houres are good for Those resolu'd to goe. 59 Grudging to die in flower of thine age, Thou grieu'st to be too-soon discharg'd from Prison Repin'st, too-soon to haue don thy Pilgrimage, Loth to haue-in thy Haruest in due Season. 60 Make of thy Deeds, not of thy Dayes, account: Think not how far, but think how faire thou passe See to what Sum thy Vertues will amount; For, Life and Gold are chose by waight; the
61 Life's valued by th' effect, not by the age; he labour, not the lasting, praise it most: ong hath he liu'd that liueth to be sage; ood life (too-often) in long life is lost. 62 Long Acts commend not most a Comdi, Tis still esteemed as the Parts are plaid: , in our Liues, not Yeers considered be; ut, worthy Actions by the Wise are waigh'd. 63 Who grieues because he liu'd not heer, yet born, hundred yeers; is double worthy laughter: ut, trebble He who at his Death doth mourn; ure not to liue a hundred yeers heer-after. 64 Man's not more Happy for long-liuing heer, Number of Dayes doe not more Blisses bring: More Compass makes not a more cōplete Sphe. s round's a little, as a larger Ring. 65 And, if that Death wait on thee, & protract; With Vsurie, shee'll make thee pay it double: Thy Ioyes in Dream, thy Dolours still in act, To make long Life a long Repenting Trouble.
66 If Hee that heer thee in his Vineyard hir'd, Pay thee at Noon thy Wages, full asmuch As Those that there all the whole Day haue tir'd; Why murmurst thou? why dost thou grieue & grutc 67 He casts his Work well, well his Work-men kens; Thy Slackness, Slowness, Weaknes to hold out: Therefore, yer wearie, he thy Way-fare ends; Lest, staying longer, thou mar all, 'tis doubt. 68 He giues our Task, & he again will take it; Who Him, vnwilling; Him, vnworthy serues: Before he call, 'tis follie to forsake it; And who-so leaues it, to be left deserues. 69 Or first, or last, on All this Stamp is set; Early or late, into This Port must Wee: Who gaue the Charge, ordained the Retreat; One self-same Law did Life & Death decree. 70 The more the Body dures, Soule more indures; Neuer too-soon can Shee from thence exile: Pure, in she came; there liuing, Shee impures; And suffers there a thousand Woes the while.
71 The Soule is forc't within the Flesh to dwell; danger there shee liues, & sleeps in fear: o hatch her Bird, she needs must break her Shell, nd think It neuer can too-soon appear. 72 Soule blames the Body, Body blames the Soule; t, Death surprising, ends their Quarrell prest: own goes the Body, in the Dust to roule; he faithfull Soule, vp to th' eternall Rest. 73 Death frees the Soule from Bodies wilfull Errors; om the Soules Vices, She the Bodie saues: he Soule's Annoyes, are to the Body Terrors; he Bodies Torments, to the Soule are Graues. 74 This Body is not Man: His Stuff's more fine; is Beauty, with Heau'ns Beauty hath Affinitie: he Body dead, That euer-liues, diuine; s euen a Beam from the supream Diuinitie. 75 If then the Soule, so long Heer languishing ithin the Bodie, doe not gladly part; e hath forgotten her own Source or Spring, nd that She must, from whence she cam, reuart.
76 But, more then Death, Death's Pain appalleth the▪ That's but a Stream which swiftly vanisheth: Ther's, as no Pain, in that Extremitie: For, th' Body, down, doth nothing feele in death. 77 Then quit those Fears that in thy Phantsie stick: For, violent Euills haue no permanence: If that Death's Pain be keen, 'tis also quick; And by the Quicknes takes away the Sense. 78 To leaue thy Babes behind, thy hart it gripes; In Whose Thou shalt reuiue, from lap to lap: Happy who hath them; for they are our Types: And oft Who hath None,'s happy by mishap. 79 To leaue thy Wife thou wail'st, wel worth excusing 'T's a necessary Ill, Good stranger-like; Which, cleerest Eyes (Self-wife) too-oft mischusing, In little Flesh finde many Bones to pick. 80 Th'art loth to leaue the Court's Delights, Deuices, Where None liues long vnbrau'd, or vnabhorred: Where Treason's Prudence; where the Vertues Where som no Eyes, & wher som haue no Forehead.
81 The Mariner, that runs from Rock to Rock, From Wrack to Wrack, dwelling in dangers rife, Wauc's Bal, Wind's Thral, & Tempest's Shuttlecock, Would not exchange His for the Courtiers Life. 82 The Court beguiles thee, as black-Angel-Bands, In giuing Leaues for Fruits to Circes Sisters: Their brightest Torches are but funerall Brands: And, in the Court, All is not Gold that glisters. 83 Thou wold'st in Death reuenge thy wrōged Worth, Make known thy Loue, haue shown thy braue Ambi∣tion, Why fram'st thou not thy Death vnto thy Birth, Which brought thee naked forth, & void of Passion? 84 Fain wold'st thou see thy Learning's fruit (perhaps) Ripe, yer Thou rot; that's but a vain Desire: Art now-adayes may starue, while Ignorance Hath Shades for Summer; & for Winter, Fire. 85 All day thou trudgest thorough thick & thin, For that dull Bulk which doth thee daily braue: Phinice wreaths Ropes, which aye his Ass windes-in: The Soule that serues the Body, is a Slaue.
86 As many steps in Death as Life we tread: Esteem, for Deaths, all Daies since thou hadst breath: To come's not Thine; Present, is instant fled: And Time, in time, is ouer-come by Death. 87 When Man's imbarkt on th' Vniuersal Deck, Hee neither can swiften his Course, nor slack it: Tide, Winde, and Weather, are not at his Beck; And, To put back, hath many often wracked. 88 Some, somtimes grieue for one that gladly dies: Socrates ioyes, sith wrong he suffereth: Xantippa melts in Tears; He laughs, She cries: Diuersly iudging of these Darts of Death. 89 To runne vnto this Death, is Desperate rage: Wise Patience onely waits it euery-where: Who scorns it, showes a Resolution sage; For, Cowards flie it, & the Idiots feare. 90 When the last Sand of our last Glass goes out, Without recoiling, we must step our last: As, without grudge or noise, dislodge the Stout; And when they must goe, stay not to be chac't.
91 The Pilgrim longs to haue his Iourney done; he Mariner would fain be off the Seas: he Work-man ioyes to end his Work begun; nd yet Man mournes to finish his Disease. 92 For a short time Thy Sun is ouer-cast: t, Thou shalt once re-see't more bright than euer: nd, that same Day, which heer thou think'st thy last, a New-birth Day, to be ended neuer. 93 What Wrong doth Death, I pree-thee Worldling hen, losing (vnder hope of happier matches) (say, atting thy Life, he takes thy Card away; d when, to saue thy Life, thy Light he snatches? 94 Fear'st thou, Faint-hart, that narrow Plank to pass hich GOD Himself hath gone; which all Men must? hat, like a Childe, held by the sleeue (alas!) ith Eye still glancing on the brim thou go'st? 95 Beyond it, thou shalt see those pleasant Plains, hose boundless Beauty all Discourse transcendeth: here Kings & Subiects soules, haue fellow Raigns, n blessed Thrones, whose Glory neuer endeth.
96 What shalt thou see more, for more liuing Heet? This Heauen, this Sun, thou oft before hast seen: And shouldst thou liue another Plato's Yeer, This World would be the same that it hath been. 97 Death's end of Ills, and only Sanctuarie Of him that cannot scape the Grudge, the Gall Of a seuere Iudge and proud Aduersarie: It is a Point which Heav'n appoints to All. 98 At that Diuorce sigh Bodies, Soules do solace; Th' Exile exulteth at his Home-Retreat: This Bodie's but the Ione, tis not the Palace: Th' immortall Soule, bath an immortall Seat. 99 Death's as the Dawning of that happy Day, VVhere without Setting shines the eternall Sun, VVhere-in who walk, can neuer neuer stray: Nor Feare they Night who to the Day-ward r. 100 There's Rest eternall for thy Labours rife: There's for thy Bondage bound-less Liberty: There when Death endeth, she begins thy Life. And where's no more Time, there's Eternity. FINIS.
MEMORIALS of MORTALITIE: Written n Tablets, or Quatrains, BY PIERE MATHIEV. The second Centurie. Translated, & Dedicated To the Right Honourable, ROBERT, Earle of Essex. By Iosuah Sylvester.
TO The Right Honorable, ROBERT DEVREVX, Earle of Essex & Ew, &c. YOur double Title to My single heart, Both by your Purchase, and your Parents Right; Claims both a better and a greater Part Of gratefull Seruice, than This slender Mite. Yet, sith (to profit, more than please) I write More Sighes than Songs (lesse vs'd to Smiles than Smart) Disdain not These Restrainers of Delight; Though bitter, fitter, than the Soothing Art, To keep the Minde and Bodie both in Health; To coole the Fits of Lust, Ambition, Pride (Surfaits of Ease, Youth, Liberty, and Wealth) And cure All Sickness of the Soule, beside. Whence, Euer free; and full of Euery Good From GOD and Men, be ESSEX Noble Bud. Ex Animo exoptat Iosuah Sylvester.
MEMORIALS of Mortalitie. 1 Hat height of Kings, Crowns Ho•••, Worthies Wō∣der, Is now but wind, dust, shade. He whose Approch all'd the Prowdest: Whom; All trembled vnder; rsed base hand butcherd in his Coach. 2 ll Triumph, yesterday; to-day, all Terror: y; the faire Morning ouer-cast yer Euen: y; one short Hour saw, liue and dead, Wars Mirror, ing Death's speed-stroak vndiscerued giuen. 3 n all This World, All's sickle; nought is Firm: a Sea sanz, Safety, Calm, or Port: es, Cities, Empires haue but heer their Term: at euer 's born must vnder Death resort. 4 Time flits as Wind, and as a Torrent swifteth: aseth quick, and Nought can stop it flying: ho knowes what Ills it euery Moment drifteth▪ ems, that To leaue to liue, is To leaue dying. 5 Man in the Wombe knowes nothing of his State: wile of ) for, there, had he Reason, e should fore-know this Worlds too-wretched Fae; d rather would intom be him in that Prison.
6 Our Birth begins our Beere; our Death, our Bre On that Condition Heer aboord we come: To be 's as not to be: Birth is but Death: Ther 's but a Sigh from Table to the Tombe. 7 Life 's but a Flash, a Fume, a Froath, a Fable, A Puffe, a Picture in the Water seeming; A waking Dream, Dreams Shadow, Shadowes Tab Troabling the Brain with idle Vapors steeming. 8 Life, to the life, The Chesse-boord lineats; VVhere Pawnes and Kings haue equall Portion: This leaps, that limps, this cheks, that neks, that Their Names are diuerse; but, their Wood is one. 9 Death, Exile, Sorrow, Fear, Distraction, Strife, And all those Euils, seen before suspected; Are not the Pains, but Tributes of this Life; Whence, Kings no more than Carters are protected. 10 No: Sacraments haue been no Sanctuarie From Death; Nor Altars, for Kings offering-vp: Th' Hell-hallowed Host poysons Imperiall Harrie: Pope Victor dies drinking th' immortall Cup.
11 Thou ow'st thy Soule to Heav'n; to pay that De not compeld; Christians are willing Payers: t, yet, thy Soule as a good Guest intreat; om no good Hoste will tumble down the Stairs. 12 Tis better fall, then still to feare a Fall: better die, then to be still a-dying: e End of Pain ends the Complaint withall: d nothing grieues that comes but once, & flying. 13 This Life 's a Web, wouen fine for som, som grosse; me Hemp, some Flax, some longer, shorter some: od and Ill Haps are but the Threeds acrosse: d first or last, Death cuts it from the Loom. 14 These Names, which make some blubber, some so braue ames sprung from Iniury, or from Ambition) Death are equall: Earle, and Sir, and Slaue, der his Empire, are in one Condition. 15 For Friends Deceast, cease not Repast nor Sleep; ch Sorrow sutes not th' Intellectual part: ho wailes man's Death, that He was man doth weep: nd, that He promist, comming, to depar.
16 The Young and old goe not as equall pas't: Th' one ambles swift, the other gallopeth: Tis good to die, yer we out Life distaste. A valiant Man should dare to feel his Death. 17 Happy who leaue the World when first they co Th' Aer, at the best, is heer contagious thick: Happy that Childe, who issuing from the Wombe Of's Spanish Mother, there returned quick. 18 The Bodie's Torments are but Twigs to be And brush the Dust from Vertues pleights about; And make the Passions of the Soule more neat: As th' Aicr is purest when the Winds roar-out. 19 Grieuing that Death shuts not thine Eyes at ho And where the Heav'ns vouchfaf't them first to op Thou fear'st the Earth too-little for thy Tombe, And Heav'n too-narrow for thy Corpses Cope. 20 Heav'ns haue no lesse Order, then at their Birth, Nor Influence: Sun, Moon, and Stars, as bright; All hold their owne; Fire, Water, Aier, & Earth: Man, Man alone's fall'n from his pristine Plight.
21 Worldling, thou aist, 'Tis yet not time to mend; But, GOD hates Sinnes that in Sin delight: To grossest Sinners doth  Mercy send; But, not to Sinners ining in despight. 22 Who, Morn & Euen, doth of Himselfe demand Account of All that he hath done, said, thought; Shall find him much as'd, when he comes to stand To that Account where All shal once be brought. 23 For bitter Checks that make thy Checks to flame, And to thy Teeth tell Truths, thou hast no Action, To doe the Euill, sith thou hadst no shame, Be not asham'd to sufferthy Correction. 24 Perhaps, this Child, shal Rich, or Poore, becom▪ Perhaps a Wretch, perhaps a Liberall: Perhaps a Wise-man, & perhaps a Mome: But, past perhaps, assured, die e shall. 25 When Wine runs lowe, it is not worth the sparing; The worst & least doth to the Bottom diue: Wrong not thy leisure (yeers vouchsafe) in daring: But some-times looke into thy Graue, aliue.
26 Sinner, thy GOD is not inexorable; No Rhadamanth, Returning hearts to hate: There is no Sin, in Heav'n vnpardonable; Nor no Repentance, in this Life, too late. 27 The Eye that fixlie the Sun-beames beholds, Is suddain daz'd: so, in GOD'S Iudgements high, Mens cleerest Iudgements are as blind as Moulds: None, none but Aegles, can the Lightning eye. 28 O wrecked Vertue! wretched is Thy state; For, Fortune hath the Fruit, Thou scarce the Flower: Thou art a Stranger at thy proper Gate, Thy Friends thence banisht, & thy Foes in Bowe. 29 Man, Knowledge still, to the last gaspe, affecteth; In learning, Socrates liues, grayes, and dyes. Free frō Death's Process Knowledge none protecteth: But, to learn Well to die, is to be Wise. 30 To liue, is to bgin One-Work, and end it, Life hath, with All, not same Repute, Report; 'T's an Exile, to the Sot; Sage, Iourney ween'd it: Wherein Hee walks, not as the Common-sort.
31 For hauing a good Prince, Peers iust & wise, Obedient People, Peace concluded fast, State 's not sure: Storms after Calms arise; nd fairest Dayes haue foulest ouer-cast. 32 Man, though thou be from Heav'n Originarie, Presume not yet to Peer thee with thy God: Hee's Soueraign King; Thou but his Tributary. Hee's euery where; Thou but in one poore Clod. 33 Of Elephants, the biggest leads the Band; The strongest Bull ouer the Heard doth raign: But, Him behooues who will Mankind command, Not ablest Body, but the aptest Brain. 34 Kings Maiestie seems as eclipsed much, Vnless great Seruants in great Troops attend: Tis sure an Honour to be seru'd by Such; But, on Their Faith 'tis fearfull to depend. 35 To build a Palace, rarest Stones are sought: To build a Ship, best Timber is selected: But, to instruct young Princes (as they ought) Ought all the Vertues to be there collected.
36 Art's now-adayes a Desert desolate: Kings gracious Raies are there no more discerned: Philosophers wait at the Wealthies Gate, And rarely Rich men do regard the Learned. 37 Th' hand bindeth not except the heart with-go: What coms not thence, nor Thank nor Thought d∣seru He giueth All that doth Himselfe bestow; He Nothing giues who but his heart reserues. 38 That curious Thirst of Trauaile to and fo, Yeelds not the Fruit it promis'd men in minde: Changing their Aire, their Humors change not tho; But, many Lodgings, & few Friends they finde. 39 In vain the Soule hath Reason's Attribute, Which vnto Reason cannot Sense submit: For, Man (alas!) is bruter then a Brute, Vnless that Reason bridle Appetit. 40 Self-swelling Knowledge, Wits own Ouer bearer, Proues Ignorance, & findes it Nothing knowes: It flies the Truth to follow Lyes and Error: And, when most ight it weens, most wry it goes.
41 The Vicious trembles, alwaies in Alarmes; ' Eye of the Vertuous keepes him as at Bay: hen All the World fear'd Rome's All-reaching Ar, ne vertuous Cato did all ROME dismay. 42 Vice blinds the Soule, & Vnderstanding clogs, akes good of ill, takes foule for fairest look, a, Durt for Dainties: o-liue loathsom Frogs, ather in Puddles than in purest Brook. 43 In Greatest Houses Vice hath battered, hose Honors though no less haue shined bright: What are the Graceless to the Good▪ Not dead, ut liuing Branches, in the Tree haue Right. 44 If Men might freely take Essay of Court; None, hauing tasted, would return so neer: The happiest there meets many a Spight in Sport, And knows too-well be buyes his Wl too-deer. 45 Toloue None; All to doubt; to , to flatter; To form new Faces, & transform true harts; To offer Seruice, & lie-off in Matter; Are Contiers Lessons, and their Ground of Art.
46 Set not thy Rest on Court, Sea's barren sand; There grows no Goodnes; good, there, euil growes: Rest's Temple yerst did forth the Citie stand: No Sent's so sweet, as is the Country Rose. 47 Who weens in Court to thriue, will find him weak, Without two Aiders; Impudence, Immunitie: For, first behooues him his own Brows to break, Yer Others heads he break with Importunitie. 48 Who is not sory for Time's losse, in stay For Kings slowe Fauours, seems to haue no sense: The losse of Goods a Prince may well repay, But loss of Time Kings cannot recompence. 49 Is't not the Top of Follies Top, to note An Old Sir Tame-asse gallanting in Court, To play the Yonker, & Swan-white to dote On Venus Douelings, in despight of Sport? 50 A mean Man hardly scapes the Mightie's Clawes; Hee's as a Mouse play'ng by a sleeping Cat; Who lets it run, then locks it in her Pawes: And all her sports boad but the Death of That.
51 World's Vanitie is rife in euerie place, (Alas! that good Wits should be'witched so!) Maskt in the Church, in Court with open Face. For, there's the place her perfectly to knowe. 52 By euill Manners is good Nature marred; None falls at once, all Vertue to deie. ice, in the Soule is a strange Plant transferred: And wert not dressed, it would quickly die. 53 With By-Respects Impietie wee couer: Earth more then Heav'n is priz'd among vs Now: At GOD's great Name we scarce our heads vncouer; When Kings are named, euery knee doth bow. 54 Disorder Order breeds: good Lawes haue sprung From Euill-liues: Would All keep Iustice line, In Westminster there would be soon lesse Throng, Less Work, less Wrack, less Words for Mine & Th. 55 Law-Tricks now strip the People to their shirt: Shift is their Shield, Gold in their onely God: Wasps break the Web, Flies are held fast & hurt: The Guiltie quit, the Guiltless vnder-trod.
56 Ther's now no trust: Brother betraies his Brother: Faith's but a phansie, but by Fooles esteemed: Friend's false to Friend; & All deceiue each-other; Th' ui pulls down the Wall by which it climbd. 57 Treasons be Trifles: Man's a Wolfe to Man: Crimes be but Crums; Vice is for Vertue vanted; Sodom's and Cypris Sinnes we suffer can: And Impious tricks in all their Tracks are hanted. 58 In perfect'st Men som Imperfection's found, Some-what amiss among their good is seen: Gold, & pure Gold we dig not from the ground, There's Dust & Dross, & grosser stuffe between. 59 Merit, of old did Friendship feed & six; Where now-adais 'tis founded all on Profit, With deep Dissembling & Deceitfull-tricks, And euermore the Poore is frustrate of it. 60 Th' Earth cannot fill thy hearts vnequal Angles; Thy Hearts a Triangle, the Earth's a Round: A Triangle is fill'd but with Triangles: And th' infinite the finite cannot bound.
61 T's a Death to die far from ones Natiue Citie: t Death's not milder there, then else-about: ath without ROME, did not Rutilius pittie; ither, within ROME, Him that ne'r went out. 62 When Man is com'n to th' old last Cast of Age, en Nature can no longer lend nor borrow; thinks not yet to pack, and leaue the Stage; t still, still hopes to liue vntill to-Morow. 63 Fain, would'st thou flie Loue's wanton Luxurie? ut-off Occasions: speak farre-off; fly Fitnes: un Solitude: liue still in Companie: hey fall alone that would not fall with Witnes. 64 Muse not, to see the Wicked prosper faire: he Sun his Shine euen vnto Theeues doth giue: hen of their Patients Leaches do despaire, ey giue them ouer as they list to liue. 65 Slander is worser than Hell's burning Torture, he Force more fierce, the Heat more vehement: ell, after Death, doth but the Guilty martyr; ander, aliue, torments the Innocent.
66 Affliction razes, and then raises hearts: As, vnder Waight, victorious Palms are wont: As, vnder Seals the Wax doth swell (in part); Vnder the Crosse the Soule to Heav'n doth mou. 67 Enuie, in vain pure Vertues Anuil bites, Breaking her Teeth: as on a Stone the Cur, That barks of Custom, rather then Despight, At euery poore and harmlesse Passenger. 68 Enuie's a Torture which doth Men molest; Euen from their Birth; yer they ought els can doo: Behold Two Infants nursed at one Brest; They cannot brook their Teat for meat to Two. 69 This is the Ods twixt Honest men & Knaues; Th' one tels his Neighbor, All mine owne is mine, And all Thine too: The other (void of Braues) Saith, Thine's not Mine; but, what I haue is Thi 70 What Enuie likes not, that she makes a Fault: Ioseph, with Ismael, for his Dream, was barter'd: Abels pure Offring to his End him brought: And for the Truth the Innocent are martyrd.
71 Flat-Cap, for whom, hoord'st thou thy heaped Trea∣sures? hy Bodies Sweat, thy Soul's deer Price (poor Sot!)? Prodige-all (thine Heire) in Protean Pleasures, ill waste, in one Day, All thine Age hath got. 72 True Liberality would be intire: t not at-once, at all times, and to all. ne may mis-giue, to giue yer one require: et Gifts vn-asked sweetest Gifts I call. 73 Content with Fruits from thine own Labor grow'n, fore-hand still, a set Reuenew saue: r, He's a Foole in more respects than one, hat spends his Store, or more, before he haue. 74 There is no Goodnes in a groueling heart, nt on the VVorld, bound to this Rock belowe: Vere not the Moon so neer this Neather part, he would not, could not, be Eclipsed so. 75 Goods are great Ills to those that cannot vse them: isers mis-keep, and Prodigals mis-spend-them: ell-hounds, to hasten toward Hel, abuse-them: s Wings, to Heav'n-ward, heav'n-bent-Soules extend thē.
76 Presumptuous Spirits spring not frō right Ny Courage, that comes from Pride, proues neuer true: Pride ruines hearts, whose Raiser is Humility: The humble Shepheard the proud Giant slw. 77 Pride glitters oft vnder an humble Weed: Oft louely Names are giuen to loath'd Effects; Men sooth them in the Cause, to 'scuse th' ill Deed: And blame Light, rather than then Sight's Defect. 78 A Prudent man is, for Him-self, sought-forth: He's more admir'd then what the World most vant Praises are due vnto ones proper Worth: Not purest Gold addes Price to Diamants. 79 Th' Humble, doth Others prize; Him-self depress▪ Saue again Pride he neuer bends his Browes: The more his Vertue mount-him, counts-him less: God th' humble Sinner, not proud Iust, allowes. 80 O! Hypocrite, which hast but Vertue's Vaile, Seem what thou art, and what thou seemest be: To hide thy Filth, all thy Fig-leaues will faile: Thou canst not hide thee from thy God, nor Thee
81 Mock-Saints, whose Soul-weal on your Works you lay, ith eyes & hands to Heauen, while hart's els-where: or shame you durst not to the least man say, hat you (profane) dare whisper in Gods eare. 82 Gold's fin'd in fire: Soules in Affliction better: oths gnaw the Garment locked in the Chest: ill water stinks, vnwholesom, black, and bitter: ords rust in Sheathes, and so doe Soules in Rest. 83 Opening thy Soul to God, cloze Mouth from Men: or let thy Thoughts roame from thy due Intent; OD sees the hearts, his iudgement soundeth them, d hem confounds whose Words & Deeds dissent 84 Gamesters may well All to to-Morrow post, o see, or to be seen, th' haue neuer leasure: ith aduerse Windes their Minds are euer ost; sse bringing Grief, more than the Gain brings Plea∣sure. 85 To shun Affaires, behoues exceeding heed: roubles vnsent-for, and vnlookt-for, haste; n-set, vn-sowen, too-early growes the Weed: e meet too-soon the Care we hoped past.
86 All Idleness, dis-natures Wit, dis-nerues-it; A mod'rate Trauell makes it quick, addrest: Sloath quels and kills it; Exercise preserues-it: But, He's not Free that hath no time to rest. 87 Who seeketh Rest in troublous Managings, Thinks to find Calm amid Tempestuous Seas: The World & Rest are Two, two aduerse things: Thick streams re-cleer when Storms & stirrings 88 Fortune in Court, is fickle, apt to varie: Fauors sort seldom to the Suiters minde: They many times euen in the Port mis-carie: The hotter Sun, the blacker shade they finde. 89 Gifts, Honors, Office, Greatnes, Grace of King Are but the Vshers of Aduersity: For their last mischief, haue the Emmets wings: And height of Health betokens Sicknes me. 90 Youth hath more Lures, more Traps, more Then Fouler Sins, or Baits the Fisher-man: Age would, but cannot what it would, fulfill: Senex, thou leau'st not Sin: Sin leaues Thee, than.
91 h'Eye tends to Bewty, as the Centre of-it: r the Eyes, Heart and Affections drawe: hard to keep safe what so-many couet: mens Desires Kings cannot keep in Awe. 92 Good or Ill-hap that heer happens thee, es from Opinion (which All-ruling seems). ion makes vs Other then we be: not vnhappy, who him happy dems. 93 rom contrarie Effects is formed Sadnes: h Smoak & Smiles haue made the Eyes to water. o sowe in Tears, shall one day reap in Gladnes; o sowe in Ioyes, shall reap Annoys heerafter. 94 s leaue out I, and No, in Conuersation: rds now trans-posed, and wax-nosed, Both, ROMES New Doctrine of Equiocation, ich giues a Lye the Credit of an Oath. 95 Friends, now-adayes, wake at the noise of Gain. Bees to Flowers, as Crowes to Carion haste, Flyes to Flesh, as Birds and Ants to Grain; Friends to Profit thickly flock and fast.
96 Who reaues thine Honour, scoffes, if he pre T' haue don thee fauour, that thy life hee left: Why should the Bird liue, hauing lost her Pl? The rest is nothing whe the Honor 's rest. 97 Little sufficeth Life, in th' vn-delicious; The Sun for need may sometimes dresse our Vi I blame, alike, the Cynik and Apicius; This, for his too-too-much; That's, too-too- 98 Too-oft is made too-ill Interpretation Of Words & Deeds best meant & built on Re All's euill to the Euill, by Self-flation: Whence Bees their Hony, Spiders suck their Po 99 Happy the People where Iust-Gentle Prince-i: Whose Sword is Iustice, and whose Shield is For These Augustus Deified long-since-is: And without These, Kings Scepters maimed 100 Good-hap, Good heart, Fauour, and Labour Bring Men to Riches and to Honors heer; But that's the Way about: To be born Great, Is great Aduantage; Not to buy so deer. FINIS.
HENRIE THE GREAT, (The Fourth of that Name) LATE King of FRANCE & NAVARRE: HIS Tropheis and Tragedie. Written By PIERE MATHIEV. Translated, & Dedicated To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM Earle of Salisburie. By Iosuah Sylvester.
To the Right Honorable WILLIAM CECILL, Earle of Salisbury. Esides the Bonds which did most Vowes engage To your deere Elders; and besides the Due Which to your Selfe might iustly thence accrw; apparant Vertues of Your April-age, alleng'd of right This Poëms Patronage: The rather, sith we first receiu'd from you, The speedy Notice (no lesse quick than true) HENRY'S Death, through Hells dis-chained Rage. saw this Sunne, at his High-Noone-shine Set In suddaine Clowd of his owne Royall Bloud. O Horrid Hap! Who euer can forget th Fate, such Hate; of one so Great, so Good: O! Iust Revenge, roote out th' Ignatian Pack, The Moules that moou'd in Faux and Rauaillac. Ios. Syl.
THE opheis of the Vertues and Fortune of HENRIE the Great. nce first Apollo lent the World his light, And Earth empregned with his heatfull might, pe hath seene no Potentate, no Prince, Parallel Great HENRY's excellence. Terme, no Time, his fresh Renown shal shed: er was King more dear, neuer more dread. hoenix of Kings, wonder of Christendome, ing all past, and without Peere to come; Courage onely matcht His Clemencie; should his Tomb to These Two equall be, h Spain & France, could not contain the same, ich haue so often seen his feates of Fame. is Life's a lamp to Princes, and a line; rophey rear'd by Miracle diuine: Theater to all the Vertues built; goodly Garden with such plenty fild hoisest fruits & flowers, that chusing, there oundance troubles more then Want else-where.
The yeer that EDWARD in Great Brittain dy'd: That France (beyond the mountains) Spain de'd: That Therwin walls were thundred to the ground: That a faire flower our Royall Hymen Crownd: I'th vvinter Solstice (whn the yeare is worn) Within Pau Castle This young▪ MARS was born. Born for the Worlds Good, as his Enterance Presag'd him then the HERCVLES of France; To re-aduance her Lillies long decayd: For as (by chance) bare-head, abroad he playd, At foure yeers old, a Snake he finds & kills; At forty, foiles the Hydra of our Ills. Nor was He bred in soft delicious wise (Which forms young Spirits into the form of Vice) His Grandire vs'd him to all VVeathers Ire, His Sauce was Labour, Exercise his Fire, His noble Heart did neuer ought inflame, Saue Heauens desire, & th'Honour of the same. Scarce fourteen times had e behld the birth Of th'happy Planet (which praesag'd his Worth) Predominant in his Natitiall; When he became an Armies Generall, Whose hottest flame, without Him was but fume; Nor, but by Him, durst any good presume.
He purchast Peace, the which eftsoones was staind th His Friends bloud, & his young soule con∣straind faine some Change of His Religion: Vinseine Castle He was seaz'd vpon, d to the Court confin'd; where, discontent, s Spirit droopes, out of His Element. Escaped thence: with restlesse toyle, He tends saue the Side of his Afflicted Finds; peace again he bringeth all in vre: d Mounsieur's death doth well his Hopes assure f th'after Crown, who but between him stood; now was He the first Prince of the Blood. Then from afarre he doth new Storms discry, threat his fortune, and his force to try: e meets the danger with vndaunted front, d in foure yeeres beares ten braue Armies brunt, l with the might of a great Monarch grac't; hereof, at Cotras he defeats the last. At last, the King to extreame Streights reduc't, doubt of all, and daring none to trust, plores This Prince, who rescues him from Tours, ith iust Reuenge; & had, yer many houres, -humbled Paris to her Princes yoake, t for Saint Clements Paricidiall stroke.
After which stroak (which all true French-men ha France sadly falls in a most wretched state: VVho hath least Reason, hath most Insolence; VVho hath most Power, hath least Obedience. Nor Awe, nor Law; Disorder euery-where: Good, without hope, and Wicked without feare. Rebellion spaunes as fast as (in the Spring) Fruit-fretting vermine; it doth Discord bring In Families, dearth in Townes, death in Field: O! happy you who neuer daign'd to yeeld Vnto that Hagge; but, Loyall to the Crowne, Haue left your Heires, Heires of a true renowne. Who counts the Cares that on a Crown doe wait, As well may number Autumnes fruitful fraight, And Flora's too. Yet this great spirit of man, 'Mid th'ebbs and flouds of This vast Ocean, Seems a tall Ship; which magre Winds & Waues, In wished Hauen her & her Burthen saues. Hee's neuer idle, nor his Exercise Other than stands with princely offices: MARS, & DIANA, & CVPID wait on Him: Maugre his Losse, hee alwaies gaines by Time. Vnto Affaires his eares are open aye, Nor waits hee lazying on his bed for day.
afts, Tigers, Torrents; no nor Lightning flies e swift about, than This bold Eagle plies nid all perils) to preserue his State, h Heed & Speed, from Rebels Pride & Hate. attells first, last in Retreats: in brief, Action, Souldier; in Direction, Chief. iepe saw his Fortunes on a desperate Dy: e League presum'd he needs must yeeld, or fly: , as a Brook the more we stop his Course, aks down his Bay, and runs with swifter force, foiles his Foe at Arques, and shewes them plain, hat Heauens iust hand doth his dear Right sustain. Tis▪ buzz'd in Paris, and beleeu'd in part, hat he is taken; or constraind to start om Diepe to Douer, to seek Englands Aid; nd, while Him comming Prisoner-wise, they said, o the Bastile; He came and ouer-came heir Suburbs soon, to their Suborners shame. Conquest attends Him, whether he encamps, r marches on: again he takes Estampes: izieux, Eureux, Mans, Meulan, Vandosme, Perch, nd Honfleur, fomost in His Tophie march; s earnest-pence of His recouer'd State, nd Crowne of Franc, which well admits no Mate.
Tiber and Iber then together flow (Too strong in wrong) his Right to ouer-throw▪ There proudeth Power, Heer Prowess brighter shi And daily shewes vs by a thousand Signes, How great Aduantage a true Birth-right brings (Against Vsurpers) vnto lawfull Kings. In IVRY Fields, he seems a Blazing Star; Seen in the Front of all his Hoast, afar: Maiestick Fury in his Martiall Face, The brauest Troops, doth in an instant Chase: And boldest Rebels, which the rest had led, Came Charging one way, and by forty Fled. Melun surrenders, to his War-like Lot, Chartres is chastizd with his thundring Shot, Louuiers lyes humbled at his Conquering Foot, Noyon lamenteth her Three Succors rout, Espernay yeelds her wholely to his hest, Dreux twise besieged, opens as the rest. The League that late so violently burn'd; To a Cold Feuer now her Frenzie turn'd; And trusting still in Strange Physycians aid, Neglects her Cure till all her strength decaid: In dread of all, In doubt her owne will quaile; As a weak Ship affraid of euery Saile.
That (late) ACHILLES of the Spanish-Dutch, uezean Parm that atchieu'd so much Anwerp's Siege, by match-lesse Sratagem; d weend the World had had no Peer to Him: d here the heart, twice, to refuse to Fight; d twise departed and bod none Good-Night. Fortune, for Him, no longer vs'd her Wheel; t, kind and constant, followes at his heel: e's Happy euery where, and ouer all ring Palmes and Lawrels: only neer Amale murderous Bullet put him to some pain, t hindred not His Rescue of his Train. Who weens to vanquish Him, makes Him invict; lde to the Meek, to Proudlings stern and strict: e loues the Lawrels without blood be-sprent, Cruell Conquest He doth euen lament. is Thunder batters but Rebellious Walls: nd who least fear him, on them first he falls. France, Selfe to slay, and her owne Throat to Cut, rms her owne hands; & (in strange rage) doth put he Knife to whet, in Spaines ambitious pawes; pain that would Spoil her Crowns primordial Lawes, nd would a Scepter with a Distaffe blin: ut all in vain: The Lillies cannot Spin.
Re-Romaniz'd, so (say They) Heauen coniures; His Errors at Saint Denis he abiures: This Chāge, in Court yet chang'd not one nor other; For, though his Subiects haue not all one Mother, He holds them all his Sons, They him their Sire; And Christians all, all to one Heav'n aspire. Wihin the Temple of The Mother-Maid, That bore her Son, her Sire, her God, her Aid, With Heav'n-sent Oyle He is anointed King, Dons th' Order-Collar; and by euery thing, To proue, in Him, Saint Lewis Faith and Zeale, The Sick he touches, and his Touch doth heale. By law of Arms, a Citie tane by Force, Should feele the Victors rage, with small remorse; Paris so taken, is not treated so: Though well his Iustice might haue razed lowe Those rebell Wals which bred and fed These Wars; To saue the guilt-less, He the guilty spares. There, There's the Hope and Safety of His Side; If There he faile, then farewell all beside: The Spaniard therfore Thither speedy sends, A great strong Conuoy to confirm His Friends. Which soon defeated, There began the End Of Ciuill Wars, and all to Vnion tend.
Th' Honor of sauing and restoring France, s not alone due to His Valiance? His Clemencie hath part; which lets him in To strooger Holds, than all his Arms could win: That, satisfied with Tears, makes from all parts, Repentant Rebels yeeld him vp their Hearts. Lyons, the Porter of one Part of France, Rouen, that sees none like strong in Ordinance, Orleans, which England did vndaunted proue, Marseillis, iealous of old Neptune's loue, Aix, Bourges, Sens, Meaux, Poictiers, Troy, Thoulouse, And Reins; of These, each to his Bounty bowes. This gracious Prince excus'd the simpler sort, VVhom (Malice-lesse,) blind Passions did transport, Against the Lawes, with fury of the Time, VVho self-affraid to faile in fowler Crime, Seduc't by others slie seditious Lore, Follow'd (like Sheep) their Fellowes straid before. This heauenly-humane Clemency of His, Yet cannot shield Him from some Treacheries; One wounds him in the Mouth and breaks withall One of his Teeth, (O Act vnnaturall!) And had not God in part put-by the blowe, Euen then in Paris had he perisht so.
But, hauing quencht the Ciuill Fires in France, Gainst his ill Neighbors now his Arms aduance; In Piedmont-Fields his Lilly-flowers he plants, Pills Bourgogne, and all Artois He dants, And makes the great Castilian MARS to fly, With Feare within; without, with Infamy. Then, those great Warriors that had disobeyd (Whom not their Courage but their Cause betray'd Which came with shame and sorrow (as was meet) To cast their swords at his victorious Feet, Fearing his Rigor; He receiues them (rather) With King-like grace, and kindnesse like a Father. Heauen daily works, for Him, some special Mira His Faith's an Altar, and his Word an Oracle: His greatest foes haue neuer found him faile. And should Sincerity, in all men quaile, Exiled from the World (as Moors from Spain) In This Kings soule she had been found againe. Spain by a train of many Wyles well laid, Surpriseth Amiens, France is all affraid: The Spaniard, hence prouder then cuer, swells, Vndanted HENRY Thence him soon repells, Regains his Citie, and constrains His foes, To beg their Peace, or to abide his blowes.
The Storms that long disturbd the state are val'd, 'ill Vapors now are from all hearts exhal'd, d France is now all French euen all about: ly the Breton stifly yet stood out. t, those white Ermines at the last must need, th' only Sent of the faire Lillies feed. Old PHILIP longs to see the Waters calme, ds all designes vain to supplant This Palme; h the more shaken, it more fast doth grow: seeketh Peace, the Pope solicits so, doth treat it, Bruxells sweares it don, nd PHILIP pleas'd departs the World anon. France yet retains one sensible Offence, r which she vowes Reuenge or Recompence: mong the Alps her thundring Canons roare, oud-browd  flaunts & vaunts the more stop her fury, but in fine is fain rue her rashnesse and repent in vain. God hastens his owne Work: This Monarch mar∣ries Lyons Church, the choice, the Chief of Maries; he Heauens delight, our Lilies ornament: in one heart two louely Soules hath blent: hence Peace is more confirm'd, and Discord, dashe: r, by This knot many great Plots are quasht.
At Fountainbleau (a Paradise for site) She brought him forth his Dolphin, his delight, Whose tender youth giues happy hopes of Worthy One Daughter also did she there bring forth, And two Sons more (Supporters of the Crowne), Two daughters more, Paris for birth doth owne. His Clemency hath conquered Rebels rage, Made of dis-loyall loyall Vaslalage; Yea forced Wills by Pardons and by Grace, The proof whereof is writ in euery place; Through all the Townes of France both great & Where, for Reuenge, Reward was daign'd to all; Once, only once, his Mercy admirable, VVas deafe to Biron and inexorable; Sith when he might, his bault despight would no I wonder not to see that Myrmidon, In the Bastile, a shamefull death to beare: But This I wonder, that he would come there. Of factious spirits, of close deep hearts and (Whose Life is strife, whose Rest is best in trouble) He knowes the drifts, & know en dissolues the As falst as fire melts Lead within the flame. His voyce alone, as Dust cast vp aloft, Breakes Hornets buzzing and their swarming,
Discord disturbing holy Churches rest, wixt Rome and Venice did debates suggest: mbition set in foote, fore-Iwald with hope, o bridle both the Snate and the Pope; th prest to fight: His Prudence reconcil'd heir Difference, and dad their mindes remil'd. He relisht now the harmeless Sweets of Peace, illing his People should partake no lesse; t yet some-where be feeles a Thorne to prick: o pluck it out he armes and marches quick, en to the Frontier: There  his will, isedome (so) fitly takes her Season still. You Nations, that for fortie yeeres have seen ELLONA 's Tempests, & felt MARS his Teen; hat for your Liberties haue pawd your Liues: freely now you ioy your Wealth, your Wiues: now your Trades into the East you bring, der Heauens Kingdom) onely thank This King. hus heapt with Honors, This brave King is loath hat his brane Knights,  by Sloth, id Games & Damas, during so long a Peace, ould still lye still in Citties pomp and ease: herefore be  an Army strongly dight, Gulich's  his wronged friends to right.
A noble Prince, whose Prowes & Prudence, l Buda admir'd, and Rome hath wondred-at (The Honor of His Time) was Generall; So stoard with Gold, with Guns, with Arms, with all, That neighbor Princes all were in alarm: Yet Them This Thunder brought more feare then harm. Fearless it marches; &, respectless, threats What—euer Log its ready Passage lets; Gesture and voice already skirmishing, And vnder Conduct of so braue a King, Great-Britaines, Germans, Switzers, Belgians, Scrue all the Greatnes of the Crown of France. Els-where, the while, The Duke that rules the Seemd t'haue his heart no more beyond the Calpes; Braue noble heart, Saxonically-French. Fuentez, affraid, with shoulder-shrinking wrench, Doubts lest that Milan stoop to France againe; And CHARLES prouoked proue the Scourge of Heau'ns now, to Crown his Tropheis, had set down, That at Saint Denis he his Queen should Crown VVith royall Diadem; and in one Day The State, the Maiesty of France display. Nothing but Great; but great Magnificence; But, MARIES Grace excell'd all Excellence.
HEnce, hence false Pleasures, momentary Ioyes; Mock vs no more with your illuding Toyes: strange Mishap, hatched in Hell below, th plung'd vs all in deepest Gulfe of Woe, ught vs, that all Worlds—hopes as Dreams do fly, d made vs all, Cry All is Vanitie. Four houres frō Noon, forth frō the Lonure rode his mighty Prince (without his Gard) abroad, o see His Arcenall: To his Caroche, a streight Lane, a Hell-hound durst approche; nd with a Knife, twice stabbing, kill'd him quite, urning that fairest Day to foulest Night. Twice did the Monster stab: for else, the first nd not been mortall; but, the Knife, accurst, hrilling his Lungs, cut at the second stroake h' artereal vein, whose bloud-floud soon did choa he peerless Prince; His dying Eyes & Hart ploring Heauen, soone did his Soule depart. Fell Tyger, tell vs, tell vs Why, or Whence, hou durst (accurst) assault so Great a Prince? herein had He to Thee or Thine done wrong? hē once (yer this) Thou didst too neer him throng▪ is Gard rebuk't thee; but, He Them, for That: aus'd That Thy Malice, & His Murderous fate?
Fates ruthless Law allots his royall brest To die the death that CAESAR thought the best; Death without sense of death, a death so quick, It sildome leaues Kings leisure to be sick; Nor giues Him leaue of his sixt Decads date To fill the Roule; but seauen six Months did bate. He, He that was the Hope, the Prop of His, He that restored France to what it is, He that confin'd the Power of Princes still, He that Commanded Victory, at will, That was the Worlds delight, Kings glory sheen, He, He receiues Deaths treacherous stroak vnseen. Th'vnhappy street where This fell Hap fel-out, Where wofull Paris saw her Light put out, VVhere cursed Iron pierc't her Princes hart, In shall no more be clept The Iron-mart: It shall be call'd The cursed Corner, still; The Hag-street, or The Hell-street: which you will. Lord! where wer Thou! When That distoiall With cruell hand did Thine Anointed reach; Quenching the Raies of Royall Maiestie? No heart is hid from thine All-piercing Eye, It sees the Centre, knows the thoughts, yer thought; Could it see This, and suffer it be wrought?
Hell oft before, out of his black Abyss, ad spew'd vp Monsters to haue acted This: ut, still thy hand from former wounds did ward. nd had he not still trusted to Thy Gard, is Owne had waited Round about his Coach, nd This fell Tyger neuer should approach. These Words, these rasher Words escapt my tong; hen I beheld That Monarch layd along ead on his Bed; so dead, so butchered; blamed Heauens, & Whispering soft, I said, ecause They stopt not This strange Hap before, heir slūbring eyes now watch the World no more. But, are mine eyes mine own? Is This That Prince hich might haue made all Europa His, long fince, ad he not thought th'Empire of France enough; hat Lion-heart, that Courage Cannon—proofe, Vhich did so oft Impossibles atchicue? ee tis He: yet scarce my sight beleeue. Is This That Mighty King, Gods huely Image, o whom the greatest in the World did Homage? Peace a Doue, in Warre an Aegle quick, ESTOR in Court, in Camp ACHILLES-like; hat with a hundred horse, a thousand foil'd: hat from most Dangers neuer yet recoil'd.
Great Rome was strangely maz'd and all a-mor, When She beheld her CAESAR'S bloody shirt: And say, Great Citty, how wert Thou dismaid, When first thou saw'st Thine HENRY sadly layd Along his Coach, & couered with a Cloak? "I thought the Prop of all my Fortunes brak. Those that haue seen in Townes surpris'd (while∣yer) When to the Churches All haue fled for fear, May well imagine Paris deepe Affright. Nothing but shiuering: Nobles armed bright, Clergy at Prayers, People weep and houle: And HENRY'S wound hath wounded euery Soule. Paris in Honour of her peerless Queen, Had plotted Showes (more pompous neuer seen) As, rich to th'outward, rare to th'inward sense; But, all those Archs (Marks of Magnificence), Those Tropheis, Terms, Statues, Colosses, All, Make but more Mourners at the Funerall. I yeeld My Pensill: help APELLES, heere, To Limn (to life) Her dying-liuing Cheere: Beleefe is hardly in Mans heart imprest, Her Griefe more hard to be by Art exprest. Therfore ô Queen! Great Stay, Great Star of Fr This Veile I draw before Thy Countenance.
Heauē steel'd Thy Hart with Fortitude That Day, hy Courage kept the Kingdom from Decay; nd to the Throne Thy Son our Soueraign heft: hough angry Fates of Father him bereft, et Mercifull, they left him such a Mother, hat France could hardly haue been rul'd by other. The suddain Clap of This drad Thunder sounds, rom Alexander's to Alcides Bounds: he Kings and Princes stand amazed all, ith horror of an Act so Tragicall. ome, Rest forsake: others, Repast forbeare, nd Each like Fortune to himselfe doth feare. So suddainly to see Day turn'd to Night, ryumphant Palmes, into Funereall Plight, The Royall Crown to a deep Mourning Vale, liuing King, to a dead Corps & pale, Our Flowers to Thorns; seem Tricks of Sorcery, Wherein, Conceit consents not with our Eye. Yes, He is dead: and his eye-lids no more To view this Light shall open (as before); Those louely Eyes, the Load-starrs of the Court, Whose gracious glances, on the Worthy sort, aue Vertue vigor; and Whose awefull frowne Dis-dared Vice: are now Eclipst and downe.
Where are those ready Battaile-ranging Hands? Those lightning Eyes whose wrath no wall with. stand That Voice so dreadful to the stoutest harts? That Heart which wrought so many wondrous parts That piercing Wit, dispersing Clowds of Doubt? VVhere is that mighty King, so Fam'd about? Inexorable Death! inhumane, cruell, Thou shalt no more reae vs so rare a Iewell; Nature hath broke the Mould she made Him in. In all thy Triumph (trayling euery Kin) Shal neuer march His March, nor worthier Prince, T'haue been exempted from thine Insolence. Ah! poore, weak Vertue, zealous Loue of Thee, Prolongs not Life, protracts not Death (I see): This Prince that gaue Thee euē his Hart for Tēple This Prince whose Raign shal serue for rare Exempl To future Kings, in future Things dismaid, Should haue come sooner, or haue later stayd. His Pietie, was neither Fond, nor Faind; His Prowesse, neither Feare, not Rashnes staind; His Prudence clear'd his Coūcells, steerd his State; His Temperance his Wrath did temperate; His Iustice with his Clemencie did Yoake: Yet could not All free Him from Fatall stroake.
nuincible in all: only, the Dars, hich haue not spar'd the Gods immortall harts, ue often batterd His: but, by your leaues, fairest Bewties! (Bewtie it self deceiues) on neuer were the Souerains of his brest: e You (perhaps) You neuer Him possest. lu Arms-Art, what He knew not, none can know't, either attempt what He attempted not, eason was aye the Aime of His designes; is braue Exploits (worthie immortall lines) all furnish Theam to Thousand learned Clarks. hose Works shal Honor Him, He more their Warks His Royall Gests are euery-where extold, rauen, Carued, Cast, in Marble, Wood, & Gold; is Life alone's an History admir'd, herein all Pens, all Pencills shall be tir'd. pourtraying all His valiant Feats to-forn, hose Tables euer shall all Courts adorn. His Bounties Temple had a hard Accesse. Not known to any but to Worthinesse: That Gate (indeed) did seldom open quick. His Liberality, (coy Bewty-like) ou'd to be woo'd, prest, and importun'd still; Yea, forc't to giue, what glad and fain she will.
Yet, by th' effects to waigh his Clemencie, Me thinks His Heart must more then humane be, Me thinks therein some higher Power did shine, It surely seem'd celestiall and diuine, And but I saw him dying, pale and wan, I could haue scarce beleeu'd This Prince a Man. He euer lou'd rather to saue then spill, Not cementing his Throne with Blood, with Ill; Nor ween'd, by Feare his Diadem assur'd; With mildenes rather, grieued minds he cur'd: His Memory did neuer wrongs retain; Beloued Kings, He thought, securest raign. Praise you his Bounty, you that, past the Poles, Beare Heauens Embassage to Belief—less Soules: HENRY restor'd your Countrey, and your Credit, He gaue you leaue ouer all France to spred it; Restor'd you Bizance, and each pleasant part, Left you his Court, bequeath'd to you his Heart. If France now flourish, proyning, round about, Oliues within, and Lawrels all with-out, If now, She giue the Law to other States, If Peace and Plenty raigne within her Gates, If now She feare no Ciuill Storms again, These are the fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign
If now Her Schooles with learned men abound, Her rare wits be through the World renownd, doubts of Faith be cleared and explor'd, Learning be to her due Place restor'd, now Desert the Charge in Church attain, hese are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign. If now her Buildings passe for bewty farre he Worlds old Wonders (which so famous are) Paris Thou be peerlesse to behold, or State, for Store, for People, Goods, & Gold, f in thy Citie, Cities sprout again, hese are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign. If the French Scepter be now Self-entire, ear-less of Forain or Domestick fire: f France haue Fellowes of ACHILLEs Fame; f now in France be nothing out of frame, f now the Indies her Bastile containe; hese are the Fruits of this Great HENRY's Raign. If now we ioy to see our Countrey free rom Theenes and Rebels (which exiled be): f Iustice now doe keep the lewd in awe, f Desperate Duels be now curbd by Lawe, f now the Weak waigh not the Strongs disdain, These are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign.
If Merchants rich, If Magistrates be sound, If Officers like Emperors abound, If Pursie Lawyers liue Prince-like at home, If now Inuentions to their height be come, If now good wits find where them to sustain, These are the fruits of This Great HENRY's Raigne Who lou'd not Him, neuer beheld his browes, Who knew his Fortunes, must admire his Prowes, Who feard him not, His greatnes did offend, Who weend Him to beguile, his Wisdom kend: Who durst displease Him, knew his mercies store; Who durst not speak, his mildnes did ignore. Who waileth not his Death, knew not his Life, Glory of His and Others Enuie rife, Incomparable, Admirable Prince, Excelling all th' old HEROEs Excellence. For, His true Story shall their Fables shame: Inintable Life, Illimitable Fame. O French-men, stop not yet your weeping flood: This Prince for you hath lauisht oft his blood. O! be not niggards of your Tears expence, (Vaile heer, my Verse, do ANNE a reuerence; Rare ANNE that shames the rarest wits of Ours, Her diuine Stances furnish theethese Flowers).
The Heauens may giue vs all Prosperities, stain our State, remooue our miseries; cannot dry vp our Tears bitter streame: extreame Euills remedies extreame. store our King, quick shall our Ioyes recouer: , neuer look our Sorrowes should giue-ouer. Eech-where our Grief finds matter to augment it, Names remembrance doth each-where present it, famous Gests do busie euery Sort, me tell his Warres, others his Works report. thers his Fauors past, glad-sad deplore; en, not to monrn, is not to mind Him more. Ah! must we liue, and see so sodain dead e Life that late our Liues inspirited? ike saile my Soule, let's put-into the Port, hile HENRY liu'd 'twas good to liue (in sort): t let vs after: sith Hee's reft of breath, sire of Life is now farre worse then Death. Sorrow, with vs doth both lie-downe and rise, rinkles our Browes, withers our Cheeks & Byes: e shun what-euer might our Griefs allay, e wish the Night, w' are weary of the Day, ight brings sad Silence with her horrid Shade, nd euen her Colour seems for Mourning made.
Extreamest Woes yet are with Time ore-past, Riuers of Teares are dryed-vp at last: But neuer Ours; Ours, euer fresh shall flow: We defie Comforts, We'll admit no mo, Nor seek them, but as Alchimy profound Seeks that which is not, or which is not found Who, from the Ocean, Motion can recall, Heat from Fire, Void from Aire, Order from All, From Lines their Points, from IRIS all her Dyes, Perils from Seas, from Numbers Vnities, Shadowes from Bodies, Angles from the Square, May free our Hearts from Grief, our Mindes from (C He must be hart-les that is smart-les found: The Soule that is not wounded with This wound, Most brutish, hath no humane Reason in't: There is no brest of Steel, no heart of Flint, But must be-mone so great a King, so slain. Who would not waile a Gally-slaue so tane? Let vs no more name HENRYS, Kings of Fr Death with two Kniues, & with one shiuer'd Lance, Hath kild Three HENRYS: one at Iousts (in iest); Th'other in's Closet; in's Caroche, the best: So, Three King RICHARDS, & Fiue Other, cry, Some fatal Secret in some Names doth lie.
hat worse Disastre can you haue behinde, hreaten France? O Destinies vnkinde! t greater Mischief can your Malice bring? ood a Father reft, so great a King? t will you more? sith we no more can hope any Good that with This Ill may cope. his noble Spirit doth to his Spring re-mount, s Bounties Flood retireth to his Fount, s Atomie to's Vnity vnites, s Star returns to the first Light of Lights, s Ray reuerts where first it light did take, l mortall wounds, This Prince immortall make. e-well sole Honour of all earthly Kings, e-well rare Prince for All-kinde Managings, e-well Great HENRY, Heav'ns & Natures Gem, e-well bright Star of Kings, Glories great Beam, e-well sole Mortall that I keep in minde: e-well false Hope, Fortune, & Court vnkinde. eer, lest Obliuion should vsurp her roome, ME writes in Gold, These Lines vpon thy Toomb. his Prince, vn-Peerd for Clemency and Courage ly Sur-nam'd, the Great, the Good, the Wise, ror of Future, Miracle of Fore-Age; short Mis-hap for-euer Happiies. FINIS.
