24885 99837901 2248
A Catalog of the Bi∣shops of Excester, with the descrip∣tion of the antiquitie and first foun∣dation of the Cathedrall Church of the same. Collected by Iohn Vowell alias Hoker, Gentleman. Ezec. 3. Act. 20. I haue made thee watch-man ouer the house of Is∣rael, to giue them warning from me. Take heed therefore to your selues, and to the flocke whereof the holie Ghost hath made you ouer∣seers. Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham. 1584.
POST MORTEM VITA
To the Right Honourable and Reue∣rend Father in God, John by the sufferance of God Bishop of Excester, and to the Right worshipfull and Reuerend the Deane and Chapter of the same; Iohn Vowell alias Hoker, wisheth grace mercie and peace. ABout a few yeares past, right Honorable, re∣uerend and worshipfull, I was requested to giue out the description of the citie of Excester, some one (then liuing) pretending and minding after the or∣der of Ministers, to set foorth a generall description of the whole realme of England, and also a Topo∣graphicall and a particular discourse of euerie pro∣uince, citie, and towne, in the same. This request ten∣ding to so good an end, liked me so well, that albeit I were and am verie vnfit, and of small knowledge, to wade into such a matter: yet when I sawe no man would take it in hand, I was contented to yeeld therevnto. And finding no such thing before doone, my paines were the greater, and I driuen to make the more diligent search and in∣quirie, for such old and ancient presidents, records and writings, as might be found and had for my best furtherance herein. In which my trauels, it was my hap among other things, to haue the sight of a certaine table within your Ca∣thedrall church, which cheefelie conteined a certeine Catalog of a few Bishops thereof. I did not so much reioise at the sight thereof, at the first, but when I had throughlie perused and considered the same, I was sorie, that no one man, in the course of manie yeares, had continued it. At length, considering with my selfe, that there is such a sympathie and affinitie, betweene this citie and the church, both which are inclosed and inuironed within one wall, and be as it were one bodie, though in certeine priuiledges distinguished; and that in the search for the one, I might the better doo the like in the other, I did resolue my selfe, to be∣stowe my trauels in both alike, and yet greatlie was I herein discouraged, for being an earnest sutor to some of your owne companie, for some helpe out of your auncient records, I had small furtherance; some being more suspicious than needed; some if I may speake it, vnder your patience, not vnlike Aesops dogge, who would neither eate haie himselfe, nor yet suffer the oxe to doo it, by meanes whereof, I was driuen to picke out els where what I could, which I doo persuade my selfe to be so much the more imperfect. Well, what I haue doone for the citie, I haue presented it to the Maior and magistrates of the same; and what I haue doone concerning your church, I doo here most humblie offer vnto you, the effect whereof is; The antiquitie and first foundation of your cathedrall church, when and by whom the same was doone, and then the Catalog of all the Bishops that I can find, which haue beene of this prouince, as well before as si∣thence the sea was stablished in this church and citie. And for as much as the Bishops were alwaies accompted to be the fathers of Gods people, for the di∣rection of them in all holines, vertue and religion, I will by way of a little in∣troduction, set downe the beginning of christian religion, within this realme,
and of the first placing and appointing of Bishops ouer this prouince and coun∣trie of Deuon and Cornewall. It is recorded in sundrie histories, that immedi∣atlie vpon the death of Christ, the Gospell was preached in this land of Eng∣land. Some write, that Simon Zelotes, one of the apostles was here and preached; some write that S. Paule was here, and did the like; some saie that Ioseph of Ari∣mathia, did come into this land, when king Aruiragus reigned, & did both preach and baptize the king and his people; some saie that it was some one of the apo∣stles, but they name him not; but whosoeuer was the preacher, true it is, that Christ was preached, and his Gospell receiued, euen with the first: notwith∣standing, the seed was cast among the thornes and high waies, and brought foorth no fruit, but as a candle vnder the bushell, and as fire raked vp in the im∣bers, it seemed to be hidden and buried, vntill the time of king Lucius the sonne of king Coyleo, who about the yeare of the Lord 187. was by the goodnes of God called to the knowledge of the Gospell; and he foorthwith expelled all the Archiflamines and Flamines, and constituted in their places, Archbishops and Bishops, which were in number three of the one, and xxviij. of the other; and at this time the prouinces of Deuon and Cornewall were vnder the Archbishop of London, for of anie other particular Bishop, there is no mention made. And notwithstanding, the Gospell had his free passage for the time, yet clouds coue∣red the sunne, and through persecutions, the godlie were put to silence, and the true religion seemed to be extinguished, for almost about foure hundred yeares, vntill the time of king Vlphus, then king of West sex, or West Saxonie, who about the yeare of our Lord 636. was conuerted vnto christian religion, by the good and godlie man Birinus, and the sea for West sex was appointed to be at Dorche∣ster, and then vnder the same were the prouinces of Deuon and Cornewall a∣bout twentie yeares, vntill the time of Kinwalchus, who builded the church of Winchester, about the yeare 654. and he remooued the sea from Dorchester vn∣to Winchester, and thencefoorth was all Deuon and Cornewall vnder the Bi∣shop of Winchester, for and about fiftie yeares, vntill the time of king Iewe. In whose time about the yeare of our Lord 705. there was a synod or a prouinciall councell, holden vnder Brithewaldus Archbishop of Canturburie, in which it was ordeined, that the Bishoprike of Winchester, should be diuided into two Bi∣shoprikes or diocesses: that is Winchester, and Shereborne, and then vnder the Bishop of Shereborne, and in his Diocesse was Deuon and Cornewall, and so thenceforth did this constitution hold and continue about two hundred yeares, vntill the time of king Edward the elder, the sonne of king Alphred, who making a progresse through out his kingdome of Westsex, came to this citie of Excester, and found both it, and the whole countrie cleane destituted of Bishop or prea∣cher, and so had beene for sundrie yeares, wherevpon by the aduise of Pleymun∣dus Archbishop of Canturburie, a synod or a prouinciall councell was kept in Westsex: and therein it was ordeined and concluded, that in euerie particular prouince or shiere, within Westsex, there should be a particular Bishop: and then one Bishop was appointed for Deuonshire, and an other for Cornewall. Werstanus was consecrated Bishop of Deuon, and his sea was then at Tawton, now named Bishops Tawton, and from thence shortlie after remooued to Kir∣ton, and after manie yeares, from thence to Excester. Herstanus was consecrated Bishop of Cornewall, and his sea was first at S. Petrokes in Bodmin, and after re∣mooued vnto S. Germines, and at length was vnited vnto Crediton, and in the end both were remooued vnto Excester. And for as much as I haue not yet found anie thing of the Bishops of Cornewall, worthie memorie, I will deale
and set downe onelie the Catalog of the Bishops of Deuon and of Excester, and what I find doone by them or in their time worthie the obseruation. I know that for want of knowledge in me, there be manie imperfections herein. But among so manie wise godlie and learned men, as you are, I hope that some one good man or other, and hauing accesse vnto your euidences and records, will either reforme what they find amisse, or impart it vnto me, that I may so doo it, when time and opportunitie shall serue therevnto. And thus much concerning the first receiuing of the true and christian religion, and appointing of Bishops in this prouince of Deuon. And for as much as this pamphlet doone and written a fewe yeares past, came vpon some occasion to my hands, to be reuiued at this present time; being the end of the yeare past, and the beginning of the new now come, in which it hath beene an old vsage and custome among good freends, and especiallie of the yoonger to their elders, and of the inferiour to their supe∣riours, to offer some small present, ech one to the other, congratulating thereby the good successe of the yeare past, and wishing the like to come, and considering also, that you which doo labour in the word and in doctrine, doo dailie beget vs through the Gospell in Christ Iesus, and are his ministers to our saluation, and therefore the more worthie of double honour; and for as much as I my selfe am (his name be praised) by these meanes made partaker of his heauenlie bles∣sings, and dailie confirmed, doo thinke my selfe most bounden to be thankefull and gratefull vnto you all herein. Wherefore these my trauels, so much as con∣cerne your church, I thought it good, by waie of a strene, to offer and present vnto you, praieng you, that though it be somewhat imperfect, yet such as it is you will accept and take in good part, not respecting the slendernes of the thing offered, but the good will and beneuolence of the offerer. And herewith also I am to praie you to call to your remembrance, that as the old yeare is past, and the new is come; so that euerie one doo cast awaie the old man, which is cor∣rupt, and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousnes and holines, and that you be renewed in knowledge after the image of God, which created vs, and to cast awaie the workes of darkenes, and put on the armor of light, walking honestlie as in the daie time, not biting nor deuouring one the o∣ther, least we be consumed one with another: but walke in loue, and peace, long suffering, gentlenes, goodnes, faith, meekenes, and temperance, which are the fruits of the spirit, crucifieng the flesh and the affections and lusts thereof; and thus hauing purged awaie the old leauen, and being freed from sinne, and made the seruants of God, and prepared to good works through Christ, you maie haue your fruits in holines, and in the end to enter into the ioie of our Lord, and life euerlasting. And thus commending you vnto the eternall and euerliuing God in Christ Ie∣sus, I doo most dutifullie take my leaue. Exon the last of the old yeare, and the be∣ginning of the new. 1583. Yours in the Lord Iesus, Iohn Hoker.
The antiquitie, foundation, and building of the Cathedrall Church, of S. Pe∣ters, in the Citie of Excester. AFter that false and superstitious religion, was crept and receiued into the Church of God: and the people growen verie deuout therein, they began the erecting and building of religious hou∣ses, and monasteries, in euerie place: (which after the maner of the most part of Christendome) as it was doone vniuersallie within this realme, so also there wanted not the like in this citie after the rate and portion thereof. For this humor being now entred, and the people misled therein, so prone and forward was ech man to continue the thing begun and receiued: that the more busie, forward, and liberall he was therein, the better man he was re∣ported, and taken to be. There were therefore in this citie from time to time, as oportunitie serued, diuers religious houses, and monasteries, foun∣ded and erected: whereof appéereth that thrée were within the site, circuite, and place, which is now called the close of S. Peters: and which, in time, crewed and were vnited into one. The first was a house of women, cal∣led Moniales or Nunnes, which is now the calenderhaie and the Deanes house of the Cathedrall Church. The other was of monks, and supposed to be builded about the yeere of the Lord 868. by King Etheldred, the third sonne of King Ethelmophus: and these two were by Bishop Leophricus ad∣ded and vnited to the Cathedrall Church. The third was a house of Moonks of the order of S. Benet, and founded by K. Athelstane, Anno 932. And this is that part of the Cathedrall Church, now called the Ladie chap∣pell. For the said King, hauing driuen out of this citie, the Brytaines (who then dwelled therein) and minding to make a full conquest of them, and of such as then inhabited in Deuon or in Cornwall followed and pursued them, whom in the end he conquered; and hauing exploited his wit, and gotten the victorie, returned to this citie, and here staieng and soiourning for a time, did reedifie the citie, as also yeélding himselfe thankefull to God for his good suc∣cesse, builded the said monasterie for Moonks, for thus is it so written of him, Hanc vrbem primus Rex Athelstanus in potestatem Anglorum effugatis Brytonibus re∣dactam, turribus muniuit, & muro ex quadratis lapidibus inxit: ac antiquitùs voca∣tum Munketon, nunc Exeter vocari voluit: ac ibi sedens mansum quoddam dedit ad fun∣dandum monasterium pro monachis deo & sancto Petro famidantibus. And besides the great charges he was at, in the building, he gaue also sufficient lands & reuenewes for their liuing, whereof Morkshut and Thresaurers beare, be yet remaining & are appertaining to the treasurer of the said Church. But after the time of K. Athelstane, the Danes with great hostilitie, & crueltie hauing ouerrunne this land, this citie and Church was much infected and troubled, for with no lesse crueltie, did the Danes pursue the English men, and Sax∣ons, than did the Saxons before pursue the Brytaines. And then the Moonks not able to indure the same, fled and forsooke their house, seéking places of refuge, and better safetie: and so was this monasterie left destitute, and forsaken for sundrie yeares, vntill the time of K. Edgar, for he making a pro∣gresse
into those west parts, to visit his father in lawe Ordogarus (whose daughter he had married) then Earle of Deuon, and founder of the abbeie of Tauestocke, came to this citie, Anno, 986. and he pittieng the distressed state of the said Church, caused the Moonks to be sought out, and to be assembled togither; whom he then restored to their house and liueliehoods, and appoin∣ted Sydemannus (who afterwards was Bishop) to be their Abbat. And thencefoorth, they continued togither (although in great troubles) vntill the time of K. Swanus the Dane, for he with a great troope and armie of his Danes, came to this citie, anno, 1019. who besieged it, and at length, hauing taken the same, he spoiled, destroied, and burnt, both citie, and mona∣sterie, but yet shortlie after it was againe restored, for K. Cahutus or Canu∣tus, being aduertised of the great cruelties doone by his father Swanus, did at the request of one of his dukes named Atheldredus, make restitution vnto A∣theluoldus then Abbat, both of lands, liuings, and priuiledges, as appéereth by his chapter dated, anno, 1019. After this, néere about xxx. yeares, K. Edward the confessor came to the citie, and he by the aduise and counsell of Leophricus, then Bishop of Crediton and sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, and of the priuie Councell, with the said King; partlie for the better safetie of the Bishop, and his suc∣cessors, and partlie to prouide a more apt place for the Moonks, did remooue the Bishops sea, from Crediton to this citie, and sent the Moonks to westmo∣naster; and did himselfe in his owne person, togither with Quéene Edeth his wife, place and install Bishop Leophricus in possession of his new Church and sea. The Bishop then thus remooued from the old, and placed in the new, indoweth his new sea and Church, with the lands, and liueliehoods of his former Church, and to make his sanctuarie to his mind, pulleth downe the two monasteries, néere adioining, the one of Nunnes, the other of Moonks, and addeth them to his owne Church: and then hauing thus brought his de∣uise to effect, maketh ordinances, lawes, and orders, for the good gouernment of his Church and cleargie. After Leophricus death, his successors following his example did euerie of them, for the most part, procure the augmentation & increase of their church, some in liueliehoods, some in liberties, and priuiledges, and some in buildings, and some in one thing or other. William Warewest, the third Bishop after the conquest, being sometimes chapleine to the conqueror, and to William and Henrie his sonnes, obteined of the conqueror such grace and fauour, that he gaue to this Church▪ Plimton, Brampton, and S. Steeuens in Excester, which his gift, his foresaied two snnes by their charters did also confirme: and then the said Bishop, hauing the ordering and distribution thereof, giueth Plimton to the regular Can∣nons, for whom he had erected a monasterie there, and where he himselfe short∣lie after, leauing his Bishoprike became a Cannon; Bramton was reserued to the Cathedrall Church, and afterwards was annexed to the Deanerie, but S. Steeuens, with the fée to the same, he reserued to himselfe, and to his successors, whereby they are Barrons and Lords in the parliament. Anno 1112 the said Bishop Warewest began to inlarge his Cahedrall Church, which at that time was no bigger than that part which is now the Ladie chappell, and laid the foundation, of that which is now the chore or quier. Anno 1235. or there about▪ William Brewer Bishop, established and made a
Deanes chapter of xxiiij. prebendaries: for the Deane (whom he then appoin∣ted, and whose name was Serlo) and for his successors, he appropriated & gaue Brampton, and Coliton Rawleigh, for the prebendaries he purchased lands, allotting to euerie of them, the like portion of foure pound, by the yéere. Anno 1284. Peter Quiuill Bishop, finding the chancell of his Church to be builded and finished to his hands, beginneth and foundeth the lower part, or bodie of his church, from the quéere westwards; he also appointed a chanter, and a subdeane in the Church, to the one he impropriated Painton, and Chudleigh, and to the other, the personage of Egloshale in Cornewall, he also impropriated the personage of S. Newlin in Cornewall, & of the Stoke∣gabrill in Deuon, to the Chancellor of the Church for reading of a Diuinitie lecture in his Cathedrall Church. Anno 1340. Iohn Grandisson Bishop, did increase the length of his Church, from the foote, westwards; he vaulted the roofe of the whole Church, and fullie ended and absolued the same; and albeit, from the time of K. Athel∣stan, the first founder, anno 932. vntill the death of this Grandisson, which was anno 1369. there were 437. yéeres distant, and in the meane time, this Church builded by sundrie and diuerse men, yet so vniformelie the same is compact, as though it were builded at one instant. Anno 1456. George Neuill then Bishop of this Church, but shortlie after Archbishop of Yorke, began to build the chapter house, which was en∣ded, finished, and absolued, by his next successor, Bishop Edmond Lacie, but the cloister, and librarie, was builded by the Deane and chapter. And thus much concerning the first foundation and building of this Church, and the full ending of the same, and now to the Catalog of the Bishops, and of so manie as I can find, who haue béene particular Bishops in this prouince of Deuon, sithens the time of Edward the elder, the sonne of K. Alphred.
A Catalog of the Bishops of Excester. WErstanus, at a prouinciall synod, holden in west sex, anno. 905. was consecrated Bishop of Deuon, and had his sea at Bishops Tawton: and in the yeare following 906. he died and was buried in his owne church. PVtta, after the death of Werstanus, was elected and consecrated Bishop, and had his sea at Tawton, and taking his iorneie to∣wards Crediton, to sée and visit the king (or as some saie, Vffa the kings lieutenant) was by the said Vffas men slaine, and then vpon his death the sea was remooued to Crediton. EAdulphus, brother to Alpsius duke of Deuon, and Corne∣wall, and founder of Launceston, was consecrated Bishop of Deuon, but installed at Crediton, where he had his sea, and continu∣ed Bishop xxij. yeares, and then dieng about the yeare 932. he was buried in his owne church. EThelgarus, anno. 932. succéeded Eadulphus. and in his time king Athelstane subdued the Cornish people, reedified this citie, and compassed the same with a stone wall: he founded the monaste∣rie of S. Peters, for monkes of S. Benets order. This Ethelgarus af∣ter he had béene Bishop ten yeares died, and was buried in his owne church. ALgarus, anno. 942. after Ethelgarus was constituted and in∣stalled Bishop at Crediton, and hauing béene Bishop about ten yeares, died and was buried in his owne church. ALfwoldus, as Mathew of Westminster writeth, was next Bishop after Algarus, and consecrated by the aduise of Dun∣stane, anno 952. In this time Odogarus Earle of Deuon, and father in lawe to king Edger, builded the Abbie of Tauestoke, and king Edgar calleth home all the Monkes of S. Peters which were disper∣sed, and without anie Abbat, and made Sydemanuus Abbot, who was afterwards Bishop. This Alfwoldus after sixtéene yeares that he was consecrated, died and was buried in his owne church. ALwolfus, as Dicetus affirmeth, was consecrated Bishop, anno 969. and after nine yeares died, and was buried in his owne church.
SYdemannus, of an Abbat was made a Bishop, anno. 978. in this mans time the Danes ouerranne and spoiled the whole con∣tries of Deuon and Cornewall, burned the towne of Bodmen, and the cathedrall church of S. Petrokes, with the Bishops house. Where∣vpon the Bishops sea was remooued from thence to S. Germans, where the same continued vntill the remoouing and vniting thereof vnto Crediton. Sydemannus in the twelfe yeare after his consecra∣tion died, and was buried at Crediton in his owne church. 990. ALphredus, whom Dicetus calleth Alfricus Abbat of Malmes∣burie, was consecrated Bishop, and installed at Crediton, he was taken for a learned man, bicause he wrote two bookes, the one intituled De rebus coenobij sui, and the other De rerum naturis. In this Bishops time, king Etheldred endowed the Bishoprike of S. Ger∣manes, with lands, liberties and priuiledges. The Danes made a fresh inuasion, in and vpon all Deuon and Cornewall, burned and spoiled the Abbie of Ordolphus at Tauestoke: they beséeged Exce∣ster, and being remooued from thence, were fought withall at Pin∣neho, about thrée miles from the citie, and ouerthrowne. Alphredus, after he had béene Bishop about nine yeares, died anno. 999. and was buried in his owne church. ALwolfus, as Dicetus writeth, was the next Bishop. In his time Sweno king of Denmarke, by intisement of one Hew, then Earle of Deuon, came with a great hoste and besieged the citie of Excester, tooke it and burned it, and with great crueltie vsed the people, vntill in the end Almarus then Earle of Deuon, and the gentlemen did yéeld and submit themselues, and so obteined peace. This Alwolfus about the fiftéenth yeare of his Bishoprike, anno. 1014. died, and was buried in his owne church. ALnoldus, by the report of the Archdeacon of London, succée∣ded Alwolfus, and was installed at Crediton. In this mans time king Canutus gaue to Athelwode Abbat of S. Peters of this citie, great gifts and sundrie priuiledges, in recompense of his fa∣thers great iniuries. Arnoldus in the fiftéene yeare of his Bishoprike 1030. died, and was buried in his owne church. LEuigus or Leuingus, Abbat of Tauistoke, and nephew to Brythewaldus Bishop of Cornewall, was chosen the next Bi∣shop,, and according to the orders then vsed, consecrated and instal∣led. He was in great fauour and credit with king Canutus, vpon
whome he attended in pilgrimage vnto Rome. And after his vncle the Bishop of S. Germans being dead, obteined of the king that the Bishops sea was remooued from S. Germanes vnto Crediton, and both were thereby reduced and vnited into one Bishoprike, and so hath euer sithence continued: he was after the death of Brythegus Bishop of Worcester, remooued to that church, and there died and was buried as some suppose: but some affirme, that in the time of Hardicamitus the king, at the accusation of Alfredus then Archbishop of Yorke, for that he should be consenting to the death of Alfredus the sonne of Etheldred, that he should be deposed of his Bishoprike there, and so did returne vnto Tauestoke, where be died: but Dicetus affirmeth that he purged himselfe of this crime, and by that meanes was restored both to the fauour of the king and to his Bishoprike a∣gaine, and died Bishop of Worcester. It is recorded that he was Bishop of Crediton fiftéene yeares. LEofricus, a man descended of the blood and line of Brutus, but brought vp in the land of Lothoringia or Loreine, was so well commended for his nobilitie, wisedome and learning, that king Ed∣ward the confessor had him in great fauour, and made him first one of his priuie Councell; and then Lord Chamberlaine of all Eng∣land: and lastlie the Bishoprike of this prouince being void, he was made, consecrated, and installed, Bishop of the same. By him and by his meanes, the Bishops sea was remooued from Crediton, to this citie of Excester, for at his request, king Edward togither with Quéene Edith his wife, came to Excester, and remoouing the moonks from hence to Westminster, did also remooue the Bishops sea from Crediton to his citie, and did put the Bishop in the possessi∣on: for he conducting the Bishop on the right hand, and the Quéene on the left hand, brought him to the high altar of his new church, and there placed him in a seat appointed for him. He suppressed sun∣drie houses or cels of religion within his sanctuarie, and appropria∣ted and vnited them to his owne church, as also by the good liberali∣tie of the king, obteined great reuenues, possessions, priuiledges, and liberties, to be giuen vnto the church. In this mans time, William Duke of Normandie, made a conquest of this whole realme, as also in the yeare 1068. besieged this citie of Excester, which after by com∣position he restored to his former estate againe. Also in his time Richard de Brion, a noble man of Normandie, the sonne of Baldwin of Brion, and of Albred the néece to the conqueror, was made Baron of Okehampton, warden of the castell of Excester, and Vicount of
Deuon. This Leofricus after that he had well and worthilie ruled his church and Diocesse, by the space of xxiij. yeares, he ended his daies in peace, and died anno 1073. and was buried in the cemitorie or churchyard of his owne church, vnder a simple and a broken Mar∣ble stone, which place by the sithens enlarging of his church, is now within the south tower of the same, where of late, anno 1568. a new monument was erected in the memorie of so good, worthie, and no∣ble a personage, by the industrie of the writer hereof, but at the char∣ges of the Deane and chapter. OSbertus or Osbernus, a Normaine borne, and brother to an Earle named William, was preferred to this Bishoprike, and in the yeare 1074. was consecrated and installed to the same. Polydorus writeth, that one Galfrid who ioined with Odo Earle of Kent and Bishop of Boion, against William Rufus, should be Bishop of Exon: but it was not nor could not so be. In this mans time Wil∣liam the conqueror, and William Rufus his sonne died. This Osbertus or Osbernus, after he had béene Bishop thirtie yeares, was blind, and died, and lieth buried in his owne church. WIlliam VVarewest, a Normaine borne, and chaplaine both to the conqueror and his two sonnes, William and Henrie, was a verie graue and a wiseman, and for the same was pre∣ferred by Henrie the king to this Bishoprike, anno 1107. and was consecrated by Anselmus Archbishop of Canturburie, in the moneth of August, the same yeare. He first began to enlarge his church, which at that time was no bigger than that which is now called the Ladie chappell. He founded and builded the monasterie of Plimpton, and placed therein regular Canons: in his latter daies he waxed and became blind; and yet notwithstanding for his wisedome the king sent him in embassage vnto Pope Paschalis the second, wherein he so wiselie dealed, and so discréetlie behaued himselfe in his message, that he made a reconciliation betwéene the Pope and the King, and returned with great praise and commendation. Not long after his returne, and hauing small ioie of the world, he gaue ouer his Bishop∣rike, and became one of the religious canons in his owne house of Plimpton, where he died and was buried, he was Bishop about twentie yeares. RObert Chichester, Deane of Sarisburie, was consecra∣ted Bishop vnder Anselmus Archbishop of Canrtuburie, anno. 1128. and the xxviij. yeare of king Henrie the first, he was a Gentle∣man
borne, and therefore estéemed for his zeale in religion, wherein he was verie deuout according to those daies, and thinking his la∣boures to be best emploied that waie, did eftsoones go in pilgrimage, sometime to Rome, sometime to one place, sometime to an other; and euer he would bring with him some one relique or other. He was a liberall contributor to the buildings of his church. In his time was founded and builded the Monasterie of S. Stephens in Laun∣ceston, and furthered by Reynold Earle of Cornewall, but vnto it this Bishop was an aduersarie; not for misliking the worke, but for feare of an intrusion vpon his liberties. Likewise at this time was builded the Priorie of S. Nicholas in Excester, by the Abbat of Battell, vnto which Abbie, this Priorie was a cell. In this mans time also, king Henrie made William Rideuerse a Normaine, and his kinseman Earle of Deuon; and therewith the Lordship of Twi∣fordtone, and the honor of Plimpton, togither with the third pennie of his reuenues in Deuon, which in the whole was then xxx. marks, whereof this Earle had ten. Also in this mans time, king Henrie died, and king Stephen entered, and tooke vpon him the crowne, whereof ensued great warres. This Bishop after that he had occupi∣ed the place xxij. yeares, died and was buried in his owne church. But the moonke of Westminster writeth that he should be Bishop xxvij. yeares, and died in the yeare 1155. but he neuer sawe the re∣cordes of this church which are to the contrarie. RObert VVarewest, Nephew to William the Bishop of this church, Deane of Sarisburie, was consecrated Bishop by Theobaldus Archbishop of Canturburie, anno 1150. he nothing de∣generate from the steps of his predecessors, but was altogether of the same bent and disposition. In his time king Stephen died, and Henrie the second was crowned king. This Robert after that he had occupied this sea nine yeares or there about, died and was buried at Plimpton by his vncle. BArtholomeus Iscanus, otherwise Bartholomew of Exce∣ster was consecrated Bishop of Excester vnder Theoldbald Archbishop of Canturburie, anno. 1159. he was called Iscanus of Isca, which is one of the ancientest names of this citie. He was a meane citizens sonne, but being verie apt vnto learning, his pa∣rents and fréends kept him to schoole, and he so well profited therein, that he came and prooued to be a verie well learned man, and being Bishop he wrote sundrie bookes, as of Predestination, Fréewill,
Penence, and others: of all men he could not brooke nor fauor Tho∣mas Becket, Archbishop of Canturburie, for his contempt and diso∣bedience against the king, for the which he sharpelie improoued, re∣buked, and inueighed against him openlie, in the parliament house holden at Northampton; and with such effectuall reasons and pithie arguments, he did so temper the same, that the whole parliament re∣lied vnto his iudgement and opinion herein, against Thomas Bec∣ket. And after his death, such was the grauitie, modestie, and wise∣dome of the man, that he was speciallie chosen to be Embassa∣dor for the king vnto Pope Alexander the third, and so wiselie and with such discretion vsed the same, that notwithstanding his cause and message had manie aduersaries, yet he reconciled the Pope, and the king, obteined the good will and fauour of the Pope, and brought his message to good effect. This Bishop was in great familiaritie and acquaintance with Baldwin of Excester his countriman, now Archbishop of Canturburie, who was a poore mans sonne in this ci∣tie; but for his learning aduanced to this estate. In this Bishops time, about the yeare of our Lord 1168. William Fytzralph a citi∣zen of this citie, founded a cell for moonks within this citie, and dedi∣cated the same to S. Alexius, which not long after was vnited to S. Iohns within the East gate of the same citie. In his time also Rey∣nold of Courtney, a nobleman of Normandie, the sonne of Elorus the sonne of Lewes, named Lewes le grosse, king of Fraunce, came into this land, and married Hawise, daughter and heire to Maud the daughter and heire to Adelis, sister and heire to Richard de Bri∣ono the first, Vicecount of Deuon, and in hir right was Vicecount of Deuon. This Bartholomew after he had béene Bishop about xiiii. yeares, anno. 1184. died, but where he died and where he was buried, it dooth not appeare. In this Bishops time about the yeare 1170. one Iohannes Corinienses a Cornish man borne, was a famous learned diuine, he was a Student at Rome and other places in Italie, and by that meanes grue into great acquaintance with Pope Alexan∣der the third, he wrote diuers bookes, and namelie one De incarnatione Christi, against Peter Lombard, who affirmed, Quòd Christus secun∣dum quod homo est, aliquid non est; and this he dedicated to Pope Alexander. IOhn, the Chaunter of the cathedrall church of this citie, was con∣secrated and installed Bishop of this church, anno. 1184. he was well reported for his liberalitie, in continuing the buildings of this church, wherein he was nothing inferiour to his predecessors. In his
time king Henrie Fytzemprise died, and he himselfe hauing béene Bishop about sixe yeares, died anno. 1191. HEnrie Marshall, Archdeacon of Stafford, the brother to Walter the Earle Marshall of England, was consecrated Bi∣shop by Hubert, Archbishop of Canturburie, anno. 1191. he finished the building of his church, according to the plat and foundation which his predecessors had laied, and that done, he purchased the patronage and Lordship of Woodburie of one Albemarlie, which he gaue and impropriated vnto the vicars corall of his church. In this mans time anno. 1201. one Simon Thurnaius, a Cornish man borne, brought vp in learning, did by diligence and studie so prosper therein, that he became excellent in all the liberall sciences, and in his daies none thought to be like him: he left Oxenford, where he had béene a studi∣ent, and went to Paris, and there became a priest, and studied di∣uinitie, and therein became so excellent and of so déepe a iudge∣ment, that he was made chéefe of the Sorbonistes; at length he became so proud of his learning, and glorified so much therein, that he would be singular, and thought himselfe to be another Ari∣stotle, and so much he was therein blinded, and waxed so farre in loue with Aristotle, that he preferred him before Moses and Christ. And behold Gods iust iudgement, for suddenlie his memorie failed him, and he waxed so forgetfull, that he could neither call to remem∣brance anie thing that he had doone, neither could he discerne, read or know a letter of the booke. This Henrie, after that he had spent and liued twelue yeares in his Bishoprike, he died, and lieth buried in the North side of the Chauncell of his church, in a verie faire toombe of Marble, anno. 1206. SImon de Apulia, anno. 1206. was installed Bishop of this sea, of him there remaineth no memoriall at all. In his time were famous Ioseph Iscanius, and Alexander Neckam; the one was verie well learned in the Latine and Gréeke toong, and in the liberall sci∣ences; the other was Prior of S. Nicholas, and was an vniuersall man, being a profound philosopher, an eloquent orator, a pleasant Poet, and a déepe diuine. In this Bishops time, the doctrine of ele∣uation, adoration, reseruation, and praieng for the dead, being esta∣blished by Pope Honorius the third, the parish churches within this citie were limitted, anno. 1222. In this mans time, anno. 1212. one Iohannes Deuonius, so surnamed bicause he was borne in Deuon, being well bent to good studies, was much commended for his lear∣ning
and modestie. He was familiar and of great acquaintance with Baldwin Bishop of Canturburie, and being made Abbat of Forde, was in such fauour with king Iohn, that he chose him to be his confessor and chapline, he was a writer, and compiled diuers bookes which were then accounted of. Being dead he was buried in his Abbie, the people much lamenting the want of so good a man. This Bishop hauing spent xviij. yeares, died anno. 1224. and was buried in his owne church. WIlliam Brewer, verie shortlie after the death of the fore∣said Simon, was elected Bishop, and consecrated by Ste∣phan Langton, Archbishop of Canturburie, anno. 1224. he was borne and descended of a noble house and parentage, being brother to Sir William Brewer knight, the husband of the eldest daughter and one of the heires to William de Verona, Earle of Deuon; and who also was founder of the Abbeis of Tor and of Hartland, and of other Monasteries. This Bishop so wiselie and so discréetlie beha∣ued himselfe, that he was had in great reputation among all men, and in speciall fauour with the king: for king Henrie, hauing giuen his sister Ladie Isabell, to wife vnto Frederike the emperour, did commend and betake hir to this Bishop, to be conueighed and con∣ducted to the emperor. And such was the fame and good report spred of him, that as he passed through the countries, they were from place to place receiued with great honour, and being come to the citie of Coleine, the Archbishop there did not onelie verie honourablie re∣ceiue and entertaine them, but also accompanied them vnto the ci∣tie of Wormes, where the marriage was solemnized. When this Bi∣shop had séene the marriage, & althings performed, he tooke his leaue and was dismissed with great presents, and honourablie accompa∣nied homewards by the Archbishop and others. At his returne he was ioifullie receiued of all the noblemen about the king, and most thankfullie by the king himselfe, and whom the king vsed as his spe∣ciall and most trustie councellor in all his weightie causes. This Bi∣shop being come home to his owne house, and minding as his prede∣cessors had doone, to leaue some good memoriall behind him, he made a Deane, and constituted xxiiij. prebendaries within his church, to the one he impropriated Brampton, & Coliton Rawley: for the others he purchased so much land, as out whereof he assigned to euerie pre∣bendarie iiij. pound by the yeare, & of these he ordeined his chapter. Also in this mans time, anno 1240. Gilbert Long, and Robert his brother, citizens of this citie, builded and founded the hospitall of S.
Iohns, within the East gate of this citie, for the sustenance of cer∣teine poore folks, called afterwards the poore children of S. Iohns, & gaue all their lands, & tenements to the same, which was sufficient. The yeare following the cell of S. Alexus was remooued and adioi∣ned to S. Iohns, and then the founders being dead, the charge and gouernment of that house was by those founders commended to the Maior of this citie, and they thensefoorth were founders & patrones thereof. Anno 1244. there grew a contention, concerning the poore. lazer, sicke people of the Magdalen without the south gate of this ci∣tie, whose maner and vsage was then, with a clapdish vpon euerie market daie, to resort and come to the markets, and there to beg e∣uerie mans deuotion: but by reason of their sicknesse, which was lothsome and abhorred, the peoples deuotion waxed short and scant against them, as also euerie man murmured against their going and begging at large, wherevpon the matter being brought into question, betwéene the Bishop and this citie, it was concluded, that a permutation should be made, and that therefore, the Bishops should be patrones, and haue the gouernment of S. Iohns, and the Maior and his successors to be gardians and founders of the hospi∣tall of the Magdalen, with a prouiso that the proctor of the Magda∣len, should on one daie in euerie moneth, come with his box to S. Peters Church, at the time of seruice; and there receiue and gather the deuotion of the canons, which is vsed at these presents. This poore house remaineth still, but the other for want of good fréends, was suppressed and dissolued. This Bishop after that he had conti∣nued in his Church, about xix, yeares he died, anno 1244. and lieth buried in the middle of his owne Church, vnder a plaine Marble stone. RIchard Blondie, 1245. was consecrated and installed: Bishop Bonifacius, then being Archbishop of Canturburie. This Richard was a man of a mild spirit, but verie stout against such as in his time, did offer anie iniurie to the church, and in his old yeares being but a weake man, he was much carried and ruled by such as were his officers, and about him; who taking the oportuni∣tie of the time, vsed all the meanes they might, to inrich themselues, his chéefest officers were one Lodesewell his chancellor, Sutton his register, Fitzherbert his officiall, and Ermestow the kéeper of his seale. These with other of the chiefe seruants of the houshold, com∣pacted amongst themselues, that whilest the Bishop was yet liuing, who then laie sicke and verie weake in his bed, to make and conuaie
vnto themselues, conueiances of such liuelihoods, as then laie in the Bishops disposition; and accordinglie made out aduousons and o∣ther such conueiances, as to them séemed best, all which were foorth∣with sealed and deliuered, according to the orders among them con∣cluded, but these their subtill dealings, were not so closelie conueied, but that the next Bishop following, boulted and found the same out, and did not onelie reuerse all their dooings, but also did excom∣municate them, and who were not absolued vntill they had doone their penance for the same. Which was doone at S. Peters Church, openlie vpon Palme sundaie, being the xix, of March, 1267. This Bishop Richard in the twelfe yeare of his Bishoprike died, and was buried in his owne Church. WAlter Bronescome, Archdeacon of Surreie, was consecrated Bishop of Canturburie, vpon passion sundaie, anno 1286 vnder Bonifacius, then Archbishop, he was borne in this citie of Exon, and was the sonne of poore parents, but he being of a verie towardnesse and good disposition, and verie apt to learning, they partlie of themselues, and partlie by helpe of their friends, did put him to schoole, and kept him to his booke▪ wherein he prooued and prospered so well, that he was verie well learned. At the time of his election, he was no préest, and therefore not capeable of anie such dignitie, but immediatlie he tooke that order vpon him, and foorth∣with was consecrated Bishop, all which being doone within fiftéene daies, it was counted as for a miracle, namelie, that he should be e∣lected Bishop, then made préest, and at last to be consecrated within that space. For so manie dignities as they termed it, to be cast vp∣on one man in so short a time, had not béene lightlie séene. He foun∣ded the colledge of Glascin, in Perin in Cornewall, and endowed the same with faire possessions and reuenewes. He purchased the the Barton of Rokesdone, and Clist; and gaue it to the hospitall of S. Iohns, within the Eastgate of the citie of Excester. He institu∣ted in his owne Church, the feast called Gabrils feast; and gaue a péece of land for the maintenance thereof, he also did by a policie, pur∣chase the Lordship and house of Clist Sachisfield, and by a deuise did inlarge the Barton thereof, by gaining of Cornish wood, from his Deane and chapter: and builded then a verie faire and a sumptu∣ous house, and called it Bishops Clist, which he left to his successors. Likewise he got the patronage of Clist Fomeson, now called Sow∣ton, and annexed the same to his new Lordship, which as it was said was in this order. He had a frier to be his chapline and confessour,
which died in his said house of Clist, and should haue béene buried at the parish church of Faringdon, bicause the said house was and is in that parish: but bicause the parish church was somewhat farre of, the waies foule, and the weather rainie, or for some other causes; the Bishop willed and commanded the corps to be carried to the parish church of Sowton, then called Clist Fomeson, which is verie néere, and bordereth vpon the Bishops Lordship: the two parishes there being diuided by a little lake called Clist. At this time one Fomeson a Gentleman, was Lord and patron of Clist Fomeson, and he be∣ing aduertised of such a buriall towards in his parish, and a léech waie to be made ouer his land, without his leaue or consent requi∣red therein; calleth his tenants togither, and goeth to the bridge o∣uer the lake, betwéene the Bishops land and his, and there méeteth the Bishops men, bringing the said corps, and forbiddeth them to come ouer the water. But the Bishops men nothing regarding the same, doo presse forthwards to come ouer the water: and the o∣thers doo withstand and fall at strife about the matter, so long, that in the end my Lords Frier is fallen into the water. The Bishop taketh this matter in such gréefe, that a holie Frier, a religious man, and his owne chaplaine and confessor, should so vnreuerentlie be cast into the water, that he falleth out with the Gentleman, and vpon what occasion I know not, he sueth him in the lawe, and so vex∣eth and tormenteth him, that in the end he was faine to yéeld him∣selfe to the Bishops deuotion, and séeketh all waies he could to cur∣rie the Bishops good will, which he could not obteine, vntill for his redemption, he had giuen and surrendred vp his patronage of Sowton, with a péece of land, all which the said Bishop annexeth to his new Lordship. Thus by policie he purchased the manor of Bi∣shops Clist, by a deuise gaineth Cornish wood, and by power wre∣steth the patronage of Sowton. This Bishop after he had occupied this sea about xxiij. yeares, died and was buried in his owne church, in a sumptuous toombe of Alablaster. PEter Quiuill, anno. 1281. was consecrated Bishop of this church, vnder Iohn Archbishop of Canturburie. He first instituted a Chaunter and a Subdeane in his church. To the one he impropria∣ted Painton and Chidleigh, & to the other the rectorie of Egloschaile in Cornewall, he was a liberall and a speciall benefactor to the hos∣pitall of S. Iohns in Excester, as well in goods as in liuelihoods; he first began to enlarge and increase his church from the chauncell downewards, and laid the foundation thereof. In his time anno.
1285. Walter Lichelade the first Chaunter, was slaine in a morning as he came from the morning seruice, then called the Mattines, which was then woont to be said shortlie after midnight. Vpon which occasion the king came vnto this citie, and kept his christmas in the same, and therevpon a composition was made betwéene the Bishop and the citie, for inclosing of the churchyard, and building of certeine gates there, as appéereth by the said composition, bearing date in Festo annunciationis beatae Mariae 1286. The king at the sute of the Earle of Hereford, who at his being here, was lodged in the house of the Graie Friers, which then was néere the house of S. Nicholas, ob∣teined of the Bishop, that they should be remooued from thence to a more wholesome place, which was to the place without Southgate: whereof after the kings departure grew some controuersie, bicause the Bishop refused to performe his promise made to the king. This man also impropriated the parish of S. Newleine, and the parish of Stoke Gabrell, and vnited the same to the office of the Chauncellor of the Cathedrall church, and vnder condition that the said chauncel∣lor should continuallie read a lecture within the said citie, of diuini∣tie, or of the decretalls: and if he should faile to doo this, that then it might and should be lawfull to the Bishop to resigne the said parso∣nages impropriated, and to bestowe it at his pleasure, as appéereth by the said grant, vnder the seales of the said Bishop, Deane and Chapter, dated the twelfe of the Calends of Maie. 1283. This Bi∣shop not long after, and in the eleuenth yeare of his Bishoprike, died being choaked in drinking of a sirrop, anno. 1292. and was buried in his owne church. The Franciscans or Graie Friers of this citie, imputed his death to his hard dealing with them: for whereas he had promised the king to prouide a conuenient place for them to build their house in, and had willed their warden, named Deoditus, to séeke out and make inquirie for the same: yet notwithstanding, when he had so doone, bicause the same was in his fée, he did swarue from his said promise, and did vtterlie denie to performe the same, by the persuasion of one Peter Kenefeld, a Dominican or a blacke Frier, and confessor vnto the said Bishop: for he enuieng the good successe of the Franciscanes, persuadeth with the Bishop, that in no wise he should permit them to enioie the place which they had gotten, nor to build therein, bicause it was within his fée; for saith he, as vnder colour of simplicitie, they créepe in to the hearts of the peo∣ple, and hinder vs poore preachers from our gaines and liuings: so be ye sure, that if the canons put foote within your liberties, they will
in time so incroch vpon the same, as that they will be cleane exemp∣ted from out of your libertie and iurisdiction. The Bishop being soone persuaded and contented contrarie to his promise to yéeld therevn∣to, denieth the Franciscans; and vtterlie forbiddeth them to build or to do anie thing within his fée or libertie. About two yeares after, the Bishop kept a great feast, vpon the sundaie next before Saint Francis daie, and among others was present with him one Walter Winborne, one of the kings chéefe iustices of the bench, and who was present when the Bishop at the request of the king, made promise to further and to helpe the Franciscans, and who in their behalfe, did now put the Bishop in mind thereof, and requested him to haue con∣sideration both of his owne promise, and of their distresse. The Bi∣shop misliking these spéeches, waxed somewhat warme and offen∣ded: and in open termes, did not onelie denie to yéeld héerevnto, but wished himselfe to be choaked, what daie so euer he did consent or yéeld vnto it. It fortuned that the same wéeke, and vpon the daie of S. Francis Eue, the Bishop tooke a certeine sirop to drinke, and in too hastie swallowing thereof, his breath was stopped, and he foorth∣with died. The Franciscans héering thereof, made no little a doo a∣bout this matter, but blased it abroad, that S. Francis wrought this miracle vpon the Bishop, bicause he was so hard against them. THomas Bitton, the yeare following was elected Bishop, and the sea of Canturburie was void, he was consecrated by Iohn Roman Archbishop of Yorke, he left no memoriall of anie great things doone by him, sauing that he continued in the building of his church, as also was a fauourer of such learned men as were in his Dioces: in his time, namelie, Robert Plimton a regular Canon of Plimpton, and a professour of diuinitie, and who wrote two books, Walter of Exon a Franciscane, Frier of Carocus in Cornewall, who at the request of one Baldwin of Excester, wrote the historie of Guie of Warwike, William of Excester, Doctor of diuinitie, and warden of the Franciscan Friers in this citie, Godfrey, surnamed Cornewall, a subtill schooleman, and a reader of diuinitie sometimes in Paris. This Bishop after xiiij. yeares that he had occupied this sea died, anno. 1306. and was buried in his owne church. WAlter Stapledon, anno. 1507. being elected Bishop of this citie, was consecrated, by Robert Wincelsey, Arch∣bishop of Canturburie, he descended of a most noble parentage, which ioined with his learning, wisdome, & politike hed, did get him
great credit & fauour with the King, who had him not only one of his priuie counsell, but also made him Lord Treasurer of England. At his inthronization or installing, he kept a solemne obseruation. For being come first to the citie, immediatlie after his consecrati∣on, as soone as he came to the Eastgate, he alighted from his horse, and went in on foote, all the streate being couered and laied with blacke cloth; he was led on both sides, with two men of worship, and Sir Hew Courtneie Knight, who claimed to be steward of his feast, went next before him. The feast it selfe was verie sumptuous, and liberall, a controuersie was betwéene him and the said Sir Hew Courtneie, concerning his challenge, to be his steward, but it was compounded and ended. This Bishop as he grew and increased in wealth, so he was carefull in the well disposing of part thereof; for the increase of learning he builded & erected two houses in Oxford, the one named Stabledons inne, but sithens Excester colledge, the other Harthall, he was also a speciall benefactor vnto the hospitall of S. Iohns in Excester; vnto the which, for the reléeuing of certeine poore children therein, he impropriated the rectorie or personage of Ernescome. In the controuersie betwéene his maister King Edward the second, and Charles the French king, he was sent Embassadour, to the French king and ioined in commission with the Quéene, for the treatie of a peace and reconciliation: which though it were obteined, yet he ioining with the Spensers, who fa∣uoured not the Quéene, he returned into England; leauing the Quéene behind him. And whereas they practised what they could, to put enmitie betwéene the King and hir; and to set hir besides the cushion, they themselues fell into the same snares, which they had lai∣ed for others. For not long after the Quéene, by the helpe of the Earle of Henaulde, and of S. Iohn his brother, came into Eng∣land with a great armie, whereof the King and the Spensers, being afraid, departed from London to Bristowe, leauing this Bishop at London, and made him custos of the same, who requiring the keies of the gates of the citie, of the Maior, the commoners tooke him and beheaded him, as also his brother Sir Richard Stapledon, in cheape∣side, and carried his bodie to his house without templebarre, and there buried it in a sand-hill; namelie, the xv. of October, anno 1329. But the Quéene forgetting all discourtesies, and reuerencing his calling, commanded his corps to some more honourable buriall, wherevpon the same was taken vp, and brought to this citie, and with great solemnitie, was buried in his owne church, vpon the 28.
of March; where his epitaph by the writer thereof is set. Thus after that he had béene Bishop about xx, yeares, he ended his daies. IAmes Barkeleie, vpon the xxvj. of March, anno. 1327. before the buriall of his predecessor in his owne Church, was consecrated Bishop of this citie, he descended of the noble house of the Lorde Barkeleie, and albeit he were reputed to be a verie godlie and a wise man, yet he had no time to yéeld the triall thereof. For he di∣ed in the fourth moneth after his consecration, vpon the xxiiij. of Iu∣lie, anno, 1327. and was buried in his owne church as some saie, but some thinke he neuer came hither at all. IOhn Grandesson, being in Italie, with Pope Iohn, the xxij. after the death of Iames Barkeleie; the King presented him vnto the Pope, who accepted the presentation, and consecrated him Bi∣shop of this diocesse, the eight of October, anno 1327. he was borne and descended of the ancient house of the Grandessons, Dukes of Burgundie, his father was named Gilbert, the brother of Otho the great Lord Grandesson, which Gilbert comming into this land, was well interteined by the king and nobilitie: and had a good liking of the countrie, that by meanes of Henrie Earle of Lancaster, with whom he came into England, he married ladie Sibill, daughier and one of the heires to Iohn Tregos, Lord of the castle of Ewas, néere Hereford east, and by hir had issue fiue sonnes, and foure daughters; of which this Bishop was one, and was borne in the parish of Ashe∣perton, in the diocesse of Hereford. He was from his childhood verie well affected to learning, and became a good scholar and a professor of Diuinitie, of which method he wrote two bookes, the one intitu∣led Pontificales maiores, & the other Pontificales minores. He was also verie graue, wise, and politike, and thereby grewe into such cre∣dit with Pope Iohn the xxij. that he was not onelie of his priuie counsell, but also Nuntius apostolicae sedis. And in all matters of weight, and importance, an embassador for him, to the emperor, to the kings of Hispaine, of France, of England, and all other, the mightiest princes of Christendome, and being on a time sent on in an embassage to K. Edward the third, he did with such wisedome and grauitie behaue himselfe, that the king was rauished in loue with him; and did so tenderlie loue and fauour him, that he neuer ceassed vntill he had procured him from the Pope, and then he gaue him the Archdeaconrie of Notingham, and bestowed great liuings vpon him. He made him one of his priuie counsell, and in the end
preferred him to this Bishoprike. After this, there being some dis∣liking betwéene Pope Clement the sixt, and the king, he for his ap∣prooued wisedome was sent in an ambassadge to the Pope, anno. 1343. for an intreatie of a peace, and an amitie betwéene them to be had; and with such wisdome he did his message, that he obteined his purpose, and made a reconciliation. After his returne home to his Bishoprike, he was altogether giuen in dooing some good things, he builded and founded the colledge of S. Marie Otrey, and endo∣wed the same with great and goodlie liueliehoods. He was a li∣berall benefactor to the Vicars Chorall of his owne church, as also to the colledge of Glasney in Perrin; he builded the two last arches in the West end of his church, vaulted the roofe of all the church, and ful∣lie performed and ended the buildings of the same, and then inri∣ched his said church, with plate, ornaments, and great riches, he also builded a verie faire house in his sanctuarie at Bishops Taington, which he gaue and least full furnished vnto his successors, and did im∣propriate vnto the same the personage of Radwaie, to the end as he setteth downe in his testament, Vt haberent locum vndè caput suum reclinarent, si fortè in manum regis eorum temporalia caperentur: and which his halsening in the end came partlie to effect. For not onelie the most part of the temporalities of this Bishoprike, but this new builded house and impropriation are come to be the possessions and inheritances of temporall men. This Bishop waxed old, and féeling in himselfe a decaie of nature, made his last will and testament, wherein he made such large and bounteous legacies to the Pope, Emperour, King, Quéene, Archbishop, Bishops, colledges, churches, and to sundrie persons of high estates and callings, that a man would maruell, considering his great and chargeable buildings and works otherwise, how and by what meanes he could haue attei∣ned to such a masse of wealth and riches; but his wisdome and poli∣cie considered, it was easie. For first he sequestrateth from himselfe and out of his house the troope of manie men and horses, reteining and kéeping no more than to serue his reasonable estate, his diet was frugall, his receipts great, his expenses no more than necessa∣rie. Moreouer he had taken and set an order with all the ecclesiasti∣all persons of his Diocesse, that at the time of their deaths, they shuld leaue & bequeath all their goods to him or to some other in trust, In pios vsus, and towards his chargeable buildings; & so well he was beloued, & his dooings liked, that they all accepted this his order: by meanes whereof he grew within the course of xl. yeares to infinite
wealth and riches. He was in all his life time a plaine man, and void of all vaine glorie and pompe, and preuenting that none should be vsed at his buriall, commanded the same to be doone plainelie and simplie. And that none of his executors, Chaplaines, seruants, nor none of his house should weare anie moorning blacke cloths at the same, but onelie their accustomable and common apparrell, which then was commonlie graie coloured clothes. This Bishop was no more graue and wise, than stout and of courage, if occasion so did re∣quire. And among other things, this is reported of him; that about the yeare of our Lord 1331. Simon Mepham, then Archbishop of Canturburie, sent his mandatum vnto this Bishop, that he would visit his church and diocesse vpon mondaie next after Ascension daie then following. This Bishop (vpon what occasion it is not written) did refuse this mandatum, and appealed from the same, aduertising the Archbishop that he should not visit his church nor diocesse. Not∣withstanding, the Archbishop at the time appointed, came to this citie and went to S. Peters church, nothing thinking that anie durst to withstand him. But the Bishop knowing of his comming, goeth to the church doore and méeteth the Archbishop, and forbiddeth him to enter into his church; and the Archbishop pressing forward, as with force to enter, the Bishop being then well guarded, denieth and re∣sisteth him: wherevpon the Archbishop departed, and after at a pro∣uinciall councell holden at London, the Archbishop complained hereof, but by meanes of the like discord betwéene him and his suf∣fraganes, he preuailed not. In this Bishops time one William of Excester, a verie well learned man, was a Canon of this church, and he ioining himselfe with Nicholas de Cesena, Okeham, Walsing∣ham, and others, did openlie preach, that Christ and his apostles were but poore men, and had no temporall possessions: neither was anie Emperor or laie man subiect to the Pope, but onelie in matters of religion. But when he heard that Pope Iohn the xxiij. had excom∣municated, and would condemne them all for heretikes; this Wil∣liam to saue his liuings, secretlie shronke away from his old compa∣nions, and changed his copie, and writeth certeine conclusions a∣gainst them, and his owne preachings. Also in this Bishops time about the yéere of our Lord 1340. one Iohn of Bampton, so named, bicause he was borne at Bampton, in this diocesse, and a moonke of the order of the Carmelites, was a verie good scholar, and first did openlie reade Aristotle in the vniuersitie of Cambridge: where he was a scholar, and afterwards he studied diuinitie, and was made
Doctor, he wrote certeine bookes, which are not extant. This Bishop after that he had occupied this church, about xlij. yéeres, he died vpon S. Swithins daie 1369. and was buried in a chappell, which he buil∣ded in the west wall of his owne church. THomas Brentingham, after the death of this Iohn Grandisson, was at one instant chosen Bishop of Excester and Bishop of Hereford, who refusing the one tooke the other, and was consecrated Bishop of Excester, vpon the tenth of March 1370. be∣ing the feast daie of Nereus and Achilles, William of Worcester then Archbishop of Canturburie. This Thomas, was a man verie well learned, and experted both in ecclesiasticall matters, and in politike gouernment, and in both these respects, greatlie reuerenced and e∣stéemed; and for that cause, at the parliament holden at Westmin∣ster, in the tenth yéere of K. Richard the second, he was chosen to be one of the twelue péeres of the realme vnder the King, he was a be∣nefactor to the Calenderhaie, of the vicars chorall, of his own church, and performed and supplied in buildings; and otherwise what his predecessors had left vndoone, and hauing béene Bishop xxiiij. yéeres, he died the third of December, anno 1394. and was buried in the North side of the bodie of his owne church. EDmond Stafford, vpon the xx. daie of Iune, anno 1395. was consecrated at Lambhith by William Courtwaie, Archbi∣shop of Canturburie, he was borne and descended of noble paren∣tage, being brother to Ralph Lord Stafford, created Earle of Staf∣ford, by K. Edward the third; he was both wise and learned, for his wisedome, he grewe into great credit with the king, and was both of his priuie counsell, as also Lord Chancellor of England. At the parliament holden at westminster, the xxj. yéere of K. Richard the se∣cond, he being then speaker of the higher house, made a verie lear∣ned and pithie oration, to prooue the absolute authoritie of a King: his theme was, Rex vnus erit omnibus, and hauing discoursed at large of the authoritie of a king, did conclude; Quod potestas regis es∣set sibi sola vnita annexa & solida, and whosoeuer did by anie meanes impeach the same, Paena legis meritò esset plectendus. And for the fur∣therance of good letters, he did increase two fellowships in the col∣ledge of Stapledons inne in Oxford, reformed the statutes of the house, and altered the name of it, and called it Excester colledge. After that he had continued Bishop in much honour, about xxiij. yéeres, he died the fourth of September, being the seuenth yéere of
King Henrie the fift, and lieth buried in his owne church, in a verie aire tombe of Alablaster. IAmes Carye, Bishop of Chester, being at Florence when newes was brought to Pope Martin the fift, of Bishop Staffords death, was then and there made Bishop of this church, anno 1419. and also consecrated, but long he enioied not his office, for there he died, and was buried. EDmond Lacie, Bishop of Hereford, was translated from thence vnto this church, in the feast of Easter, and in the eight yéere of king Henrie the fift, anno 1420. he was a man verie deuout, and religious, but subiect to flatterers, who carried him to their pleasure; he was a liberall benefactor to the vicar of Calenderhaie, great contentions were betwéene him and the citie, for liberties, which by arbitriment were compounded, he founded the chapter house, in his owne church. He was a professor of diuinitie, and very well learned; for in the second yéere of his Bishoprike being the ix. yeare of the kings reigne, there was a parliment holden at West∣minster, in which great complaints were made against the loose and dissolute life of the religious men, and especiall the blacke moonks. And this matter being brought to the conuocation house, this Bishop as chéefe prolocutor of that assemblie, did make a verie learned and a pithie oration, before the king then of purpose present, and the whole cleargie, much lamenting that the religious men were so far straied from the rules of their professions, and the holi∣nesse of their predecessors. And when he had at large discoursed the same, he deliuered vp certeine articles in writing, praieng for refor∣mation: which his spéeches were so effectuallie vttered, and his arti∣cles so effectuallie penned, that both the king and the clergie, did not onelie with great liking and allowance praise and commend the same, but also tooke order that there should be a prouinciall Councell called out of hand for a reformation, which was then promised, but not performed, by reason of the kings death, which not long after fol∣lowed: but yet in the waie of good spéed it was then concluded and agréed that euerie third benefice, being of the gift of anie of the pre∣lats, or of anie monasterie, should from thencefoorth, for seauen yeres be giuen to some scholar of Oxenford or Cambridge. This Bishop after he had liued xxxv. yeares in this Bishoprike, died and was bu∣ried in the North wall of the quier in his owne church. After whose death manie miracles were said and deuised to be doone at his
toombe, wherevpon great pilgrimages were made by the common people to the same. GEorge Neuell, succéeded Edmond Lacie, and was conse∣crated in the feast of S. Katharine, anno, 1455. he was of a noble parentage, being the second sonne of Richard Neuell Earle of Sa∣risburie, he finished and ended the chapter house which his predeces∣sor had begonne. And after that he had béene Bishop about ten yeares, he was remooued to Yorke, and made Archbishop there, anno. 1465. IOhn Bothe, after the translation of George Neuell to Yorke, was consecrated Bishop vnder Thomas Burscher, Archbishop of Canturburie, vpon the xxij. of Februarie anno. 1466. He was by profession a Ciuillian, and a Batcheler of the same, he gouerned his church verie well, and builded, as some suppose, the Bishops sea in the quier, but being wearie of the great troubles which were in this con∣trie, betwéene king Edward the fourth, and the Earle of Warwike, he remooued from hence to his house of Horsleigh in Hamshire, where in the twelfe yeare of his Bishoprike he died vpon the fift daie of Aprill, anno. 1478. and lieth buried at S. Clements in London. PEter Courtnaie, immediatlie after the death of Bothe, was presented to this Bishopricke, and consecrated by Thomas Archbishop of Canturburie, in Nouember anno. 1477. at S. Ste∣phens in Westminster; he was the sonne of Sir Phillip Courtnaie of Powderham, his mother was named Elizabeth, daughter to Walter Lord Hungerford, he for his wisedome and good behauiour was in great credit and fauour with king Henrie the seauenth, by whose meanes he was translated from this church vnto Winche∣ster, in the ninth yeare of his being Bishop here, and in the fift yeare of his being there, he died vpon the xx. of December, anno. 1491. and lieth buried in his owne church. He finished the North tower of S. Peters, and gaue the clocke bell which is in the same, and which beareth the name Peter. RIchard Fox, vpon the remoouing of Peter Courtnaie, was consecrated Bishop of this church, vnder Thomas Archbishop of Canturburie 1466. he was a verie wise man, and in great credit and estimation with king Henrie the seauenth, vnto whom he was a faithfull counsellour, and of his priuie Councell; with whom he ac∣quainted himselfe at Paris, when he was there a student. For king Henrie then Earle of Richemond, being at Venice, and aduertised
how the nobilitie of England was bent to haue him to be their King, came from thence to Paris, and sought vnto Charles then king of France for aid and helpe: in which the Earle his sutes, this Fox was a speciall traueller and counseller; and in the end, God gi∣uing the successe, the Earle obteined the crowne, and hauing had the triall of the fidelitie, wisedome, and trust of this Bishop, he made him Lord priuie seale; and kept and vsed him, and his aduise in all his weightie matters, as well at home as abroad. He being Em∣bassador sundrie times, to the K. of France and Scotland, and of a verie hartie good will and loue, the King made him godfather to his second sonne K. Henrie the eight. There was a kind of emulation, betwéene this Bishop and the Earle of Surreie: both of them being verie wise and of great seruice to the King and common-wealth. Howbeit, in some diuersitie of respects, the one hauing no issue, to care for, did deale without anie priuate affection, or singular gaine; and the other hauing issue, was desirous to aduance his house and honor. These affections did bréed some dislike betwéene them two, yet the king finding a faith vnto himselfe and a commoditie to the common-wealth; misliked it not, if the same excéeded his measure: and they more warme than commendable for their calling & estates. The king then or the councell would deale betwéene them for the ap∣peasing and pacifieng of them, and to them he was both fréendlie, lo∣uing and liberall. The one he deliuered out of the tower, pardoned him of his offenses, restored him to his lands, receiued him into spe∣ciall fauour, made him of his priuie councell, as also Lord Treasu∣rer of England, and his generall into Scotland, and augmented his liuelihoods. The other he first made Bishop to this church, then remooued him vnto Bathe, and from thence vnto Durham, and lastlie vnto Winchester. Erasmus in his booke intituled, the Prea∣cher or Ecclesiastes, declareth how that the king vpon a time, wan∣ting some péece of monie, was to borowe the same of the commons and of the clergie. And for the dealings with the clergie, the matter was by commission committed to this Bishop. Who when they came before him, vsed all the excuses that they could, to shift them∣selues from lending of anie money: some came verie séemelie and well apparrelled, and awaited vpon by their men, according to their liuelihoods, and these alledged, that they were greatlie charged in hospitalitie, and house kéeping, with other charges incident to the same, so that they had no money, and therfore could paie none. Some came poorelie and barelie apparrelled, and they alledged that their
liueliehoods were but small, and yet their charges great, and by that means the world was so hard with them, that they had it not to spare. This bishop hauing heard all these excuses, vsed this dilemme: to the ritcher sort he said, For as much as you are so well and séemlie appar∣relled, and doo kéepe so great houses, and haue all things necessarie about you, it is a manifest argument, that you haue some store about you, or els you would not doo as ye doo: and therefore ye must néeds lend. To the others who pretend excuse of their pouertie, he thus re∣plied vnto them; that For as much as they were so bare in their ap∣parrell, and so sparing of their expenses. It must néeds be that they saued their pursses and had money, and therefore they must néeds paie, and so adiudgeth them to lend vnto the prince. As he rose by learning, so he was a great fauorer and furtherer of learning, and for the good increase of the same, he builded and founded Corporis christi colledge in Oxenford. In his latter daies he waxed and was blind, and dieng in Winchester, he was there buried in his owne church, after that he had béene Bishop of Excester sixe yeares, he was remooued to Bathe, anno. 1492. OLiuer King, immediatlie vpon the transferring of Bishop Fox, was consecrated Bishop of this church, in Februarie 1492. Iohn Morton, then Archbishop of Canturburie. This Oliuer was chaplaine to king Henrie the seauenth, and Deane of Winde∣sor, and register of the order of the Garter. In his time were the re∣bellions of Ioseph the Blacke-smith, in Cornewall, and of Perken Warebeke. This Bishop after that he had occupied this sea about fiue yeares, he died, anno. 1497. and as some suppose, he was buried at Windsor. RIchard Redman, immediatlie vpon the death of Bishop Oliuer King, was translated from his Bishoprike in Wales, vnto this citie; but after fiue yeares he was remooued vnto the Bi∣shoprike of Elie, and installed there in September, anno. 1501. He was a Gentleman borne, and descended of a verie worshipfull house, which ioined with his wisedome and learning, did much in∣crease his credit and good report. IOhn Arundell, next after the translation of Bishop Redman, was remooued from Couentrie and Lichféeld, vnto this citie, and was installed the xv. of March 1501. Wherein he sought not the pre∣ferment for anie liuelihoods, but rather desirous to be a dweller and resiant in his countrie where he was borne, for he was descended of
the Arundels of Lanherne in Cornewall, a house of great antiquitie and worship. He long enioied not his new Bishoprike, for after two yeares after his installing, he had occasion to ride vnto London, and there died and was buried in Saint Clements church without Templebarre, anno. 1503. HEw Oldham, vpon the death of Arundell, by the prefer∣ment of the Countisse of Richmond and Darbie, vnto whom he was Chaplaine, was preferred vnto this Bishoprike, and installed in the same. He was a man hauing more zeale than knowledge, and more deuotion than learning; somewhat roughe in spéeches, but fréendlie in dooings. He was carefull in the sauing and defending of his liberties, for which, continuall sutes was betwéene him, and the Abbat of Tauestoke, he was liberall to the vicars chorall of his church; and reduced them to the kéeping of commons, and towards the maintenance thereof, he gaue them certeine reuenewes, and impropriated vnto them the rectorie of Cornwood; he albeit (of him∣selfe) he were not learned, yet a great fauourer and a furtherer of learning, and of learned men. Notwithstanding, he was somtime crossed, in his honest attempt therein. He first was minded to haue inlarged Excester colledge, in Oxford; as well in buildings, as in fellowships. But after being a requester to the fellowes for one At∣kins, to be a fellowe; in whose fauour he had written his letters, and was denied, he changed his mind, and his good will was alienated. About the same time, Doctor Smith Bishop of Lincolne, was buil∣ding of the colledge, named Brasen nose, and was verie willing and desirous to ioine with him: but being denied to haue the nominati∣on of a founder, his mind was changed. Not long after being ad∣uertised, that Bishop Fox of Winchester, was minded to erect and found a new colledge, ioined with him, and contributed vnto him a great masse of monie, and so a colledge was builded for scholers, and great liueliehoods prouided for them: and then the house was na∣med Corporis christi colledge. Whereof the one of them bare the name of a founder, and the other of a benefactor. Howbeit some di∣uersitie was betwéene these two Bishops, at the first, to what vse this colledge should be imploied: for the founder was of the minde that he would haue made it for a house of moonks, but the benefactor was of the contrarie mind, and would haue it for scholers; alledging that moonks were but a sort of bussing flées, and whose state could not long indure; whereas scholers brought vp in learning, would be profitable members to the common wealth, and good ornaments to
the church of God, and continue for euer. The founder being a wise man, and of a déepe iudgement, when he had well pawsed and consi∣dered hereof, yéeldeth herevnto: and so it was concluded betwéene them, to make and build a colledge for scholers. And foorthwith for the good direction, guiding, and gouernment of the said colledge, and scholers; such wise, good, and politike statutes and ordinances were by good aduise and counsell deuised, stablished, and ordeined; as wher∣by the said colledge hath béene, and yet continueth one of the best nurseries for training and instructing of good scholers in learning within that vniuersitie. This bishop and the abbat of Tauestoke did still contend and continue in lawe, during their liues: and during which sute, this bishop died, being excommunicated at Roome, and who could not be suffered to be buried, vntill an absolution from Rome was procured for him, after that he had béene Bishop about xvj. yéeres he died the xxv of Iune, 1519. and was buried in his owne church. IOhn Voiseie, otherwise Harman, succéeded Oldham, by the preferment of K. Henrie the eight, whose chapleine he then was, and Deane of his chappell, as also of this church, he was Doctor of the lawes, verie well learned and wise, and in great fauour with the king, who sent him sundrie times in embassages to forreine prin∣ces, he was Lord president of wales, and had the gouernment of the kings onelie daughter, Ladie Marie princesse of Wales. Of all the Bishops in the land, he was accompted the courtlikest, and the best courtier, and although he were well reported for his learning, yet better liked for his courtlike behauiour, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as to the vtter ruine and spoile of the Church: for of xxij. Lordships and mannors, which his predecessors had, and left vnto him, of a goodlie yéerelie reuenewe, he left but thrée, and them also leased out. And where he found xiiij. houses well furnished, he left onelie one house bare, and without furniture, and yet charged with sundrie fées and annuities; and by these meanes this Bishop∣prike, which sometimes was counted one of the best, is now become in temporall lands, one of the meanest: and according to the fore-prophesieng of Bishop Grandisson, a place arse left for the Bishop to laie and rest his hed in, and yet neuerthelesse, he was a great fauo∣rer of learned men, and especiallie of Diuines, whom he preferred in his church aboue others. He was verie bountious and liberall vn∣to all men, but especiallie vnto courtiers, vnto his owne kindred, and contriemen. Vpon manie he bestowed much, vnto the confusi∣on
of some of them; and vpon the other he spent much, by buil∣ding of a towne, named Sutton Colshull where he was borne, which he procured to be incorporated, & made a market towne: and set vp therein making of kearsies, but all which in the end came to small effect; in his time, after the death of King Hen∣rie the eight, there was an alteration of religion, by King Edward the sixt, whereof insued rebellion, and a commotion in this diocesse: which in some part was imputed to this Bishop, bicause he laie farre from it, and dwelled in his owne countrie. Wherevpon he resigned the Bishoprike, into the kings hands; after that he had béen Bishop about xxx. yéeres, and liued by the rents of the temporaltie of the Bishoprike, which when he alie∣nated, and discontinued, he did receiue vnto him, for tearme of his owne life. MIles Couerdale, after the resignation of Voisie, was by king Edward made Bishop of this citie, and consecra∣ted at Lambeth by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Cantur∣burie, anno. 1550. He was borne in the North countrie, and from his childhood giuen to learning, wherein he profited verie much: he was one of the first which professed the Gospell in this land; in the time of king Henrie the eight, he translated the Bi∣ble out of the Hebrue into English, and wrote sundrie bookes vpon the scriptures, which doctrine being verie new and strange in those daies, and he verie straightlie pursued by the Bishops, made his escape, and passed ouer into lowe Germa∣nie, where he printed the Bibles of his translation, and sent them ouer into England, and thereof made his gaine, whereby he liued: but the Bishops, namelie Doctor Stokesley, Bishop of London, when he heard hereof, and minding to preuent that no such bibles should be dispersed within this realme, made inqui∣rie where they were to be sold, and bought them all vp, suppo∣sing that by this means no more Bibles would be had, but con∣trarie to his expectation, it fell out otherwise; for the same mo∣nie which the Bishop gaue for these bookes, was sent ouer by the merchant vnto this Couerdale, and by that meanes he was of that wealth and abilitie, that he imprinted as manie more, and sent them ouer into England; but he was then so narrow∣lie sought for, that he was driuen to remooue himselfe out of Flanders into Germanie, and dwelled vnder the Palsgraue
of Rhene, where he found much fauour; first he taught yoong children, and hauing learned the dutch oong, the prince Pala∣tine gaue him a benefice, named Burghaber, where he con∣tinued and liued verie well, partlie by that benefice, and partlie by the liberalitie of the Lord Cromewell, who was his good Lord and reléeued him verie much. At length when the religi∣on was altered in England, and the Gospell had a frée pas∣sage, he returned and did verie much good in preaching of the same. And when the commotion in Deuon was for religion, he was appointed to attend the Lord Russell, when he came to suppresse the same, and verie shortlie for his learning and god∣lie life was made Bishop of this sea: who most worthilie did performe the office committed vnto him, he preached continu∣allie vpon euerie holie daie, and did read most commonlie twise in the wéeke, in some one church or other within this ci∣tie. He was after the rate of his liuings, a great kéeper of hos∣pitalitie, verie sober in diet, godlie in life, fréendlie to the godly, liberall to the poore, and curteous to all men; void of pride, full of humilitie, abhorring couetousnes, and an enimie to all wic∣kednesse, and wicked men: whose companies he shunned, and and whom he would in no wise shrowd, or haue in his house and companie. His wife a most sober, chast, and godlie matrone; his house and houshold, another church, in which was exercised all godlinesse and vertue. No one person being in his house, which did not from time to time, giue an account of his faith and religion, and also did liue accordinglie: and as he had a care for the good successe in religion, so had he also for the directi∣on of the gouernment in ecclesiasticall causes: and bicause he he was not skilfull therein, neither would be hindered from his godlie studies, and be incombred with such worldlie matters, which neuerthelesse he would haue be doone in all vprightnes, iustice, and equitie, he sent to Oxford for a learned man, to be his Chancellor, and by the ministerie of the writer hereof, he procured and obteined one Maister Robert weston, Doctor of the ciuill lawe, and afterwards Lord Chancellor of Ireland, vnto whom he committed his consistorie, and the whole charge of his ecclesiasticall iurisdiction; allowing vnto him, not onelie all the fées therevnto apperteining, but also lodged and found him, his wife, familie, horse, and man, within his owne house,
and gaue him a yéerelie pension of xl. pound. And surelie the Bi∣shop was no more godlie and carefull of his part, concerning preaching, but this man also was as diligent and seuere in doo∣ing of his office, without reproch of being affectionated or cor∣rupted. And notwithstanding this good man, now a blame∣lesse Bishop, and liued most godlie and vertuous, yet the com∣mon people, whose old bottels would receiue no new wine, could not brooke nor digest him, for no other cause, but bicause he was a preacher of the Gospell, an enimie to papistrie, and a married man. Manie deuises were accompted against him, for his confusion; sometimes by false suggestions, sometimes bp open railings, and false libelles; sometimes by secret back∣bitings; and in the end practised his death by impoisoning, but by the prouidence of God, the snares were broken and he deliue∣red. After that he had béene Bishop about thrée yéeres K. Ed∣ward died, and then Quéene Marie hauing the crowne, the re∣ligion was altered, and he depriued. And notwithstanding, the malice of the Prelats and archpapists, was most bitter a∣gainst him, and who had sworne his death, yet by the goodnesse of God, he was most miracouslie preserued, and deliuered from out of their hands, at the sute and by the meanes of the king of Denmarke: who so earnestlie sewed, and so often wrote to the Quéene for him, that he was deliuered and sent vnto him, with whom after that he had staied a while, he went againe into Ger∣manie vnto the Palsegraue, who most louinglie receiued him, placed him againe in his former benefice of Burghsaber, where he continued vntill the death of Q. Marie. And then the prea∣ching of the Gospell being againe receiued, and hauing a frée passage, he returned into England, but would neuer returne to his Bishoprike; notwithstanding it was reserued for him: and sundrie times offered him, but liued a priuate life, continu∣ing in London, preaching and teaching the Gospell, so long as the strength of his bodie would permit; and at length being ve∣rie old and striken in yéeres, he died and was honourablie bu∣ried at S. Magnus church in London. IOhn Voiseie, after the depriuation of Miles Couerdale, was restored to this church, and for the better setling of the Romish religion, did here staie for a while: but his mind was adicted to his own countrie, that he returned thither, and made
his onelie abode there, practising there what he could, to haue the making of kersies, to come to seme effect; but the same be∣ing more chargeable than profitable, came to small effect: this man being verie old died in his owne house, with a pang, and was buried in his parish church there, anno 1555. IAmes Troblefield, succéeded Bishop Voiseie, and was consecrated, anno 1556. he was a gentleman borne, and of a good house, verie gentle and courteous, he professed di∣uinitie, but most zelous in the Romish religion, & yet nothing cruell nor bloodie. And yet that he might not séeme to doo no∣thing, he was contented to prosecute and condemne a giltles poore séelie woman, named Agnes Pirest for religion & heresie, & who was burned in Southingham for the same; it was laied to hir charge as dooth appéere, by an inditement taken at Laun∣ceston, Die lunae in quarta septimana quadragesimae anno Philippi & Maria, secundo & tertio, before William Stanford, then iu∣stice of the assise, that she should denie the reall presence in the sacrament of the altar: and that the same was but a signe and a figure of Christs bodie, and that none dooth eate reallie the bo∣die of Christ but spirituallie. He was verie carefull to recouer some part of the lands of his Bishoprike, which his predecessor wasted, and did obteine of Q. Marie, to him and to his succes∣sors, the fée ferme of the manor of Crediton. After that he had béene Bishop about two yeares Q. Marie died, and he was de∣priued, and liued after a priuate life. WIlliam Alleie, in the second yeare of Q. Elizabeth, was chosen Bishop, and installed the sixt of August, 1561. In all Q. Maries time, which were called the Marian daies, he trauelled from place to place, in the North countrie, where he was not knowne; and sometimes by practising of phi∣sick, and sometimes by teaching of scholers, he picked out a poore liuing for himselfe and his wife, and so continued, being not knowne to haue béene a préest, during all Q. Maries time: after whose death he went to London, and there did reade diui∣nitie lecture in Paules verie learnedlie, and to his great com∣mendation; and from whence he was taken and made Bishop of this citie. He was verie well learned vniuersallie, but his chéefe studie and profession was in diuinitie, and in the toongs.
And being Bishop, he debated no part of his former trauels,  spent his time verie godlie and vertuous. Vpon euerie ho∣lie daie for the most part he preached, and vpon the wéeke daies he would and did reade a lecture of diuinitie; the residue of his time, and frée from his necessarie businesse, he spent in his pri∣uate studies, and wrote sundrie bookes, whereof his prelections or lectures which he did reade in Paules, and his poore mans li∣brarie he caused to be imprinted: the like he would haue doone with his Hebrue grammar, and other his works, if he had li∣ued. He was well stored, and his librarie well replenished, with all the best sort of writers, which most gladlie he would im∣part and make open to euerie good scholar and student, whose companie and conference he did most desire and imbrace: he séemed to the first apparance, to be a rough and an austere man, but in verie truth, a verie couetous, gentle, and an affable man; at his table full of honest spéeches, ioined with learning, and pleasantnesse, according to the time, place, and companie. All his exercises which for the most part was at bowles, verie merrie and pleasant, void of all sadnesse, which might abate the benefit of recreation, loth to offend, readie to forgiue, void of malice, full of loue, bountifull in hospitalitie, liberall to the poore, and a succourer of the néedie, faithfull to his fréend, and courte∣ous to all men; a hater of couetousnesse, and an enimie to all euill and wicked men, and liued an honest, a godlie, and vertu∣ous life. Finallie he was indued with manie notable good gifts and vertues, onelie he was somewhat credulous, and of a hasty beléefe, and of light credit, which he did oftentimes mislike, and blame in himselfe; in his latter time, he waxed somwhat grosse, and his bodie full of humors, which did abate much of his woon∣ted exercises, and hauing béene Bishop about eight yeares he died the first of Aprill 1570. and was buried in his own church. WIlliam Bradbridge, Deane of Sarisburie, was the next Bishop, & consecrated at Lambhith, by Mat∣thew Parker, Archbishop of Canturburie, the 18. of March 1570. he was a professor of diuinitie, but not taken to be so well grounded as he persuaded himselfe, he was zelous in religion, but not so forwards as he was wished to be, in his latter daies, he delighted to dwell in the contrie, which was not so much to his liking, as troublesome to his cleargie, & to such as had any
sutes vnto him, it was thought he died verie rich, but after his death it prooued otherwise, he died suddenlie, no bodie being about him at Newton ferris, the ninth yeare of his Bishop∣prike, vpon the xxix. of Iulie 1578. and was buried in his owne church. IOhn VVolton, now liuing, next after Bradbridge, was called to be Bishop of the sea, and consecrated at Lambhith, by Edmond Grendall, Archbishop of Canturburie, in August 1579. He is a professor of diuinitie, and a preacher of the Gos∣pell, and vniuersallie séene in all good letters; great good things are looked and hoped for at his hands, and that he being now made a watchman ouer the house of Israel, and a shéepheard ouer the Lords flocke, to be a minister of the Gospell, and a dis∣poser of Gods holie mysteries, will attend the same, and per∣forme the office of a true Bishop, in preaching in season and out of season, not by constraint or slowlie, but willinglie and glad∣lie; not for filthie lucre, but of a readie mind: by leading an vn∣reprooueable life, to be example of good works, in all sobrietie, patience, gentlenes, and integritie. And that he liuing thus godlie in this life, may not onlie haue a good report to the poste∣ritie; but also looke for the blessed hope and appéering of the glo∣rie of God and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that when he shall present himselfe and his talent the people of God be∣fore the high and chéefe shepheard, they may all enter into the Lords ioie, and re∣ceiue an incorruptible crowne of glorie. FINIS.
