25410 S101726 99837532 1858
SOME HELPES TO STIRRE UP TO CHRISTIAN DVTIES. Wherein is explained the Nature of the Dnty of stirring vp our selves. Instances are given in the most neces∣sary Christian Duties. Some Questions about this Subiect are profitaby resolved. By Henry Whitfeld, B D. reacher of Gods Word, at Ockley in Surrey The second Edition, Corrected and enlarged. LONDON: Printed for Jhn Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Gilt-Cup in Cheape-side. 134.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, ROBERT GREVIL, Lord BROOKE, of Beauchamp-Court, en∣crease of Grace. Right Honourable, COnsidering how hard a thing it is, by reason of that fraile and corrupted nature we carry about with us, to profit by
praise; and finding moreover,Vt quis∣quis est lau∣de dignissi∣mus ita mi∣nime lib en∣te suas au∣dite solet laudes. Bu∣chol. that the more deserving and worthy any are of it, the lesse desirous they are to heare it; Iudg∣ing your Lordship to be of the same minde, I resolved not to de∣taine you with matter of that nature; nei∣ther indeed dare J giveIob 32.22 flattering Ti∣tles, fearing the se∣cret reproofe and
stroke of God in my owne Conscience. I have adventured to addresse this Dedi∣cation to your Lord∣ship, partly for the shrowding and shel∣tring this little Booke under your Honours name and protection, which I humbly crave; and partly because J deemed your Lordship a fit patron of it, the Lord having added
this to al his other fa∣vors, as to give you a hart stirred up in du∣ties of his Service & Honour, which is the subiect of this Trea∣tise; I conceived also some hopes that you might see something in it, whereby you might be farther pro∣voked and stirred up in the earnest Love, and open profession of the Truth wherof you
have given abundant Testimony before many witnesses, which this Treatise cals for, and gives some light unto. Blessed be the Divine Maiesty, who (notwith∣standing the great seve∣rity of that Sentence in Holy Writ,1 Cor. 1.20. That not many wise men after the Flesh; not many mighty, not many Noble are called) hath, in your fresh and
florishing times, amidst the confluences of many worldly blessings and contentments, looked upon you, and made choice of you for himself to doe him service, and hath taught you to e∣steeme the world as it is; when he hath passed by so many of high birth, and of great ranke and quality, who are migh∣tily enthralled, and lye prostrate, adoring the
seeming felicities of this present world. What re∣mains then but that you advance forward, and doe still more Nobly & worthily, improving those singular endow∣ments bestowed on you to the best advantage of the giver of them. Thus shall the Lord still goe on to performe his pro∣mise,1. Sam. 2.30. That such as ho∣nour him he will ho∣nour. The truth and
comfort of which I doubt not but your Lordship hath already found and felt, the greater & more excellent part of which remaines to be fulfilled to you when your earth∣ly honour is layed in the dust, and your soule ad∣vanced to that hoped for perfection. For the full accomplishment whereof hee shall ever pray, who rests Your Lordships to be commanded in all Christian Service, Henry Whitfeld.
The Epistle to the READER. Christian Reader, OVr spirituall life being the most choyce and preci∣ous treasure that we carry about us in these our earthen vessels, in the lively sense and operations of which consists the very life of our lives, and the the height of our comfort and solace here below: How needfull is it that we consider of all meanes, and wayes, by which this life may be preserved, and inlarged, that we may have it in more abun∣dance. And this we should the rather doe, both in regard of
those inward annoyances, which flowing from our cor∣rupt nature, doe cause many faintings, and decayings even in the best, as also in regard of those evils, which comming from without, and breaking in upon this life, do wondrously waste, weaken, and hinder the operations of it. Now as it fares with our naturall life, that stirring and exercise proves specially helpefull for the pre∣servation of it; so that which makes our spirituall life more lively, and fils it with stronger spirits, and activenesse, is the exercising of the severall pow∣ers and faculties of it, the seve∣rall gifts and graces of it, in all those acts and wayes in which it is to put forth it selfe. The serious thought of which hath caused me (Christian Reader) to make this Eslay, and to come to thy helpe in what I might in this short discourse following:
The matter I know is necessa∣ry, and of generall use for all Gods people, though the man∣ner of handling of it will not be found so notionall, accurate, or judicious; yet finding none, as I could call to minde, that had travelled in this Subject, I thought my weaknesses in this kinde might bee sheltered un∣der my desire of a more gene∣rall good. I considered also I had many of my Christian friends, and neerest kindred farre removed from mee, who being part of my care, I was willing to put somewhat into their hands, which might, not onely bee as a pledge of my love to them, and some direction for them, but might also (by Gods bles∣sing) have somewhat in it to quicken them up in their Chri∣stian course. I saw my glasse running out apace, and I knew it would bee a griefe of heart
unto me, if either they or I had beene called for hence, before I had left with them some proofe of my care and love, which I conceived might best be effected this way. I viewed also the way, and course of many professours of Religion, even of such as are counted of the forwarder sort; where I found much sloth, luke∣warmenesse, and backsliding. I thought if I could throw but a sparke into the heart of any such, who did know what a fire it might kindle: In many also (though well minded) there is plainly to be seene a lownesse, and flatnesse of spirit, together with a contentednesse to goe an easie and ordinary pace in their Duties and performances: Now if I could but a little heighten the affections, desires and endevours of such, and cause them somewhat to ad∣vance and put forward, it
would bee abundant recom∣pence for what-ever paines I could bestow in this kind. I found also I had a dull and sluggish heart of my owne, which by this meanes might haply be quickned up, and that thus setting rules, and lawes to my selfe, what I had written might be of further use for me for the time to come. Some fruit also, and accep∣tance I found amongst such, where I preached over these Notes, in a shorter manner. All which layed together have now prevailed with me to doe that which I never intended to do, viz. to give way to the pub∣lishing of them, and bringing them into a more open light. What-ever I have done, I offer it unto thy view, and submit it to thy loving censure; hoping, that if thou gaine ought by what is written, thou wilt re∣member him at the Throne of
grace, whose ayme and end was meerly thy profiting. And thus, beseeching the Lord in mercy to guide us with the Spirit of wisdome and meeke∣nesse in writing and reading, that we may be able to give up a comfortable account of both in the great day of our recko∣nings; I rest Thine in the Lord Iesus Christ, H. WHITFELD.
The Contents of the severall Chapters of this Treatise. CHAP. 1. THe Coherence and resolu∣tion of the Text. page. 1 CHAP. 2. That Gods people doe charge themselves with more secret sins than any else doe. p. 13 CHAP. 3. How Gods children should seeke unto God in evill times, when he gives tokens of his dis∣pleasure. p. 29 CHAP. 4. That the worke of a Christian in respect of a spirituall estate, lyes most with himselfe. p. 39 CHAP. 5. About this Christian duty of stirring up our selves, and what
it is to stirre up ones selfe in Christian duties. p. 66 CHAP. 6. What the maine duties are about which we are to stirre up our selves. p. 73 Section 1. Of stirring up our selves in the most weighty businesse of our owne and o∣thers salvation. p. 74 Sect. 2. Of stirring up our selves against our owne sins. p. 89 Sect. 3. Of stirring up our selves against the sinnes of others. p. 94 Sect. 4. Of stirring up our selves when we come to God in prayer for our selves. p. 99 Sect. 5. Of stirring up our selves when we come to pray for others. p. 102 Sect. 6. Of stirring up our
selves in praysing God. p. 106 Sect. 7. Of stirring up our selves in standing for God and his honour. p. 109 Sect. 8. About stirring up our selves in the reading & hea∣ring of Gods holy Word. p. 116 Sect. 9. About stirring up our selves in Meditation. p. 122 Sect. 10. Of stirring up our selves in sanctifying the Lords day. p. 129 Sect. 11. Of stirring up our selves in our partaking of the Sacraments. p. 131 Sect. 12. How to stirre up our selves in laying hold on the Promises. p. 138 Sect. 13. Of stirring up our selves in the duties of love and mercy. p. 151
Sect. 14. Of stirring up our selves in regard of our Chri¦stian race. p. 154 Sect. 15. How we are to stirre up our selves when our last end approacheth. p. 157 CHAP. 7. Shewing the grounds of this Duty of stirring up our selves. p. 164 CHAP. 8. Where the doctrin of stirring up our selves is applyed in the severall uses of it. p. 170 CHAP. 9. Shewing some Motives unto this duty of stirring up our selves. p. 204 CHAP. 10. Shewing some Rules and Meanes by which we might at∣taine to this stirringnesse of heart. p. 217
SOME HELPES TO STIR UP TO CHRISTIAN DVTIES. ISA. 64.7. And there is none that calleth upon thy Name, that stirreth up himselfe to take hold on thee. CHAP. I. The Coherence and Resolution of the Text. THese words are part of a Confes∣sion, and Confes∣sion part of a prayer, which the Prophet
poures out unto God, upon occasion of the sad, and de∣solate estate of the Church of God, to be caused by the Caldeans, which the Prophet foreseeing in spirit, speaketh of it as present. For it may appeare by the sad expostu∣lation which the Prophet maketh with God in the lat∣ter end of the former Chap∣ter, that God had given up his people to the errour of their wales, and to the hardnesse of their hearts: and, which much aggravated their mi∣sery and calamity, God had taken away the meanes of their Reformation (which were the holy Ordinances of his Worship) by giving up his Sanctuary to be trodden downe of the Adversaries;
so that now they were over∣whelmed both with Spiri∣tuall, and outward Iudge∣ments together; inward de∣sertions, and outward deso∣lations both of Church and Common-wealth, Chap. 63. vers. 17, 18. Now looke as when the Cisternes are dry, and the Conduit-pipes are broken, men are wont to have re∣course to the Fountaine for supply of living water: so in this dry and dead estate of the Church, when the wayes of Gods people were foule, and their hearts worse, and themselves left destitute of all meanes of redresse and succour, the Prophet loo∣keth up to God in heaven: and because the succour they
stood in need of, was a work of great power and glory, hee bursteth forth into a ve∣hement and earnest prayer, calling unto God to come out of heaven, to worke their Salvation and Redemption for them with his mighty and glorious power: Oh (saith hee) that thou wouldest rent the heavens and come downe, that the mountaines might flow downe at thy pre∣sence: meaning, that God would suddenly and strong∣ly shew forth the might of his glorious power in their behalfe; that so those moun∣taines of difficulties, which hindered their deliverance and restitution, might be re∣moved, or at leastwise melt, and give way to them, v. 1.
Now this prayer of the Prophet (which taketh up this whole Chapter) consi∣steth of three principall parts: 1. Of a Petition, vers. 1. to the 5. 2. Of a Confession, vers. 5, 6, 7. 3. Of a Deprecation, vers. 8. to the 12. which en∣deth the Chapter. In the Petition (which is the first part of the prayer) the Prophet earnestly pro∣voketh God to manifest his glorious power, and fierce wrath against their adversa∣ries: his glorious power is expressed, vers. 1. That hee renting the heavens, and com∣ming downe, the mountaines might flow at his presence. His
fierce wrath, vers. 2. That as when melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the water to boyle; So the fire of Gods wrath, burning against their adver∣saries, as drosse (though mountaines of drosse) yet they might boyle, and melt, and wast away. This petition the Prophet worketh upon God with an holy and spirituall wrastling by a threefold argument: 1. From the glory of Gods great Name; that so hee might make his Name knowne to his Adversaries, and the Nations might tremble at his presence, Vers. 2. 2. From the ancient, ter∣rible, and glorious power, which God shewed forth in their deliverance out of E∣gypt,
and in the promulgati∣on of the Law, vers. 3. When thou diddst (saith he) terrible things which we looked not for, thou cammest down, the Moun∣taines flowed at thy presence. 3. From the unspeakea∣ble & unconceiveable riches of the grace of the Gospell, which from the beginning God hath prepared for his people that wait for him, vers 4. and so the Apostle expoundeth the place, 1 Cor. 2.9. The second part of this Chapter, and of the Pro∣phets prayer, is the Confes∣sion that he maketh, and that of two things: 1. Of Gods readinesse to shew mercy, vers. 5. 2. Of their unprepared∣nesse to receive mercy, in re∣spect
of any desert of their owne, vers. 5, 6, 7. Gods readinesse to shew mercy, is expressed in the beginning of the fifth verse, Thou meetest him that reioy∣ceth and worketh righteousnesse, those that remember thee in thy wayes. Their unpreparednesse to receive mercy, is expressed, first, generally; and then particularly. Generally, in regard of their sinnes, and of Gods just displeasure against them for their sinnes, in the next words; which yet he quali∣fieth with hope of salvation, by the continuance and con∣stancy of Gods wayes of grace and mercy to his peo∣ple, vers. 5. Behold, saith
he, thou art wroth, for we have sinned, (and so are unworthy and unfit for mercy) yet in those, to wit, in those wayes of thine (wayes of grace and mercy, prepared in the Go∣spell from the beginning of the world) in those is continu∣ance, and constancy, (not∣withstanding our undeser∣vingnesse) and wee shall bee saved. More particularly, their unpreparednesse for mercy is expressed, vers. 7. in a double respect: 1. In respect of the un∣cleannesse and filthinesse, not only of their corrupt nature, but even of their best acti∣ons and duties, vers. 6. But we are all (saith he) as an un∣cleane thing, and all our righte∣ousnesse,
are as filthy ragges, &c. In respect of their spiri∣tual dulnesse and sloth to ex∣ercise such graces and duties as might turne away Gods wrath, and remove their sins and misery: Vers. 7. There is none that calleth upon thy Name, that stirreth up himselfe to take hold on thee. In the third part of this prayer and Chapter (which is the Deprecation) the Pro∣phet earnestly prayeth a∣gainst the sorenesse or great∣nesse of Gods wrath, and the everlasting remembrance of their iniquities, vers. 9. and this request hee presseth upon God by two Argu∣ments: 1. By the mutuall inte∣rest
they have in God, and God in them; Thou art our Father, our Potter; wee thy children, and as clay in thy hand, vers. 8. Wee thy people, vers. 9. thou therefore our King. 2. By the desolate and forlorne condition of Gods owne Cities; yea, of his, and their holy, and beautiful house, vers. 10.11. Which injuries and indignities the Prophet demands with a patheticall question, how he can endure to looke at, and refraine and hold his hands from redres∣sing, vers. 11. To returne to the words of the Text, they be (as you see) a Confession or Com∣plaint of the latter of those evils, which made them un∣worthy,
and unprepared to receive mercy; to wit, in re∣spect of their Spirituall dul∣nesse and untowardnesse to the exercise of such Graces and Duties, as might turne away Gods wrath, and their sinnes together. Wherein observe, 1. The generality of this Spirituall dulnesse; it is E∣pidemical, common to them all, none free from it; there is none (saith he) that calleth, &c. 2. The Duties neglected, which were two: 1. Calling upon Gods Name (though in a most needfull time.) 2. Taking hold of God; by which is meant, either by faith laying hold of his Co∣venant;
or else figuratively, as it were, holding God, and staying him that hee depart not from them, keeping him with them, as Saul would have kept Samuel, 1 Sam. 15.27. And this latter hee am∣plifieth by their neglect of the very endevour after it: None stirreth up himselfe to take hold of thee. CHAP. II. That Gods people doe charge themselves with more secret sinnes than any else doe. ANd there is none that cal∣leth upon thy Name.] Be∣fore wee come to lay forth
the maine thing intended, it will not bee amisse to take a short view of some passages in the Text as they lye in our way. And first in generall, from the nature of their com∣plaint; if wee looke to the matter of it, we shall finde it to be not so much in regard of their present pressures, and evils which lay upon them; neither for grosser sinnes, which were more open and obvious to the eyes of o∣thers, but for more inward and secret corruptions, and failings, such as the world takes no notice of, or will hardly bee brought to ac∣knowledge they are sinnes at all; or if so, yet not worthy the troubling themselves for
them; as not to have striven with the Lord in their prayers, to stay the iudgment threatned; and not to stirre up themselves to hold the Lord, that he depart not from them. Hence wee may observe, Gods Children, in the times of confession of their sinnes be∣fore God, are wont to charge themselves with more close and secret evils and corrup∣tions. Their complaints are ming∣led with bitter bewailings of more inconspicuous and indiscernable evils, of wic∣kednesse more spirituall, not to be perceived by a carnall eye, and therfore not lamen∣ted by a carnall heart.
To give some instances: As, For theirPsal. 51.5 Isay 64.6 birth-sinne, that corrupted masse they brought into the world, which steames like a dung-hill, and sends up stench and unsavorinesse into the whole man; hindering in all duty, and putting forward unto all evill. They complaine of those remainders of Atheisme, of their wicked and blasphe∣mous thoughts, of strong objections rising up in their mindes against cleare and evident truths; as against the very Being of God, the worke of our Redemp∣tion by our Saviour Christ, the truth of Gods Word, and many such like. So also they lament theirPsa. 31.22. Psa. 116.11 Unbe∣leefe,
2 Cor. 12.7 He that tel∣leth the peo∣ple of God of the me∣dicine God applyed to heale and prevent the exalting of himselfe a∣bove mea∣sure, secretly confesseth the privy pronenesse of his owne heart to selfe-exal∣ting. privy Pride,Psa. 51.10. Praying for a right Spi∣rit, he confcsseth his owne spirit not right nor streight, but crooked and deceitfull. secret hypocrisie,Isay 6.5. Nehem. 13.22. His great zeale for reformation, yet needeth great mercy to spare it from exact examination. and the evill which cleaves to their best works, their selfe-love, selfe-seeking, andPsalm. 30.6. self-confidence, their greatPsal. 106.6, 7. Nehem. 9.35. unprofitablenesse under all those meanes, and mercies offered, theirIsay 63.17. hard∣nesse of heart, and that greatProv. 30, 2, 3. I feele such ignorance of God and al his wayes, so many yeares towards mee, such folly which keepeth mee from taking any thing to heart which respecteth God, or concerneth my selfe; such uncircumcision of heart, which maketh mee that I cannot be holy, poore, and abiect, though consci¦ous of innumerable Motives, past, present, imminent, whieh might move mee thereunto. Lastly, I feele such a selfe-sufficiency as will not let mee perceive what need I have of my God to be with mee for quickning, strengthening, comforting, directing, prospering of mee in my course. Baines, Letter 19. blindenesse and ignorance which they finde in them∣selves; it much grieves them many times for their
unrulyPsa. 73.3.22 passions, and theirIsa. 45.9. strivings with God, and im∣patiencies under his hand; their security, lukewarme∣nesse, and notCant. 1.6. keeping their Watch; theirDeut. 32.15 Nehe. 9.28 abusing law∣full things; theirHos. 8.12. unthank∣fulnesse for Spirituall mer∣cies; theirEzech. 9.4 Isa. 42.19, 20 not mourning for the sinnes of the land, and of the places where they live; nor taking to heart spi∣rituall judgements; theirIer. 9.3. fearefulnesse and aptnesse to be discouraged, and give out in good businesses, and Gods causes; their too much1 Sam. 2.9 indulgency and fa∣vouring themselves, and those that are neare unto them in their faults and fai∣lings; soPsal. 78.37 38, 40, their often breach of promise, and Covenant
with God;Isa. 64.7. their sleight∣nesse and perfunctorinesse in the service of God; much irreverence, &c.Mat. 26.40 43. their dul∣nesse, heavinesse, wearinesse, indevotion, together with their distractions, and dissi∣pations of heart in holy du∣ties; theirMat. 8.18 forgetfulnesse,Hos. 6.4. inconstancy, andPsal. 43.5. uncom∣fortable walking in their Christian course. These and such like doe make them sigh in secret, shake their heads, and wring their hands, and cry out with many a bitter cry when none eye sees them, or eare heares them. The grounds and Reasons of this, amongst others, are such as these: This proceeds from that divine, and spirituall light,
they have received into their minds (being hence de∣nominated1 Thess. 55, children of light, and calledEph. 5.8 light in the Lord by which they discerne these close and hidden corrupti∣ons, being now by this light made, as it were, transparent unto themselves. For looke as it is with luminous and lightsome Bodies, as a Dia∣mond, Christall, Glasse, or the like; when the light of Sunne-beames shine upon them, it causeth a transparen∣cy in them, so that the foule∣nesse within is as visible as the foulenesse without; so it is here. The word used by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12. will serve somewhat to explaine this: Hee tels the Corinthi∣ans, that in simplicity, and
godly sincerity hee had had his Conversation in the world, ,Vid. Bez ad loc, i. e. in all candour, and perspicui y of spirit and heart; as in the sight of God, which might plainely bee seene even through and through. Now as the good, so is the evill in Gods Children transparent; as the spots which appeare in the face of the Moone, so that by the help of this light they are able to passe a judg∣ment upon themselves, and their more secret evils. The Conscience being renewed, and having this light shining into it, and con∣veyed into it from the un∣derstanding, hath also this quality of Tendernesse, by which it quickly smites and
bleeds for knowne, though close sinnes, and so affecteth the heart with sorrow for them. They being Spirituall, they can conceive and judge of spirituall things; As of God, whom they serve, to be a Spirit; of his Law and worship, by, and in which they serve him, to bee Spiri∣tuall. Now as the Law is, so is the transgression; where there is no Law, that is, no spiritual apprehension of the Law, there men cannot con∣demne themselves for secret and close sinnes: Paul is a∣live when without the Law,Rom. 7.9. and hee is without the Law whilst carnall; but Paul be∣ing become spirituall, the Law also is become spiritual
unto him, vers. 14. So that spirituall and secret sinnes so apprehended he could then judge of, which before hee could not. Yet we are to know,Caution. that this worke of bewayling se∣cret evils, is not found in all Gods children alike, since their Consciences are not e∣qually inlightned, and made tender; neither are they all alike mortified, or watchful; nor have they the Spirit of judging and discerning alike; neither are all so easily con∣vinced alike; but this is found in all, so farre as their light goes, there will be smi∣ting for guiltinesse in these things. Hence wee have a broad difference betweene those
confessions which are found in the truly penitent and humbled soule, and those or∣dinary large formes taken up by carnall men, either by custome, or extorted from them by their naturall con∣science in some painefull and hellish pangs of it: As Pha∣raoh in extremity cryed out, I have sinned this time,Exod. 9.27 the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. So Saul being convinced of his un∣iust and unnaturall dealing towards David,2 Sam. 26.21 1 Sam. 24.17 said, Returne my sonne David, I will no more doe thee harme. I have played the foole, and have erred excee∣dingly. Thus was it with Iu∣das in the grosse and open case of betraying his Master;Matth, 27.4 I have sinned in betraying in∣nocent
blood. When the Con∣science hath but Natures light, it must be a great print that a man can read in this kinde, taking knowledge on∣ly of more grosse and staring evils, and that most an end against the second Table: but the regenerate goe far∣ther, as I have said, confessing and lamenting their inward & secret corruptions, which the hypocrite swallowes up, as not worth the naming. Hence it may appeare that the world is extremely mis∣taken, and hath much to an∣swer for those hard and cru∣ell speeches which are eve∣ry where uttered against such; that they are proud, and despisers of others; that they are Hypocrites, and
Dissemblers, &c. whereas they appeare in their owne eyes doubly vile, and twice as sinfull: For in others their open and outward sins onely are apparent, but in themselves they behold both their open and inward sinnes, which must needs breake downe all high thoughts of themselves, and cause them to prefer others above themselves. Neither can they bee so charged with Hypocrisie, since the foulenesse of the in∣side of the platter is seene, and bemoaned, and washed with teares by them, as well as the outside: They are more troubled for praying, than thou for not praying; for hearing, than thou for
not hearing, &c. This being seldome found in the pra∣ctice of any hypocrite to lay such things as these to heart, abounding so much in selfe-love, and selfe-deceit, and being secretly willing to rest in his present condition, and to make his bed as easie, and to lye as soft as hee can, and so to rest with as little disturbance as may bee; hee will not search for matter to trouble himselfe, but keeps up himselfe in as good an e∣steeme with himselfe and o∣thers, as possibly hee may; nothing troubling him more than to know, or be knowne what secret guile and rot∣tennesse there is in his spirit; and therefore loth, not only to heare others speake, and
complaine of it to him, but to heare himselfe speak and complaine of it to God, is an heavy, irksome, and un∣pleasing worke; only Gods childe, as hee is willing to know the worst of himselfe, so will he confesse the worst of himselfe in the eares of the Lord;Iustus fave∣re sibi ne∣scit rigorem iudicis circa se non novit inflctore. Amb. Apol. cap. 9. none thinking or speaking so bad of them, as they doe of themselves; and none laying so much to their charge, as they doe to their owne. This also may bee for a comfort, and stay to the hearts of the godly in the time of trouble, and houre of darkenesse, when Satan shall rake in their hearts for matter to increase their pre∣sent distresse, and shall cast
their secret failings in their faces, yet then when the con∣science can beare witnesse, and the distressed soule can truly say in Gods presence, The Lord knowes these evils have not wanted complai∣ning against,In quantum non pep ceris tibi in tantum tibi Deus paret Tertul. de poenit. secret though they be, I have often spread them before the Lord, as my sores and sorrowes. CHAP. III. How Gods Children should seek unto God in evill times, when hee gives tokens of his displeasure. THere is none that calleth upon thy Name.] This is the first thing they charge
themselves withall; not that they were altogether praier∣lesse, as the Heathen, or prophane; but it grieved them that this their service had not beene according to the Law of prayer; they had not intended their inward affections to apprehend the Lord, to keepe him with them in their affliction, they were sluggish, and did not seeke to stay Gods wrath before the judgment came. Hence we may observe, In evill times, when the Lord gives tokens of his displea∣sure, then not to call upon him with intention of spirit, increaseth sinne and wrath. This appeares, whether it
be an evill time with a mans selfe, or with a Land and Na∣tion: The Hypocrites in heart (saith Elihu in Iob) put to wrath, or heape it up,Iob 36.13 because they cry not when God bindeth them; having wilfull and rooted stubbornnesse in them, habituall contempt of God, without all reverence of his word, or Rod; that even in adversity they will not submit themselves to God, but obfirme and har∣den themselves under the e∣vils. Of this also the Pro∣phet Ieremy complains,Ier. 5.3 Thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved. The people striving and stomacking a∣gainst God, they intreat not his mercy and favour, there∣fore their curse is augmented
more and more,Vers. 6. vers. 6. This the Prophet Esay affirmed of the people of his time; The people turneth not to him that smiteth them,Isay 9.13 neither doe they seeke the Lord of hoasts; therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, head and taile, branch and rush in one day. So in Zephany, the Lord threa∣tens the neglecters of his worship, not only Idolaters, and those that mingled their Religion with superstitions: but those that have not sought the Lord,Zeph. 1.6 nor enquired for him: i e. not sought him by pray∣ers, and intreated his helpe in such a declining and cor∣rupt time. What cause then have men to feare Gods hand go∣ing out against them? whose
course and practise, if it were searched with a candle, it would bee found that they had never opened their mouthes, nor lifted up one petition this way, seeing what desolations have beene wrought in forraine parts, what tokens of his displea∣sure amongst our selves in the land wee live in; nay, when the Lord hath knock'd at their owne dores, brought it home to them, and the ve∣ry markes and signes of his anger have been upon them∣selves, their wives, or chil∣dren, yet then to have the heart so sinke and fall, and to be so over-growne with senselesnesse, as not to be a∣ble to commend the case of themselves, or theirs, to the
Lord; this shewes the A∣theisme of the heart; for in what degree a man is praier∣lesse, in that degree hee is godlesse. How may it humble Gods owne children? How may it goare our very hearts, and make them bleed, that wee have beene so wretchedly wanting both to God, our owne soules, the good of o∣thers, and the good land in which God hath planted us? How justly may we take up the confession of the Pro∣phet Daniel,Dan. .13, 14 All this evill is come upon us, yet made wee not our prayer before the Lord our God. Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evill, and brought it upon us. How may they call and
cry to us out of the Palati∣nate, Bohemia, and other pla∣ces, & say, Some of you have seene, and most have heard of the grievous evils that have befallen us;Lam. 1.12 Behold and see if there were ever sorrow like unto our sorrow, to have the glorious Gospell of Christ taken from us, the Arke displaced, and Dagon set in his roome; our Mini∣sters banished, and our peo∣ple betrayed unto Antichri∣stianisme; our Country laid wast and desolate, mny a Family driven from house and home, not knowing where to lay their heads; many of us seldome going to bed with dry eyes, confi∣dering the many pressures, straights, and necessities of
our selves and ours. O then why were your prayers and teares wanting to helpe to extinguish the flame of Gods wrath broken out against us? May not many amongst our selves of this land cry a∣gainst us, when Gods hand hath been upon them by the Pestilence,Psal. 91.6. which walked in the streets at noone-day; by Famine, and other miseries, yet our prayers have not bin with the Lord with intenti∣on. O we put not forth our selves as wee ought to have done, by strong cryes in the behalfe of the distresses of our bretheen: What may we thinke is justly owing us to this day for our great neg∣lects herein? the Lord grant it be not laid to our charge.
Let us hence be exhorted to be more frequent, and in∣tent in this service in the be∣halfe of our selves, Gods Church, and people: To make amends in time to come, plying the Throne of grace with all earnestnesse, whilest we see the judgment hanging in the threatning, or already executed upon o∣thers, lest this stare thee in the face another day, and thy conscience upbraid thee when the day of thy calami∣ty hath overtaken thee, or thou art enwrapt in the common judgement, and say unto thee, Remember, the time was when thou sawest Gods judgements on the Land, the Church, &c. and thou heldest thy peace, and
didst not helpe by thy pray∣ers as thou oughtest to have done; see now how heart∣lesse and shiftlesse thou art, and it is just with God it should bee so; O this will adde to the bitternesse of the crosse, and strike the stings of it deeper into thy Spirit. On the other side, if thou hast disharged thy consci∣ence this way, if the worst fal,Zeph. 2.2 yet either thou shalt be hid in the day of Gods wrath, or with Noah,Ezech. 14.14 Daniel, and Iob, thou shalt deliver thine owne soule; or thou shalt be migh∣tily assisted, and furnished with faith and patience to undergoe the present afflicti∣on, and thy prayer shall re∣turne into thy owne bosome like Noah his Dove into the
Arke, with an Olive branch of peace in its mouth; and God, who hath beene a wit∣nesse of thy heart and waies, will looke to it, that thou shalt not lose thy reward. CHAP. IIII. That the worke of a Christian, in respect of his spirituall e∣state, lyes most with himselfe. OR that stirreth up him∣selfe.] This is the se∣cond part of their complaint they had beene sluggish and drowsie, they had not beene dealing with themselves, nor labouring with their owne hearts for quicknance
and stirringnesse; they did not stirre up [themselves.] Hence observe, The businesse of a Christian, in regard of his spirituall estate, should lye much with himselfe. A Christian hath of all o∣thers the greatest businesse, and this lies in many places; in heaven, in the Church, in the Family, in the Closet, &c. and though God set him his worke, and give abilities to doe it, yet in regard of the transacting and perfecting this worke, it hath speciall, and primary relation to a mans selfe, and specially to that part of a mans slfe which wee call the Inner
man, as his minde, and thoughts, wil, and affections, and Conscience; God being a Spirit, with whom our principal businesse lieth; and the service being Spirituall, in which we are to addresse our selves unto him; its the ordering and managing of our spirits that lyeth upon us, as the chiefest of our im∣ployment. See it in some In∣stances: First, in the great businesse of Repentance, and turning to God: we shall finde this in Scripture to be calledLuk. 24.1 A comming to a mans selfe: To make this farther to appeare let us take the whole order and course of this worke. It pleaseth the Lord, at some time of a mans life, such
an one whom he purposeth to save, by the Ministery of the Word, together with the helpe of the Spirit, to meet in his way to Hell, where there is discovered unto him the vilenesse and horrible∣nesse of his sinnes, and the fearefull estate the sinner is cast into by reason of these: The conscience is now a wakened, the books are ope∣ned, hee sees sinne clearely, and is convinced of them, so that he cannot shift, hee cannot deny them; his thoughts also beginne to be troubled, and to beat one a∣gainst another with unsavo∣ry perturbations; finding all is not well, he goes alone by himselfe, begins to search, reads his sinnes as in a story;
his conscience tels him, I am sent unto thee with heavy ty∣dings; and one messenger followes another to tell him of his lost and condemned estate:Dan. 5.27 To thee be it spoken, thou art weighed in the bal∣lance, and found too light; these be thy sinnes, and these will be thy sorrowes. Being thus perplexed, he begins to cast about, and to consider what way hee were best to take to extricate, and unwind himselfe out of these Mazes and Labyrinths of sinne and misery: He lookes upward, and sees heaven shut against him; he lookes downward, and findes hell opened for him; he lookes round about him, and sees no helpe in a∣ny creature, men, or Angels;
he lookes into himselfe, and findes innumerable sinnes cōpassing him about, which stare upon him, and having every one, as it were, a chain in their hands, they are bin∣ding him hand and foot, to cast him into utter darknesse. Being cast into these great streights, such thoughts be∣ginne to rise in his minde, (God being mercifull to him;) Is there not mercy with the most High? Will hee cast off any poore sinner that comes unto him? And therfore resolves and saith, SureLuk, 15.18 I will arise and goe, and I will say to the Lord, I have sinned against heaven, and be∣fore thee; who can tell but the Lord may shew mercy to as great a sinner as I am?
He comes therfore, and casts himselfe downe before the Throne of grace, and saith,Iob 7.20. What shall I say unto thee, O thou preserver of men? I have no arguments to plead, no excuses to make, no reasons to defend my selfe withall; my sighes are my best Apo∣logies, and my teares are my best arguments: O that thou wouldest pitty! O that thou wouldst spare! O that thou wouldst have mercy upon a poore worme, a wretched and forlorne sinner! Thus all alone he humbleth him∣selfe, heePsal. 32.5 confesseth his sinnes, and spreadeth them before the Lord,Eze. 20.43 loathing himselfe in his owne sight;Luk. 15.21 ac∣cuseth himselfe;1 Cor. 11.31. iudgeth himselfe worthy to be destroied:
He now beholdsIohn 3.14 Christ lif∣ted up to him (as the brazen Serpent in the wildernesse) which he sees with his own eyes, embraceth with the armes of his owne faith, ap∣plyes him to himselfe for his owne everlasting com∣fort. And thus his sinnes pur∣sue him to the Sacrifice of Christ, to this City of re∣fuge, giving him no rest, till Christ speake peace to his soule: and all this is done by a man with himselfe. Secondly, as it is thus in regard of Initiall Repen∣tance, so is it in regard of re∣newed Repentance; when a man falls into sinne after cal∣ling, to get up againe, and re∣cover, the businesse lies with a mansPsal. 4.4 selfe. Thus we1 Kin. 8.47 read
in 1 King. 8.47. When Gods people are carryed captive into their Enemies Land, the pro∣mise is, that yet if they shall bethinke themselves, and re∣pent, and make supplications, &c. then God would heare them: He speakes it of re∣newed Repentance, of them who are already Gods peo∣ple; and this hee cals a be∣thinking themselves, or a brin∣ging backe a mans heart, a going downe into a mans selfe; and answerable to this is the other expression in the same Chapter, ver. 36. When they shall know every man (that is, particularly) the soare and plague of his owne heart. Thus also, Levit. 16.29. the children of Is∣rael were to afflict their soules
and to make bitter to them∣selves the remembrance of former sinnes, they wereEze. 16.62 63, & 36.31 voluntarily to cast them∣selves into heavinesse: so PeterLuk. 22.32 went out by himselfe and wept bitterly. As it is with a man in times of taking Physicke to recover health, hee betakes himselfe to his chamber, takes the potion prescribed, and is contented to be pained, and made sicke: So in this Repentance, which is Spirituall Physicke, the worke lyes by ones selfe: as it is in Zach. 12.11. They went apart, the Land shall mourne e∣very Family apart, and their wives apart. Thus wee see it in the businesse of Repen∣tance. It is the same also in the
work of Mortification. How doth it lye with a mans selfe, as the severall phrases in Scripture, pointing to this, import; when a man is toGrandis virtutis est tecum pug∣nare quoti∣die etinclu∣sum hostem centum o∣culis obser∣vare. Hieron. ad Fur. fall out with himselfe, and to have great2 Cor. 7.11 indignation a∣gainst himselfe; toGal. 5.24 crucifie his lusts, and corruptions; toMat. 18.8 cut off, as it were, the parts and members of ones owne body, as to pull out our eyes, to cut off foot or hand; to1 Cor. 9.27 keepe under the body; toMat. 8.34 deny a mans selfe; all which seeme terrible and bloody words to corrupt nature, and carnal reason; yet about this must a Christian be exercised, and that by himselfe. Againe, when feares and doubts rise in that great and weighty matter whether we
have any part or right in Christ or no? this question must be resolved by2 Cor. 13.5 proving and trying a mans owne selfe, by a private search and scru∣tiny, which must be made in our owne bosomes. Lastly, see it briefly in re∣gard of some particular du∣ties, we shall find the worke still to lye with ones selfe; as in 1 Hearing and Reading the holy Word of God: Heare itIob 5.27 (saith Eliphaz to Iob) and know it for thy good, or for thy selfe, as it is in the Margent. When we apply things to our selves, as the Disciples upon that speech of Christ unto them, One of you shall betray me: theyMat. 27.22 as∣ked every one, Master is it I?
To doe as the Bee, which brings home the honey ga∣thered to her owne Hive, there layes it up to nourish her, and to feed upon it as need requires. A man must so looke into the Word that heIam. 1.23 may see his owne face in it as in a glasse; and so helping himselfe to reforme what is amisse. 2. In singing of Psalmes theEphes. 5.19 Apostles counsell is, that wee should speake to our selves, singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord. 3. In preparing to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wee are ex∣horted1 Cor. 11 28 to examine our selves before we come. 4. When crosses and af∣flictions
breake in upon us, and God layes his hand on us, we are toLam. 3.28 sit alone by our selves, pondering and consi∣dering the grounds and cau∣ses of them; so quieting our selves, that wee may beare them with patience.Jer. 15.17 I sate alone because of thy hand (sih the Prophet Ieremy. This private, particular, and punctuall dealing with a mans selfe, wil much work out hypocrisie, and make all our performances to be with much more sincerity; which doth most appeare in our personal performances, since every man is truliest that, that hee is in private, and by himselfe, in his secret reti∣rednesse, and when separated from all spectators and wit∣nesses.
For here indeed lyes the streight and pinch of our Christian worke: To be wrestling with God in prayer; To bee dealing hand to hand against our be∣loved corruptions, and to keepe a constant and close fight against them; To be much in selfe-examination; To be gaging our own harts, and digging into our selves to finde the roots of our sin∣full distempers, to rake in the puddle and sincke that is in our owne bosomes, and to smell the stench and unsavo∣rinesse of it, to bee humbled by it: These, these are those private and painfull workes which must be done, if ever thou meane to make sure worke for thy soule, and
without which all thy Re∣ligion is but a selfe-decei∣ving. In our more publike and open performances also this hath place: So to tend to our hearts, and spirits, that they bee preserved in their strength and intention in the duty, beyond what will sa∣tisfie men, as in Hearing, Receiving, Praying with o∣thers, &c. all which may be done with ease by the out∣ward man; but doe thou say to thy selfe, this charge must I alwayes lay upon my selfe in all duties that are of pub∣like Observation, to doe them from my selfe, not from others; that is, to set upon them from such a vi∣gor of spirit as would carry
mee to such performances, even from my selfe, if there were none to behold me. Secondly, there can ne∣ver be any saving worke up∣on the heart without this, and that by reason of the deepeIer. 17.9 deceitfulnesse of our hearts, and desperate wicked∣nesse. A man can lay no sure foundation of his house, that diggeth not deepe beneath all quicke-sands, and rotten soyle, so here. This serves for great re∣proofe of such who have no such kind of businesse with themselves, but are stran∣gers in their owne bosomes, altogether ignorant what passeth in their owne hearts, whether they get or lose, whether they draw nearer
to heaven or hell; of such the Prophet complaines,Ier. 8.6 None saith what have I done? They live abroad out of themselves, looking and pry∣ing into others, but leave their owne hearts neglected and untill'd. Nay, they shunne, and decline this worke as a grievous taske. Oh, mee thinkes it is a folly and a madnesse, that wants a name to expresse it, that Man, a reasonable creature, endued with such abilities, and so fitted every way for this worke, and it be∣ing a businesse of that great consequence, yet that hee should make such an escape from himselfe, and live at such a distance from him∣selfe, so farre out of his
owne call and reach! Oh what studying is there in the world of sundry sorts of salutations, garbs, and com∣plements? What asking of each others health and wel∣fare?Nullum tibi anima tua propinquiorem nullum ut ces chariorem Si te amiseris omnia in e prdis. Salv. lib 3. cont. Avarit. Of all priso∣ners, use oft nest to visit thine owne soule. Greenham.  &c Intende i∣mae oculum in tuum isiu examin ut nosca ectne anpecus e∣at anima u. Basil. yet never to aske his soule how it fareth; not so much as to bid it good mor∣row, or good even; I meane, he passeth it by as a worth∣lesse, and a neglected thing. What great desire have ma∣ny to visit farre Countries, and to know the manners and customes of other Na∣tions farre or neere? What long Pilgrimages doe many make with many a weary step? yet they will not take a short journey downe into their owne hearts, nor know the behaviour and language
of their owne soules and consciences. The grounds of this extreame folly may be such as these: 1. In many it proceeds from Ignorance, they know not what this duty meanes, or that there is any such work reqvired of them, they know not how to behave themselves in such a busi∣nesse. 2. In many it proceeds from slothfulnesse, they will not be at the paines,Est et he perversitas hominum mo∣riitius, quam curati desi∣derare. they choose rather to put things to the venture, speed as it may: They say they keepe their Church, say their prai∣ers, come to the Sacrament, pay every one his owne, &c. if this wil not serve the turn, but that there must be such
adoe, then God helpe. They thinke such as call for more, or doe more, are more busie then needs, and that farre lesse would serve the turne. 3. In many it proceeds from a strange levity, in∣composednesse, flotingnesse, and unsetlednesse of Spirit; they cannot keep their mind steddy, nor serious in this worke, but are quickly tur∣ned aside to other things, e∣ven a feather flying in the ayre will divert and take them off, and cause them to wander in vanity and imper∣tinencies. 4. In some it proceeds from a guilty fearefulnesse; they will not bee too busie this way, to pry into them∣selves, fearing lest they
might see that which would make their hearts ake to see, by causing the remembrance of their former evill wayes to returne upon them: They think it would bring a damp on their worldly comforts, and marre their carnal mirth making them grow mellan∣cholicke and mopish, and so expose them to the scorne of the world, or their com∣panions, and carnall friends. 5. In some it is from worldlinesse, and earthly-mindednesse; they will not afford so much time, being carried along with such great intention and vehe∣mency of Spirit, they can∣not be atAs if a sicke man should say, I have no leisure to be cured. leisure for this bu∣sinesse. But canst thou be at leisure to eat, drinke, and
sleepe? Canst thou finde a time to looke upon thy Cat∣tell, corne, and bagges? To laugh and be merry? nay, to lye, sweare, drinke, &c. Be thou assured, that so continu∣ing, God will not be at lei∣sure to forgive thee thy sins, or save thy soule. Try therefore what busi∣nesse hath beene dispatched this way, with thy selfe, a∣bout thy Spirituall estate; what peace procured, what occasions of sinne prevented, what corruptions mastered, what watch kept, what rec∣konings cast up, what doubts cleared, what graces increa∣sed; what duties practised, what temptations resisted, what provision made for ae∣ternity, what time thou hast
spent by thy selfe about these things; be ashamed for thy failings, and blesse God har∣tily for any time spent, or thoughts had, or progresse made about these things. Bee exhorted to set thy selfe to this worke, thy hand to this plough, study thy selfe, read thy selfe, reason much with thy selfe, and converse frequently with thy selfe, consult and advise with thy selfe about thy Spi∣rituall estate, be ever ready to returne into thy selfe up∣on all occasions, what ever befals thee; comforts or crosses, mercies or miseries. When fallen into any sinne, traverse quickly those, Iam. 1.22. false reasonings of thy hart which drew thee into it. Say to thy
selfe, how came this to passe? As Absolon said to Thamar, when shee came weeping with dust upon her head,2 Sam. 13.20 Hath Ammon bin with thee? So, Hath Satan beene with thee? Hath passion over-born thee? Hath Pride swelled thee? Have worldly cares choked thee, &c. How came this about? To move us further to this duty, take these few helps:Motives, 1. This, of all other acti∣ons of life, is the most No∣ble, and tends most to the perfecting of the soule, which is the most excellent part; this perfects a man as hee is a Christian: Other thoughts, and discourses of thy Spirit may perfect thee as a man, a Scholler, a states∣man,
and Common-wealths man, &c. but this, as a Chri∣stian. This, being the most noble worke, and businesse of the minde, puts a lustre and beauty upon the soule. This is the speciall part of wisdome, and makes a man the wisest man. All other thoughts and actions, with∣out this returning into a mans selfe,Ier. 17.11 Pro. 5.13, 14 leave a man at last in the midst of folly and misery. 2. This makes the soun∣dest, and most setled Chri∣stian, sound in heart, in judg∣ment, and life; the neglect of this causeth so many er∣rours both in life and judge∣ment. 3. This keepes the soule and conscience in a quiet and
peaceable state, sweet, cleane and comfortable, as often sweeping keepes the house cleane; and often reckoning keepes long friends: This will make thee rejoyce in thy owne bosome, and thePro. 14.10 shranger from this worke shall not meddle with thy ioy: Otherwise the soule must needs be a loathsome place, and a cage for every un∣cleane lust and sinfull vani∣tie.
CHAP. V. About this Christian Duty of stirring up our selues, and what it is to stirre up ones selfe in Christian duties. NOne that stirre up them∣selves.] This is the se∣cond Duty neglected, they did not stirre up themselves to take hold on God, there was a neglect of the very in∣devour after it, which is here charged upon them: whence we have the Observation ly∣ing plaine before us, It is our duty seriously to ex∣cite and stirre up our selves in all exercises of piety and Godlinesse, with all inten∣tion
of spirit, to our utter∣most. For the further opening of the point, two things are to be explained: 1. What it is to stirre up ones selfe. 2. The things, about which, this duty is to bee conversant and exercised. For the first, to stirre vp a mans selfe, hath these two things in it: 1. The awaking of our selves, the shaking off that dulnesse and drowsinesse which cleaves to us. To this the Apostle hath reference, Rom. 13.11.. Excitari. Expergisci. It is high time to awake out of sleepe; he speaks to such as were already con∣verted: Now this awake∣ning is a freeing of our grace
from the oppression it was under, by worldly cares, car∣nall feares, or some sinfull lusts, which cause a neglect of universall piety, and the workes of the light, and day of regeneration, unto which wee had our new Creation. The Beleevers, in theirFerventior esse solet, qui rem primùm aggreditur. first setting out, are com∣monly more earnest and fer∣vent in following God cal∣ling them; the first appre∣hensions, and sense of their blessed change affect more, which may bee gathered from the reproofe of the Church of Ephesus, in the losse of their first love, and cal∣ling her to remember from whence she was fallen, to do her first works, Rev 2.4, 5. That seemes to be like it, Ier. 2.2.
I remember for thy sake the kindnesse of thy youth, though that doth more principally declare the kindnesse of God in taking that people to him∣selfe before all other, as an argument of conviction, that for no cause, against all obli∣gations of duty, they, con∣trary to their first beginnings forsooke the Lord: As in processe of time men grow colder, in their affections to him at least, though they ut∣terly forsake him not; the Prophet therefore cals upon them, and useth divers argu∣ments in the verses follow∣ing, to put them upon the duties enjoyned them. Though Gods children are called out of the world, yet they have much of the
world in them still, and therewith are miserably en∣thralled many times, so that we need awaking, and stir∣ring up. In which respect it is that the Lord hath provi∣ded, as well goads to pricke forward the dull, as nailes to fasten them that are incon∣stant, Eccles. 12.11. See also for this, these following Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.34. Re∣vel. 3.2. Heb. 10.24. The second thing in the stirring up a mans selfe, is not onely the awaking up of our selves, but the setting a∣worke that grace bestowed, together with the employ∣ing of our faculties in their sanctification, to their utter∣most abilities. This may appeare by Saint Paul his ex∣hortation
to Timothy, I put thee in remembrance that thou stirre up the gift of God that is in thee: as if he should have said, Considering thou hast an unfained faith, and be∣cause of my great affection to thee, whereby I am care∣full of thee, I, with great confidence, put thee in re∣membrance that thou. 2 Tim. 1.6 Sicut ignis indiget lignis, ita & gratia alacritate, ut fervère perpe∣tuò possit. Chrysost. ad loc. quic∣ken up the holy fire that is in thee, and blow it up, use the grace thou hast with cou∣rage, and strength of Spirit. So againe the same2 Tim. 2.1 Apo∣stle, Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Iesus. Now as there is required great wisdome and circum∣spection in ordering the gra∣ces given, and setting them in their right place and stati∣on,
and so giving them their due worke and exercise; When, one saith, knowledge bee you ready to discerne what Gods will is; Faith, be you ready to beleeve what God promiseth; Hope, be you ready to expect what is promised; Patience, be rea∣dy to beare what the Lord inflicteth; Obedience be you ready to goe about what God commandeth: I say, as there is required this wise∣dome in ordering grace, so there is required great inten∣tion of Spirit in intending al instruments of motion, all faculties and powers of bo∣dy and soule, for the keeping these in their due height, that they slacke not, nor abate not of their former strength
and vigour. Thus you see what it is to stirre up ones selfe, and wherein it stands. CHAP. VI. What the maine things are a∣bout which we are to stirre up our selves. SEcondly, we are to shew whereabout we are to stir up our selves, and what the duties are; to speake, as the truth is, these are of large extent, and beare an equall latitude with all duties of Religion and godlinesse; there being no duty, unto which this is not required, it being as the fire to kindle the Sacrifice, andMark. 9.9 as Salt to
season it. I shall give in∣stance in some particulars, such as are of great concern∣ment, which doe call for our utmost care and intention of spirit. Section 1. Of stirring up our selves in the weighty businesse of our owne and others salvation. FIrst, concerning the most weighty businesse of our Salvation, and our everla∣sting estate, it is our duty that wee mightily stirre up our selves, and tend to the good of our precious soules above al things in the world beside: about this, three things are specially to bee
heeded by us: 1. To take hold of all seasons and opportunities for the furthering and ad∣vancing this worke: For this end wee are to take a serious view of the times and places where wee live, to consider what they afford and bring with them, what confluence and concurrence of meanes, more than at other times, or in other places. The Apo∣stle cals upon, and stirres up the Corinthians with this Ar∣gument,2 Cor. 6.2 Can. 2.10.13 Ester 5 2 Behold (saith hee) now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation: that is, whilst the light of the Gospell shines, whilst the Ministers call, whilst the Lord (like Ahasueros) holds forth his golden Scepter, his
promises of mercy and par∣don to all such as come to him, especially when he be∣gins to stirre the heart with touches and remorses for sinne, and desires of mercy and pardon. The people that were stirred by the Mi∣nistry of Iohn the Baptist, how wonderfully eager were they in the pursuit of their Salvation?Mat. 11.12 From the dayes of Iohn Baptist untill now (saith our Saviour) the kingdome of heaven suffers vi∣olence, and the violent take it by force; that is,Quidam ad omnia viae & vita huus ex∣erita non So∣lum mbulant sed et crrunt, io poius vlnt. Bern Serm. 3. de . s. Dom they would have no nay, they were set upon it; as if they should have said, What a time is this? What dayes be these of light and grace? Who ever perish, wee will not:
Who ever goe to Hell, wee will not: As long as there was grace and mercy to bee had, as long as such gracious offers were tendred unto them, they resolved to refuse no labour nor paines: rest they cannot, have it they must, whatever it cost them: Oh the strong and restlesse desires! Oh the unwearied endevours of such, whose hearts God hath truly tou∣ched with a care of their owne Salvation! 2. For our going forward in this blessed worke, and bringing of it to its height and full perfection, it is our duty to stirre up our selves: To this thePhil. 2.12 Apostle ex∣horts, that we should worke out our salvation with feare and
trembling. As Salvation is a great worke, which should take up our whole man, so it is still to be wrought out, that if at any time wee were questioned what we were a doing, we might answer, we were working out our Sal∣vation with all our strength; as the fountaine workes out the mudde, and as Physicke workes out the disease, so to be throwing out all that hinders, to bee stillSapiens quā∣diu vivit, tamau addit. adding to this worke, one grace to another, one duty to ano∣ther; according to that of the2 Pet 1.5 . Lin∣king them hand in hand Apostle, Giving all di∣ligence, adde to your faith, ver∣tue; to vertue, knowledge, &c. Be stil going onward to per∣fection, as theHeb. 6.1 Apostle Saint Paul teacheth us; Therefore
leauing the principles of Christ, let us goe on to perfection. and againe,2 Cor. 7.1 Having these promi∣ses, let us perfect holinesse in the feare of God: so never sla∣king our pace, or giving o∣ver our care, till wee had brought it to its full maturi∣ty: and this is to bee done with feare and trembling, no∣ting that great seriousnesse of going about this worke, what aActs 7.32 feare should fall up∣on our hearts, considering the great Majesty of God, with whom wee have to deale; and our owne unwor∣thinesse and great insuffici∣ency, as of our selves, to goe forth in so great and weigh∣ty a worke: Neither is this feare, a blinde, or a servile feare, but such as is accom∣panied,
1. with Humility and lowlinesse of minde, oppo∣sed to high mindednesse, and self-confidence; as Rom. 11.12. Be not high minded, butTimor vir∣tutum omni∣um usios est. Hierony. feare. 2. With an awful and child-like reverence of God, opposed to wantonnesse and carnall security; as Hebr. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a kingdome which cannot bee moved, let us have grace, wherby we may serve God with reverence and godly feare. When we doe things in faith and obedience, and in great love to God and his holy Commandements, for his truth and goodnesse sake, Hos. 3.5. Instance might be given in preaching the Word, by which Gods peo∣ple are gathered to him; I was
with you (saith the1 Cor. 2.3 Apostle to the Corinthians) in weake∣nesse, in feare, and in much trembling. So in hearing, thus the2 Cor. 7.15 Corinthians received Titus with feare & trembling. And the LordIsay 66.5 Ezra 5.4 saith, he looks to such; that is, with the eye of pitty and favor, that trem∣ble at his Word. So for prayer and other duties, which help forward this worke; and this wee must take for an everla∣sting truth, that they alwaies speed best, and have most assistance, and enlargement of heart in duties, that set to them in most Humili∣tie and tremblingnesse of Spirit. 3. To grow up to more and more full Assurance of our salvation, unto which
we are exhorted, Give all di∣ligence to make your calling and election sure. Diligence here implieth, 1. Care of the heart, so rendred, 2 Cor. 7.11 2. Earnest indevour, which hath in it speed, instantnesse, painefulnesse, putting forth our best strength thereunto, taking paines for God and our soules [to make our calling and election sure] that is, that we be not disappointed, or doubt or distrust of it; the former is the assurance of the things in themselves,Certitudo obiecti. the o∣ther is in regardCertitudo subiecti. of us. This duty is to bee done, 1. by building our hope of both, not upon the Sand; that is, either uponEphes. 2.3 good nature, orMatth. 3.9 Gods outward Covenant, orMa. 7.21, 22, 23. common graces, and du∣ties,
for these will deceive us, but upon the Rocke, which is Christ, Mat. 7.24. and in him, upon his promise of Word & Oath, Heb. 6.18 2. By gathering certaine signes of our safe estate in him, as from our chusing him for our God, Psal. 73.25. a sure signe heIoh. 1 19 first chose us, 1 Iohn 4.19. so of our effe∣ctuall calling, and the like. 3. Eschewing such evils as might darken, or dampe our Assurance, and breake the bones and strength of it. 4. By adding grace to grace, and linking one to another, as you heard before. Thus you see what things are re∣quired of us about this great worke and businesse of our Salvation; and unto this wee
should the rather hasten with all our might, as in ma∣ny other respects, so, in that priority in enjoying the be∣nefits of God in Christ, is a great prerogative; and eve∣ry one should stir up them∣selves about it. To be first in Christ, hath speciall pri∣vileges; Rom. 16.7. Salute Andronicus and Iunia (saith Saint Paul) who were in Christ before me: So is Epinetus re∣corded to be the first fruits of Achaia: The sooner we get out of the world, which lyes in wickednesse, unto Christ, the safer we are, what ever befals us; and the more sins and pollutions of the world shall we be freed from, and so the sooner shall wee pro∣vide for the peace of our
consciences, and the comfort of our lives. Thus also are we to stirre up our selves, according to our places and callings,Pecora fra∣tris tuo erran∣tia iubel ut reducas fratri tuo nedum ipsum sibi. Tertul. a∣bout the salvation of others, and to further the same with all earnestnesse of intention, by all the wayes and meanes we can, as they stand in rela∣tion unto us. Thus Cornelius, taking the opportunity when Peter was to come to his house to Preach the Word unto him,Acts 10.24 he gathered toge∣ther his kinsmen and meere friends. So Andrew cals his brother Simon, andIoh. 1.40, 41 tels him We have found the Messiah, and so brought him to Iesus. This being an infallible note of a good man, that hee can∣not tell how to goe to hea∣ven
alone. This care, and deare affection should spe∣cially be found in Ministers of Gods Word; how should they stirre up themselves when they come to perform this worke? Before them sit the blinde, and ignorant; the proud, profane, and rebelli∣ous sinner,2 Tim. 2.20. held under the power of the Devill, and led captive by him, according to his will, who are making hast, and fetch large strides to the fiery Lake, which is but a little before them. What tender compassions should they put on to bring home wandring sinners, andHeb. 5.2 such as are out of the way; that, if it were possible,Acts 20.28 not one soule should perish, committed to their charge.
When the Lord is plea∣sed to call home a lost sin∣ner, and beginnes to lay a foundation of his blessed change in his soule, wee should stirre up our selves by all signes of joy and re∣joycing. As it was when God put to his hand to lay the foundations of this glorious frame of the world, the Lord himselfe tels us,Job 38.7 that the morning starres sang together, and the Sonnes of God, that is,Vid. Ion. ad loc. the Angels, shouted for ioy; much more when he beginsAmos 9.6 to build his stories of grace and mercy in the soule of a∣ny, it being a greater, and a harder worke to save one sinner, than to make the world; because in that work there was no resistance, for
he did butPsal. 33.9 Gen. 1.3 speake and it was done; he said, Let there be light, and it was so; but in the soule of man there is great resi∣stance, who stands out as long as ever hee can, and God hath much adoe with us before hee can bring us home: therefore are wee to make it matter of great joy, even as it is to the holy An∣gels themselves, Who reioyce over one sinner that repenteth, Luk. 15.10. Thus doth the Father of the prodigal child in the same Chapter,Luk. 15. ult It is meet (saith he) that we should make merry, and be glad; for this thy brother was dead, and is alive againe;Luke 10.21 Jesus reioy∣ced in Spirit he was lost, and is found: and good cause have wee to rejoyce, one soule more being pulled out of the
Divels clawes, and king∣dome; one more is added to the Church; one more, of a child of wrath, death, and hell, is made an heire of grace and salvation. Section 2. Of stirring up our selves a∣gainst our owne sinnes. THe second thing, about which this duty of stir∣ring up our selves is to bee exercised, is in regard of sinne, and Gods offence, whe∣ther in regard of our selves, or others. 1. In regard of our selves, and our owne sinnes. 1. First, in regard of our inbred and inherent corrup∣tion,
wee are to stirre up our selves,Incentiva vitiorum sta∣tim in mente iugulabis, et parvulos Ba∣bilonis allides ad Petram. Hieron. in opposing and re∣sisting the inward motions, stirrings, and provocations of it, it is our duty to set our selves against them with all our might, to sharpen our eyes against them, we should labour to see Death, Hell, Wrath, and Gods curse in the least risings and motions unto them; we should looke upon Lust, Pride, Malice, Revenge, thoughts of blas∣phemy, &c. as upon the Di∣vell himselfe; we should be no otherwise affected with the stirrings of these, then as if thou didst feele a Toad or Serpent stirring & crawling in thy bosome: O in what a case wouldst thou then think thou wert? How wouldst
thou shake thy selfe, and ne∣ver be at quiet till thou hadst got forth that loathsome and venemous creature: So, and much more shouldst thouDum in co∣gitatione vo∣luptas non re∣primitur, eti∣am in actione dominaetur, strive and struggle a∣gainst all motions and pro∣vocations to sinne. Say to thy selfe in such a case, Oh these filthy lusts, whither wil they carry mee? How shall I bee able to looke God in the face, if I should give way to it? And I must goe to him before I sleepe,Cavendum vulnus quod cum dolore Sanatur. Hieron. Ep. ad Sal. in what a case will my consci∣ence bee within this halfe houre? Begge hard of the Lord to keepe thee, and to give thee strength a∣gainst these sinfull stirrings of thy corrupt nature. Thus have Gods Children with
successe helped themselves, when they have set them∣selves against the brood of the Devill, crying, as the re∣penting Israelites against their Idols,Isay 30.22 Get thee hence, and so have preserved their peace. 2. When former sinnes unrepented of come into thy remembrance, it is our duty toIonah 3.8 cry mightily against them, and to be in great bitternesse for them,Zac. 12.10. as one that is in bitternesse for his first-borne; even to cry out as a travel∣ling woman, amidst the pangs and throwes of guil∣tinesse. Hence2 Chr. 33.12 Manasseth is said to humble himselfe great∣ly. O when the fountaines of theGen. 7.11. great deepe are broken up, and the heart of the penitent sinner beginnes to breake
and melt, there bee strong grones and sighes uttered, which pierce the very hea∣vens, and the voyce and cry of them is heard on high. 3. When fallen into any sinne, it is our duty to bestir our selvesLicet lapsi sint, non com∣morentur in lapsu, nec in ipsis se sepuli∣ant ruinis suis sed ilicò, ubi concidere re∣surgant, Salv. lib. 1. cont. Avarit. to get out of the mire, never to give thy selfe rest in it, think thou lyest all the while amongst ginnes, and snares, and Scorpions, a∣midst quick-sands, in which thou sinkest deeper and dee∣per every moment thou so abidest. Wee should call to mind what Peter did in such a case,Luke 22.62 He went out presently, and wept bitterly.
Section 3. Of stirring up our selves a∣gainst others sinnes. IN regard of others sinnes it is our duty to stirre up our selves, and that in regard of the evill of doctrine, or judgement, or of life and conversation: 1. For the evill of do∣ctrine, false and erroneous tenents, and positions, wee should stirre up our selvesIude 3. to contend earnestly for the faith, once delivered to the Saints; not to lose the least dram of that precious do∣ctrine: we are not to looke for any more Gospels, or a∣ny more truths to be penned
for us, therefore to looke well to these wee have. As they are penned and written for all Gods people, so all have interest in them; it be∣ing the Common Salvation,Iude 3. al should stand for it to their uttermost;Mos iste semper in Ec∣clesiae viguit ut quó quis{que} foret religion fior eò promp∣tiùs novellis ad inventio∣nibus contra irt. Vincent. Le∣rinens. so to stand a∣gainst that which is contrary to sound Doctrine. Ah (deare Christian) wee should prize most dearely every truth of God, the least of which is more preciousMat. 5.18 than heaven and earth, and a most sweet and beautifull thing; where∣as every errour is loathsome and deformed,Nova dog∣mata vetus Testamentum deos alienos appellare con∣suevit. Id. Vinc. casts a ble∣mish on the most holy and pure nature of God, and tends to the ruine and con∣fusion of all things. He that goes about to corrupt and
debosh another in life and manners, by wicked coun∣sell, or example, is to bee shunned as a dangerous ene∣my; but he that goes about to corrupt and debosh ano∣ther in his judgement and understanding, which is the most precious and excellent part of man, and to spoyle him in his intellectuals, is to be accounted as a cursed e∣nemy, and to be driven out from the society of man∣kinde.Revel. 2.2 The Church of E∣phesus was commended,Vid. Pareum ad loc. that shee could not beare with them that were evill: that is, such as were false Apostles, who carried about false doctrins, and corrupted others. How did Saint Paul stand out a∣gainst Elymas,Acts 13.9 who sought to
turne away the Deputy from the faith: How did he shar∣pen his Spirit against him, saying, O full of all subtilty, and all mischiefe, thou childe of the Divell, thou enemy of all righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right waies of the Lord. 2. In regard of the evill of life, and corruption of manners in others,Ne sitis neg∣ligentes in cor gendis vst ad cu∣ram vestiam quoqu moo perimentibus monendo, do cendo, hortan do terrendo, Aug. ver Dom. .8. we are to stirre up our selves against it, as farre as our calling and condition of life will per∣mit. They that forsake the Law (Pro. 28.4 saith Salomon) praise the wicked; but such as keepe the Law, contend with them. The innocent shall stirre up himselfe against the hypocrite▪ saith Iob, Iob 17.8. They will not let them carry it a∣way
so, but will reprove them for their wickednesse. The example of that wor∣thy Governour Nehemiah, is remarkeable in this kinde; who contended with the Nobles who profaned the Sabbath day, and by their example drew on others to that grievous sinne: Heare what he saith,Neh. 13.17 Then conten∣ded I with the Nobles of Iudah, and said unto them; What evill thing is this that yee doe, and prophane the Sabbath day? Did not your fathers thus? and did not our God bring all this evill upon us, and upon the Ci∣ty? yet yee bring more wrath upon Israel, by prophaning the Sabbath.Vers. 28 See also how hee cleased from him one of the sons of the high Priest, because hee
was sonne in law to Sanballat, who was a professed enemy to Gods people, and a great scoffer at all their procee∣dings. But incomparable is the example of our Saviour in reforming the abuses of the Temple;Iohn 2.15 Zealous of his fathers house, he whipt out the buyers and sellers, powred out the mony-changers, and over∣threw the Tables: At which fact, the Disciples remembred that it was written, The Zeale of thy house hath eaten me up. Section 4. Of stirring up our selves when we come to God in prayer. VVE are also to exercise this stirringnesse of
heart in all duties of Obedi∣ence, whether they be duties of immediate worship, or o∣therwise. To give some instances: When wee draw neere to the Lord to pray to him, it is our duty to stirre up our selves, and to declare by all signesVitus Theo∣dorus wri∣ting to Me∣lancthon, speakes thus of Luther, No day pas∣se him, faith e, but he spent three houres at least in prayer. Once I happened to over∣heare him being at rayer: O what spirit, and life, and faith, was there in his prayers! what hee aske, hee doth it with sch eve∣re ce, as having to deale with God; with such faith and  pe, as speaking with hi Father, or his friend, In vit. Luth. pag 142 our great desire to be heard of him: God is of such Majesty, as he looks for all earnestnesse in our petiti∣ons; and the excellency, to∣gether with the great need of the things desired, should move intention of all our powers in seeking them from God. S. IamesJam. 5.16. saith, that ef∣fectual prayer, (,
deprecation incitated, dri∣ven with motion, and force, vehement, fervent, with great affection of devotion)Diligent prayer and the commit∣ting of sinne wil not stand together for if prayer cannot make a man ceae from sinne, yet his sin∣nng will make him leave off praying, Mert. lib. t. page 61. hath great force with God to obtaine that which wee desire.Acts 26.7 Paul speaketh of the twelue Tribes, that they instant∣ly served God day and night: the word is, , with intention of Spirit. This is sometime called2 Kin. 19.4 lifting up of a prayer: It is recorded to the great praise of Iacob, thatGen. 32.26 28 Hos. 12.3, 4 by his strength hee had great power with God; yea, he had power over the Angell, and pre∣vailed; he wept, and made sup∣plication unto him, hee found him in Bethel, and there hee spake with us. In which is set downe, both the favour of God to Iacob, vouchsafing
the manifestation of him∣selfe, and speech with him; and the faith and piety of Iacob propounded to be imi∣tated by us, as belonging to our confirmation, who hol∣ding fast the promise made him at Bethel, wrestled strongly by the faith of it, and found that hee had not beleeved in vaine; at Bethel againe was the Promise re∣newed unto him. Section 5. Of stirring up our selves in prayer for others. SO when we seeke to him by prayer for his good∣nesse to others, it is our duty to quicken and enkindle in
our selves, strong affections.Gen. 18.13 Abraham was earnest and importunate with God for wicked Sodom: especially for such as are neare and deare unto us; as theMat. 15.22, 23. woman of Syrophenissa obtained her request in the behalfe of her child. But most especially wee should put forth all the strength of our spirits in the behalfe of the Church and people of God: Yee chat bee Lords Remembrancers (Isa. 62.6, 7 saith the Prophet Isaiah) keepe not silence, and give him no rest, nor hold thy peace day nor night, til he establish and make Ierusalem a praise in the earth. When Gods people were driven into great streights, by reason of Pharaoh his pursuing them behinde, and
having the Red Sea before them, the Lord asked Moses,Exo. 14.15 Num. 14. 12 20 Why cryest thou unto me? Ah! Moses could not hold his peace, but must burst out in∣to strong prayers and cryes. Aaron also bestirred him∣selfe, when the plague brake forth amongst the people;Num 16. 46 47 He ranne quickly, stood be∣tweene the dead and the living and made attonement for the people: So interposing, and, as it were, exposing himselfe to the wrath of God for the people: It was not so much the Incense, as the strong prayers of Aaron that pre∣vailed with God to stay the plague. So when Peter was in prison, it isActs 12.5 sayd, that Prayer was made of the Church with∣out ceasing for him; (the word
is , earnest and stretched-out prayer;) the Church was so earnest with the Lord, that hee was faine to take him out of prison, unloose his chaines, and bring him to them, and set him before them; as if the Lord had sayd, there hee is, your importunity hathDeus ipse qui∣nullu cont se virilus su∣peraripotest prcibus vn∣citur. Hiero over∣come me. O the power of fervent-conjoyned prayers! These bee thePrece sunt Bombard & instrument ell a Chri∣tian rum. uther. Arius the heretike was bouht to onf o by th p∣ers of Alex∣ander the good Bishop of Constantinople, and  eath w, precationis opus non morbi. Socra, lib. 1 cap 15. scaling-ladders that are set up to heaven; and these doe lay siege to the Throne of God, and encompasse him round, and will not depart till they have that they came for.
Section 6. Of stirring up our selves in praysing God. VVHen we draw neare to prayse him for blessings, received, having therein a comfortable taste of Gods love to us, that he is our God, and we his peo∣ple, it is our duty to stirre up our selves in all the heights and elevations of our hearts, that possibly we may: Hence have proceeded those high straines of speech, andEbullit Cor. Psal. 45.1 ebul∣litions of the hearts of Gods servants.Iudg. 5.12 Deborah, to her due praysing of God, calls upon her selfe to awake, to sing a song; and the redoubling
of the word, Awake, awake, Deborah, awake, awake to utter a Song, implyeth her care to doe it with all, her might. So David,Psa. 57, 7, 8 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: which noteth the addicting of himselfe, with constant purpose of minde, to the duty of praysing God, and also his alacrity wherewith he comes to it, not only op∣posed to hypocrisie, but to torpor and spirit-lesnesse; kindled with zeale, he shoo off all impediments, to bee attentive to this voluntary Sacrifice; which the verse following declares; Awke up my glory, awake up Lute and Harpe; expressing the ve∣hemency of his heart, and burning desire, hee stirres up
his tongue, and joynes the helpe of Instruments to fire himselfe the more. In ano∣ther Psalme he stirres upPsal. 101, 1 Habet eso∣num Cor, Aug. ad loc. all that is within him; he cals, as it were, a Council, assembles all his powers, andZeph. 3.14 Zach. 9.9 faculties of soule, understanding, will, affections, in their full strength, to this duty of praysing God It falls out sometimes, that when the soule is in serious contem∣plation of Gods mercies past, present, and to come, that the fire secretly kind∣leth, and a man bursts out in∣to high prayses of God, fin∣ding his tongue to come far short of his heart, and his heart infinitely too narrow to comprehend, either the multitude of so many mer∣cies,
or the great love of him that is the bestower of them and so he is swallowed up in that Sea which hath neither banke nor bottome, but is faine to cry out, O the depth, the depth, the depth! and can goe no farther: and this is the highest manner of pray∣sing God, though one can speake never a word more. Section 7. Of stirring up our selves in standing for God and his honour. IN our standing for God, promoting his honour, and exalting his name, it is our duty to stirre up our selves, and that not onely by
spreading the knowledge of him in our owne hearts, and setting, him up as glorious there, making al things with∣in us to stoope and doe low∣ly obeysance to him, byJam. 4.12 ac∣knowledging his authority in what hee commands, andPs, 119.128 by keeping the heart in a continuall readinesse to set about what shal be comman∣ded us from him, andIer. 42.5, 6 1 Sam. 3.9 by re∣sting in his will when it is revealed,Gal. 1.15, 16. Heb. 11.8 without resisting or gaine-saying, and not on∣ly by a faithfull dependance upon him, and hanging up∣on him from day to day, as a childe upon the mothers brest, by all which wee ad∣vance, and lift up the Lord in our hearts; but also when wee are ready to make an o∣pen
profession of him, not fearing the face of man, when Gods cause comes in question. Then a man is right in his way, when hee gives up himselfe to bee wholly for God, when al his ends, projects, and purposes are subservient and subordi∣nate unto him and his glory. We read of Caleb, that when the false SpyesNum. 13, 28.30 discouraged the Israelites from entring into Canaan, by telling them of Cities walled up to hea∣ven, and of the Gyants the children of Anak, his spirit was mightily stirred, and he sayd,Num. 14, 8 Let us goe up at once, if the Lord delight in us, he will bring us into this Land. For which standing in Gods cause, the Lord gives this
testimony of him, ThatNum. 14.24 Ad verbum implevit post me. he had another spirit with him; and, that he hath followed mee fully. The Hebrew word is a metaphor taken from a Shippe under sayle, which is carried strongly with the wind, as if it feared neither rockes nor sands. Iehosha∣phat also1 Chr. 17.6 had his heart lif∣ted up in the wayes of God: he was more couragious and bold in promoting the true worship of God, than Asa his father was: With a high Spirit he tooke away Idola∣try; contemning perill, hee tooke away the high places and groves, which either his father left, or the people in the latter end of his reigne brought in againe. David, but a youth, was mightily
stirred up in Gods cause whē Goliah railed on the hoast of the living God, thy1 Sam. 17.32.48 servant (saith he) wil go & fight with this Philistim: drawing neere him to fight, hee hasted and ranne, moved with fervent zeale, to be avenged on the blasphemy of Gods name. It is said of Baruch, in the repayring of the wall of Ie∣rusalem, heNeh. 3.20 Se occendit repayred earnest∣ly, or as some read it, he fired himselfe, burst out into heat, angry with himselfe, and o∣thers, that were so slothfull in working, so finished his portion in a shorter time. This stirringnesse of Spirit did appeare in Levi, who preferred Gods glory to all naturall affection,Deut. 33.9 Who sayd to his Father and his Mother, I
have not seene him, neither knew hee his owne brethren, or his owne children; for they observed thy word, and kept thy Commandement. Thus also have the holy Confessours and blessed Martyrs done, whose Spirits wee should desire to be dou∣bled upon us, in these evill and backe-sliding dayes; who living incurst and cru∣ell times, in Gods cause and for his sakeRev. 12.11 loved not their lives unto the death, but thought the prisonWho will ever beleeve that I shall say? or what man will e∣ver thinke? in the deepe darke dun∣geon to find a paradise of pleasure in the place of sorrow; and to dwell in tranquillity, and hope of life in a cave infernall to be found ioy of soule: where other men doe shake and trēble, there strength and boldnesse to be plenty? Algerid his letter, Fox, Act. & Mon. ol, 2. p. 181. a para∣dise, and great iron chaines greatMarsac go∣ing to the stake to be burned, with two others with ropes about their neckes, see∣ing himselfe to be spared by reason of his order and degree, desired to have one of those precious chaines about his necke, in honour of his Lord, Fox, ib. p. 141. Luther resolved to appeare at Wormes, though all the tyles on the houses should be Divels. ornaments, and em∣braced the flames as cheere∣fully as Eliah did the fiery
Chariot, that came to fetch him to heaven. O when the love of their deerest Redee∣mer had once warmed their hearts, they were mightily inflamed, and like Davids three Worthies, who for Da∣vids sake, brake through the hoast of the Philistims; so these were ready, for his sake to undergoe all hard adven∣tures, to looke all dangers in the face, and to breake tho∣row an hoast of Deaths and Devils.
Section 8. About stirring up ourselves in the reading and hearing Gods holy Word. IN regard of Gods holy word, when wee are to be exercised in the reading of it, or hearing it preached, or read, it is our duty to stirre up our selves: as, 1. In reading the holy Scriptures: when thou ta∣kest up the Bible into thy hand to read, looke upon it, as upon the most blessed booke that ever eye saw, and that no booke in the world hath that in it,Quid est Scriptura sa∣cra nifi quae∣dam Epistola omnipotentis Dei ad crea∣turam suam, Greg. which con∣cernes thee so much, contai∣ning in it the whole counsell
of God for thy good. And as children are stirring and wakefull when they heare their fathers Will reade, to know and understand what is left them there; so ought wee to stirre up our selves, considering those many rich and precious Legacies which our Savior hath bequeathed unto us, in that last Will and Testament of his, sealed with his owne blood. So in hearing the Word read, wee have a notable ex∣ample in Ezra his time, thatNch. 8.3 when hee read in the booke of the Law, from morning to mid-day, the eares of all the people were attentive to the booke of the Law. 2. In hearing the Word Preached, it is our duty to
stirre up ourselves with all the life of attention we may; as hearing the Lord speaking in his Servants: Hither tend those pressing exhortations in Scripture, ToIsay 55.3 incline the eare; To beJam. 1.19 swist to heare; Flying, to the places of as∣semblies, asIsa. 60.8 Doves to their windowes. The Bereans are commen∣ded for this, that they heard the Word,Acts 16.11  with all readinesse and ala∣crity. In hearing the Word, we are toPsal. 24.7 lift up these everla∣sting doores, to set wide open the doores of our hearts, that the King of glory may come in. We are to choose the Word as ourPsal. 119.111.173 portion, for the good∣nesse, beauty, and truth of it. To bring hearts and affecti∣ons
answerable to the mat∣ter in hand; when the Lord threatens, to bring feare; when he promiseth, to bringNeh. 8.12 joy; to2 Chro. 34 27. Luke 3.10 yeeld willingly to the stampe of every truth, as the Wax to the Seale. To set the heart strongly to e∣very word of God,. 1 Tim. 4.15 clea∣ving inseparably to every truth, binding them close to the soule.Deu. 32.46 Set your hearts, (saith Moses) to all the words which I testifie amongst you this day, which you shall com∣mand your children to observe to doe all the words of this Law, for it is not a vaine thing for you, because it is your life, and through this you shall prolong your dayes. 3. For Ministers, and such as are to preach the Word, it
is their duty toIn Bucholse∣ro vivida om∣nia fuerunt, vt vida vox, vivida oculi, vividae manus gestus omnes vividi. Mel. ad in vit. ipse p. 556. stirre up themselves in the carefull discharge of this their weighty calling. 1. The Names given in Scripture, doe all imply la∣boriousnesse, and great in∣tention: They are calledEzec. 3.17 Watchmen,Ier, 23.4 Shepheards,1 Cor. 3.10 Builders,Mal. 3.1 Messengers,Tit. 1.7 Ste∣wards, &c. 2. Their worke set them, as dealing with the precious soules of men, and to call home wandring lost sinners, cals for so much. They are to Preach with allActs 18.2-28. diligence,2 Tim. 4.2 earnestnesse, and instancy; in season, out of season; with cou∣rage and freedome of spirit,Isa. 58.1 Ier. 28.17 fearelesse of the face of man: With greatPhil. .8 earnest desire of the salvation of Men, and
the people committed to them. This made the Apo∣stle Saint Paul to enter into greatCol. 2.1 conflicts and combatings for the Colossians, and to bee pained and afflicted as a wo∣man inGal. 4.19 travell. O me thinkes what should not one doe to keepe one soule from perishing everla∣stingly! if anyHic est ille Farellus qui nullis difficul∣tatibus fractus nullis minus convitiis, ver∣beribus deni{que} inflictus teri∣tus, Mempel-garoenses A∣quilenses. Lausanenses, Gene eses, Noacomen∣ses, Christo Lucrifecit. M l. Adam Decad. in vi∣ta Farel. p. 115. paynes and study would doe it; if deny∣ing a mans credit, profit, pleasure, and ease would doe it; if stooping, and yeel∣ding, and laying our hands under their feet would do it. if prayers and teares would doe it; or if, like Clouds, we should sweat our selves to death, so soules might bee brought home to God, it were a blessed way of dying.
Section 9. Of stirring up our selves in Meditation. THe minde being quie∣ted, and composed, and deepe silence and attention being caused in the whole man, thy spirit being awed with the presence of God, draw forth the subject mat∣ter thou wouldst meditate of, and to stirre thee up in the duty, take these two helpes: First, in things that are good, and of a divine and heavenly nature, labour to see them at their best, present them to thy selfe in their prime and beauty. To give
some Instances: 1. If thou wouldst medi∣tate of God, labour to see him in the glory of his At∣tributes, as Moses saw him, Exod. 34.5, 6. 2. If thou wouldst me∣ditate of Christ, ay me at the highest and most raised ap∣prehensions of his excellen∣cy; see him in his Nature, and Offices, or hanging on the Crosse, or sitting at the right hand of God, as Steven saw him, Acts 7.55. and Isa. chap. 9. view him in those places wherein Paul repre∣sents him, Heb. 1. and Col. 1.13. to 21. 3. If thou wouldst medi∣tate of heaven, and the glory of it, labour by the eye of faith to penetrate into it, and
to see it at the best, as Paul saw it, being caught up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.12. and as Peter represents it, 1 Pet. 1.4. 4. If thou wouldst medi∣tate of Gods Love to thee in Christ; See it at the best, in the dimensions of it, in the bredth, length, heighth, and depth of it, Ephes. 3.18, 19. Thinke from whence thou art brought, to what things advanced; thy selfe digged out of the rubbish, and ruines of forlorne man∣kinde, and placed as a living stone in Gods building;1 Pet. 2.5 as a brand pluckt out of the fire,Zach. 3.2 and like Ionah, from the bel∣ly of hell, cast up upon the dry land, and made a childe of God, and heire of life.
5. If thou wouldst medi∣tate on the Promises, looke on them at their best, as most fresh, and greene, as they grow out of the heart of God, and brest of Christ, their native and proper seat; out of whom they are but as fading and dying things. They being in their full strength and vigor as ever, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; what Gods people have hereto∣fore found them to bee, they are still the same unto us; like silver tryed and purified seven times,Psnl. 12.6 and have as much life and comfort in them as formerly in Abrahams,Heb. 11.13 or in Davids time; what ever they could speake of them, Gods people in this age of
the world are able to report the same. Secondly, if thou wouldst meditate on things which are in their nature simply evill, labour to see them at their worst. Take for instan∣ces: 1. If thou wouldst me∣ditate of sinne, and the na∣ture of it, see it at its worst, even worse than the Divell himselfe; for what made him a Divell but sinne? it was sinne spoyled him; he was a glorious Angell till hee was acquainted with sinne. Thinke it is that which is most contrary to the most holy Nature of God, and is the sole Object of all his hatred; whereas his love is dispersed to severall things,
his Selfe, his Sonne, his Children, &c. Thinke it is that which makes the grea∣test separation betweene God and us, and to be with∣out God in this world, which onely makes a man accursed, which all miseries of themselves can never doe. This blots out the Image of God, stamped on us at our first Creation, which being lost, all Paradise could not make Adam happy. This conformes us to the Image of the Divell, and causeth us to have communion with him, who is Gods greatest enemy: This is it that grieves Gods most Holy Spirit, and sends him sad to heaven, when wee resist his motions, and rush into evill.
2. If thou wouldst me∣ditate of Gods wrath, looke upon it as at the worst; as it keepes burning and glow∣ing those everlasting flames, and can blow the coales of a thousand hels more; the least sparke of which let fall into the Conscience sets all on a flame, which without the sprinkling of Christs blood, and the teares of true Repentance, can never bee quenched. 3. If thou wouldst me∣ditate of the state of a soule that is lost, thinke of it as at worst; even as of a forlorne, helpelesse, hopelesse crea∣ture, covered with shame and horror, and lying amidst the pangs, throbs, & throws of guiltinesse, which is the
Worme that never dyes;Mark. 9.44 of whom all mercy, pitty, and comfort have taken their leaves for ever, being there to remaine in that dungeon of fire so long as Hel is Hel, and God is God. Section 10. How we should stirre up our selves in sanctifying the Lords day. IN sanctifying the Lords day it is our duty to stirre up our selves, both in long∣ing for it before it comes, and highly prizing it when it is come;Isa. 58.23 making it the ioy and reioycing of our hearts. It is recorded of the godly Jewes, before our Saviours
time, that they called the Sabbath,Wemes. Christ. Syn. p. 76. Desiderium dierum the desire of dayes, the most desired day. Every moment of this day should bee preci∣ous, as having Gods blessing more immediately annexed unto it, and unto all those duties performed in it; ha∣ving, as it were, his Image and Superscription more lively portrayed, and engra∣ven upon it; and therefore to be improued by us to our uttermost, in all the parts and duties of that day.
Section 11. How wee are to stirre up our selves in our partaking of the Sacraments. IN the use of the Sacra∣ments, it is our duty to stir up our selves: 1. In regard of the Sa∣crament of Baptisme,How to stir up our serve to make use of our bap∣tisme to our selves and our children both to our selves, and our chil∣dren, and that in these re∣spects:  1. By calling to minde what wee, and our children are by nature, chil∣dren of wrath; both wee and they, all of us (like still-borne children) borneEphes. 2.3 dead in trespasses and sinnes,Ezec. 16.6 wel∣tring in the blood of the sins of our first parents, empty of
all grace, prone to all wic∣kednesse, though as then not able to put it forth in out∣ward Act, no more then young Vipers, or then the Cubs of wild beasts; which yet, when wee grow up to ripenesse and strength, are ready to breake forth to doe any mischiefe, if wee be not restrayned.  2. By intere∣sting our selves, and our children in the Covenant of Promise, whereof Baptisme is the Seale.  This is done by dedicating and resigning up our selves, and them, to be Gods people; as Hee, in the Covenant,Gen. 17.7, offereth him∣selfe to bee a God to us, and ours; and withall praying for our selves, and them, that we, and they mightGen. 17.18 live
in his sight. How should it provoke us to wrestle with God, to convey a Covenant and Sacrament of life unto our children, since wee have conveyed to them nothing but sinne, and wrath, and the fruit of both, which is death.  2. By growing up our selves, and training up our children to keepe the Covenant on our parts, that the Lord may delight toGen. 8.19 bring the blessing of the Covenant upon us and ours.  3. By walking in the purity of Gods Ordinances, with a pure and an honest heart: for want of the for∣mer, Gods wrath burst forth against Gedeons children, Iudg. 8 27. and against Eli and his, 1 Sam. 3.13. For want of the latter, against A∣maziah,
2 Chron 2 5.2. which David sought to prevent, by giving his sonne Salomon better counsell, 1 Chr. 28.9 2. In receiving the Lords Supper,How to stir up ourselves in the right use of the Lords Sup∣per. it is our duty to stir up our selves,  1. By conside∣ring the great need we stand in of such an Ordinance: what need Christ to be dis∣penced to us, as Bread to strengthen us, and Wine to quicken us, if we were not of our selves weake, and dull, and even starved creatures without him?  2.1 Cor. 11.28 By exami∣ning and searching out the feeblenesse of our best gra∣ces, and the strength of our manifold corruptions; that so as by searching into the sores and wounds of the bo∣dy, the body is payned and
grieved; so by searching in∣to the sores and wounds of our soules, our hearts may be inwardly pricked and affli∣cted.  3. By reforming our selves and our families be∣fore wee come to partake in this Supper: For if wee bee uncircumcised our selves, we discovenant our selves and them; as on the contrary, if the Master of the Family bee a true beleever, the Co∣venant is made with him, and his houshold: There∣fore when Zacheus was con∣verted, Christ sayd, This day is Salvation come to this house,Luke 19.9 for as much as hee also is the Sonne of Abraham. And hence wee read in the Acts, when the master of a Fami∣ly was turned to the faith,
that he was baptized and his whole houshold; and there∣fore also it lyes upon us not to leave them at home; so, nor to bring them with us uncircumcised, so farre as it lyes in us to use the means for their good, Exod. 12.48. Christ was carefull to1 Ioh. 13, 8 10. wash his Disciples feet, to purifie their hearts against the Sa∣crament. Such new wine, as Christ is, would bee put into new bottles.  4. By beholding Christ in the Sacrament, as it were crucified before our eyes, that we might mourne the more seriously in remem∣brance of the sins, by which we have piercedZac. 12.10. him  5. By admiring at the wonderfull goodnesse of God to our soules; who when we were
as2 Sam. 9.8 with 19.28 dead dogge (as Mephibo∣sheth said to David) yet the Lord is pleased to set us at his owne Table, to feed us with the Body and Blood of his owne Sonne, and thereby to make us one body and spi∣rit with his Sonne, giving him to us, and us to him, that wee might partake in all the precious blessings hee hath purchased for us, both for this life, and for a better, and therefore we are to feed up∣on him with faith, and ex∣ceeding joy for all his abun∣dant goodnesse to us herein.  6. By setting up Christ (whole Christ) in our hearts as our King, Priest, and Pro∣phet; that he, being received into us, may rule us, and teach us, and pacifie us, and
purifie us, andGal. 2.20 live our whole life in us.  Lastly, by cleaving the more to our brethren in al love and deare affection, whom wee see to communicate with us in the same Christ;1 Cor. 10.17 2 Cor. 12.13 and called of God to partake in the same Table with us. Section 12. How to stirre up our selves in laying hold on the Promises. IT is our duty to stirre up our selves, to conceive confidence in our hearts in taking hold of God, as hee hath offered himselfe in his Covenant, & Promises (the speciall thing mentioned here in the Text) and a point
of great use through the whole course of our lives: on which I shal a little more insist; opening the phrase what it is to take hold on God, and shewing how the Scrip∣ture calleth for this duty. The phrase is put for the Act of beleeving, which be∣cause it is to bee performed by the whole man, and all the powers of it, and is the great Act of all others, and includes all others, there∣fore it is set forth to us in Scripture by all the severall Acts of each member or faculty in a man: So, else∣where it is called Seeing,1 Pet. 2.3 performing the Office of the eye to the soule; Eating,Isay 30.7 tasting, comming to Christ, sitting still; and here (to
name no more) Taking hold of God, performing the Of∣fice of the hand, it being all in all to the soule. Thus, Isa. 56.2. God promising to bring neare his righteousnesse and salvation, and to place it in Sion for Israel his glory; he addeth, Blessed is the Sonne of Man that takes hold of it; that is, any mortall man, be hee Jew or stranger; which was first in fulfilling his Promise to restore the Cap∣tivity of Babylon, but prin∣cipally the righteousnesse declared in Christ and his Salvation: And vers. 4. it is called taking hold of the Covenant; that is, beleeving. Faith then is the hand wher∣by God is to bee layed hold upon; God in himselfe, as
he cannot be seene, so nor be layed hold of by the hand of any mortall man, but hath subjected himselfe to the capacity and apprehension of faith, by setting forth his Sonne and Promises be∣tweene us and him; where∣by, as by two Handles, wee lay hold on that God, whom the world in the darke feeles after, and cannot finde, Acts 17.27. First, his Sonne; and therefore faith is expressed to us by apprehending Christ, Philip. 3.12. and thus the Church, being in Temptation of Unbeleefe, after shee had found Christ for attonement, shee layed hold on him, Cant. 3.4. and would not let him goe. And
so laying hold on Christ, wee have , manu∣duction, are led by the hand to God, Ephes. 3.12. And secondly, the Pro∣mises; therefore, Heb. 11.13. the Patriarchs are sayd by faith to have received the Promises, and to have embraced them: So as first wee take hold of the Promi∣ses, and of Christ in them, and then by this meanes we come to God, having both hope and faith in him, 1 Pet. 1.21. The life of faith then lyes in apprehension, and application of the Cove∣nant, and of God therein. The Covenant sayes, I will bee a God to them, and they shall bee a people to mee. First, indeed God speakes to the
soules of men, Thou art my people; and then they lay hold on him, saying, And the Lord is my God. As in our first seperation from the world, by Divine Calling, wee stand up, and take hold of him for the obtaining of reconciliation, and all other blessings flowing from hence in Jesus Christ, so wee goe on after in our life, seeking by increase of faith to enjoy him more and more, and apprehend him for the blessing of the Co∣venant, whereunto our ef∣fectuall Calling gave us Title: That as all blessings that wee enjoy with his fa∣vour proceed from him, as declaring himselfe to bee our God; as blessingsExod. 6.7 earth∣ly,
Heb. 8.10. spirituall andHeb. 11.16 heaven∣ly; so in our necessities, we renew our faith of that Co∣venant, I will be thy God; and plead our interest in him for obtaining all blessings, hol∣ding him fast; as, Psal. 119.4. I am thine, save mee: and the Peophet here, vers. 8, 9. Thus David, Psalm. 43.2. Thou art the God of my strength, why dost thou cast mee off? and, vers. 5. My soule hope in God, for I shall yet prayse him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God: And thus are wee especially to take hold of God in evill times (to which this Text especially referres this duty) when Gods hand is stretched out against our selves, and the Church. So,
Isa. 27.4, 5. when God goes through his Church, bur∣ning up the briars & thorns, to prevent which, hee bids a man take hold of his strength; that is, by faith hold his hands. As when a man is lifting up his hand to strike, another steps in, and layes hold on it, and stayes him, as Moses did when Gods wrath was gone out against the Israelites: Let mee alone,Deut. 9.14 saith God; which if a man doth, God promiseth in the following words, that hee shall make peace with him, for fury is not in mee. When the Lord seemes to bee furious, yet faith laying hold, hath power with him to stay his hand; though it bee his strength, and the hand of
faith weake in it selfe, yet it shall have power with him, Hos. 12.3. And then when hee beginnes to with-draw himselfy, as it were, we are to excite our faith, draw neere, and take hold of him. Oh be not farre from mee, for trouble is neare, saith David, Psal. 22.11. As a childe if hee bee to goe in the darke, or in a crowd, hee will bee sure to take fast hold of his father, and not leave him. And because wee are natu∣rally dull unto this, there∣fore wee must stirre up our selves to it. Other things, as Riches, &c. are, ad manum, nigh us here below; and therefore like dying men, that catch hold on any thing that is next them, so doe we
on these to helpe us, and do trust in them. But God, and Christ, they are high, and farre above our sight and naturall reach, and therefore wee are loth to stretch to them, to lay hold on them, and must stirre up our selves to it. Thus having explicated the phrase, and shewed the duty, I shall briefly shew how wee are to stirre up our faith to make use of the Promises to our selves, and lay hold on them, and God by them, which is done di∣vers wayes. First, by knowing that wee are the children of the Promise, Rom. 9.8. so called because the Promises per∣taine to us, vers. 4. So as
knowing our selves chil∣dren, we may call the Pro∣mises ours; They are the childrens bread; and we may lay hold on them as our owne mercies, Ion: 2.8. All the Children of God being in this case, as Isaac was, the Seed of the Promise; all of us borne of a word of faith: and as wee are borne of a Promise,Rom. 10.17 so to all the Pro∣mises are wee borne; yea, being in this right accounted one with Christ. Therefore Gal 3 16. to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; to Seed as of one, which is Christ; that is, Christ mystical, the whole Church. Secondly, by considering that God hath given us his owne Sonne, Cor. 1.20 in whom all
the Promises are wrapped up and fulfilled; andRom. 8.32 for whose sake God will deny us nothing: We having mar∣ried the heire, have a joynt Title to his Inheritance, and the Deeds of it. Thirdly, by observing the uprightnesse of our harts to take the Commandements, and threatnings as due to us; and hee that maketh consci∣ence to take the Comman∣dements as his Way, and the threatnings as his Bridle, hee may safely take all the Pro∣mises for his Inheritance and comfort.Psa. 119.111 112. Fourthly, by considering the free grace of God, in gi∣ving and fulfilling his pro∣mises, not for any worth in us,Isa. 43.25 but for his Name sake:
Gen. 32.10 acknowledging our owne unworthinesse of the least of all the promises and mer∣cies of God, which make our empty vessels more fit to receive them. Fifthly and lastly, by me∣ditating on the Promises themselves, pondering and musing upon them: Whence the Spirit of Christ, beheld in the Promise, is conveyed unto us,2 Cor. 3.18 to transforme us into the likenesse of Christ by it.
Section 13. Of stirring up our selves in duties of Love and Mercy. THus of some Duties which have a more im∣mediate Relation unto God, about which wee ought to stirre up our selves, now to goe forward, and to instance in some duties which have reference to our selves or o∣thers. In all workes of Love and Mercy towards others, it is our duty to stirre up our selves, that wee2 Thes. 1.3 abound in them; and wee should have2 Cor. 8.16 an earnest care about them; whether it bee in regard of the bodies, or soules of o∣thers,
or any other way. Our love should be1 Thess. 1.3 laborious ful of theRom. 12.10 bowels of tendernesse, and compassion; to be kindly affe∣ctioned, to be1 Tim 6.18 ready to distri∣bute, willing to communicate. Where we see grace in any eminency to have our hearts knit to such,1 Sā. 18.1, 2 as Ionathans was to David.Heb. 10.24 To consider one another, and to provoke to love, and good workes. Some we may finde in soule trou∣bles, withNehe. 2.2 Gen. 40.6, 7 countenances sad and dejected, faces pale and wan, heavy-eyed, and sighing as they goe, now to stirre up our selves to come to theirIob 4.4 help and succour, by all the wayes wee can: if it bee thy friend, or any thou canst any way reach, never give thy selfe rest, but let it
pitty thy very heart, cry to God for their ease and deli∣verance, and if God have gi∣ven thee the skill of a Spiri∣tuall Physician, with a ten∣der hand bind up the bruised Spirit. Some also areRom. 14.1 weake in faith, these wee should support: Some are feeble-minded, apt to bee discoura∣ged, thes.1 The. 5.14 to strēgthen. Some are overtaken with frilings and temptations, these toGal 6.1  set aright, as a bone that was out of his place, as the word there signifies: some grow dis∣orderly, and scandalous, these to1 The. 5 14 reprove: some grow cold, luke-warme, and are like toHeb. 12.15 fall away, these to quicken and rowse up from their drowsinesse.
Section 14. Of stirring up our selves in re∣gard of our Christian race. IN regard of our Christian race we are set to run, it is our duty to stirre up our selves,1 Pet. 1.13 to gird up the loynes of our minde, to runne like the two Disciples to our Savi∣ours Sepulcher, who ranne with all their might, who should come thither first: Wee should not stay for company in this weighty bu∣sinesse,Quoties co∣gitas de per∣festione vir∣tutum noli considerare quid alii mi∣nu habeant quam tu ha∣be, sed quid s minus ha∣bis, quam ha∣bere iam de¦bes. Filg. neither are wee to content our selves with the pace of carnall professors, temporary beleevers, or la∣zy Christians; nor with that pace which wee our selves
do, or have gone; nor should wee looke backe to see who comes after, but thinke thou art upon life and death; thereforeHeb. 12.1 to cast away every weight, and the sinne that doth so easily beset us; nothing in the world should cause us to step aside, but to runnePro 4.25 forth right: Wee should nowPhil. 3.13 for∣get all things that are behinde reaching out to the things which are before. To this end we should set before us, thatHeb. 12.1 cloud of witnesses, those bles∣sed servants of God, who have gone before us, who have finished their course, and kept the faith to their latest breath; especiallyHeb. 12 2 looking to Iesus, the Author and finisher of our faith; who, for the ioy that was set before him, endu∣red
the crosse, despising the shame, and is set downe at the right hand of the Throne of God. Our Savior Christ is not as a dead marke,Note. who helpes not the runners at al, but loo∣king to him by faith, he gui∣deth us in our way with his eye,Psal. 32.8 enlargeth our steps, and gives us strength that wee faint not, but still helpeth us toPhil. 3.14 presse toward the marke, till we obtaine the price of our high calling of God through him. And this wee ought to doe with the more care and ear∣nestnesse, there being so ma∣ny that look upon us, whom wee may encourage by our example, either in doing or suffering. Wee little thinke how many doe eye us in our Christian walke, and what
good wee may doe byPhil. 2.15 hol∣ding forth the light of a good example, how it may2 Cor. 9.2 1 The. 1.6, 7 pro∣voke others to mend their pace, and to runne with the more cheerefulnesse, having some to lead the way before them. Section 15. How we are to stirre up our selves when our last end ap∣procheth. VVHen our last end approacheth, and wee lye upon our last bed, (if God bee so mercifull to us as to afford any strength, ease, or respit from paine, freedome from Temptation, or to continue the use of our
reason and memory) it is our duty to stirre up our selves, that we quit our selves well in the last act of our life: and this is done, 1 By a carefull prepara∣tion of our selves for our blessed change, and depar∣ting hence, by making our reckonings even, and expres∣sing by all signes and tokens, ourPhil. 1.12 desire of being dissolved, and to be with Christ. Now to stirre up our hope, and ear∣nest expectation of the ac∣complishment of all those blessed promises of the life to come,, The same word used, Rom. 8.19 according as the A∣postle speaks of himself, Phi. 1.20. the word used by him there, signifies to reach out ones necke in looking after somewhat we greatly desire,
and earnestly expect to come unto us. Ask is said ofIudg. 5.28 Si∣sera his Mother, she looked out at a window, and expecting the returne of her sonne, shee cryed, Why are his Chariots so long a comming? So now the soule should be looking out, and reaching forth it selfe, expecting that good howre when God will send for it. O when the immortall soule which hath long so-journed in this sinfull flesh, shall be∣ginne toIntrepidè purgamus ad Redemptorem nostrum Ie∣sum, intrepidè ad Patriar— charum con∣cilium, trepi∣de ad patrem nostrum A— braham enm dies adveneris prfie; samur Ambr, lib, de bono mortis, draw neere to the confines of eternity, there being, it may bee, but a few houres, and, as it were, but a step betweene it and everla∣sting blessednesse, and those beatificall visions, which in∣finitely transcend all that e∣ver mortall eye saw, as farre
as the glory of the greatest Princes Court doth the mea∣nest Cottage, how should wee beginne to lift up our heads with ioy, theLuk. 21.28 day of our finall redemption from sinne and misery, being so neare? Here indeed sometimes, and it is but sometimes, we have a glimpse of heaven shewed us, and a ray and beame of celestiall joy hath beene let downe into our harts, which hath infinitely passed all the pleasures of nature, but it stayes not long; but now thou art going to take full possession of that glorious inheritance which hath more comforts in it than the heaven hath Starres; or there be Sands on the Sea∣shore, how should thy heart
When Doctor Tailor that worthy Martyr was going to suf∣fer, he saw a∣far off many people stan∣ding toge∣ther, he as∣ked what it meant; it be∣ing told him it was the place where he must suf∣fer, he said, thanked be God, I am e∣ven at home Fox, Act. & Mon. vol. 2. p. 178. leape within thee, and spring forth to meet those approaching blessings? 2. ByS compa∣ratum est cunctis ferè mortalibus ut morituri sub ultimum vita exitum hortationem apud suos re∣linquere ser∣veant. in vit. Cranmeri, p. 15 applying our selves in all the wayes of ad∣vice, counsell, and comfort, in regard of such as are a∣bout us; it may be a sorrow∣full wife, who stands besides thee with a heart ready to burst, to thinke of her lea∣ving of thee; it may bee children, or servants stand before thee weeping, or neere friends or kindred are with thee, who are loth to leave thee; now to stirre up thy selfe to leave somewhat with them, which they may remember when thou art in the dust: That the child may say, I have lost a carefull fa∣ther, these were my fathers
words, and last charge unto me, those that stand by may say, Thus did hee exhort us, thus did hee comfort us,Mr. Calvin did the like being neere his end, vid, Bez, in vit. Calv. these were his last words, thus went he to his rest. We shall finde it recorded of the Patriarke Iacob, that drawing neere his end, when his children came to see him, he stirred up him∣selfe,Gen. 48.2.9.20 and strengthened him∣selfe on his bed, and he blessed them. A worthy patterne for all parents to follow, he lay not like a logge in his bed, as many doe, but now, though of great age, and weake, yet hee raised up that little strength which was left, and spent it inGen. 49.23 leaving a blessing on his children; his last words were blessings.Ioh. chap. 13, 14, 15, 16 17, per tot. Our Saviour, when hee was to
leave this world, shewed his great care and love to his Disciples, in preparing them for his departure, and leaving with them many precious counsels, comforts, and ex∣hortations, by which they might be helped and streng∣thened for the time to come. Thus did the Apostle Peter imitate his Master,2 Pet. 1.12 to 15 Who knowing shortly hee was to put off his Tabernacle, he did stirre them up; that after his depar∣ture they might have those things alwayes in remem∣brance which he had taught them. The Apostle Paul being how aged, andActs 30.18 to 35 know∣ing the time of his departure was at hand, hee called for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and leaves with
them many excellent and weighty exhortations, they being now to see his face no more. CHAP. VII. Shewing the grounds of this duty of stirring up our selves. THus you have the ex∣planation of those two things proposed; to wit; what it is to stirre up ones selfe; and secondly, about what it is mainly to bee exercised. Now follow some grounds and reasons of the Point. This duty, as it is enjoy∣ned, & commanded by God himselfe, that we should stir
up our selves in what we do, that it be done with all our might,, as the word is. with an harmonicall consent of all parts of man, understanding, will, and all the faculties existing in the person of man, with the whole strength; so it is most pleasing unto God, as most a∣greeable to his nature, who is a Spirit infinitely active & stirring, and impatient of all dulnesse and sluggishnesse. ThePsal. 68.17 Angels are his Chariots,Psal. 18.10 he rides upon a Cherube, and doth flye; he comes also on the wings of the wind:Isa. 19.1 he rides on a swift cloud, which the racke wind drives, all which shadow out unto us the won∣derfull activity of his na∣ture: WhoIohn 4.24 seekes therefore such to worship him. Hence
is David commended for his readinesse to fulfill all theActs 13.22 . 2. Sam. 6.14 wils of God, for so it is in the Originall. Thus he dan∣ced before the Lord with al his might; that is, with the might of his spirit. Our Saviour Christ, who gave himselfe for us in the greatnesse of his love, (2 Cor. 5.14 even of his love that passeth know∣ledge,) andTit. 2.14 purchased us to be a peculiar people to himselfe, did it to this end, that wee should be zealous of good works. Zeale is an affection proper to Men, who having will, to which belongeth the choice of good, as the object of it, have two attendants theron, the Concupiscible, and the Irascible part; the former moving towards the object,
the latter encountring what∣ever difficulties hinder the attaining and enjoying of it;Cant. 8.6, 7 The coles thereof are coles of fire, which have a vehement flame, which many waters can∣not quench, nor floods drowne. Hence, such as are Christs, areLuke 3.16 baptized with fire; that is, with the holy Ghost, who is like fire; not onely in purging away their drosse and corruptions, but mighti∣ly heating them, and stirring up strong and ardent affecti∣ons in them for God and his glory. Thirdly, wee should put forth our selves in this duty, in regard of that wonderfull aptnesse that is in the best to grow cold, and dull, and that insensibly; even as age, and
yeares come on us and we feele it not, and as the dust falls upon our clothes, and we perceive it not; so that, if one let himselfe alone but a short time, the minde will sinke, and get downeward: wee must therefore ever and anon be winding it up, as we do our Clocks and Watches, and still bee tending unto it by renuing our purposes, andPsa. 132.4, 5 Psal. 137.5, 6 tasking our selves to all du∣ties, that the heart may bee kept in its due height, and this must be done often, the heart being not in that frame in the evening as it was in the morning: As an Instru∣ment of Musicke, though put never so well in tune over night, though it rest un∣toucht by an externall hand,
yet the strings will fall and grow out of tune of them∣selves; and thou shalt finde a few weekes will breed a great alteration in thee, which many moneths may not recover againe: such wretched natures doe wee carry about us, which are such great enemies to the worke of grace, that if wee looke not very narrowly un∣to it, a great dampe and chil∣lishnesse will fall upon our hearts, our prayers wil grow weaker and weaker, shorter and shorter, good purposes and resolutions will quickly dye, goe out, and bee lost in us. Happy is he that can say in a spirituall sense (as it was said of Moses) that after long profession of Religion,Deut 34 7 his
sight is not waxed dimme, nor his Spirituall force and heat abated. CHAP. VIII. Where the Doctrine is applyed in the severall uses of it. THis shewes us that the profession of Religion, and the exercise of it, is no dull or lazy thing, but a bu∣sinesse of the greatest inten∣tion of all others in the world, unto which is requi∣red the strength andNon est ad magna facilis ascnsu; quem sudorem per∣petimur cum coamur ascō∣dere c lles, & vertices mon∣tium? quid ut asendan us ad coelum? Cyp. de dis. & hab. Virg. high∣est pitch of our affections, our most elevated thoughts, and the utmost of our ende∣vours.
Againe, it shewes how much they do deceive them∣selves, that content them∣selves with doing duties of Religion out of forme, and custome, without theinward Principles of Faith,Quodlibet agens propter amorem agit, quodcunque agit, Aq. 1.2 q. 28. art. 6 Love, and Obedience, to set them a going, and to move and stir them forward. Amongst these we may ranke, 1. The Papists, whose Religion cannot be but joy∣lesse and uncomfortable, re∣sting in the work done; who if they can give in such a number and tale of Prayers, undergoe such penance, and screw up their outward De∣votions to such a height, thinke all is wel, though the heart all this while hath not stirred a foot about the busi∣nesse,
nor so much as looked toward the body what it was a doing. 2. Amongst our selves we may take in our simple ignorant people, who are full Papists in this; who therefore thinke they have prayed, because they have bin upon their knees; heard the Sermon well, because they have beene at Church, &c. and so plod on from day to day, without any sense of the evill, or comfort of the good. 3. Thus is the Civill man, and carnall Professor decei∣ved; who though hee hath more knowledge than the other, and by the benefit of education, good example, or the light of naturall con∣science,
hath more dealings with God, yet hath hee his heart as cold, starke, and un∣stirring as the other; and though he applaud himselfe in the Mediocrity of his temper, as having found out aNihil Sal¦vator idli∣um ama e∣pido en. Hieron. middle way to serve his turne, betweene strictnesse and profanenesse; yet is it of al others the most dangerous and most loathed by the Lord, who, being of theRev. 3.16 La∣odecean temper, shall certain∣ly bee spued out of Gods mouth. 4. Thus is it with the subtill and close hypocrites of these times, who, like the cold Glow-wormes of the night, seeme to carry more light about them, and make a greater bustling than the
other; yet because it is with∣out all heat and sweat of the minde and heart, what they doe shall be reckoned but asHeb. 9.14 dead workes, which have a loathsome savour in the No∣strils of the Almighty. Thus theRev. 31 Angell, or Minister of the Church of Sardis is sayd to have a name to live, though he was dead. This may bee for tryall and examination of our selves, what our care and en∣devour is in stirring up our selves in all duties and exer∣cises of piety; How have we answered all that cost and care of God towards us? How doe our hearts run and cleave to the Lord in prefer∣ring him before all things,Psal. 73.26 satisfied with him alone?
How are wee for Christ? since the saithfull called and chosen are with Christ,Revel. 12.7 & 17.14 fighting on his side against the Dragon and his Angels, against Anti∣christ and all his Adherents; and sinceMat. 12.30 he that is not with Christ, is against him; and hee that gathereth not with him, scattereth with the Devil Our new Creation giving a new disposition, whereby we rise up on the Lords side, against whom, before,Rom. 8 7 our wise∣dome was enmity. Doe thou seriously weigh what answer thou canst give, as in Gods presence, without deceiving thy selfe, or others, unto that pressing question of our Sa∣viour,Mat. 5 47 , What singu∣lar thing do you? What doe ye more than others? What doe you more than the carnal and profane?
than the civill, or the hypo∣criticall professor? What doe you more for God than these? How may this smite, as with a mighty scourge of reproofe, the very spirits of Gods owne people for that sluggish and bed-rid disposi∣tion that cleaves to our na∣ture? How doth our won∣derful guiltinesse of the neg∣lect of this duty begirt, and besiege us on every side? Whose heart may not smite him? Whose minde doth not secretly mis-give him, and falls under the thought of his grievous omissions? Whose conscience doth not tell him that hee is involved and enwrapped in this spiri∣tual drowsinesse and Lethar∣gie?
Who may not take up this heavy complaint, There is none that stirreth up him∣selfe? and may say, and I am one of them: and so may I say, that speake this; and thou that hearest this. Ah wee fooles, and slow of heart, we have not put forth our selves in any proportion answerable to the grace gi∣ven, or mercies received. Ah! (deare Christian) hee that shall looke backe, and take a serious view of the time of his life since his cal∣ling, and shall consider what speciall opportunities of do∣ing, and receiving good h e hath fore-slowed, how cold and carelesse hee hath bin to oppose, or prevent sinne in himselfe or others; what a
dead heart hee hath had for the most part, in all the du∣ties of Gods worship, both in his prayers to him, his prayses of him, and his stan∣ding for him; how the bow∣els of his compassions have bin lockt up from his bre∣thren, whose good he should more have tendred: his slack∣nesse and slownes in his chri∣stian race, going most an end a snailes pace, as though hea∣ven were notworth the com∣ming thither: if any shall (I say) consider his many fai∣lings, and grosse omissions in althe aggravating circum∣stances of them, if the teares stand not in his eyes, he hath just cause to complaine of he hardnesse of his heart. Ah if our hearts were sear∣ched
with lights and tapers, what a deale of luggage and lumber would there bee found? what heaps of drosse, of cold and sluggish matter would appeare to lye dead∣ing and damping those few sparkes of heat, and little light yet remaining in us? Good Lord! how full are we of our selves, and of the world? what strange lusts and passions lye yet unmor∣tified in us? which keepe downe our minds that wee cannot lift them up to divine and spirituall things: May it not be said in a spirituall sense of most of our hearts and houses, as theIsa. 47.14 Prophet speakes, there is not a cole to warme it. How should this humble
and ashame us? how should wee bewaile this wretched luskishnesse and sluggishnes of our spirits, this indisposi∣tion, this unactivenesse and unzealousnesse, if it were possible, with teares of blood? The godly are wont to esteeme of life, not accor∣ding to that they find in their body, but their soule; when that wants a heavenly dispo∣sition to spirituall things, they lament over it as a dead soule, since herein stands the life of it, to be stirring and active in our duties of love and obedience.Isa. 38.15.16. O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit, saith that good King Hezekiah. Let us view our selves in the severall relati∣ons
wee stand towards o∣thers, whether Magistrate, Minister, Parent, Master of a Family, Friend or Neigh∣bour, &c. and then let us but stand a while and think what good might have beene done, which now hath been fore-slowed in our owne hearts, in our families, and abroad: if in our first setting out in our Christian race wee had thus bestirred our selves; now that time is past and gone, and spilt like water on the ground, which can no more bee ga∣thered up againe! What prayers and Sermons have beene lost, &c. what sinne and evill might have beene avoyded, what sinne might have beene restrained by us,
the guilt of which now stickes upon us. But more especially should it abase us, and throw us downe in our selves, and make us blush within our selves, that wee have bin so vilely wanting to the Lord and his grace, that we have not stirred up our selves according to the grace given, and abilities be∣stowed upon us; in that wee have not done that which we might have done, and was in our power to do, both in regard of resisting sins and temptations, and perfor∣ming duties of piety and mercy. Whether a man may do more then he doth with that ability which he hath? But here it may be deman∣ded, Whether a man may doe more than he doth with that ability which he hath?
For the answering of this question, I shall lay downe these severall positions: First, it is granted that an unregenerate man can do no good Spirituall without grace;Mat. 12.33 the tree must be good before the fruit can be good: AsIohn 15.4. the branch beareth not fruit but in the Vine, Iohn 15.4. Secondly, Yet a naturall man may doe more then he doth, towards the attainment of a better state, and to the good of other men, they might use meanes, as Hea∣ring, reading, prayer, as it is an outward action, so giving to the poore, &c. Thirdly, a regenerate Christian, as in his first rege∣neration, he is only passive, God infusing new habits of
grace, new qualities into e∣very faculty: so after rege∣neration hee cannot doeRom. 7.15. Gal. 5.17. all the good he would, nor when he would, nor as hee would. Fourthly, A regenerate Christian after grace recei∣ved, standeth in need not onely of generall ayd,It is Gods free grace, his volunta∣ry influence which habi∣tuateth and fitteth al our faculties, which ani∣mate thus unto a hea∣venly being, which gi∣veth us both the strength and first act, whereby we are qualified to work, and which con. curreth with us in astu se∣cundo, to all those works which we set ourselves a∣bout. As an instrument, even when it hath an edge cutteth nothing till it be assisted and moved by the hand of the ar∣tificer: so a Christian, when he hath a will and an habituall fitnesse to worke, yet is able to doe nothing without a con∣stant supply and assistance and eoncomitancy of the grace of Christ, exciting, moving, and applying that habituall power unto particular Actions. E. R. but of supply of new grace, to put forth every spirituall act of grace; partly for the wor∣king out of his owne salvati∣on, and partly for the more spirituall and lively perfor∣mance and accomplishment of the worke it selfe. Hee standeth in need of, 1. Preparing grace, that
whereby God prepared the heart of Titus to receive Pauls exhortation, 2 Cor. 8.17. By this grace the hearts of Gods people are prepa∣red to pray, Psal. 10.17. 2. Exciting, or awake∣ning, or quickning grace: Isa. 30.4. in the latter end of the verse, Hee wakeneth mor∣ning by morning, hee wakeneth my eare to heare as the learned. So, Psal. 143.11. 3. Assisting and strength∣ning grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. 4. Enlarging grace, Psal. 119.32. 5. Directing grace, 2 Thes. 3.5. 6. Protecting, or preser∣ving grace, keeping off pre∣vailing interruptions, Esay 27.3.
7. Perfecting grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. Fifthly, Though a rege∣nerate Christian cannot by his owne abilities excite, or prepare, or enlarge his owne heart to any Spirituall duty, yet by the grace he hath re∣ceived, he may, and ought to use the meanes which God hath appointed for the stir∣ring up of the heart towards God: for, 1. Hee may walke in a conscionable care not to live in any knowne sinne, or after the flesh; for to live after the flesh, deadeth and dulleth the Spirit, Rom. 8.13. 2. He may abstaine from the constant, abundant use of sensuall comforts; for such (though lawfull) will se∣cretly
choake the heart of a Christian, as they did Salo∣mons. 3. Hee may diligently use the holy Ordinances of God, especially the hearing of the Word where it is Preached with power; in the use whereof, a regenerate Christian, by grace received, exceedeth a naturall man, in that a naturall man can onely heare, but not upon a right ground, nor for a right end; but a regenerate Christian, by grace received, may heare in obedience to Gods ordi∣nances, and for his edificati∣on, seeking and waiting up∣on God for a blessing, Cant. 3.1. 4. He may discerne the dulnesse and deadnesse of his
owne heart to all spirituall duties, and mayIsa. 63.17 complaine thereof unto God in prayer, Isa. 63.17. Sixtly, for want of the use of these means he may justly be said not to prepare his owne heart, 2 Chron. 12.14. not to stir up himselfe to take hold of God, as in the Text: and so therby toEphe. 4.30 grieve the holy spi∣rit of God,2 Cor. 6.1 and to receive the grace of God in vaine, and therfore may justly be repro∣ved hereof, and complained of, as in the Text. Besides this, the constant experience of all the children of God wil beare them witnesse, that there be no sinnes that lye more heavy upon them, or under which they doe more deepely grone and mourne,
than their walking unwor∣thy of those precious mer∣cies and graces they have re∣ceived,Verum, heu mihi, studium ellud meum et zelus (si hoc nomine dig∣nus est) adeo remissus & languidus fuit ut innu mera mihi ad mu∣nus meum preclarè fun∣gendum defu∣isse fatear In Test. Cal∣vini in vita ipsis, p. 102 Quest. neither growing up in them to that strength, nor imploying them to that fruitfulnesse they might have attained unto. But why is it a sinne not to stir up our selves to holy duties, since exciting grace is Gods worke alone, and hee must renew it every mor∣ning, else the worke wil not be done, Isa. 50.4. Answ. Because it is by reason of our sinne that God doth not stir us up: as, 1. Our narrownesse of heart and mouth in prayer, Psal. 81.10. Aske liberally and have liberally: prayers are2 King. 13.17, 18, 19. like arrowes of Delive∣rance,
which would be mul∣tiplied and enlarged. 2. Our heedlesnesse in the use of the Ordinances, Luk. 8.18. 3. Unfruitfulnesse in the use of grace received, Mat. 25.29. 4. Unbeleefe, Mat. 14.31. else renewing our waiting on the Lord for his help and grace, would renew our strength, Isa. 40.31. Thus you see how still the faultRectè homo corripitur que precepta non implet quia exetus negli∣gentia est quod gratiam non habet per quam possit servare man∣data. Th. Aq. quest. disp. 24. art. 14 returnes upon our selves, how we cannot stand before this truth, but must lye downe as condemned of our selves, and guilty of this evill, that we have not stir∣red up our selves to doe that which was in our power to have done, that good (I say)
which wee ought and might have done. What remaines now but that I should call upon you, and my selfe, with all the strength of exhortation I may, (and the Lord grant it may be effectuall to us all) that wee set about this so needfull a Christian duty, and that if it be possible we might bee drawne off from our dregs and lees, to get a∣bove our selves, and to bee heightned in our desires, and practice of all Christian duties, to doe them in a more lively, active, and stirring manner: this being like oyle to the wheeles, and as wind to the sayles that sets all a∣going; this indeed is all in all, for what are all our ser∣vices,
but saplesse, livelesse, and loathsome things with∣out this? And first I would bend my speech to such as formerly have bin more forward and stirring-hearted, but now are growne more remisse and spirit-lesse: I would speake to such, in the Name of God, as the Lord speakes by the Prophet to his people,Ier. 2.5 What iniquity have your fa∣thers found in mee, that they are gone from mee? What e∣vill have you found in Gods wayes, that you are growne weary of them? Speake, in the presence of God, what evill have you found in prayer, that you grow so slacke in it? You were wont you could have gone to
the Lord with much en∣largement, and, it may bee, with many teares;Psa. 45.1 your tongue was as the pen of a ready Writer; why are you now so narrow-hearted? Why doe you so fore-slow the duty?Siccine puta∣mus orasse Io∣nam? Sic Da∣nielem inter Leones? Sic latr nem in cruces? Hier. speaking thereof cold prayers. and make so many excuses? and are so loth to come into Gods presence? neither is there that strugling against this woful disposition as for∣merly. What evill have you found in Gods word? the time was when you went with much joy to Gods house, and you loved the Bi∣ble above al books, and now it can lie a day, & sometimes a weeke, and you never looke into it?Iob 15.11 Are he consolations of God small with you? are the counsels and exhortations of
the Scriptures grown weake? Are the Promises of God more dry and withered? Is not God still a hearer of praiers? or is his arme short∣ned that it cannot save? God forbid! But doth not the fault lye in yourselfe, unto whom the world, and other sinfull distempers have mar∣red the rellish and taste of these Divine counsels and comforts? What evill have you found in the societie of Gods people? of whose grace and goodnesse you cannot bee but well perswa∣ded; why are you so strange unto them? the time hath bin when you have prefer∣red them before all others, and chose them for the one∣ly companions of your life,
you could have opened your mouth to the edification of others, but now you are like a curst Cowe that will not give downe her milke; you can now like well enough of carnall speech, and worldly companie, and can sort your selfe with such of whose happinesse you have no per∣swasion. Speake, is not this your case? are you not blame-worthy? why then be grieved, and sigh within your selfe: andRev. 2.4, 5 Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent and doe thy first workes. Let our Saviours counsell come seasonably to thee,Rev. 3.2 Be watchfull to streng∣then the things which remaine which are ready to dye rest not in this unprofitable and
uncomfortable condition, till thou find thy spirit to revive, and thy care of better things to flourish, and spring againe in thee:Heb. 12.12 13. Lift up thy hands that hang downe, and the fee∣ble knees, lest that which bee lame be turned out of the way. Labour to recover thy for∣mer strength and station; and therefore to cherish and blow up that fire which yet remaines hid under the ashes2 Iohn 8 that thou lose not that which thou hest wrought, but mayest receive a full reward. But lest any be discoura∣ged,Cautin. wee are to know, that this dulnesse and unstirring∣nesse of heart, may proceed sometime from 1. Weaknesse, faintnesse, and feeblenes of body, whe∣ther
it beinregard of present sicknesse, indisposition to health, age, or other bodily infirmities, in which case a good Christian may be fee∣ble in performance of duties the minde most an end fol∣lowing the present temper of the body. 2. It may proceed from melancholy distempers with which the minde may be o∣ver-growne. 3. Or the party may lye under some violent tempta∣tion of Satan, or distresse of conscience, which may strangely, for the time, make one dull, mopish, and forget∣full. 4. Or it may proceed from spirituall desertion, when the sense of Gods fa∣vour,
love and wonted pre∣sence may be departed from him for a time. 5. Or the outward meanes of the Word may be taken from them, either wholly, or it may be much ecclipsed, which formerly they en∣joyed in more plentie and power. These, and many such like, may bring a dulnesse upon the hart in Duties; but if thy wearisomnesse in duties, and thy decayings in good arise from none of these, but that it hath rooting and foundati∣on in thy owne corrupt na∣ture, and is cherished and fo∣mented by the lusts of other things, thoumust take it home to thy selfe, and know thy case is so much the worse,
and that thou art laden with the more guilt, by how much thou art left without excuse, God having done so well for thee, and thou ha∣ving soDeut. 32.6 ill requited him. Lastly, this exhortation is to be set home upon every one that feares the name of God, be they poore or rich, noble or meane, learned or unlearned, young or old, all need it, and therefore all may harken to it; for all to kindle and quicken up our selves, to sharpen and set an edge upon our selves, to rouze up our selves, to presse forward and goe an end with all our might, in all our duties. O what is worthy our care, paines and travell if this be not, to have our spirits quick∣ned
and enlivened with stronger incitations to what is required of us, to tugge and toyle, to labor &Non ad ru∣borem tantum sed ad sudorē, sweat in this worke, breaking through all difficulties, and bearing up against all oppo∣sitions. As the Cocke claps his wings to stirre up him∣selfe to crowe, and as a fire-brand borne in the wind is theSee Davids answer when Michall his wife mocked him, 2 Sm.  20 21, 22, 23 more enkindled; and as Sampson stirred up his strength, when it was told him the Philistims were up∣on him. As there was more in Sampson than in another man, so is there in every true Christian, who being in co∣venant with God, and having his vowes upon him, he goes forth in the strength of these and so long as heJudg. 6 14 goes forth
in this might, and cleaves to him that is the strength of Israel, so long no sinne shall master him, nor duty be too hard for him; otherwise hee shall bee weake, and as another man. Hence it is that Salo∣mon saith,Pro. 15 24 The way of life is above to the wise. The godly man goeth an higher way than his neighbour, even in the common businesses of this life, even of his ordina∣ry calling, because they are done inGal. 2.20 Rom. 14.23 faith andDeut. 5.29 obedi∣ence: much more when hee draweth neere to God in more immediate duties of his worship, as when we are to praise him, or stand for him This is that which p s the difference, even the hea t stirred and moved with these
principles, which being wan∣ting in every naturall man, the heart must needs sinke, and flagge in his performan∣ces. O then that there were such an heart in us as to goe this higher way, to get a∣bove the ordinary sort, even like the Aegles of heaven, who delight themselves in their high flying, and when they are farthest from the earth: so to get above earth∣ly men, and earthly things, to be as the flame, which, the higher it riseth, the purer it is; so still to bee aspiring in our thoughts, desires and in∣devours, and to get them up to such a pitch,Prov. 4.18 by which they might bee freed from their dregs and drosse. And seeing the strength
of our minds is the most pre∣cious thing wee have, wee should reserve this for the most excellent duties and businesses, and bestow it up∣on them. Thus shal we makeFides auget aetatem. Amb a short life a long one, and thus shalt thou live more in a day, than another doth in seven yeares, or in all his time: for it is not to be rec∣koned a life which is measu∣red with dayes and yeares; but that which isIn brevi vi∣tae spatio tem∣poa virtu∣tum multa complevit. Hieron. Ep. ad Fu. filled with good Actions, with fer∣vent prayers, with walking in an awfull feare of God, with denying thy selfe, and mortifying, thy lusts, with bearing afflictions patiently, with giving good example unto others, to helpe the di∣stressed and afflicted, to stand
on Gods side, opposing the sinnes and evils of the times, &c this is truly to live; these are the most noble actions of life, and these are the most excellent issues and produ∣ctions of the mind and soule CHAP. IX. Shewing some motives unto this duty of stirring up our selves. NOw that wee might be farther moved and stir∣red up hereunto (for God knowes that great is our dul∣nesse; and sloware our appre∣hensions of these things) let us consider in the generall how wee are commandedCor. 11.3, . Cor 14.12 earnestly to covet the best gifts
and * to study that we may ex∣cell; and that it is honoura∣ble to be2 Cor. 9.2 leaders in good∣nesse, to be presidents of pi∣ety, provoking others; and that if this stirringnesse of heart bee wanting, all goes but heavily forward. As theExo. 14.25 Aegyptians, who, when their wheeles were taken off, drave their Chariots but heavily. But more specially there be three things which I would offer to your consi∣deration to move to the du∣ty in hand. First, looke a while, and see what a stirring and busie world it is,Consider what a stir∣ring world it is. how mightily men are put forward, and set a going in their severall wayes, according to the se∣verall projects they drive,
and those inward principles by which they worke, and by which they walke. The world is as a great Ant, or Emit-hill, where there are multitudes of those busie creatures, carrying and re∣carrying strawes, stubble, or other such luggage, and eve∣ry one busie in doing some∣thing, and intent to adde, and bring to the heape: So in this world there is a mighty and general businesse, an ear∣nest trudging about, a conti∣nued sollicitousnesse, plot∣ting, and working upon the face of the earth. See it in a few instances: 1. The Time-server is busie to fit his sailes to every wind, marks what is in grace and fashion with the Times,
observes the Motions of great ones, and studies how he may please the most. 2. The deepe and clung-headed Politician, who dwels many times the next doore to Atheisme, is busie in wheeling about his owne ends, is darke in his wayes, and usually, like a Boat-man, lookes one way, and rowes another. 3. The Ambitious man puts on Absolons behaviour, is busie in seeking applause and respect and how he may be carried aloft, as a feather, upon the breath of men. 4. The Voluptuous man is busie to draw out the quin∣tessence of all sinnes and va∣nities; to sucke the sweet out of them, to array him∣selfe
like a childe of Para∣dise, and to have his part in all the pleasures of nature. 5. The worldling is bu∣sie in telling his money, ca∣sting up his accounts, loo∣king in his Almanacke, en∣quiring for a purchase, enlar∣ging his barnes,Luke 12.18. alwayes plot∣ting how hee may get or save. The Papists are busie to advance the Catholicke cause, as they call it, to make Proselytes; busie they are in their Devotions, as theIer. 7.18 Prophet speakes, The Chil∣dren gather wood and the Fa∣thers kindle the fire & the wo∣men knead their dough to make cakes to the Queene of heaven. The Devill is busie,Iob 1.7 going to and fro in the earth, doing mischiefe, murdering soules,
and filling Hell. All these, and many others, are driven with great force upon their severall wayes, and are un∣wearied in them. Thus it is with the men of this world,Psal. 17.14 who have their prrtion in this life. And how should this fire us, and put life and spirit into us, who serve a better master, and have better work to doe?Turp est impios diabol tam strenué servire nos Christo pro sanguinis pre∣tio nihil re∣pendere. Cyp. lib. de opere et ele∣mosy. Why should not we do more for God and his honor, than any in the world should doe for themselves, or to promote Satans king∣dome. Let us resolve there∣fore with the ProphetMich. 4.5 Mi∣cah, All people (saith he) will walke every one in the Name of his Grd,Zach. 10.12 and we will walke in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.
Secondly, let it move us to consider how our blessed Savior,Looke upon our Saviour, how he stir∣red up him∣selfe in the great busi∣nesse of our Salvation. in the great businesse of our Salvation, stirred up himselfe, and put forth him∣selfe to hisHeb. 7.25. . uttermost for us; he stirred up all his strength, left nothing undone, bare as much as hee could beare,Phil 2.7. Scipsum ex∣manivis. went as low as he could go, downe to the grave, even to hell it selfe in paines and an∣guish of Spirit, did what pos∣sibly he could doe, which should fill us with strong desires, and endevours, to enforce our selves to our uttermost, for soQuid nos pro Domino tam bno fa∣cere conveniet cum ille pro malis Servis tana seceret? Salv. kinde a Redeemer as we have found him to be, to love his person, to prize his merits, to obey his will, to delight in his Ordinances, to love his chil∣dren,
to doe what wee may to advance his honour and service, toGen. 3.15 tread hard up∣on the Divels head, and to be professed enemies to his kingdome all our dayes. Lastly, this stirringnesse of heart,The certain∣ty and ful∣nesse of the reward. as it is accompani∣ed with much sweet peace, and inward comfort, and rest of heart; and as it brings a good report, and esteeme in the Churches of Christ; causing one Christian (of what degree, calling, and condition soever hee be) to excell another, and appeare higher, even as Saul did a∣mongst the people: so it is attended with certainty and fulnesse of reward, and that according to the quality of our worke; as there hath bin
more grace in it, more reve∣rence, zeale, fervency, more faith and resting upon God; so shall the2 Tim. 4.7, 8 reward be more plenteous and abundant. The more faithfull service wee have done, the more welcome shall wee bee to him when hee cals for us; As a faithfull Embassadour is welcomed home by his Prince; and as a Factor, that hath done his master good service in a farre Countrey, is gladly received by him. O when the faithfull soule, being carried on Angels wings, shall first set footing on the glorious pavement of heaven, and the Lord shall say, Welcome my deare and faithfull servant, thou hast beene a good servant unto
me,Mat. 25.23 Enter into the ioy of thy Lord; this speech shall bee of more infinite refreshing, then if ten thousand worlds, and the glory of them, had beene given unto it; for what could bee spoken more by the Creator? what could be desired more by the Crea∣ture? This their faithful∣nesse also, with how much the more stirringnesse and advantage to the Lords ho∣nour it hath beene managed and discharged, by so much theRev. 3.21 neerer in place it brings us to the Lord; As Davids Worthies were admitted to have the nearest place about his person. How many thou∣sands are there of Saints at this day,Rev. 7.9.14 15. standing before the Throne of God, with Palmes in
their hands, and Crownes on their heads, who in this world have beene the Lords Wor∣thies, who have fought his battels, and lifted up his Name to their uttermost. Speake, O ye blessed soules departed, whether this bee not your glory and your joy that you have had your harts stirred for the Lord; and if you were upon the earth a∣gaine, whether you would not doe, if it were possible, a thousand times more for him, that for such weake services, such poore and im∣perfect performances, hath rewarded you with the fa∣vours and joyes of eternitie.Rev. 15▪ 3 O who would not feare and serve thee, O Lord, thou King of Saints, & glorifie thy name?
who makest all thy servantsRev. 1.6 Kings, and affordest them everlasting Communion with thy selfe! It matters not (deare brethren) what wee are in this world, how shunned, despised, and1 Cor. 5.13 made the off-scouring of all things; nay, though every one that meets us should spit in our faces, revile, and trample up∣on us, if by this meanes any honour might redound to the Name of the Lord; it is enough for us to bee happy when wee dye, and to be set safe over thatLuk. 16.26 gulfe that parts Hell & Heaven, and toIob 33, 26 see the face of God with ioy to all eternity. O Eternity! Eternity! blessed Eternity! this makes abundant amends for all, though wee should
live here thousands of yeers, and in them all doe and suf∣ferFredericke Danvile, and Francis Re¦bezies after they had re∣turned from the Torture to their fel¦lowes in pri∣son, reioyced together, & comforted themselves with the me∣ditation of the life to come, and contempt of this world, singing Psalmes to∣gether till it was day. Eox. Act. & Mon vol. 2. p. 160. hard things! How should this fill our hearts with great thoughts, our hands with all advantages? how should wee with great courage goe forth to meet al opportunities? What a spur should this put upon all our endevours? How should we thinke our selves happy that ever we were borne, that the Lord hath done us this ho∣nour, as to put us into his service? and that hee hath conferred upon sinners and poore wormes, such as thou and I are,1 Cor. 2.9 Such things as nei∣ther eye hath seene, eare hath heard, nor have at any time en∣tredento the heart of man to conceive.
CHAP. X. Shewing some Meanes to at∣taine a stirring heart in duties. NOw for our further help and light in so needfull a point, I would lay downe some few helps and meanes by which we might the bet∣ter attaine unto this stirring∣nesse of heart: First, we should endevor the removing of al those lets and hindrances,The remo∣ving of all those impe∣diments which damp and dead the heart. which doe any way dampe and dead the heart, keepe it under, and lay bolts and fetters upon it. Such are, 1. Idlenesse, slothfulnesse, and carelesse mis-spending
our time, incogitancy, let∣ting the mind drive, as a Boat or Ship that hath none to guide it, but it floats up and downe uncertainely; so li∣ving without a calling, and the like. 2. Barrennesse, and un∣fruitfulnesse in our Christian course. 3. Lusts, and passions, and such like sinfull distem∣pers, which are the sicknesses of the soule, and keepe it in a low and weake estate. 4. Unnecessary sadnesse, and unchecrefulnesse. 5. Vaine feares of what may befall us in regard of our Christian profession. 6. The disswasion of worldlymen, carnal friends, and kindred, which say,
Why cannot you content your selfe to doe as others doe,Vulgar spee∣ches against the earness. profession of Religion. but you must make all the Towne and Countrey to talk of you, in being so strict and precise, in running after Sermons, and in saying as many praiers as would serve two or three besides, there is a reason in all things, and e∣nough is enough. Thus our Saviours kindred dealt with him, who seeing him won∣derfull earnest, and painfull in Preaching to the people, came to lay hold of him, thinking he had binMark. 3 20 21. besides himselfe. 7. Worldly cares, and multitude of worldly busi∣nesse, whichMat. 13.22 choakes the heart. 8. Sinfull pleasures, too
much carnall mirth, or abu∣sing of lawfull things, which mightilyAnima di∣spersa fit mi∣nor. weaken, intene∣rate, and emasculate the Spi∣rit, and draw out the vigour and vivacity of it. 9. Consorting much with Civil and Carnal company, these are as a continuall dropping, which insensibly cooles the lively operations of the Soule: A good man a∣mongst such, is like a sheepe amongst the briars, he will come away a loser, do what he can. 10. Resting in thy pre∣sent condition, contenting thy selfe with the begin∣nings of Grace, and with that measure thou hast. 11. Discouragements in thy selfe at thy owne weak∣nesses
and inabilities for want of parts and gifts. For this God was angry with Moses, who pleaded his in∣ability to goe on Gods er∣rand: consider what the Lord said to him,Exo. 44.10 Who hath made mans mouth? or who ma∣keth the dumbe or deafe? or seeing or blind? have not I the Lord? Who hath given thee that which thou hast? Who can increase it? Who also will expect no more then he gives. Secondly, seeke this of God by earnest prayer,Earnest prai∣er to God. Iam. 1.19 from whom comes every good and perfect gift. Let thy heart follow the Lord with un∣cessant requests, leave him not till hee answer thee in this great suit of giving thee
a stirring heart. Iabez, in the1 Chr. 4.10 first of the Chronicles, makes this prayer to God, saying, O that thou wouldst blesse mee indeed, and enlarge my coast! and God granted him that which he requested: So doe thou say, O that thou wouldst blesse me indeed, and enlarge my heart. This is a blessing indeed, if God would bee so gracious to thee as to grant thy request. ThusPsal. 143.11 & 0.11 David often prayeth, that God would quicken him, and unite his hart to feare the Name of God.Cant. 1.4 Draw me (saith the Church in the Canticles) and wee will runne after thee. These are the breathings of a faithfull soule, and thus shouldst thou doe: if thou hadst but one request to make, next to the
salvation of thy soule, this, O this should bee it, That God would give thee a stir∣ring heart: for without this, heaven it selfe would not be heaven; and with this, a ve∣ry dungeon would seeme a corner of heaven. In all thy prayers therefore, put up one petition for this, that God would keepe this Holy fire upon the hearth of thy heart all thy dayes. Thirdly, we must renew ourPs 119.116 purposes and promises often,Often to re∣new our for∣mer promi∣ses and pur∣poses. wee must lay more bonds and engagements up∣on our selves, more Vowes and Resolutions,Ps. 132.2.8 Psa. 137, 5, 6 and charge our selves with them, and to doe it solemnly with Prayer and Fasting if need require, to bind our selves, the more
strongly to our duties: even that wee will stand on the Lords side, and give up our selves more for the publike good; and for this end wee should often commune and reason with our owne harts, chiding and reproaching our selves for our dulnesse, and dejection of Spirit. Why art thou cast down, O my soule (saithPsa. 42.5, 6 David;) As if hee should have said, O my God, I doe lye downe o∣verthrowne in the strength of my minde, and I am a∣shamed of my selfe for it: My soule hope thou in God, I will yet praise him more, I will remember him, and all his promises and mercies, and cleave unto them with more faith, and greater con∣fidence
than ever yet I have done. Fourthly, wee should of∣ten set before us the exam∣ples of Gods Saints and ser∣vants,To set be∣fore us the examples of Gods ser∣vants, who have excee∣ded this way who have exceeded the common measure in their zeale and earnestnesse. As the Apostle saith of the1 Thes. .7 2 Thes. 1.3, 4 Thessalonians, That they were patternes to all them which be∣leeved in Macedonia and A∣chaia, and propounds them in their rare faith and pati∣ence with glorying.Luk. 7.44 Seest thou this Woman (saith our Saviour to Simon) compare her love to mee with thine, and bee ashamed. So also let us looke upon such who are now living, who excell in this grace; prize them highly, rejoyce in their so∣ciety,
resort unto them as to thePsal. 16.2 most excellent upon the earth. When wee want fire, wee use to goe to our neigh∣bours, and to light our Can∣dle at anothers flame. Seeke them out, though it cost thee much travell and paines, they will abundant∣ly recompence all thy la∣bour.Luk. 24.32 Did not our hearts burne within us, say the two Disciples when they travel∣led together, and talked with our Saviour. O the commu∣nion of Saints! what a bles∣sing is folded up in it, and goes along with it! How doe the sparks flye abroad? and how are our cold and dull hearts quickned and enflamed thereby? How doe Gods servants many
times part from each other, blessing God in their hearts, that ever they saw the faces, or heard the voyces each of other, having got such cou∣rage and strength one by an∣other. Lastly, the carefull and frequent exercise of that grace we have in any kinde,The fre∣quent exer∣cise of that grace we have. helpes much to stirre up the heart. Every act intends the habit, and the more the acts of grace are iterated and re∣peated, the more the grace is intended and enlarged, the more spreading, strong, and active it growes. The more wee lay forth our selves, dresse, and tend to every grace and gift bestowed, the greater is the increase and fruit of them.Simile. As it is in a
tree planted, and plashed a∣gainst a wall, the more it is spread, and laied forth in the branches, even to the least twigge, the more warmth and vigour it gets from the Sun-beames, and the more fruit it beareth. Thus when every grace is exercised, and put to the best use and ad∣vantage, it must needs make a stirring and a fruitful Chri∣stian. And as men get warmth into their hands by rubbing them, and as the wax is made fit for the seale by chafing it; soQuomodo sine exercitio doctrinae, aut sine usu profe∣ctus? Res om∣nis proprius ac domesticis ex∣ercitiis auge∣tur. Amb. offic. 1. cap. 5. exercise of grace helpes to warme and kindle the heart, and makes it fit for many Divine and heavenly impressions to bee put upon it. Thus fervent prayer kindles the heart, in∣creaseth
that grace by the often exercise of it, stirres up other graces in us, and shakes off all heavinesse and drowsinesse of soule.Exo. 24.39 When Moses had beene long with God in the holy Mount, there was a brightnesse and shining put upon his face. So our conversing much with God by prayer puts a grea∣ter light, and brightnesse up∣on the soule. Thus he that edifies ano∣ther, edifies himselfe, and whilst he is imparting what grace hee hath to others, it growes in his owne heart, as theMat. 14.19.20. bread did in the Dis∣ciples hands, whilst they were distributing it to the poore hungry people. The more also wee put forth the
fruits of Christian love to∣wards others? the more loving it makes us; by gi∣ving we become more libe∣rall, and by shewing mercy on the distressed, more pitti∣full; besides that great com∣fort and refreshing of heart which followes upon well-doing. FINIS.
