3469 99855481 20976
A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF A cruell fact committed by a Gen∣tlewoman towardes her Husband, her Father, her Sister and two of her Nephewes. First printed in French at Roan: and now translated into English. I W printer's or publisher's device LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, and are to bee sold at his shoppe within Popes head Alley in Lombard street. 1599.
A true discourse of a cruell fact com∣mitted by a Gentlewoman towards her hus∣band, her father, her sister, and two of her nephewes. AT Lucera, a Citie distant foure iourneyes from Naples, there was a good gentleman, named Sig∣nior Alexander de Buringel, who had two daughters, to wit, Anna, and Lucienna, the which he mari∣ed highly, according to their qualities. The worthy Gentleman Signeor Appian de Boyse Chauncellor of Naples, a man most expert, wise & vertuous, espoused Anna the elder: and Alphonse de Barseils espoused Lucienna. The solemnities done, and the feastes and pastimes finished, it was not long but Signior Appian went to Naples, & taking his leaue of his wife, went to Barseils to see his brother and sister in law, where hauing soiourned some daies, he depar∣ted with all diligence to finish his voyage. Thus An∣na remained alone very long, whereat she beganne greatly to grieue, and began to thinke and cast, which way to procure a seruaunt to supply her husbandes place: Finding her selfe greatly solicited by one Maurice Talleys, a young man, faire, and bold, but of a
base condition and bad life, she her selfe burning day∣ly with his loue, gaue the rains to all voluptuousnesse, breaking her faith and coniugall loue. Her husband hauing occasion to stay at Naples, sent for her diuers times, which she refusing, he in anger sent her word, not to faile to come, withall vsing some threates: She againe excusing her selfe, sent him word that she was sicke, and that she feared to come least the aire of Na∣ples should kill her. Some daies after being in confe∣rence with her fauourite Talleis, she shewed him her husbandes letters, whereupon finally they conspired Appians death. The conclusion was, that Anna should go to visite her sister Lucienna, three iourneyes from Lucera, at the Castel of Barseils, whither Talleys also ap∣pointed to come and there to ende their complottes. Anna hearing that her brother in law was to muster his quarter, tooke horse & departed to visite her sister: Being hard by the Castel, she sent her Lackey to giue her knowledge of her comming, wherat the good ḡe∣tlewoman being very glad, went to meet her with her two little sons, hauing first giuen order in her house for the entertainment of her sister. After the welcomes and embracementes, they returned to the Castell, where they founde the table couered and the cates readie, expecting their comming, the welcomes be∣ing repeated, they washed and set themselues at table, where they were serued with such cheere as any one may iudge that a sisters hart could afforde. After din∣ner the two gentlewomen began to talke of the go∣uernment of their houses and husbands, where Luci∣enna greatly commended her husbande, assuring her
sister, that if he had beene present she should haue had better cheere, beseeching her to holde her excused. Anna sighing, thanked her saying, my cheere passeth my desert; but truely sister, God hath done you more fauour then me, being so well matched with a kinde husband, and meruaile not of the great loue, which my father hath alwaies borne you in respect of mee, in hauing matched you so wel to your content. It is your pleasure to say so (quoth Lucienna) but without com∣parison you are more richly & highly matched then I am. A figge for riches (replied Anna) so I had but a husband as you haue, to my contentment, and of whom I might reape some delight, for in truth I am as badly furnished with a husband as any Gentlewo∣man in this country, and thinke you not that I speake this in any enuy towardes you, or any wayes to your preiudice: but I blame our Father for it, in hauing so badly matched me. T'is straunge (quoth Lucienna) for my brother your husbande hath at diuers times beene heere, of curtesie to visite vs, and hath remay∣ned here some daies (though not so long as wee desi∣red) in which time wee haue found him so honoura∣ble and graue in all his deedes, that in mine opinion we should greatly wrong him to blame him: also hee hath at diuers times told and protested vnto mee the loue which he beareth you, shewing me the letters by which you refused to come to Naples, because that you were sicke, with many other circumstances: he said moreouer, that he desired with all his heart to re∣turne to his house for a time, but that vrgent affaires hindred him, that it was impossible (in respect of his
office) to doe it. O God (quoth Anna) I thinke my mischiefes increase dayly from worse to worse: for she of whom I expected comfort and succour, is my halfe enemie, in giuing more faith vnto the fained wordes of my husband then to mine. If you did but know him as wel as I, you would not defend his cause so much. O you know not his trickes which he vseth at Naples, not contented with one trull, but keepeth and maintaineth three, yea foure: therefore it is no meruaile though wee haue no lineage, which truely greatly grieueth me, and it would grieue me as much to declare you one thing which lieth vppon my sto∣macke, although you are my sister. The young gen∣tlewomā belieuing her words said, sweet sister be not displeased, nor thinke not strange of the things which I tell you, for in deed men are harde to bee knowne: but in these afflictions we ought to pray to God, and with our vertues seeke to draw our husbands heartes to vs, and certainely God will chaunge their mindes: I speake not this for my selfe, for (as I haue told you) I haue no cause to complaine. Here she stopt, by reason of the ariuall of some Gentlewomen neighbours to Lucienna, and so their parley was broke off, and after salutations, passed the time vntil supper in talke: mean while Maurice Talleis with two other Gentlemen was come, the which for her sake were very welcome and greatly feasted. After supper Talleis tooke his loue Anna vnder the arme, walking into the garden, and began to talke how they should performe their dam∣nable and wicked enterprise. Sweet loue (quoth An∣na) you know I haue against my will beene maried to
this olde doting foole, which maketh no account of me, who I feare by his subtiltie will espie our familia∣ritie, which if he doe, it wil cost vs both our liues, and therefore the surest way is to make him out of the way, after the subtillest sort possible, to the ende that we may liue in delight without thought or feare, and finish our loue in pleasure and content, vpon conditi∣on that you shall marrie mee, and for recompence I will make you the richest man in this land. I sweare and protest vnto you (quoth that miserable wretch) not to disobey you in any point, but to accom∣plish your will to the vttermost. Well then (quoth she) you shall go to Naples, and I will giue you my Lackey with letters to my husband, and as soone as you shall haue knowne my husband, insinuate your selfe into his acquaintance, by which means you may more easily giue an ende to his wretched and misera∣ble daies by some secret death, which I thinke poison would do best, & with lesse perill. This counsel was by Talleis found good, the houre of rest being come, they parted: the gentlemen to one chamber, & the gentle∣women to another, where Anna forgot not to dispatch her husband. The two sisters lay together, but Anna tooke small rest, by the thought of her wicked enter∣prise. The morning the Gentlemen tooke leaue of the Gentlewomen & Anna gaue her letters to the Lackey, & the poison to Talleis as they had agreed. Being come to Naples, and marked whither the Lackey went, and so knew Signior Appian, hee saluted him, in prosering him all humble seruice, wherof he thanked him. This he continued for a great while, often saluting him, and
accompanying him euery where, where hee went. One day he made a banket, to the which amongst o∣ther Gentlemen he inuited Signeor Appian: and in the middest of the Supper, and their meriment, hee seeing time made signe to a fellow (whom he had hi∣red forthe nonce, giuing him fiftie Crownes) who gaue him the deadly potion. Which done, he wat∣ched a time so well that hee murthered him who had done the fact, thereby to make the matter sure: and the next day tooke horse and posted to Lucera, to giue the newes thereof to Anna. The good Gentleman Signeor Appian finding himselfe ill at ease, resolued to go to his house at Lucera, whither he could not attain, but died within two leagues of the same. Anna be∣ing at Barseils was aduertised by the Lackey that her husband was gone to Lucera, whereof she made great signes of ioy, and taking leaue of her sister, departed for Lucera, where she found her husband deceased, whereat she seemed greatly discomforted. In fine, she caused the funeralles with great pompe to bee so∣lemnized, at the which were diuers Gentlemen, and especially her father, the which all comforted her, the obsequies ended, euery one departed home, & Talleis came to visit his mistris, to whō he told how he had ef∣fected the murther: wherat she was maruellously wel pleased, saying that thence forward they might with∣out feare liue together contentedly, counselling him to demand her of her father in mariage, but that whe∣ther he would or no, she was resolued neuer to haue other but him. Whereupon Talleis did as she willed him, but her father gaue him no aunswere, whereof
she being aduertised (possessed of the Deuill) was greatly enraged, and imagined how she might be re∣uenged in making him die: and presently without other deliberation thereon, resolued to poison him, together with her sister, & her two nephewes, the bet∣ter to take her pleasure without contradiction, and to enioy the goods. Meane while her brother in law Al∣fonce de Barceils fell sicke in his house, to whom their father trauelled to visite him, causing him to bee well tended, but notwithstanding hee died, to the great griefe of Lucienna, and her father: his funerals being ended, her father returned againe to his house, leauing Lucienna with her children alone. Shortly after, a desire tooke him to make a voyage into Fraunce, wherefore he feasted all his friendes, a∣mongst the which his two daughters were not forgot∣ten: Anna likewise forgot not her diuilish intent. The banket was braue and honourable. The father being moued with mirth, called for a cup of wine to drinke to all his friendes: Anna faining the good hus∣wife stept to the pot her selfe, and filled a cup of wine, where hauing put the poison, with a pleasant counte∣nance presented it to her father, who not doubting a∣ny thing, drunke a great draught vnto all the assistants, whereof in few dayes he died, to the great content of Anna & her adulterer. Lucienna was sent for to the fu∣nerals of her father, who came accordingly with her two children, and was by Anna greatly welcommed, and requested to lodge in her house, which she did, staying there some daies to her mishap, for her sister seeing a fit time, gaue her also a drinke of the same na∣ture:
whereupon the gentlewoman finding her selfe veriesicke, departed to her house, leauing her two children in the keeping of her sister: and being come home she was not long there but dyed. Whereof An∣na being aduertised, making semblance of greate griefe tooke horse to ride to Barseils, to ordaine the funerals, but before her departure set order to her house, which together with her two nephewes she left in the kee∣ping of an Aunt of hers, giuing her charge of the chil∣dren aboue all things: but the wicked wretch had al∣ready giuen them also of the drinke which she had gi∣uē to the mother, the which because but yong & ten∣der, they could not so long resist the violence of the poison, but died shortly after the departure of their wicked Aunt, who comming to Barseils, with a fained sorrow, hauing interred her sister, tooke possession of the goodes, in the name of the children, saying that she was to looke to their right, the which also she did by her fathers goodes: all which being done, she re∣turned to Lucera, where finding the two infants dead and buried, made such pitifull signes of griefe, and wofull lamentations, that her treason was neuer per∣cieued nor doubted. Hauing brought all things thus to her wish shortly after was maried to Maurice Talleis, where the feasts & pomps were great, & honored with a great number of nobility. The mariage rites being ended, Talleis perceiuing that he had attained his de∣sire, began to riot, to haunt plaies and bankets, where∣at Anna began to enter into ielousie, and at length in∣to such a hate of him, that she dispraised and blamed him in euery place where she came: for Gods iust pro∣uidence
is such, that it neuer suffereth any such wicked actes to continue hidden and vnpunished, to the end that euery one may take example by them, especially to children to keep them alwaies in the feare and loue of God, and obedience of their parents and friends. The Deuill desiring to see the ouerthrow of this wicked Anna, sowed such discord betweene her hus∣band & her, that they did nothing but wish one ano∣thers ruine. Signior Antonio de Boyse, nephew to the de∣ceased Appian tooke awife, & at his mariage amongst his kinsfolkes and friendes, Talleis and his wife were inuited, when being at the table, the company verie merrie, Talleis looked angerly vpon his wife, and gi∣uing her somename, tolde to some of his familiar ac∣quaintance which were by him, what dishonour she did him euery where: she to the contrary reproched him, that she had raised him vp from a begger to a Gentleman, & that it was well knowne what she was, and what hee was. Talleis finding himselfe touched, spurned at her with his foote vnder the table, inso∣much that she feeling the smart called him murtherer and poisoner, and that hee had poisoned her late hus∣band: whereat Talleis drawing his dagger stroke at her, but being by some of the company hindred, the dag∣ger flying out of his hands stucke in the side of a yong Gentleman of good calling, of which blow he died, Signior Anthonie Boise, hauing heard their debate, and seeing the murther committed in his house, presently sent for the Iustice, which attached. Talleis & his wife, and vppon examination Talleis confessed all and euetie circumstance of the murthers, whereupon she
being examined apart, vtterly denied all, and to be ig∣norant of any such matter, which greatly troubled the Iustices: yet by good meanes and faire wordes they fetched her out, that she confessed that she was con∣senting to her husbands death, wherupon they shew∣ing her that she deserued punishment, and putting her in mind of Gods great mercy & of his horrible iudge∣ment against the wicked: she finding her conscience to witnesse against her, confessed also to haue poiso∣ned her father, her sister, & her two nephewes: all at the persuasion of the Deuill, for concupiscence of her desires, the carnall voluptuousnesse, wicked am∣bition and couetousnesse: imploring Gods mercy, and the fauour of the Iustice.
The sentence and iudgement against Maurice Talleis, and Anne his wife, for the mur∣thers and empoisonmentes by them committed. THe iustice hauing considered all, & finding the verification of their fact by the agreeing of their confessions, they were cōdemned to make hono∣rable amends, naked in their shirtes with cordes about their neckes, and each of them a torch in their hande, before the great church, aske pardon & mercy of God and the Iustice. After they were by the executioner of the high Iustice brought into the publique place, where they had their tongues pulled out, and their handes cut off, which done, they were beheaded, and their heades set in the most eminent place to behelde and to serue for a memorie for euer: their bodies burned and consumed to ashes. Where before the finishing of their daies, the poore Gentle∣woman shewing signe of great repentance, lifting of∣ten her eyes vp to heauen, beseeched the assistants well to educate and instruct their children in the feare of God, laudable vertues and good manners, and tur∣ning her voice to the children, exhorted them to take
example at her: that they shoulde alwaies haue the feare of God before their eyes, to render obedience to their parents and friendes: and often to rememo∣rate that pitifull spectacle. Making their prayers to God to pardon their faultes, and to keepe them from falling into such extremities, and wicked accidents. I la mort tu m'espie. FINIS.
