3895 99854769 20213
AN ECCLESIASTICAL PROTESTANT HISTORIE, OF THE HIGH PASTORAL and fatherly chardge and care of the Popes of Rome, ouer the church of Brita∣nie, from the first planting of the christiā faith there, by S. Peter the Apostle, and his Disciples: continued in euery age, and hundred of yeares, by holy Bishops, and cleargie men, sent hither and consecra∣ted by them, his Successors in the See Apostolicke. Euidently deduced and proued by historicall narration, from the published and priuiledged wri∣tings (to appease al protestants) of the most learned & allowed English protestant pretended Bishops, Doctors, Antiquaries, & others of that Religion. Mementote praepositorum vestrorum, qui vobis locuti sunt verbum Dei. Obedite praepositis vestris, & subiaceta eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Hebr. 13. With licence. 1624.
THE GENERAL ARGVMENTS OF THE ENSVINGE HISTORIE: SER∣VINGE ALSO FOR A PREFACE, to the Reader, to declare the scope of the Author, and contents of the worke. THE Catholick Author well requainted with the procee∣dings of Protestants, in these times, and the controuersies of them, to accept and allowe of nothing, but what is liked and allowed by them selues; and yet to make the world beleeue, they are Reuerencers of antiquitie, and would willingly embrace, and fol∣lowe that, which was our first faith in any question deliuered by the Apostles, & thence continued from them: the greatest of all
beeing that who planted here first the holy faith, and since had cheifest commanding power in such things: Hee setteth histori∣cally downe from the best Antiquaries, and learned protestant writers of this contry, & other antiquities approued by them, the meanes and maner of our first conuersion vnto Christ, and by what spirituall cheife ruling authority this nation hath euer beene gouerned in such thinges, since then, vntill the conuersions of the Saxons by S. Augu∣stine, and his associats sent hither by Saint, and pope Gregory, the first, after which tyme now aboue 1000. yeares, our prote∣stants put it out of Question, and agree, that the power of the popes of Rome abso∣lutely ruled here in such matters. Therfore this historie of the first sixe hun∣dred yeares, is diuided into sixe Centuries or ages, euery one conteyninge one hundred yeares. In the first, hee sheweth from those protestant Authors, and Antiquaries, how S. Peter that greate Apostle of Christ, both immediately by himselfe, and mediately by his holy disciples, first preached here, foun∣ded our church, consecrated for vs Bishops, preists, and other cleargie men, and ordey∣ned
all thinges thereto belonging: and how from this first institution by him, we euer had a continued succession of such conse∣crated parsons, vnto the more generall con∣uersion by pope Eleutherius in the daies of kinge Lucius after which time there can bee no question of such a succession of Bishops here. And how after the death of S. Peter vnto the end of the first hundred yeares, spi∣rituall matters were ordered here by autho∣ritie and direction from the see of Rome, and successors of S. Peter there. In the second hundred of yeares, is proued by the same protestant authors, and their an∣tiquities, how from the beginninge of that age, to the end thereof, all spirituall things were likewise managed here, by that see Apostolicke, more or lesse, as the times then permitted. And in the generall con∣uersion of kinge Lucius, and his king∣dome, all ecclesiasticall businesses were done, and settled by iurisdiction of the popes of Rome, and their legats, directed hither by their authoritie, exercising here as ample iurisdiction spirituall, to the greate honor of this kingdome, as any pope of Rome may clayme.
Such was the estate of spirituall power, and proceedings here in the third, fourth, fift, and sixte age, or hundred of yeares also: in the later end whereof, S. Augustine was sent hither to conuert our auncestors the Saxons. In all which ages, and Centenaries of yeares, both the Kings, Archbishops, Bishops, and others, both Rulers, and Ru∣led in this kingdome, gaue as much priui∣ledge, and prerogatiue to the popes of Rome, as Catholicks now may doe, by their catholick Roman Religion. In which tyme also, amonge all those christians which then liued here, those Bis∣hops of Scotland, and Walles, who, as our protestants tell vs, and commend them for it, did onely or most oppose against the po∣pe, his legates, and authoritie here, were those alsoe, by the same protestants, which did much more intermeddle in princes af∣faires, then any popes, their legats, or such as were most obedient vnto, or Ruled by them. Which proceedings the Author doth in all places leaue to protestants relation, and medleth not with them otherwise at all. But soe much as with probabilitie in histo∣rie, hee may, mitigateth such matters, as
some protestants, euen with publick allow∣ance of the protestant state of Englād, haue boldly published to the world in that kinde: freely and before God protesting, as hee ne∣uer hitherto had any intermedlinge with the temporall affaires of Princes, but euer to his vttermost, did yeeld and render all dutie vnto them, praying for the safety, honor and preseruation of his Soueraigne, and this kingdome, soe hee will euer continue the same moste humble and dutifull af∣fection. Other particular Questions in Religion depend vppon this. Because whosoeuer in anie Religion hath the cheife chardge and cure, the particulars depend vpon his pro∣ceedings, whether it bee Pope, Prince, Su∣perintendents, Presbyteries, or whatsoeuer, and soe beeing proued that from the begin∣ninge of christianitie in this kingdome, the Pope of Rome euer had cheife cōmaund & direction in Religious things. It must needs followe, that which protestants name pa∣pistrie, euer raigned here. But I vnderstand there is a generall controuersiall historie to bee shortly published, of all such things in particular, from the first preaching of
the Gospell in this kingdome, which will giue, full and ample satisfaction, in all such Questions. THE FIRST CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED OF YEARES. THE I. CHAPTER. Wherein is briefly made demonstration by the best learned protestant Antiquaries, and others of England, that Saint Peter the Apostle first preached the faith, and foun∣ded the Church of Christ in this our Britanie. TO bringe vs vnto a more certayne, and vndoubted knowledge, of the first prea∣chers of christian Religion, in this king∣dome, the best learned protestant Antiqua∣ries wee haue, prescribe certayne Rules, and squares, to bee directed by to come vnto them, in their iudgment. Matth. Parker. an∣tiq. Britan. pag. 1. Godw. Conuers. of Brit. Ho∣linsh.
hist. of Engl. Mason. l. 2. c. 2. pag. 51. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. first they af∣firme, that the Britans receaued the faith, soone after the Ascension of our blessed Sa∣uiour, in the time of Tiberius, Caius Caligu∣la, or Claudius Emperor: and they build this their assertion cheifely vppon the words of S. Gildas. l. de Excid. & conq. Britan. c. 5.6. Who speaking of things done here in Bri∣tanie, either in the time of Caius, or Clau∣dius, addeth: Interea glaciali frigore rigent Insulae, indulget sua praecepta Christus. In the meane time while these things were doinge, Christ doth afford his precepts to this frozen Iland. In which place, hee rather meaneth the time of Claudius, then any other, as may easely appeare, to all iudiciall and e∣quall readers of that auncient Author in the place alleadged, needles to bee insisted vp∣pon, if wee will bee guided by our prote∣stant directors, because in their next Rules they shall make it euident. It must needes in their opinion bee soe vnderstood. For they deliuer for a second Maxime, that this nation embraced, and was taught the Religion of Christ, by some one of the Apostles. Soe say their
Archbishop Parker. in antiq. Britan. Bal. in act. Pontif. Rom. in Gregor. 1. Cambd. in Brit. Fulke Answ. to a Romish. cath. pag. 40. Powel. annot. in l. 2. Giral. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Eng. c. 21. pag. 102. Stowe histor. in Agricola. Stow. supr. Godwyn supr. their Bishops Bale, Godwyn, their doctors and Antiquaries, Cambden, Fulke, Powel, Holin∣shed. Stowe, the Theater writers and others, inclining to this opinion, and some of them plainely teaching, with diuers of the aun∣tient fathers, that the 12. Apostles deuided the world amongst them, to preach the ghospell in, assure vs, that to speake in their wordes, The holy Apostles beeing dispersed throughout the whole earth, did diuide the pro∣uinces amongst them, to preach the ghospell in; and it is deliuered plainely by sundry auntient writers, that Britanie fell in diuision, amongst the Apostles. The third and laste generall Rule which these men assigne vnto vs, is, that mention is not made of any Apostle in any antiquitie to haue preached here, but onely of S. Peter S. Paul, and S. Symon Zelotes, none of all these alleadged protestants or any other, I reade doth speake of any other, and amonge
these one a protestant Bishop and Antiquarie writeth in these termes. Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie. cap. 1. pag. 2. I finde mention of three onely of the Apostles to haue beene in our Bri∣tanie, to wit, Peter and Paul, and Simon Cha∣nanaus, called also Zelotes. For although some haue written that S Iames preached in Ire∣land, and S. Philip in this next adioyninge Gallia Fraunce (which I haue at lardge re∣futed in other places) yett noe one historian to my remembrance, and reading, doth teach, that either of those twoe, or any of the rest, except those three before sett downe, were at any time in this Iland. These Rules of Protestants thus supposed, and allowed, it will with a small labour, eui∣dently appeare vnto vs, by these men, and all antiquities, that the moste glorious Apostle Saint Peter was our first father, and teacher in Christ. For first concerning S. Paul, hee himselfe, and other scriptures, and these protestants alsoe confesse, hee was none of the 12. Apostles, by whō the world was soe diuided, and though miraculously called by god before, yett not properly an Apostle vntill in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, v. 2. hee was soe ordeyned:
as our english protestants by their conferen∣ce of the first chapter and verse of S. Paules Epistle to the Romans: Rom. cap. 1. v. 1. are Interpretors hereof, when the other A∣postles had preached longe before, and o∣therwise alsoe executed their Apostolicke function Secondly it is euident by the same holy scriptures. Rom. 1. c. 1. act. cap. 27.28. many Antiquities, and these protestants themsel∣ues, soe clearely cōfessinge (Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Godw. Conuers. Parker. antiq. Britan.) that S. Paul came not to Rome, nor any part neare Britanie, or these westerne nations, vntill many yeares after S. Peter was both come to Rome, and this kingdome of Britanie had receaued the faith of Christ, at the latest in the time of Claudius accor∣ding to these protestants by some Apostle as before, the first coming of S. Paul to any of these westerne Regions, beeing longe after in the time of Nero, to whome hee appea∣led from the Iewes, and Festus, and soe was brought prisoner to Rome and soe continued two yeares, not going from thence to any other place. Actor. c. 25. v. 10.11.12. cap. 27. & 28. v. 30.
That S. Symon Zelotes should bee the first Apostle that preached here, or was here at all, it is as vnprobable, or rather vnpossible by these protestants: for first diuers of them disable him euer to haue beene here, Stowe and Howes histor. in Agricola Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 5. rather thinkinge, the place Britānia, where some haue thought hee prea∣ched to bee mistaken, and not to bee vnder∣stood of this nation, or that Simon which is supposed to haue beene here, was not S. Si∣mō the Apostle, but some other of that name, as S. Simon Leprosus, or Nathaniel, also by some named Simon, which preached in these westerne parts, namely in Fraunce, and not vnprobably here. Secondly these protestants which would haue vs thinke S. Simon the Apostle prea∣ched here (Menologie. Graec. in Nathan. Bar. in martyrol. Rom. 28. octob. Guliel. Eisengr. cen∣turie. 1. & alij.) refer his beeing here vntil the coming of S. Ioseph of Aramathia, coniec∣turinge that hee came with him, who came not hither vntil the yeare of Christ 63. when they graunt that Britanie had receaued the ghospell by an Apostle soe longe before, as is alreadie declared from them. Parker
Antiquit. pag. 3. Godwyn. Conuers. of Bri∣tanie pag. 10. Thirdly (to make all sure) Such as haue taught that one S. Symon did preach in a place called Britannia; Doroth. in Synops. Maenolog. Graec. 6. Id. Maij. doe al∣soe affirme, that the same S. Symon suffered martyrdome, and was crucified in the same place, and they keepe the feast of his mar∣tyrdome vpon the tenth day of May. When concerning S. Symon Zelotes the Apostle; not onely the whole latine church, and all catholicks in the world, but Protestants al∣so, both of England, and all other nations, in their most publicke seruice bookes, and kalenders of their churches, receaued and allowed by their parlaments, and highest Rules in their Religion, which all of them ar bownde to obey, and followe, doe cele∣brate the festiuitie of S. Symon Zelotes the Apostle, vpon the 28. day of October, aboue fiue moneths after, and all iointly agree, in the historie of his life, and death, teaching hee neuer preached in any part of Europe, or neare our Britanye, and was martyred in Persia, diuers thousands of myles frō hence. Martyrolog. Rom. die 28. Octobr. Breuiar. & Miss. Rom. eod. die. Bed. in Martyr. eod. die.
Vsuard. & Ado eod die. Protestant com. Booke and all their kalenders with their Bibles 28. of Octob. Now there is noe other left to bee our first Apostle and Father in Christ but S. Peter, except some ignorant or willfull man, will alledge S. Ioseph of Aramathia, who though hee was noe Apostle, yett as some say, hee was sent hither out of Fraunce, by S. Philip one of the Apostles, and soe mediately the same S. Philip though neuer here in parson, might bee our Apostle. I answere as before, that wee contend for the first Apostle, that either immediately by himselfe, or mediatly by his disciples, preached here, and founded our church, and not to exclude all Apostles in after times, from this kingdome, for I wil at leaste probably shew, that S. Paul was here, a little before his death in an other place; and there alsoe giue his due to S. Io∣seph, and his holy company, in a far more honorable degree, then any protestant, or other one writer yet to my reading hath per∣formed towards them; But S. Ioseph from whomsoeuer hee was sent, cominge hither but in the 63. of Christ, almost twenty yea∣res (as before) after this kingdome had re∣ceaued
the faith of Christ, neyther S. Ioseph, nor any of that holy fraternitie could bee the first preacher here. And soe farr vnprobable or impossible it is, that by the Iudgment of our English pro∣testants, or others, S. Philip the Apostle should bee then in Fraunce to send S. Ioseph hither, that hee was many yares before cru∣cified, & soe dead by martyrdome in Phry∣gia at Hierapolis there, in Asia, as the com∣mon consent of antiquities, the whole-church of God, and the protestants of En∣gland, in the Rituall of their Religion, ge∣nerally vsed and allowed by them, and all other protestants doe wittnesse, and therfore keepe his festiuitie accordingly vppon the first day of May, in or about the 54. or 55. yeare of Christ, longe before S. Iosephs co∣minge into this part of the world. Bre. Rom. 1. Maij. Martyrolog. Rom. Bed. Vsuard. Ado 1. Maij. Chrysost. hom. de 12. Apost. Abd. lib. 10. Metaphrastes 14. Nou. Euseb. l. 4. c. 24. Ni∣ceph. lib. 1. ca. 39. Pet. de Natal. l. 4. c. 107. Antō. part. 1. tit. 6. ca. 11. Eisengr. contra. 1. Prot. Com. Booke and kalend. 1. Maij. Therfore of necessitie, both Catholiks and protestants must needs acknowledge, that S. Peter the
most worthie and blessed Apostle, was our first most happy father & master in Christ, which I haue made lardge demonstration of in other places, and will for particulars bee more euident in the next chapter, and this whole history: an historicall truth soe testi∣fied by many authors, that Syr William Cambden, whome others therein followe, the best antiquary of this nation, writeth in many editions, Quid ni crederemus? why should wee not beleeue them. Cambden in Bri∣tania in diuerse editionis Andree Chesnee l 3. hist. d' Angleterre. Budley pag. 171. Makinge S. Peters preachinge and foundinge the church of Christ here in Britanie a thinge soe certayne, that hee meruayleth any man of Iudgment can make doubt thereof. Ther∣fore I may boldly vse these wordes (and af∣firme them true) of a protestant Bishop in the name of the rest: Wee should accompt it a greate glory to deriue the pedigree of our spiri∣tuall linage, from soe noble, and excellent a fa∣ther as Saint Peter. Godwyn Conuers. of Bri∣tanie pag. 6.
THE II. CHAPTER. Where both the former is more manifestly de∣clared, and in particular farther proued by these protestants, & antiquities by them al∣lowed, what highest spirituall offices the same glorious Apostle, and his disciples per∣formed here. TO proue more amply what hath beene said of S. Peters beeing and preachinge here, and to shewe what hee did for the first foundinge of our church: A protestant Archbishop from diuers authorities writeth: Whitgifts Answ. to the Admonition pag. 65. sect. 1. and def. of the Answ. pag. 318. The A∣postle Peter did in euery prouince appoint one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the same prouince should obey. An other with great priuiledge saith (Sutcliffe Subuers. pag. 3.) Pe∣ter preached in noe place, but hee there ordeyned Bishops and teachers and founded churches. And to shew that all these and such benefits came to vs first from S. Peter and his holy see of Rome, among other Marcus Antonius de Dominis, now by the greate mercy of
God a penitent in the catholicke church, when hee was in profession a protestant in England (Marcus Anton, de Domin. de Re∣pub. christian. l. 4. cap. 10. with publick priui∣ledg in England) and a chosen champion for that Religion against the Pope by chei∣fest protestant authoritie in England, then testifieth: Est caput Roma quatenus ab ea dif∣fusum est euangelium in reliquas totius occi∣dentis ecclesias, & in multas orientis, atque in barbaras etiam extra Romanum Imperium na∣tiones. Rome is the head of the church, in so much as from it the ghospell was diffused in∣to the other churches of all the West, and into many of the East, and into barbarous nations also without the Romane Empire. And our. Soueraigne kings speach in parlam. 1. publickly protested of this church of Ro∣me: It is our mother church: and conse∣quently that it first brought vs forthe in spi∣rituall christian birth, as mothers doe their natural children to the world and that wee, except wee will turne bastardly vnnaturall and disobedient children, doe owe and must performe all dutie and obedience vnto it, our most holy mother in Christ. And to fur∣ther this our bounden dutie, the protestants
of England in their Theater. of the Emp. of greate Britanie pag. 203 l. 6. c 9. num. 5. will helpe vs foreward whoe write in this maner: That S. Peter the Apostle preached the word of life, in this Iland, as to other gentiles hee did, for whome God had chosen him, that from his mouth they might heare the ghospell, as himselfe alleadgeth, and that hee here founded churches, and ordeined preists and deacons, which is reported by Si∣mon Metaphrastes out of the greek Antiqui∣ties, and Gulielmus Eisingrenius in the first of his Centuries. Therfore this beeing writ∣ten by soe learned and holy a man as S. Si∣mon Metaphrastes was, and soe auntient a∣boue 700. yeares since, and out of such mo∣numents and Authorities of the Gretians, as in his time were honored with the Title of Antiquities, this alone might content vs in this matter, as it hath already the best lear∣ned protestant Antiquaries of this nation. But because allowance is giuen to the au∣thoritie which cannot be denyed, because it is the maner of Protestants to mynce autho∣rities, I will cite that holy auntient Father and Saint. S. Sim. Metaphr. 29. die Iunij. in his owne wordes which bee these. Romā re∣dijt,
ex qua venit Mediolanum, & Photicen quae sunt ciuitates in Continente. In quibns cum constituisset Episcopos & Presbyteros, venit in Britanniam. Quo in loco cum longo tempore fuis∣set moratus, & multas gentes non nominatas attraxisset ad fidem Christi, angelicam aspexit visionem, quae dicebat: Petre, instat tempus tuae resolutionis, & oportet te ire Romam: in qua cum mortem per crucem sustinueris, recipies mercedem Iustitiae. Cum ergo propterea Deum glorificasset, & egisset gratias, & apud Britan∣nos mansisset dies aliquot, & verbo gratiae mul∣tos illuminasset, & ecclesias constituisset, e∣piscoposque & presbyteros & diaconos ordinas∣set, duodecimo anno Caesaris Neronis rursus Ro∣mam reuertitur. S. Peter by reuelation came to Hierusalem, at the death of the mother of God, then returning into Egipt, by Africk came againe to Rome. From whence hee came to Milane and Photice, which bee ci∣ties in the continēt: in which when hee had constituted Bishops, and preists, hee came into Britanie, where when hee had stayed a longe time, and drawne many nations not named, to the faith of Christ, hee had an Angelicall vision, which saide: ô Peter, the time of thy Resolution is at hande,
and thou must goe to Rome, in which when thou hast suffered death by the crosse, thou shalt receaue the reward of Iustice. Therfore when hee had glorified God and giuen thankes for it, and remayned some dayes with the Britans, and illuminated ma∣nie with the word of grace, and founded churches, & ordeyned both Bishops, priests, and deacons, hee returned againe to Rome in the twelueth yeare of the Emperor Nero. Hitherto the very words of this learned Saint, soe precisely and particularly descri∣being the tyme and comming of that glori∣ous Apostle into this Iland, & staying here, with his returne to Rome againe, that as noe man except an infidell will or can deny it, no Author of antiquitie or credit auouching halfe so much for either S Paul or any other Apostle to haue beene here at all: soe except wee of Englād wil shew our selues the most vngratefull, & disobedient to that our first, and most glorious Pastor, and parent, of all nations in the world except Hierusalē, An∣tioch and Rome, wee ar most engaged to ho∣nor and reuerence this most glorious Apo∣stle & his Successors in his holy See: for nei∣ther
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, or Bythinia, which hee himselfe particularly remembreth, 1. Pet. 1. v 1. nor any other kingdome or nation mentioned in any Au∣thor of credit and Antiquitie, and to bee pa∣ralelled with him whom I haue cited, appro∣ued euen in this point with all Catholicks, and the moste iudicious indifferently myn∣ded and best learned protestants, can con∣stantly affirme and proue, that they had re∣ceaued such benefites and blessings from S. Peter, as this our Britanie, which to visitt hee went soe farr, stayed therein soe longe, and enritched as with soe many and vnans∣weareable graces and fauors: continuinge them soe longe, vntill he was admonished from heauē to returne from hence to Rome, as before his cominge thither, hee also was as Metaphrastes, die 29. Iunij. S. Leo serm. de Apostol. with others write, directed to come helpe vs in the west. And if wee will follow the Roman tradition. (Baron. annotat. in 9. Maij in Pudente. that) Domus Pudentis erat primum hospitium S. Petri Romae, the house of Pudens was the first lodging of S Peter of Rome, wee are more strictly bound to Rome and Rome to vs, that beeinge the house of
our renowned christian contrywoman Lady Claudia, as our protestant writers tell vs. Matth. Parker antiq. Britan. pag. 2.3. God∣wyn Conuers. of Britanie. Cambd. in Britan. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Now lett vs enquire and sett downe in particular, soe neare as such a desolation and losse of Antiquities as En∣gland hath often suffered, will giue vs leaue, of this Archbishop and Bishops in particu∣lar, which S. Peter consecrated for vs, to found and begin the first hierarchicall order and Succession in our primatiue church of Britanie. Many Authors both auntient and later writers and of these late times, both catho∣licks and protestants, ar witnesses that S. A∣ristobulus, one of the seauentie and two disciples of Christ our Lord, was Bishop of this our kingdome of Britanie Doro∣thaeus Bishop of Tyrus. (Dorothaeus lib. de septuaginta duobus discipulis in Aristobulo.) And the Maenologe of the Greekes are plainely of this minde. The first in his booke intituled de septuaginta duobus disci∣pulis, of the seauentie two disciples, wri∣teth: Aristobulus ab Apostolo ad Romanos commemoratos Episcopus Britanniae factus
est: Aristobulus one of the seauentie two disciples, of whom S Paul speaketh in his epistle to the Romans, was made Bishop of Britanie. And to putt vs out of doubt that hee did not mistake, naminge Britania for Bythinia, as a protestant writer would seeme to expounde him, when hee writeth: Doro∣theus saith, Aristobulus, whome the Apostle to the Romans remembreth, was made a Bishop in Britanie, or Bithania. Stowe histor. titul. the Romans. in Agricola. I thinke this man will hardly finde any Bythania in the world: wee reade of Bethania often in the Gospels, and S. Iohn saith. cap. 11. v. 18. Bethany was nigh vnto Hierusalem about fifteene farlongs off, as our protestants translate and their note there vpon is: that is about towe miles protest. annot. marginal. in c. 11.11. Io. v. 18. Which was too neare to Hierusalem, to bee a Bishops see, and the old prouinciall ma∣keth mention of noe such. And if by Bythania, hee ment the country Bythinia the Region of lesser Asia, against Thra∣cia, and next Troas, which was also som∣time called Bebrycia, after Mygdonia, and by S. Peter Bythinia in the Apostles time, and after, it is euident that Dorothaeus
ment it not, for in the next name which is S. Tyticus, hee saith, that hee was made. Bishop of Chalcedonia of Bithynia. Tyticus meminit & huius Paulus, primus Episcopus Chalcedoniae fuit, quae in Bithynia est. Doroth. supra in Tyticho. Therefore of necessitie by this Author and the rest soe affirming it, without doubt, or any exception, S. Aristo∣bulus needs must bee Bishop of this our king¦dome of Britanie, noe other place then of that name fitt for a Bishop in the knowne World to apply it vnto. And thus testifieth the auntient Maeno∣loge of the greekes, with others, both catho∣licks and protestants of whome I haue here noted some. Maenolog. Graecor. die 15. martij: Baron. annot. in martyrol. Rom. eod. die. Ar∣nold. Mirman in Theatr. Conuers. gent. Auth. of the Exam. of the Calend. praefat. and in the 3. Conuers. Syr. Ed. Hoby counterf. pag. 48. Thom. Rogers vpon the Articles of Relig. arti∣cul. 36. pag. 197. Protest. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Cambden Belg. That this holy Bishop was ei∣ther consecrated here, or sent hither by S. Peter, wee may not question, beeing soe ge∣nerally confessed by protestants before, that noe other Apostle did, or then could per∣forme
that office. And if the Identitie of the name deceaueth vs not, this our holy Bishop or Archbishop, was Father in lawe to S. Pe∣ter, his wyues Father, and Brother to S Bar∣nabas the Apostle, sent into these west parts by S. Peter: for as Simon Metaphrastes wri∣teth. (S. Simon Metaphr. die 26. Iunij.) Accepit Petrus filiam Aristobuli fratris Barnabae Apo∣stoli, ex ea genuit filium vnum & vnam filiam. Peter maryed the daughter of Aristobulus Brother of Barnabas the Apostle, and had by her one sonne, and one daughter. Marty∣rolog. Rom. 15. Martij. Godw. And beeing called in the Romane Martyrologe as a pro∣testant Bishop truely telleth. Apostolorum dis∣cipulus the disciple of the Apostles. Conuers. of Brit. It wholy disableth him from beeing disciple to S. Paul, whoe alone of the Apo∣stles besides S. Peter was in this kingdome, for the scriptures themselues are wittnes. Actor. cap. 13. v. 2 3.4. that S. Paul was not an Apostle, vntill in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, before which time by the protestants before, Britanie had recea∣ued the faith, and probably S. Aristobulus was then a Bishop, as many others of the 27. Disciples were. And many ar called the dis∣ciples
of the Apostles which were peculiarly the disciples of S. Peter, the cheife Apostle, as appeareth in diuers places of the same Authority. S. Aristo. Arch. of this our Britanie. And that this holy disciple of S. Peter, was not onely our Bishop but Archbishop alsoe in Britanie, I haue warrant both of Catho∣licks and protestants to auouche it; First if wee examine either by Dorotheus or any whomsoeuer writing of the residēcies of the 72. disciples of Christ wee shall hardly finde any amonge them, whicn had not the digni∣ty of that high callinge, yea hee relateth S. Aristobulus as a cheife amongst thē, & then beeing sent to this kingdome of Britanie soe greate & ample. And where as in other such kingdomes our protestants before assure vs, S. Peter ordeined an Archbishop, wee cānot doubt but in particular it was this his moste worthy disciple, as also the disciple of Christ, which first exercised by S. Peters assi∣gnement that Archie, and cheife pontificall order in this Iland. Secondly, because wee reade it confidētly written, and from more auncient authoritie, that this holy disciple of S. Peter was not on∣ly our first Apostle, but here began and first
founded the hierarchical order, of our Brit∣tish church, a thinge proper to that highest spiritual callinge. Arnold. mirac. Theatro con∣uers. gentium in Britan. & Aristobulo. Britānia Straboni à Britone Rege nuncupata, primum A∣ristobulum, fiue illū cuius meminit S. Paulus, quod Dorothaeo probatur, siue aliū vnū certe ex 72. discipulorum classe Apostolū est nata. Deinde Fugariū & Damianū, qui ordinem Hierarchicè Ecclesiae istic fundatae ab illo inchoatum consti∣tuerunt sanxerunt{que} more nimirum Apostolico. Britania so named by Strabo of Kinge Brito or Brutus, had for the first Apostle therof A∣ristobulus, either him, whome S. Paule remē∣breth, which Dorotheus approueth, or an o∣ther, surely one of the order of the 72. disci∣ples, after that Fugarius (Fugatius by others) and Damianus, whoe constituted & confir∣med by Apostolick maner the Hierarchical order begun by him of the church founded there. Where wee see S. Aristobulus, the first founder of the Hierarchicall order in this church of Britanie: a thinge which as al pro∣testāts against the puritans, maketh the pe∣culiar office of an Archbish. Whitgift answ. to the admonit. Bridges eccles. gouern. Bilson against the purit. Couel, Downam, Barlowe &c.
Thirdly, These protestants of England, especially the vniuersitie of Cambridge by their chosen champion Mr. Thomas Rogers for defence of their Articles of Religion of Protestants, writing (to vse his wordes) by the lawfull authoritie of the church of En∣gland, allowed to bee publicke. Thom. Ro∣gers booke of the faith of England pag. 1. doe playnely saie, that S. Aristobulus, was Archbishop in this our Britanie. Thus hee writeth in the name of English protestants and by their warrant. Rogers supra artic. 36. pag. Albeit the Termes and Titles of Arch∣bishops we finde not, yet the superioritie which they enioye, and authoritie which Bishops and Archbishops doe exercise, in orderinge and consecratinge of Bishops, and ecclesiasticall ministers, is grounded vppon the word of God: for wee finde, that in the Apostles daies, how themselues both were in dignitie aboue the Euangelists, and the 70. disciples, and for authoritie both in and ouer the church, as twelue patriarches, saith Beza, and alsoe established an ecclesiasticall heerarchie. Hence came it, that bishop was of Hierusalem Iames; of Antioch Peter; of the Asian churches, Iohn; of Alexandria
marke; of Ephesus and all Asia, Timothie: of all Creete, Titus; of Philippos Epaphra∣ditus; of Corinth and Achaia, Apollos; of Atheus Dionisius: of Fraunce Crescens; of Britanie Aristobulus. Beza in act. Apost. 1.2. D. Chrisosto. in Act. Homil. 33.2. Hieron. in Gal. Euseb. D. Hieron. ad Euagr. D. Hier. in 2. Tim. 1. Theod. arg. in epist. ad Tit. Theod. in epist. ad Phil. Euseb. lib. 2. Dorotheus in Apostol. Synops. Where we see S. Aristobu∣lus not onely ioyned in ranke, and dignitie of spirituall preeminence, with the Euange∣lists, and Apostles themselues, but with the generall authoritie of the protestant church of England plainely declared to bee the first founder of ecclesiasticall hierarchie, and Archbishop of this our Britanie. And to giue euident testimonie, that in their iudge∣ment this nation of the west, both deriued the succession of the Bishops thereof from S. Peter and Aristobulus, and neuer wanted by such vntil these dayes, they thus conclude in this matter, supra pag. 197.198. Finally from the Apostles dayes hetherto neuer wanted a succession of Bishops neither in the East, nor Weste churches, soe prouidēt hath the almightie beene for the augmenta∣tion
of his glorie, and people, by this kinde, and callinge of men. And thus much for the first Archbishop of Britany ordeyned by Saint Peter. Now to come to speake of the Bishops hee consecrated and ordeyned for vs, although it is precisely proued before, that such there were: Episcopos ordinauit. S. Peter ordeyned Bishops here in Britanie for vs, and euery Archbishop which is cheife of Bishops, such as S. Aristobulus was vnto vs, doth necessa∣rily inferr, and proue some Bishops subordi∣nate, and vnder, els hee could not bee the cheife, and principall; for euery Archbishop inferreth necessarily some Bishops or Bishop vnder him their cheife in that callinge. Di∣uers Antiquities of Glastenbury, apud Cap∣grau. in S. Ioseph, affirme, that one of the holy company of Saint Ioseph of Aramathia, namly his sonne Iosephe was a Bishop, which if so it was, hee must needes bee subordinate to S. Aristobulus. And yett if I would sett downe vncertayne thinges, I might place our holy Bishoppe and marty S. Angulus, in or neare this time, with much more proba∣bilitie then some without any authoritie I can finde, referr him to the dayes of Diocle∣tian
his persecution: or say that S. Martine, to whome the christian Romans, builded & dedicated the church at Canterbury, was a British Bishop, and in this time; for that such a S. Martyne a Bishop there was about those dayes, there bee many testimonies, and that hee was consecrated by Romane authoritie; and soe aunciently to proue it probable, hee was a Britanie, that the auntient Manuscript of Radulphus de Diceto deane of London, or whosoeuer Author of Abbreuiatio chroni∣corum, saith, that it was builded in the time of kinge Lucius, for speaking of the time of that our first christian kinge, hee affirmeth▪ (Abbreuiatio chronicorum in Lucio. M.S) Tunc constructa est extra Cantuariam ecclesia Sancti Martini: then the church without Canter∣bury dedicated to S. Martyne, was builded. As diuers also were to S. Peter, our moste glorious Apostle. One I finde consecrated by S. Peter or his successor at Rome, which was both a Britanne, and liued and died a Bishop here in the time of S. Aristobulus, a Germane writer calleth him Achates, but I take not that to bee his name, hee was one of the happy companions of S. Beatus our noble contryman consecrated at Rome, of
whome I will speake more when I come to that glorious man, when I haue first entrea∣ted of the consecration of S. Mansuetus a renowned Bishop, borne in this Iland, con∣secrated by S. Peter himselfe. This man, as many antiquities say, was na∣tione Scotus, by contry a Scot, of the north part of this kingedome, made Bishop by S. Peter, whose disciple hee was before, and sent into these parts, or consecrated by him here, and made Bishop of Tullū in Lorrayne. Tullenses habuere Apostolū, suaeque in Christum fidei pri∣mū Antistitem S. Mansuetum S. Petri Apostoli discipulum, S. Clementis Collegā origine Scotū, (Arnold. Merman. in Theatro Conuers. gentiū in Metensib.) The inhabitants of Tullum (saith Arnoldus Mermannius) had for their Apostle and first Bishopp of their faith in Christ, S. Mansuetus a disciple of S. Peter the Apostle, the fellowe of S. Clement, a Scot by birth. An other citinge alsoe for Au∣thors Antonius Democarez, and Petrus de Natalibus, saith. (Guliel. Eiseng. contenar. 1. part. 1. dist. 3. pag. 56. Petrus de Natal. l. 11. c. vlt. Anton. Monchiacen. Democh. l. 2. de Miss. contr. Caluin. c. 33.) S. Mansuetus, natione Sco∣tus, ex nobili prognatus familia Simonis Bario∣nae
Apostolorum Coryphaei discipulus, socius B. Clementis Episcopi Mettensis, à Petro Leuco∣rum in vrbe Tullensi primus Antistes consecra∣tus est anno Christi 49. Tiberio Claudio Cae∣sare Augusto. In the 49. yeare of Christ in the Empire of Claudius S. Mansuetus a Scot by contry, borne of a noble family, disciple of S. Peter cheife of the Apostles, companiō of S. Clement Bishop of Metz, was By Pe∣ter consecrated the first Bishop in the citie of Tullum. Mermennius, before cited saith, (in Thea∣tro conuers. gentium.) that Saint Clement whose companion this our contrye man Saint Mansuetus was, was Bishop of Metz in, or about the 40. yeare of Christ, in the tyme of Caius Caligula Emperor: Metensibus fidei Religionisque Antistes fuit S. Clemens Romanus, anno & quod excurrit 40. Caio Ca∣ligula Imperatore, S. Petro pontifice maximo. But to admitt, that S. Mansuetus was not made Bishop by S. Peter vntill the 49. yeare of Christ, and was noe Bishop, but an assi∣stant of S. Clement, at his first sendeing by S. Peter of him to Metz, yett to haue a Bis∣hop of our nation, and consecrated and sent to forreyne parts by the cheife Apostle, is an
inuincible argument, that both S. Peter was the first founder and father of the Brittans birth and life in Christ, disposed of all spiri∣tuall affaires here, longe before the cominge of any other Apostle, either into this kinge∣dome or part of the world to conuert it, and left at that time diuers Bishops in this con∣trie, or fitt for that moste holy order: other∣wise hee would not haue sent S. Mansuetus of this contrie forth of Britanie, to execute that high dignitie in a straunge nation, such as Lorrayne, where Tullum is, then was, and still is, to this Iland. And this I may more boldly write, by a consequent and conclu∣ded leaue, and warrant from our Protestant Bishops, and other such Antiquaries, whoe in their greate Theater of Britanie, giue vs diuers graunts, and Rules to leade vs, both to soe tymely a beeing of Saint Peter in this kingedome, & his disciples preaching here, & both claiming & exercising such power∣able iurisdiction and authoritie here, as I haue related from others. First they write in these words. (Theater of greate Britanie lib. 6. cap. 9. §. 5) If Peter were here at all (which they graunted and is demonstrated by them be∣fore)
it was before euer he went to Rome, and the ghospell was preached here, be¦fore it was in Rome, if Peter were the first, as some hold, that preached there, both which may bee more probable. Againe thus they write (§ 7.) It hath passed with allowance amonge the learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when Claudius began to bannish and persecute the Christians in Rome (which they think to bee before this time of S. Mansuetus beeing Bishop of Tul∣lum) many Romans and Britans beeing con∣uerted to the faith, fled thence into these re∣mote parts of the earth where they might & did, more freely enioy the libertie of their professions. And from this Sanctuarie of saluation, the sad lamenting Lady Pompo∣nia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plantius, the first Lord lieutenant of Britanie brought that Religion, whereof she was accused and stood indited vppon life and deathe, which was noe other then the Christian profession. And to interpret themselues more clearlye where (as they hould) this greate Lady the Lord Lieutenants wife was conuerted, thus they sett downe their marginall direction concerning this matter.
Aulus Plantius his wife became a christian in Britanie. Now to assure vs how soone it was, that S. Peter and his disciples had made soe hap∣pie an entrance, and wrought soe glorious effects in this our kingdome, these very Pro∣testants tell vs. That Aulus Plantius was sent hither out of germany, with an army the se∣cond yeare of Claudius, which was (as some Protestants write) in the 44. yeare of Christ, by others the 45. and stayed here but a short time, returninge to Rome and triumphing there, for his victories ouer the Britans, in the yeare of Christ 49. and then in the yeare 50. Publius Ostorius Scapula was Propraetor here. (Theater supr. lib. 6. c. 6. pag. 193. Pro∣testants in Festis Regum an. Dom. 44. Claudij 3. Stowe and Howes histor. an. D. 45) By which accompt of these Protestants themselues, this lamentinge Lady Pomponia Graemia, by them here conuerted to the faith of Christ, and all her christian company, as chaunceth in such cases at soe greate parsonadges conuer∣sion, and many other christians of the Bri∣tans, which they say were then conuerted by those disciples of S. Peter, or by himselfe, (noe others then beeing here) must needes
bee conuerted before, or in the 49 yeare of the Incarnation of our Sauiour, in which as I proued before our contryman S. Mansue∣tus, was ordeyned Bishop of Tullum by S. Peter, which was 14. yeares before the co∣minge of S Ioseph of Aramathia hither, by all antiquities, and diuers by the scriptures themselues, before S. Paul came to Rome or any westerne nation. And if wee may beleeue the Protestant writers of the Theater, they make the co∣ming of S. Paul to Rome, longe after, wri∣ting in these wordes. (Theater of greate Bri∣tanie supr. l. 6. §. 7.) Paule came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero. When both by them and the scriptures, hee was a prisoner two yeares, and could not depart from Rome. Which maketh these Protestants reckoning 16. or 17. yeares after the conuersion of soe many in Britanie, and consecration of S. Mansuetus that holy Bishop by S Peter. And to proue further vnto vs, not onely that these first christians of Britany were conuerted by S. Peter, but that others of this our nation, were euen at this time, consecrated preists, and Bishops alsoe by S. Peter, these Prote∣stant Bishops and others, hauing immediatly
spoken before of the conuersion of Lady Pomponia Graecina here in Britany in or be∣fore the 49. yeare of Christ, they proceede in these wordes. (Theater of the Empire of great Britanie l. 6. §. 9. B. Rhenan. in history, of Germany. Pantaleon.) And much about these times, as B. Rhenanus in his history of Germany, Pantaleon, and others doe re∣porte, one Suetonius a noble mans sonne in Britanie, conuerted to the faith by the first planters of the ghospell in this Iland, and af∣ter his Baptisme called Beatus, was sent by the bretheren from hence, vnto Rome to bee better instructed, and further directed by Saint Peter himselfe. And returninge through Suitcerland, found such willingnes and flockinge of the people to heare, and re∣ceaue the doctrine of Christ, that hee there stayed, and built an oratory not far from the bake Thun, & neare the Towne called Vn∣derfewen, where in preachinge and prayers, hee employed his time to the day of his death, which happened in the yeare of gra∣ce 110. Hitherto the words of our english Prote∣stants, of this glorious and renowned man, far exceeding that which they giue him here:
for as their Author Henricus Pantaleon. (de viris Illustr. Germaniae part. 1 p. 114. a German Protestant writeth plainely of him, that hee was, the Apostle of Heluetians. S. Beatus Hel∣uetiorum Apostolus. Which Title and name none but puritans of anie Religion will giue to any but Bishops, and none but such which onely haue power to consecrate preists, (without which a true church cannot bee) can either bee, or truely called their Apo∣stle. And that this holy Bishop of Britanie though hee staied most in Heluetia, yet that hee was principally sent to bee a Bishopp in Britanie by Saint Peter, it is euident by these Protestants before, testifyinge that hee was returning into Britanie, and soe chei∣fely directed by Saint Peter: (Pantal. su∣pra Stamph. lib. 7. de Sanct.) Which Pan∣taleon with Stamphius and others doe more plainely witnesse, saying. S. Beatus ille nobi∣libus parentibus natus ex Britannia, in pa∣triam rediens &c. S. Beatus borne of no∣ble parents in Britanie, returninge into his contry: and adding of him, omnia bo∣na pauperibus distribuit: hee distributed all his goods to the pore: must needes bee in Britanie, where of these his goods he was to
make distributor of them. And these Germā historians tel vs, that hee had an other com∣panion sent and directed with him, from Rome by S. Peter or his authoritie there, and beeinge alsoe a Britaine returned hither, beeing consecrated Preist or Bishop by the same authoritie, and at the same time. So that wee see by these Protestants them∣selues, that soe longe as S. Peter liued, the Bi∣shops and Preists of Britanie were consecra∣ted by him in this contry, and in his absen∣ce hence went vnto Rome for their conse∣cration, and to bee directed by him. This o∣ther companion of S. Beatus, borne in this kingdome, and consecrated at Rome by S. Peter, and returninge hither, where for any thinge wee reade otherwise in histories, hee continued in preaching all his life, and died here, some Germane writers haue na∣med Achates. (Anonymus apud Beat. Rhenan. de Reb. German. l. 3. pag. 172. Rhen. supr) Whether that was his true name or noe, it is not materiall to my purpose to question here: the historie it selfe in germany beeing soe certainely and generally receaued, that it is, and aunciently was published, printed, and painted in their churches there. Haec
historia non solum picta est in templis ac scripta, sed etiam typis expressa: of this historie men∣tion is made, especially of S. Beatus in the Romane Martyrologe, S. Beda, Vsuardus, Molanus, Gulielmus Eisengrenius, the An∣tiquities of Heluetia, and expressely in the auncient monuments of the church of Con∣stance, and others (Martyrolog. Rom. 9. die Maij. Beda Vsuard & Mol. ab. Guliel. Eis. cen∣tur. 2. part. 5. Annal. Helu Momment. Eccle. Constant. Baron. annot in Mart. Rom. 9. Maij.) neyther can wee thinke that these two holy Bishops or preists of this kingedome of our Britanie were singular in this, but that wee had more so consecrated, and directed from Rome besides them, and needed not Bis∣hops and pastors here, otherwise S. Beatus would not haue stayed moste of his time in Heluetia, forth of his contry, nor S. Peter his consercator and director, & our Apostle by these Protestants before, giuen allowāce vnto it. Neyther had S. Beatus beene sent (the words of our Protestants and Pantaleon al∣soe) by the brethren from hence vnto Rome to bee better instructed and further directed by S. Peter himselfe. (Theater, and Pantal. supr.)
But that the Brethren and Christians here depended of Saint Peter, and accompted it both their dutie, and honor to this nation, to haue their spirituall Guides, Bishops, and Preists consecrated and directed by him, and his Apostolicque supreame power and commaunde, in Religious thinges. Now lett vs returne to S. Peters beeinge here in Britanie; whereof I haue spoken be∣fore, how to supply all spiritual wants of this kingedome, and founde our church, in Bri∣tannia longo tempore fuit moratus, he stayed in Britanie a longe time, as the greeke anti∣quities remembred vnto vs by our Protestāts haue told vs: and to expresse his greate loue, & care, to this & other western natiōs, more particularly comended to his chardge, this longe time was soe longe, and his loue to vs so greate, that as both S. Simō Metaphrastes, and Eusebius Pamphili in some booke not now, but in the time of Metaphrastes extāt, and by him constantly cited, say: S. Peter stayed at Rome, and in Britanie, and the cities of the west, three and twentie yeares. Eusebius Pamphili dicit Petrum viginti tres annos trās∣egisse Romae, & in Britannia, & in ciuitatibus quae sunt in occidente. (Simon Metaphrastes
die 29. Iunij. Eusebius Pamph. apud eund. supr. Surius 29. Iunij.) allotinge onely as it seemeth the rest of the 25. yeares which is common∣lie said, the time of his beeing at Rome and these parts, to his Iorney in the east, at the time of the migration of the B. Virgin our Lady forth of this world. Which is confir∣med by some of our Protestant antiquaries of England in these words. This yeare 70. beinge the fourteenth yeare of Nero Bassus and Tuscus, beeing then Romane Consuls, the holy Apostle S. Peter hauinge accomplished his preachinge, in the west parts, returned to Rome, where hee preached agayne, as hee did before. (Ioh. Stow and Ed. Howes histor, titul. Romans in Iulius Agricola.) And before his departure hence, as I haue allready remembred, besides S. Man∣suetus, S. Beatus and such as hee consecrated Bishops of our nation in forreyn places, or for them out of Britanie, hee ordeyned here, and for this kingedome Bishops, Preists & Deacons. Apud Britannos Episcopos, presbyteros & diaconos ordinauit. Who these Bishops in particular were, I reade noe man precisely to sett them downe, yett if wee will followe the antiquities of Glastenbury
saying that S. Iosephe the sonne of S Ioseph of Aramathia was a Bishop, as both Catho∣licks and Protestants allowe them in other things: I craue pardon probably to write, that he was one of them which S. Peter con∣secrated here. First, because as is graunted, before S. Aristobulus our Archbishop, vnto whom S. Ioseph, whether Bishop or noe, was subiect, was ordeyned by S. Peter. Secondly because S. Ioseph is named a Bishop, and yet in pro∣bable iudgmēt none when hee came hither, with his Father S. Ioseph, for by the same and all other antiquities and histories of that matter, S. Ioseph his Father noe Bishop, was the Abbot or Superior of all that company, yet neither Catholick nor Protestant will easily instance that Bishops, by order and Sacrament Superiors, were or might bee In∣feriors or subiects to any of Inferior degree. Secondlie there is noe possibilitie by any authoritie, that I finde at all, to surmise that S. Ioseph was a Bishop before his cominge hither, but the wordes of the antiquitie which say of him: that Iesus consecrated him Bishop before in the citie Sarath: Quem Domi∣nus Iesus prius in ciuitate Sarath, in Episcopum
consecrauit. (Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Ioseph ab Aramathia.) Which noe Pro∣testant will or may by their Religion say, was a true and reall consecration, but ra∣ther propheticall, what should bee done, by orderly consecration after. For this vision was longe after Christs Ascension into hea∣uen, where all Protestants of England euer since, imprison him to keepe him from being present in the B. Sacrament of the altar. Thirdlie they and all others generally de∣nie such extraordinary proceedings, where an ordinary and vniuersall order, as in this case is appointed by Christ himselfe. Wher∣fore S. Paul himselfe that vessell of Election, and extraordinary Apostle, though miracu∣lously conuerted, chosen, and called, yett hee neither was actually a christian without externall baptisme, nor a Bishop but by Im∣position of hands, and ordinary consecra∣tion. And wee reade of S. Sampson, our holy Archbishop of yorke, that before hee was a Bishop, S. Peter, S. Iames, and S. Iohn appeared vnto him saying: (Io. Capgrau. in S. Sampsone Episc. & Confessore.) Our Lord Ie∣sus Christ hath chosen thee for a Bishop, and sent vs to consecrate thee: whom when they had
consecrated with benediction, they disappeared out of his sight. Nocte quadam vidit se densissi∣mis candidatorum turmis circundari: & tres Episcopos vestibus aureis ornatos, cum illo eccle∣siam ingredientes orare, cuius vnus illorum ab ipso inquisitus, qui esset, ait. Ego sum Petrus Christi Apostolus, & hic frater Domini Iaco∣bus, & Euangelista Ioannes. Dominus Iesus Christus te sibi in praesulem elegit, & te conse∣crare nos misit. Quē cùm benedictione consecras∣sent, ab eius oculis elapsi sunt. And yett nei∣ther S. Sampson nor any other tooke this for a reall consecration, but onely figuratiue of that which was after to bee done by the ho∣lie externall rite of the church of Christ; vntill as wee reade in the same history, our holy Archbishop S. Dubricius vpon the ap∣parition and message of an Angell did truely and really, externally consecrate him a Bishop: nec multo post Angelus Domini beato Dubricio apparens, Sampsonem ordinari Episcopum praece∣pit. (Capgr. supr.) Soe I might exemplifie in many such cases, only propheticall and figu∣ratiue, what should afterward bee done, and not what was then effected. Therfore if S. Ioseph was a Bishop as that antiquitie persuadeth, by that figuratiue vi∣sion,
& not cōsecrated before hee came into Britanie, as is shewed before, & wee reade of no other which at that time made, & conse∣crated Bishops but S Peter, I may probably at the leaste affirme, that S. Iosephe was one of them which S Peter at his departure hēce, (S. Iosephe beeing certainely here at that time) was consecrated Bishop by Saint Peter here in Britanie. And when I finde both Ca∣tholicks and Protestants affirme, (Martyrol. Angl. 7. die Februarij. Drkin Almin. an. 1620. 7. Feb. with others.) that S. Angulus was our Bishop of London & martyr, and yet noe hi∣storiā, Catholick or Protestāt, putteth him in the nūber of them which were Bishops there after the time of K. Lucius, but quite leaue him out of that catalogue, as appeareth by our Protestants Harrison, Godwyne, Stowe & others which with al diligēce they could, haue collected the auncient Bishops of Lon∣don, I must needs drawe him to an higher time then that of kinge Lucius was, before which noe consecration of Bishops in Brita∣ny was, or is so memorable as this by S. Peter the Apostle (Harris. descript. of Brit Godw Ca∣talog. of Bishop in London 1. Stowe and How. l. hist. Lucius Iocelin of Furnes l. de Episc. Brit.
And to end here the Relation or S. Peters proceedings in Britanie, wee haue clearly, deduced, with the allowance of our best En∣glish Protestant Antiquaries, and other Au∣thors by them approued; That S. Peter Prin∣ce of the Apostles, was our first Father in Christ, and renowned Apostle, both imme∣diately by himselfe, and his holy disciples; That hee performed here all cheife and emi∣nent pastorall duties and offices, when our Emperors with our Lieutenants here, as also all our Kings were pagan Infidels; That hee ordeyned and consecrated for vs Bishops, preists, and other clergie men, and founded churches to the honor & Religion of Christ, and the honor of his blessed Mother S. Mary the Virgin, (few other christian Saints then deceased) as that of Glastenbury not soe de∣dicated without his approbation, beeing cheife in such affaires. Hee consecrated o∣ther Britans out of this nation, exemptinge them from the pagan seruice of those such remembred princes, hee sent them by autho∣ritie to preach the ghospell, in other contries, hee or his disciples conuerted Pomponia Graecina the Lord Lieutenants wife of Bri∣tanie, as these Protestants haue proued, and
many in the like case, their husbands conti∣nuing in their infidelitie, and contradiction, and many husbands and children, the wiues and parents not allowinge, as seruants in respect of their Lords and masters, and Sub∣iects in regard of soueraignes. I, a Catholick Preist, now demaund of the best learned Protestāts Bishops of England, whether these proceedings and prerogati∣ues in that moste glorious Apostle, and his worthie disciples, our first Masters in Christ, were not as greate and ample, as the renow∣ned Preists and Catholicks of this kinge∣dome now attribute, and giue to the Popes of Rome his Apostolicke Successors? Wee whoe haue reade moste, and suffered much for this cause, cannot see the difference, or finde instance of disparitie, except in num∣ber of parsons, lesse or greater quantities of groundes, and some improportions in such thinges, which make noe essentiall diuersi∣tie, for otherwise wee haue beene told by the best learned Protestants with others, that S. Peter and his disciples did manifest∣lie and directly transfer and chaunge those parsons, places, and propertie of thinges of this our Britanie from a temporall, to al spi∣rituall
vse, from the commande (except in temporall dutie) of the present Emperors, Lieutenants, Kings, and Soueraignes aliena∣ted from Christiā Religion, to the cōmande of Christ, his Religion, our moste holy Apostle and his disciples, by his authoritie soe directinge. THE III. CHAPTER. How in the rest of this first Hundred yeares of Christ after Saint Peter, The Aposto∣licke See of Rome, still continued and ex∣ercised this supreame spirituall power in Britanie. IT is a question, not onely amonge Catho∣licks (but some Protestants also) whether S. Linus & Cletus were Popes after S. Peter, or onely Suffragan Bishops, as soe ordeyned by him at the first. And Pope Leo the second an holy Saint, with there nowned of our Hi∣storians to omitt others, S. Marianus & Flo∣rentius Wigorniensis, say plainely: Si Petrus Apostolorum princeps adiutoris sibi asciuit Li∣num & Cletum, non tamen pontificij potestatem cis tradidit, sed Clementi successori suo. If Peter
Prince of the Apostles, did take Linus and Cletus to bee his Adiutors, yett hee gaue not them the Papall power, but to Clement his successor. And Linus and Cletus did no∣thinge by their owne Lawes and power as popes, but only soe much as was commaun∣ded them by S. Peter. (S. Leo 2. in epist. decre∣tal. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat. 6. Florent Wigor. in Siluan. & Otho Consul. Robert. Barns in vit. Port. Rom. in Linum.) Therfore to omitt doubtfull and vncertaine thinges, and to come next to S. Clement whoe moste cer∣tainely by all Cathololicks and Protestants was Pope of Rome nominated by S. Peter: (though Baronius and others whom he al∣leageth are of opinion that S. Clement yeel∣ded his right, and did not exercise the office of supreame pastour til after Linus and Cle∣tus, yet who in S. Peters life him were his Coadiutors & after his death his successors before S. Clemēt, (to 1. Annal. p 742.743 744.745.) before any other: by this Pope, Doctors were sent into the west (as our Protestants tell vs (Margin. annot. vppon Matth. Westin an. 94. Matth. Westm supr.) in greate numbers, as S. Denis, Nicasius, Taurinus, Trophimus, Paulus Narbonensis, Saturninus, Martialis, Gratianus,
Iulianus, Lucianus, Firminus, Photinus all Bishops, & they add S. Regulus. Whome al∣though they setle thē with their Bishopricks in Fraunce, yett it proueth the power & spi∣rituall commaund of that holy pope, to haue extended it selfe aswell to this kingdome, one and the same reason beeing for, and a∣gainst them both. But wee finde diuers Authorities both late and auncient to induce vs, to consent that some of these named holy Bishops, sent at this time, by S. Clement, were sent by him into this kingdome of Britanie, namely S. Taurinus and S. Nicasius: and that S. Tauri∣nus was Archbishop or Bishop of yorke. A∣monge others, William Harrison a Prote∣stant historian. (In descript. of Britanie. pag. 23. Chronolog. ibid. an. 141.) produceth an Antiquitie that soe affirmeth: whereuppon hee writeth in this maner: Whether Taurinus Bishop ouer the congregation at yorke, were one of the nyne schollers of Grantha Cambridge spoken of in the chronicles of Burton, I doe not certainely finde. But certayne it is, that Wal∣terus Rollewink in his history fasciculus tem∣porum. (an. 94.) saith. S. Taurinus was Episco∣pus Eboracensis, Bishop of yorke, which is here
in Britanie: and soe not Ebroicensis in Fraunce, where the same or an other of that name was Bishop about the same time▪ And an other late writer (Harris Theatrum. l. 1.) in his manuscript history, alleadging both S. Antoninus and diuers others, saith: diuers haue written that both S. Nicasius and Tauri∣nus were here in Britanie, and for S. Taurinus, S. Antoninus saith, that S. Taurinus: filiam Lu∣cij Regis Britanniae à morte suscitauit. S. Tau∣rinus did raise from death the daughter of Lu∣cius, Kinge of Britanie. (S. Antonin. hist. part. 1. titul. 6. cap.) Which directly proueth, that S. Taurinus was here in our Britanie, & this Kinge Lucius for certaine, was eyther hee that liued to receaue the faith of Christ pu∣blickly in the time of Pope Eleutherius, be∣ginning his reigne in the yeare of Christ 124 (Matt. Westm. an. 124.) or Lucius Ante∣nous the Romane praefect in Britanie called there vppon. Rex Britanniae, Kinge of Bri∣tanie, as well hee might, prescribinge lawes vnto vs in Britanie as Hector Boethius. (Sco∣tor. hist. l. 5. fol. 76.77.78.) with others witt∣nesse: and was resident at yorke in the time of the Emperor Adrian, when and where S. Taurinus is supposed to haue beene Bishop
and wrought this miracle. For S. Anacasius beeing sent hither by S. Clement, they which teach soe. (Harris supr.) produce the french histories that hee preached to the Bri∣tans, which in that time were onely those of this kingdome, the little Britanie in Fraunce then and longe after named Armorica, and not Britannia. And yett to omitt others, Arnoldus Mer∣mannus in his Theater of the conuersion of nations. (§. Britones.) saith, that amonge other people, S. Anacasius beeing delegated thither an Apostle by S. Clement, did instruct and informe in the faith the Britans, and all the waste of the Ocean Sea. Britones, Norman∣dos, Rhotomagenses, Picardos, omnemque Ma∣ris Oceani tractum instruxit, formauitque fide S. Nicasius à S. Clemente illuc Apostolus dele∣gatus. And to putt vs out of doubt, that S. Clement did take vppon him the spirituall chardge of this our Britanie, as well as of Fraunce and other places, the same Au∣thor from others testifieth, that our Arch∣bishop S Aristobulus, whoe as Eisingrenius saith, had beene a Bishop from anno Chri∣sti 39. the 39 yeare of Christ, was yett our Apostle in Britanie aliue in the yeare of
Christ 99 S. Clement then Pope. Et quod excurrit 99. Clemente Pontifice Maximo, Do∣mitiano Imperatore. (Guliel. Eiseng. centen. 1. part. 1. dist. 7. fol. 67. Arnold. Mermman. Theater conuers gent. in Albione▪) And wee haue yett in England an old manuscript, a short historicall relation. (M. S. antiq. pr. Stores in Exordium.) Of the publicke Masse, and church seruice, of the Britans, and French men, from the Apostles time, written before the vnion of the Britans with S. Augustines mission, by S. Gregorie, and written by a Brittish Author, testifying that the publicke church seruice and Masse, both of the french and Brittans was carried vp to Rome to S. Clement, to bee examined and approued by him then Pope, which hee ac∣cordingly performed by his papall power, &c this Masse was euer after vsed both in Fraū∣ce, and this our kingedome of Britanie. Soe that moste euident it is, by those few Antiquities left vnto vs, that in the time of S. Clement whoe was Pope in the later end of the first, & beginninge of the second hundred yeare of Christ, this our church of Britanie was wholly in spiritual thinges, de∣pendant and subordinate to the church and
Popes of Rome: and thus much of the first age and hundred yeare, from the birth of Christ. When here and of this nation there were yett liuinge many Bishops consecrated by S. Peter, and the Romane Papall authori∣tie: S. Aristobulus, Mansuetus, Beatus, and probably S. Iosephe, Taurinus, Nicasius, Angu∣lus, and others; for to add to the former, S. Anacletus saith in his Epistle, approued by our Protestants of England, our contryman S. Marianus and others. (Rob. Barns in vita pont. Rom. in Anacl. Mar. Scot. l. 2. de aetat. 6. col. 250. Florent. Wigorn. in Domit.) that the prouinces where Archbishops were, were diuided by the Apostles and S. Clement his predecessor, ab Apostolis & Beato clemente praecessore no∣stro, ipsa Prouincia diuisio renouata est. (Some do make Clitus and Anaclitus alone, and make him praedecessour to S. Clemente see. Baro. to. 1.) Therefore most euident it is that S. Clement tooke vppon him and exercised, this su∣preame Papall and spirituall power in this kingedome.
THE SECOND CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE. THE IV. CHAPTER. Shewing by these Protestants, how the popes of Rome in this second Century of yeares clay∣med, had, and exercised supreame spirituall Iurisdiction and power in Britanie. TO begin with the second age, and hun∣dred yeare, Saint and Pope Anacletus offereth him selfe first, beeing the next and immediate Successor to S. Clement, and as hee himselfe wittnesseth. (Epist. decretal. Ma∣rian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. col. 250. Florentius Wi∣gorn. in Domitiano. Matth. Westin. an. 102.) Both instructed, and taught and made preist by S. Peter cheife of the Apostles: vt à beato Pe∣tro principe sumus instructi, à quo & presbyter sum ordinatus. This holy Pope S. Peters dis∣ciple beginning his papacy in the 102. yeare of Christ as our Protestants of England en∣forme vs. (Rob. Barns. in vit. pontif. Rom. in Anacleto. Ormerod. pict. of Pap. pag. 78.) Thought that the primacy ouer all churches
was graūted to the church of Rome by our Lord himselfe, and ouer all Christian people. Ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae Ecclesiae super om∣nes Ecclesias, vniuersumque Christiani no∣mine populum concessum esse asseruit. And they tell vs further, how according to this supreamacie graunted by Christ to the See of Rome, ouer all churches and Christian people, hee executed the same in makinge his general decrees, bindinge all Bishops, Priests and others, both concerninge the most blessed sacrifice of the Masse, and Iu∣risdiction. Amonge other thinges, to speake in Prote∣stant words. (Rob. Barns supra) Episcopos of∣ficio pares, ordine duplici distinxit: eos primates, siue patriarchas appellari voluit, qui in illis ciui∣tatibus praeessent, in quibus olim primarij Fla∣mines sederunt: in alijs metropolitanis vrbi∣bus, Episcopos Metropolitans vel Archiepis∣copos nominandos esse censuit. Hee distinguis∣hed Bishops equall in order, into two de∣grees: causinge them to bee named Pri∣mates, or Patriarkes, which ruled in those cities, in which of olde the Archflamens did sitt: in other Metropolitane cities, hee would haue them named Metropoli∣tans
or Archbishops, and hee calleth this not his owne decree, but the decree of S. Clement his predecessor, and Saint Peter al∣soe. (Anacl. supr. & apud Mar. Scot. & Flor. Wigorn. supr) And setteth downe in a cer∣tayne Tome, what cytes were to haue pri∣mates, both accordinge to his owne, S. Cle∣ments, and the Apostles order. And this decree of Sainct Anacletus, in this highest question of Iurisdiction, was soe vniuersall and generall in it selfe, soe embraced of all, and includinge, that as not onely Giraldus Cambrensis, and aun∣cient authorities of this nation, (Lib. 2. de Iure Metropol. eccles. Meneuen. ad Innocent. 3.) but the cheife Protestant Antiquaries themselues, as Mathew Parker the first Pro∣testant Archbishop of Canterburie, (Lib. antiquit. Britannic. pag. 24.) and Syr Iohn Prise, (Io. Pris. defens. histor. Britan. pag. 73.) doe plainelie acknowledge, that by that Tome of Saint Anacletus Pope, it was conteyned and decreed, how manie and which were the places throughout all this Iland euen as it conteyned England, Scotland, and Wales. And thereupon this Protestant Archbishopp, doth in expresse
termes call the diuision of Britanie in that respect: Ex Anacleto huius Insulae diuisionem. The diuision of this Iland according to the de∣cree of Pope Anacletus: And though this di∣uision was not actually made at that time for setting Archbishops in those prouinces at that time, but was deferred vntill in after when the faith was recreaued here in more publicke maner, when persecution ceased, or was mitigated; yett by these authorities there is noe doubt, but this holy Pope both claymed, and exercised the same highest spi∣rituall Iurisdiction, as well in this, as all o∣ther nations, that decree beeing generall, and without limitation for all nations, as it is allowed by these Protestants, and making all prouinces in the knowne world, substi∣tute and subordinate to the church of Rome in such affaires, and none exempted. And as this decree alone will witnes, hee sent as opportunitie and the cause required, Bishops and preists into other contries, soe he did the like to this, to encrease and conti∣nue that happy buildinge, which his prede∣cessors had founded here before. Soe wee must say of his immediate Successor Saint Euaristus, except wee will reiect the autho∣ritie
of one, of our moste auntient and ap∣proued historians, Nennius, who in his ma∣nuscript auntient history, written if wee may beleeue the Protestant Bishop Bale. (l. de scriptor. cent. 1. in Nennio.) A thowsand yeares since, confidently affirmeth that, Bri∣tannicus Rex, A kinge of Britanie receaued an ambassadge from Euaristus Pope of Rome, to re∣ceaue the faith of Christ, missa legatione à Papa Romano Euaristo; (Mennius hist. M. S.) who yett sayth with others, that the generall cō∣uersion of this land, was not vntill the yeare of Christ 167. others making it later. This holy Pope began his papacie in the yeare 111. and liued therein vntil 120. be∣fore which time our kinge Coillus, brought vp at Rome, was soe well disposed to Chri∣stian Religion, that as our Protestants and the antiquities of Glastenbury tell vs, hee confirmed the twelue hides of land to the re∣ligious Eremitage of Glastenbury. (Anti∣quitat. glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Ioseph and others.) And therefore cominge from Rome into Britanie to bee kinge (his Father kinge Marius beeinge deade) wee cannot thinke but as many of our contrimen his subiects then at Rome, were Christians, and in soe
greate number, that in one Brittish house there, the house of S. Claudia our Brittish Lady, and children after her, there were at, or soone after this time, in the time of Pope Pius the first, 96. christians; (Act. 5 Puden∣tianae Breuiar. Rom. in vit. eius 19. Maij.) So many of them, and of other nations also, and cleargie men, were sent hither by the Pope of Rome at that time, which many of our Protestant historians will confirme, as∣suringe, that both now and at all times vn∣till the conuersion of kinge Lucius, there were many christians which came from Rome, liuinge in this kingdome. (Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie pag. Caius l 1. antiq. Can∣tabrig. Will. Harrison. descript. of Brit. Ho∣linsh. hist. of Engl.) Soe doe diuers auntient antiquities of the Annals of Burton, and others of forreine nations. And touchinge the time of Pope Alexan∣der the first, next successor to S. Euaristus, hee beinge made Pope in the yeare 120. and continuinge Bishop of Rome by common opinion 8. yeares, and fiue moneths, in the fourth yeare of the papacie of this blessed Saint, as both Matthew of Westminster. (Annal. Burton. an. 141. Catal. Episcop. Tungr.)
and the autient Table hanging in the church of S. Peter in Cornehil, in London, then builded in the time of kinge Lucius, witt∣nesse, beeinge the 124 yeare of Christ. The yeare of our Lord God 124. Lucius was crow∣ned kinge: soe the one, & the other saith: an∣no gratiae 124. Coillo Britonum Rege defuncto, Lucius filius eius regni diademate insignitus est. In the yeare of grace 124. Coillus kinge of the Britans beeing deade, Lucius his son∣ne was crowned king. Math. Westin. an. 124. This kinge Lucius, although neither hee nor the kingdome were yett soe generally conuerted, yet well knowinge that many preachers had beene sent hither from Rome, and diuers Brittans here were desirous to em∣brace the faith of Christ, did not onely giue way vnto it, in this beginning of his Reig∣ne, but except Albertus Krantzius a man well acquainted with our Brittish antiqui∣ties (as a Protestant antiquary witnesseth) doth deceaue vs. (Io. Caius antiq. Cantabrig. l. 1. Albert. Krantzius Metropol. l. 1. cap. 6.) Did write vnto S. Alexander the first, Pope of Rome to haue christian Religion preached in this kingedome. Religionem Christi Lucius quondam Britanniae Rex, ab Alexandro primo
eius nominis summo pontifice, impetrauit in In∣sula predicari. Lucius Kinge of Britanie did obteyne of Pope Alexander the first, to here Christian Religion preached in that Iland. Which is confirmed by many Authorities, prouening vnto vs, that this Iland at, and immediately after that time, had diuers preachers of the faith of Christ, and among them some Bishops, besides those I named before, to proue that wee had a continuall succession of holy Bishops from Rome, as these alsoe were, from our first christianity. And that wee had many preachers, and many by them conuerted, may appeare by that is acknowledged before from these Protestants: to which many of them add, & from antiquities, that many Schollers & Doctors of our Vniuersities then were con∣uerted in the yeare 141. nyne in one place of Cambridge. In peruetustis Annalibus Bur∣tonensibus sic lego. Anno Domini 141. hic bap∣tizati sunt nouem ex Doctoribus & Scholari∣bus Cantabrigiae. I doe reade (sayth one) in very old Annals of Burtō thus. In the yeare of our Lord 141. here were baptized nyne of the Doctors & Schollers of Cambridge. (Caius lib. 1. de antiq. Cantab. pag. 95. Theater
of greate Brit. lib. 6. Harris. descript. of Brit) Like to this haue many other Protestants: who assure vs, this succession could not come from S. Ioseph of Aramathia and his company, for a Protestāt Bishop, according to the truth of histories writeth: (Godwyn. conuers. of Brit. pag. 16. c. 3.) It seemeth that Ioseph and his fellowes preuayled little by their preaching, and therefore gaue themselues at last vnto a monasticall and solitary life in the Iland of Aualon.) And euen their memorie was soe much forgotten when kinge Lucius was conuerted, that as our best antiquities wee haue of that matter, tel vs, those which S. Eleutherius sent from Rome, found the best information of them at Rome, & their auncient howse or church was soe desolat, that it was become, Latibulū Ferarum, a den for wyld beasts at their cominge hither. (Antiquit. Glaston apud Capgrau. in S. Io∣seph Aramath. in S Patr.) I finde in histories no others, from whom wee haue the leaste probabilitie to clayme a continuaunce in Religion, therefore it must needs bee from Rome, from whence alsoe wee had amonge these holy men, some Bis∣hops to continue a succession from thence.
For although S. Beatus was but lately deade liuing vnto this yeare 110. it is not vnlikely but his companion was still liuinge, and except there were twoe of that name, and in those times and the same contrie, which no history doth remember, S. Mansuetus was yet a liue, and longe after vntil wee had ma∣nie other Bishops sent from Rome, or con∣secrated here by the Romane authoritie, in the time of this Kinge Lucius. For wee reade in the Annals and Catalogue of the Archbishops of Treuers, neare vnto Tullum, that in the yeare 160. S. Mansuetus was Bis∣hop there: Mansuetus qui huic nomini & vo∣cationi suae vita proba, anno Domini 160. optime respondit. The seuenth Archbishop of Treuers was Mansuetus, whoe by his godly life did ex∣cellently answeare this his name to bee meeke, and his vocation in the yeare of Christ 160. (Annales Arch. Treuer. Petrus Merssaeus Catal. Arch. Treuer.) Which by noe historye I can finde, was or could bee any other, but Saint Mansuetus our contryman spoken of before, both the name, time, and place soe neare vnto Tullum, where hee was first Bishopp alloweinge it, and nothinge im∣pugninge it.
And amonge those Bishops here in Brita∣nie, and of our owne nation, I finde two named beinge both consecrated and sent hither by the Authoritie of the See of Rome: one of them S. Tymotheus sonne to our ho∣ly contryman, Saint Marcellus, or by some Marcellinus a Britanne borne, and a Bishop here, and after Bishop of the Tungers, and lastely, Archbishop of Treuers, both which preached here in the time of Kinge Lucius longe before his conuersion, and at or be∣fore this time, and were instruments of his happy conuersion, actually and parsonallye concurringe therto by mission and Authori∣tie from the Popes of Rome: of which I haue made more lardge and ample relation in o∣ther places: for this purpose soe many Au∣thors here cited will suffice, both Catholicks and Protestants consentinge that S. Tymo∣thie and S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, prea∣ched here in the time of kinge Lucius and before his conuersion. (Petrus de Natalib. lib. 1. cap. 24. Harris Tom. 2. Magdeb. centur 2. Annal. Eccles. Cur. Io. Stumph. in Rhetia. Pe∣trus Merssaeus in catalog. Archiep. Treuer. in Archiep. 20. Anton. Democh. l. 2. de Miss. cont. Caluin. Gulielm. Eisengren. centen. 2. part. 4.
distinct. 7. Petr. Merss. in Archiep. Treuer.) And that this S. Tymothie could not bee Saint Tymothie Bishop of Ephesus S. Pauls Scholler, to whome hee wrote the Epistles, whoe was martyred many yeares before Kinge Lucius was borne, and S. Onesimus was his Successor in S. Ignatius time, as hee himselfe is witnesse: (Epist. ad Ephes.) But onely S. Tymothie our blessed contryman by his mother S. Claudia, (Martyrol. Rom. die 20. Iunij.) and a child baptized by the Apostles, and thereupon called their disci∣ple, whoe was owner of the house in Rome, where S. Peter by the Roman tradition first entertayned there, and of S. Tymothie the Lord thereof in his time named Thermae Ti∣mothinae, the Bathes of Tymotheus, (Act. 5. Iustini Philosoph. Baron. annot. in 20. Iunij in S. Nouato.) which hee forsooke for the loue of God, and this his nation, soe soone, that by Pope Pius the first, martyred in the yeare 154. his said house was cōsecrated a church, hee himselfe beeing then in all probabilitie preaching in this Iland, as so many Autho∣rities cited doe warrant. The historie of S. Marcellus or Marcelli∣nus, both to haue beene a Britane, a Bishop,
and to haue preached here longe before S. Linus was conuerted, that hee persuaded him to bee a Christian, and after went into Germany, and returned from thence into Britanie againe, sent with others from Pope Eleutherius to conuert kinge Lucius & this kingdome as they did, is an vndoubted ve∣ritie, acknowledged by all that write of that matter. And therefore our Protestāts of En∣gland freely graunt vs in these wordes. Euen from the dayes of those godlie men, whoe first taught the Britans the ghospell, there remayned amonge the same Britans, some Christians which ceased not to teach and preach the word of God, most sincerely vnto them: But yett noe kinge amongst thē openly professed that Religion, till at length this Lucius perceauinge not onely some of the Roman Lieutenants in Britanie, as Tre∣bellius and Pertinax with others, to haue submitted themselues to that profession, but alsoe the Emperor himselfe to begin to bee fauorable to them that professed it. And then hee setteth downe how kinge Lucius sent to Pope Eleutherius to bee instructed in, and receaue the faith of Christ: and in like maner is the Relatiō of other Protestāts.
(Holinsh. histor. of England lib. 4. cap. 19. Math. Park, Antiquit Britan. pag. 4.5. Ioh. Goscelius in histor. Manuscript. Bal. l. 2. de actibus Pontif. in Gregor. 1. & l. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in Au∣gust Dirnoth. Godwyn Conuers. Powel annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. c. 1. Foxe to 2. Act. pag. 463 Fulke Ans. to count Cath. pag. 40. Mid∣dlet. papistam pag. 202. Stowe. Holinsh. &c. Then if by these men there stil continued a succession of true preachers in Britanie from the Apostles time. (Protestant Articl. of Religion. Bils. Whitgift, Barlow, Bridges, Downam, Hockeer, Couel & others against pu∣ritans.) Which the puclick Protestant Reli∣gion denieth to bee without true Bishops to consecrate such preists and preachers: and the Romane Luietenants themselues and christians, and soe consequently as the great∣nes of their state and necessitie of the church here required had Bishops, and rather from Rome, beeing themselues Romans; And I haue exemplified in soe many Bishops con∣secrated and sent hither by S. Peter and his holy successors Popes of Rome, and not any one Instance can bee giuen of any one Bi∣shop or preist in all this time, sent or conse∣crated by any others, wee must needes leaue
that prerogatiue to Rome, and honor to Bri∣tanie, to haue had the holy Bishops and pa∣stors of this church from thence: And that Apostolicke See to haue ruled here in spiri∣tuall things, as these Protestants haue freely acknowledged in the holy Popes S. Anacle∣tus, Euaristus and S. Alexander allready. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pontific. in nominibus citat. Downam lib. 1. of Antichrist. cap. 3. pag. 35. And soe they teach, that al the following Popes vnto S. Eleutherius, to witt S. Sixtus the first, Telesphorus, Higinius, Pius and Anicetus the immediate predecessor to Eleu∣therius, tooke vppon them generally the su∣preamacy and highest commaūding power in all spirituall things, and all places with∣out exception or limitation. S. Sixtus gaue authoritie to appeale to the Popes of Rome from all Bishops. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontifi∣cem appellandi Ius dedit ecclesiasticis ministris. (Barnes supra in Sixto.) Saint Telesphorus prescribed generally the fast of Lent. (in Telesphoro.) Published the maner or or∣der of Masse, and made a decree as su∣preame Iudge, howe all suites and con∣trouersies should be tryed, and decided. Saint Higinius made a lawe byndinge
all Bishops & Metrapolitans, and the whole cleargie, (in Higinio.) S. Pius dedicated the howse of our renowned contrywomā S. Pu∣dentiana in Rome, to bee a church, (In Pio) made general decrees for the holy sacrifice of the Masse, binding all Priests & Bishops. Declared it to bee sacriledge in all people whomsoeuer, which cōuerted lāds or goods dedicated to Religion, to prophane vses Ap∣pointed the age of virgins to bee consecra∣ted. Hee decreed that matters apperteyning to Religion should bee heard in prouinciall councells of Bishops, reseruinge the autho∣ritie of the Pope of Rome and appeales to him Quae ad Religionem spectant à suae Syno∣dis audienda esse statuit, salua tamen pontificia authoritate. (Idem in vit. Pont. in Aniceto.) S. Anicetus the next before S. Eleutherius, made or renewed the decree, how both Bis∣hops and Metropolitans were to bee ordey∣ned. That an Archbishop was to bee accused be∣fore the Pope of Rome. That noe Archbishops should bee called primates, except that preroga∣tiue of name were graunted him from the Pope of Rome. Archiepiscopos non primates appellan∣dos, nisi ista praerogatiua nomenclaturae ei à Ro∣mano Pontifice concederetur.
Wherfore these Popes beeing by all Pro∣testants holy Saints, and Martyrs, and the church of Rome then by his maiestie and al other learned men of the Protestant profes∣sion, our mother church, the true churche, commandinge church, most high Apostolicque church, and these their decrees vniuersal and generall comprehending all, and excluding none, either in Britanie, or any other nation, except wee will bee willfully headstronge in disobedience, wee must needs acknow∣ledge, that this kingdome from S. Peters first preachinge here, vnto the generall conuer∣sion thereof in the time of Pope Eleuthe∣rius (of which sufficiently in the next chap∣ter) euer was, and did acknowledge it selfe subiect in spirituall thinges to the holy Apo∣stolicke See of Rome. And this in parti∣cular alsoe proued by soe many auncient, and approued Authors, historians and others that entreate of this subiect, shewinge how often the Popes of Rome in these remem∣bred dayes sent preachers hither, and the Britans likewise acknowledginge euer, that See for the cheifest and supreame, sent thither though soe far distant hence, to haue preachers and Instructors to bee
sent hither by the highest papall power there. I will insist in Protestants relation for this busines: They tell vs that S. Bede, the old chronicle of Lādaffe, Goceline in the life of S. Augustine cap. 31. historiae maioris, the old chronicle called Brutus, Ioannes Nauclerus, an old manuscript history which the Prote∣stāt Bishop Godwyn saith hee had in latine, say that many preachers were sent hither frō the Pope of Rome in the yeare of Christ 156. when S. Pius was Pope: and I haue read a very old manuscript, testifyinge that king Lucius did in that yeare, send legats to the Pope of Rome, to that purpose. An epi∣stle written from the Pope of Rome to the kinge of Britanie, dated in the yeare 159. found amonge the old constitutions of this lande, and in the old chronicle called Brutus, which the Protestant Bishop Bridges, saith hee had seene, saith there was the like sendinge, in, or about that time. Mennius, as these men tell vs, affirmeth as much of the yeare 164. soe doth an other auncient chronicle, which Godwin citeth. William of Malmesbury hath the same, of the next yeare 165. S. Edwards lawes say
soe, of the yeare 167. Henry of Hardfrord hath the life of the yeare 169. Marianus Sco∣tus published by our Protestāts, so writeth of the yeare 177. The Protestant Bishopp Bale hath so of the yeare 179. Polydor Vergil the history of Rochester, Matthew of Westmin∣ster, and Martinus Polonus by Protestāts, soe say of the yeare 188. Therefore to saue the creditt of these, and many others soe aun∣cient, and allowed by Protestants, wee must needes by their leaue and allowance say al∣soe, that this our kingedome in those daies depended vppon the See of Rome in Reli∣gious affaires. And thus much of this mat∣ter before our generall conuersion in the time of Kinge Lucius. (Io. Caius antiq. Cantabrig. lib. 1. pag. 109.110.111. Godwin. conuers. of Britannie. p. 21.22. Holinsh. hist. of King. Lucius Theater of Brit. lib. 6. M. S. pr. gloriosi, ac Deo dilecti. in S. Dubritio. Matth. Westm. an. 154. Godwyn. Conuers. pa. 29.30. Stow hist. in Lucius. Caius supr. pag. 100. Godw. Conuers. pag. 29.20.22. Mason booke of conse∣crat. in Lucius. Will. Lambard. lib. de leg. Reg. fol. 130. pag. 2. Godwyn. Conuers. pag. 22.
THE V. CHAPTER. How in the generall Conuersion of this kinge∣dome in the time of Kinge Lucius, all spi∣rituall thinges were ordered, settled, and confirmed here, by the Popes Authoritie. AT the time when our Kinge Lucius, & this kingedome was generally con∣uerted, there were, as these Protestants haue proued, or graunted before, diuers Bishops and Preists in England, wee had many vni∣uersities, as Cambrige, Stamford, Greeke∣lade, Bellisium, Oxford, and others, as our Protestants contend, and diuers learned men in them, our next and neighbouringe contries, Fraunce, the hither parts of Ger∣many, Lorraine, Heluetia, and all Italie, euen vnto Rome it selfe, scituated in the further part thereof were full of Bishops, preists, and learned cleargie. (Ioh. Lidgate in Cant. Caius antiq. cont. Brian. Twin. antiquit. Oxon. Harrison descript. of Brit. Cambd. in Bri∣tan. Harding. histor. l. 1. c. 15. Ioh. Bal. in prae∣fat. ad l. de scriptor. &c.) And yett Kinge Lucius and his nobles,
now resolued to receaue the faith of Christ, could finde noe center, to rest their holy desires of soe happy a chaunge, vntill they arriued at the Apostolicke See, from whence this nation from the first originall, of chri∣stianitie here, euer receaued instructors, and instruction. And to obteyne this his soe hea∣uenly purpose, this Renowned kinge with applause of his nobilitie, did not send one onely Messadge, Ambassadge or epistle, and at one time to that end, but as our best anti∣quities say: Epistolas suas Eleutherio Papae di∣rexit: (Epist. Eleuther. ad Luc. & leg. S. Edu∣ardi apud Lumb. Calfrid. Monum. l. 5. cap. 19. Pont. Virun. l. 4. Matth. Westm. an. 185.186.) hee directed his epistles to Pope Eleutherius: diuers Epistles, and consequently diuers Ambassadges, soe reade the old Brittish hi∣storie, Ponticus Virunnius, Matthew West∣minster, as they ar published and allowed by our Protestants, and others. And these soe diuers epistles, were onely to become a Christian, & to haue his king∣dome instructed in the faith of Christ, and all things thereto belonginge ordered by his highest papall authoritie, petens ab eo, vs christianus efficeretur. And none of these
epistles was that which our Protestants tell vs hee wrote vnto that holy Pope, for lawes to gouerne his kingdome by, which were distinct from this, of which I shall speake hereafter: Wherby it is euident that this bles∣sed kinge & his wisest councell at that time, by soe often writinge both to this holy Pope Eleutherius, and some others of his prede∣cessors before, as appeareth by that I haue written alreadie, did fully and constantly in∣forme themselues, that the highest directing power in things religious, was onely residing in the Popes of Rome, otherwise they were all straungers vnto him, far distant, and a∣boue all Bishops of the world more persecu∣ted, all of them before this time and longe after, sufferinge cruell deathes and Martyr∣dome for Christ. Therefore it was for the due honor, and right belonginge to that ho∣lie See, and not temporall glory or countenance, as a Protestant Bishop would glosse the mat∣ter. (Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie c. 3. pag. 36.) but the supreamacy of the Roman Bi∣shops, which these Protestants haue giuen to all the Popes before. And because, to speake in the words of the first Protestant Archbishop in England: The
renowne of the popes of Rome at that time, was most famous in all the world, for their often martyrdome, and constancy & sincere discipline of faith: quorum tunc fama crebro martyrio & constantia, ac sincera fidei disciplina, per totum Christianum orbem celeberrima fuit. (Matth. Parker. antiquit. Brit. pag 5.) This was that, which moued kinge Lucius, to giue this due honor to the See of Rome, and appeale vnto it for instruction: for he saw that by that ho∣ly See the faith of Christ, was dilated into all these nations, as the recited Protestant Archbishop thus witnesseth. (Parker. supr. pag. 4) Cognouit complures nobiles Romanos eandem fidem à pontifice Romano accepisse, eo∣rumque exemplo Christianum nomen in singu∣las prouincias sparsum & disseminatum fuisse, statuit in eadem fide sub Eleutherio tunc Roma∣no pontifice inaugurari. When Kinge Lucius knew, that very many noble Romans, had receaued the faith of Christ from the Pope of Rome, and by their example, the Chri∣stian name was dispersed and sowen abrode into all prouinces, hee did resolue to receaue the same faith, from Eleutherius the Pope of Rome. Where it is euidently confessed, that if kinge Lucius had not acknowledged this
highest spirituall dignitie in the See of Rome, and haue sued to haue the Christian Religion settled here by that authoritie, hee should haue beene singular in that kinde, as our Protestants now are all other prouinces giuing then that honor to Rome, and ha∣uinge their faith in Christ established from thence. And this is euidētly declared, by the ma∣ner of the sending, & writting of this kinge, to that Pope S. Eleutherius, S. Bede saith: hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 4. that K. Lucius did humbly beseech Pope Eleutherius by his letters, that by his cō∣maundement hee might bee made a Christian. Obsecrans vt per eius mandatum Christianus efficeretur. The Roman Tradition saith: In the beginninge of the papacy of Eleutherius, there came humble letters vnto him frō Lucius Kinge of the Britans, to receaue him and his subiects into the number of Christians. Huic ini∣tio Pontificatus supplices literae venerunt à Lu∣cio Britannorum Rege, vt se ac suos in Chri∣stianorum numerum reciperet. (Breu. Rom. in S. Eleuther. 26. Maij. Baron. hist. Eccl. tom. 2.) A Protestant Bishop readeth: praying that by his direction, and appointment, hee might bee made a Christian. (Godwyn. conuers. p. 20.) An
other Protestant antiquary saith: Desiring E∣leutherius Bishop of Rome, to send some deuout and learned men, by whose instruction hee and his people might bee taught the faith, and Reli∣gion of Christ. The old chronicle of Lādaffe is: implorans vt iuxta eius ammonitionem chri∣stianus fiat. Humbly entreatinge, that by his appointment hee might bee made a chri∣stian. (Annal. Landaf. apud com. antiq. Can∣tab. l. 1. pag. 98. thus our Protestants alleadge that Antiquitie. Others of them say. Lucius sent an Ambassadge to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome by Eluanus, and Meduinus Britans, in∣treating Eleutherius by them, that hee would open a passadge by himselfe and his ministers, for the fosteringe and cherishinge of christian Religion in Britanie. Frauncis Mason. l. 2. p. 52. ca. 3. Like is the testimony of other historians, both Catholicks and Protestants, that kinge Lucius proceeded in this humble, and sub∣missiue maner in his writings, and Ambas∣sadges to the Pope of Rome at that time, & in these affayres. The which highest au∣thoritie spirituall in the Pope of Rome, these our Protestants further confirme, in that they teach generally, that these two Ambas∣sadors
of Kinge Lucius, Eluanus and Me∣duinus, receaued all the authoritie they had, to preach here in Britanie, from Pope Eleu∣therius, whoe consecrated the one Eluanus a Bishop, and made the other a Doctor to preach the ghospell. (Theater of great. Brit l. 6. Stow. hist. in Lucius, Godwyn. conuers. of Brit. Mason l. 2. c. 3. Bal. cent. 1. in Eluan.) And the pre∣sent Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor George Abbot, director of Master Mason as hee protesteth, and his directed Scribe ar of this opinion, that all the Bishops of Britanie after this, deriued consecration and succession episcopal, from this one one∣lie Bishop Eluanus, consecrated and autho∣rized by Pope Eleutherius. (Frauncis Mason consecrat of Bish l. 2. c. 3. p. 55.56.) Which, and more, is approued by an other a Protestant Bishop, by whome Pope Eleutherius euen in this great busines is termed. Paterfamilias, the Master of this spirituall howse and fami∣lie of Britanie. (Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Rom. l. 1. in Eleuther.) and this kingedome was con∣sequently of his family, and vnder his rule and commaund, and thereupon as a good Master and Gouernour of this familie, did confirme and solidate the Brittans, and the
whole kingedome in the faith receaued by the Apostles. Eleutherius, vt bonus paterfamilias de thesauro suo noua cum veteribus proferens, effecit, vt confirmatis & consolidatis Britan∣nis, in suscepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud regnum in eius fidei verba iu∣raret. And to make moste euident demonstra∣tion further, euen by these Protestants, aswel as by al other Antiquities, that the supreame power spirituall in all proceedinges in this kingedome at that time was wholly, and vndeniably in Pope Eleutherius, and those his twoe Legats, which hee sent hither, Da∣mianus and Fugatianus, as they are com∣monly called. The Protestant Archbishop and his Mason tell vs, in these words. (Mason l. 2. e. 3. p. 55 56.) From Rome there came two, Fu∣gatius and Damianus, but wee cannot learne that eyther of them was a Bishop. This is the constant writinge of these Protestants: yett to deale plainely, these men knew not all thinges, or else they might easelye haue knowne, that both the Brittish hi∣storie, Ponticus Virunnius, and Matthew of Westminster, as they are published by Protestants, call them Antistates, Bishops:
and a Protestant Bishop produceth an old Manuscript Author, testifying that the first church of Wincester was hallowed and dedi∣cated to the honor of our Sauiour, October 29. 189. by Fuganus and Damianus Bishops. (Gal∣frid. monum. l. 4. hist. c. 20. Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine, Godwyn. Catal. in Winchest. Matth. Westm. an. 186.) And if they were noe Bishops, it soe much more aduaunceth the Popes power, in this kingedome, for these Protestants with o∣thers shall testifie, that by their legatine power from Pope Eleutherius, they ex∣ercised more and greater Iurisdiction spiri∣tuall here, then any Bishop, or Archbishop of that time. And if they were Bishops, as those Authors affirme, yett I finde none to write that either of them was an Archbi∣shop: yett as before, and shall immediately bee proued, they by their delegate power from Pope Eleutherius, executed here grea∣ter Iurisdiction spirituall and more ample, then any Bishop, Archbishop, prince, kinge or whosoeuer, the Pope himselfe excepted, could lawfully doe. Which these Protestants and other vndeniable antiquities doe, thus demonstrate vnto vs.
The first Protestant Archbishop of Can∣terburye (Parker. antiquit. Britan. pag. 5.) writeth from diuers wittnesses, that these two Religious men were, assigned by Pope Eleutherius as cheife worke men, tanto operi praeficiundo, in gouerninge soe greate a worke, and establishinge the discipline of chri∣stian Religion. In sancienda christianae religio∣nis disciplina, and  cooperarij adhibiti in administranda ecclesia priti. Ioined by Pope Eleutherius with the Bishops in gouerninge the church, beeings killfull therein. Which must needes bee, by their legatine power from Pope Eleutherius. Martianus Polonius. (In Eleutherio Papa col. 49.) published by Pro∣testants, and dedicated by them to Queene Elizabeth, saith: Papa Eleutherius misit duos Religiosos viros Fuganum & Damianum qui Regem praedictum & populum baptizarent, e∣rant tunc in Britannia viginti octo Pontifices Idolorum, quos Flamines vocabant: Inter quos tres Archiflamines erant, sed praedicti Sancti, de mandato Apostolico, vbi erant Flamines, in∣stituerunt Episcopos, vbi Archiflamines, Ar∣chiepiscopos. Pope Eleutherius sent two Reli∣gious men Fuganus and Damianus, who baptized the said Kinge Lucius and his peo∣ple.
There were then in Britanie 28. high preists of the Idols, whome they called Fla∣mins, amonge which there were three Archflamins, but the said holy men by the commaundement of the Pope, did institute Bishops, where there were Fla∣mins, and Archbishops where there were Archflamins. This is confirmed, not onely by all Anti∣quities of these things, but the cheife Prote∣stant writers, amonge which the Protestant Archbishop Whitgift, and his frend Foxe write in this maner. (Whitg. defence of the Answ. pag. 323. Foxe tom. 1. fol. 146.) Eleu∣therius the good Bishop, hearinge the request of the kinge, and glad to see the godly to∣wardnes, of his well disposed minde, sendeth him certaine teachers and preachers, called Fugatius, or by some Fuganus, and Damia∣nus, or Dimianus, which conuerted first the kinge and people of Britanie, and bapti∣sed them. The temples of Idolatrie and other monuments of gentility they subuerted, con∣uertinge the people from their diuers and many gods to serue one liuinge God. Thus true Religion with sincere faith increasing, superstition decayed with all rites of Ido∣latrie.
There were then in Britanie 28. Head preists, which they called Flamins, and three Archpreists amonge them, which were called Achiflamins, hauinge the o∣uersight of their maners, as Iudges ouer the rest. These 28. Flamines they turned to 28. Bishops, and the three Archifla∣mines to three Archbishops, hauinge their seates in the three principall cities of the Realme: That is, in London, in Yorke, and in Glamorgantia, videlicet in vrbe Legio∣num by Wales. Thus far these Protestants, and one of them named the Archbishop telleth vs, that the constitutinge of Archbishops, in the places of the gentles Archflamines, by these Legats of Pope Eleutherius, was to followe the example, and order of S. Peter himselfe, whoe did soe, as S. Paul likewise, and maketh this reason. (Whit∣gift df of the Answ. pag. 320. 321. Which might bee done in respect of the citie and place, and not in respect of the Idolatrous preists: for Archiflamines were in greate cy∣ties, which being conuerted vnto Christ, might haue in the place of their Archiflamines, godly and learned Archbishops, to ouersee and direst
the rest of the Bishops and preachers, that vni∣tie and order might bee obserued. Thus Paul did at Ephesus and Creta. And why might not Peter doe it in other places likewise? Master Iohn Selden, a greate Protestant antiquary, and lawier, writinge of these two holy Le∣gats, speaketh thus. (Io. Selden Analect. c. 6.) Beati doctores cum per totam ferè Ierusalem paganitatem deleuissent, Templa quae in honore plurimorum deorum fundata fuerant, vni Deo ciusque Sanctis dedicauerunt, diuersisque ordi∣natorum coetibus repleuerunt. When the bles∣sed Doctors had blotted out paganisme all∣most throughout the Iland, the temples which were founded in honor of manye gods, they dedicated to one God, and his Saints, and replenished them with diuers companies of cleargie men. The very same bee the words of Matthew of Westminster, as hee is published by English Protestants. Matth. Westm. an. Dom. 185. And this present Protestant, Antiquarie refutinge the ridiculous and ignorant, or ve∣rie willfull singularitie of Godwyn the Pro∣testant Bishop, singularlie and onely as hee himselfe writeth. (Godw. conuers. of Britanie p. 26.) excepting Sutcliffe, denying Archfla∣mines
in this Iland, citing for authors Pom∣ponius Laetus, and Fenestella, thus addeth. (Pompn laet. de Sacerdot. Rom. ca. 7. Fenestell. de Sacerd. Rom. c. 5.) Quemadmodum autem E∣piscopis apud nos Archiepiscopi, sic Flaminibus Archiflamines praeponebantur. Horum potestati caeteri Iudices in Insula subijciebantur. Hos au∣tem ex praecepto Apostoli Idolatriae eripuerunt, & vbi erant Flamines Episcopos, vbi erant Ar∣chiflamines Archiepiscopos posuerunt. Sedes autem Archiflaminum in tribus nobilioribus ci∣uitatibus fuerunt, Londonijs videlicet, Eboraco, & in vrbe legionum. His tribus euacuata su∣perstitione, octo & viginti Episcopi subduntur, diuisisque parochijs, subiaeuit Metropolitano E∣boracensi Deira & Albania, quas magnum flu∣men Humbri à Loegria secernit. Eboracensis autem Archiepiscopis in omnes Scotiae praesules, ac Antistites iure primatis olim fungebatur. Quod & resaucitum erat sub Henrico secundo & Hugone Legato Pontificio celebrato concilio. As Archbishops with vs Christians, are in power ouer Bishops, soe were Archflamines ouer Flamines. In this Iland the other Iud∣ges were subiect to their power, these by the the cōmandement of the Apostle (and Pope) they deliuered from Idolatry, and where
there were Flamines they placed Bishops, and Archbishops where there were Arch∣flamines. And the Seats of the Archflami∣nes, were in the three more noble cyties, in London to witt, in Yorke, and the cytie of the Legions. To these three, supersti∣tion beeing taken away, eight and twen∣tie Bishops are subiected, and the parishes or diocesses beeinge diuided, Yorkeshire & Scotland (which the great riuer of Hum∣ber doth diuide from Loegria England) was made subiect to the Metropolitane of yorke. And the Archbishop of Yorke, did of old time enioy the Right of Primate ouer all the prelates, and Bishops of Scotland. Which was againe decreed in a cowncell held vnder kinge Henry the second, and Hughe the Popes Legate. The like to this haue all our Antiquaries, Catholicks or Protestants writinge of this matter. The Author of the old Brittish hi∣storie, the booke of Landaffe, the Antiqui∣ties of Glastenbury, S. Bede, Ponticus Vi∣runnius, Radulphus de Diceto, Asserus, Capgraue, Will: of Malmesbury with o∣ther auncients, and our present Protestant Antiquaries consentinge, as Cambden, Ho∣linshed,
Harrison, Stowe, Howes, the Thea∣ter writers and others two many to bee re∣cited, and needles, their workes commonly extant and to bee seene of all, onely I will alleadge Bicetes, because his manuscript is rare, and hee much commended, both for Antiquitie and Authoritie by the Protestāt Authors of the greate Theater, Thus hee writeth: Eleuther Papa ad quem Lucius Rex Britanniae missa epistola se fieri Christianum impetrat. Eleuther ergo misit Faganum & Dinuanum, qui Regem Lucium baptizaue∣runt. Templa etiam quae in honore plurimo∣rum deorum fundata erant, vni Deo dedica∣uerunt. Erant tunc in Britannia 28. Flami∣nes, & tres Archiflammines, & vbi erant Flamines, Episcopos, vbi autem Archifla∣mines, Archiepiscopos posuerunt. Londonensi subiacuit Loegria & Cornubia. Eboracensi Diera & Albania, vrbi autem legionum Kam∣bria. Eleuther Pope of whome Lucius kinge of Britanie obteyned by an epistle hee sent vnto him, to bee made a Christian, sent Faganus and Dimianus, which baptized Kinge Lucius. The Temples which were founded in honor of ma∣nie gods, they dedicated to one God.
There were then in Britanie 28. Flamines, and three Archiflamines, and where there were Flamines they placed Bishops, and where there were Archflamines they pla∣ced Archbishops. To the Archbishop of London, England and Cornwall were subiect. To the Archbishopp of Yorke, were subiect Diera, the North of England and Scotland, and Wales to the Archbishop of Caerlegion. (Galfrid. Monum. l. 4. c. 19.20. Chronic. eccl. Lond. apud Cam. l. 1. antiq. cantabrig. Antiq. Glast. apud Capgra. in S. Pa∣tric. Bed. l. v. hist. c 4. Pontic. Virun. l. 4. Ra∣dulph. de Dicet. hist. in Lucio. Guliel. Malmes. de antiq. caenob. Glast. Camb. in Brig. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. in Lucius. Harris. descript. of Brit. Stow & Howes in Lucius. Theat. of greate Brit. lib. 6. Hector Boeth. l. 5. fol. 86.85. with others. Thus wee see by all historians, olde and late, Catholicks, and Protestants, that in this general plantinge of the faith in this nation, all Religious matters were wholly ordered by these Legats of the Pope, & his supreame direction, all Iurisdiction spirituall of Arch∣bishops and Bishops, with their peculiar dio∣cesses and gouernements, assigned and di∣stinguished by this highest papall authoritie
of the Pope of Rome by his legats here. And to assure vs, that nothing was then thought by the kinge himselfe, or any christians here, to bee firme and validate in this kinde, with∣out the confirmation of the Pope himselfe, when these Archbishops, and Bishops with their Iurisdictions were settled, many chur∣ches dedicated to God, and his holy Saints, vniuersities or colledges for christian lear∣ninge and education assigned, all orders of cleargie men instituted, with all other ne∣cessary things in such a cause remembred in our histories, which I haue at lardge related in an other place, these holy Legates retur∣ned to Rome againe, to obtaine the Popes confirmation of all these their holy ordinan∣ces, & constitutions, which was orderly per∣formed, as both Catholick antiquities, and Protestant historians doe thus vndoubtedly assure vs herein. First Ponticus Virunnius in his Brittish historie, l. 4. as it is warranted by Prote∣stants, saith of these Legates, sent by Pope Eleutherius: Romam redierunt, & cuncta quae fecerant, a Pontifice confirmari impetrarunt: confirmatione facta, cum pluribus alijs redierunt in Britanniam. They returned to Rome, and
obteyned to haue all things they had done, to bee confirmed by the Pope, and the con∣firmation beeing made, they returned into Britanie with other. The Author of the old Birttish history, published with the selfe same Protestant approbation. (Galfrid. Mo∣nument. l. 4. histor. Britan. cap. 20) saith, De∣nique restauratis omnibus, redierunt Antistites Romam: & que fecerunt à beatissimo Papa con∣firmari impetrauerunt, confirmatione vero facta, reuersi sunt in Britanniam compluribus alijs co∣mitati. At laste when the Bishops (soe Virun∣nius also termeth those Legats) had restored all things they returned to Rome, and ob∣teyned to haue those things they had done to bee confirmed by the most blessed Pope, and the confirmation beeing made, they retur∣ned againe into Britanie, accompanied with many others. Like bee the words of Mat∣thew of Westminster, warranred by these Protestants in this maner. (Matth. Westm. an. 186.) Anno gratiae 186. beati Antistites Faganus & Deruuianus Romam reuersi, quae fecerāt impetrauerunt à Papa beatissimo confir∣mari In the yeare of grace 186. The blessed Bishops Fuganus and Deruuianus returned to Rome, and obteyned those things, which
they had done to bee confirmed by the moste blessed Pope. Which beeing finished, the said doctors with many others, returned into Britanie. And our English Protestants in their An∣notation vpon this place thus, approue it. (Protest. annot. Morginal. in Matth. West. supr. ad an. 186. (Fides Christi in Britannia con∣firmatur. The faith of Christ is confirmed in Britanie. All things of this nature were here confirmed by the Popes Authoritie. De mandato Apostolico, by the Popes commaun∣dement, as Martinus Polonus turned Prote∣testant, by these men in their publishinge of him. De mandato Apostolico, ex praecepto Apo∣stoli, by the commaundement of the Apostle or Pope, as readeth the Protestant Antiqua∣rie Master Selden. (Martin. Pol. in Eleutherio col. 49. Selden supr. in Anaclet. c. 6.) And soe all Protestants doe, or ought to confesse, ap∣prouinge those Authors I haue cited before, and fetchinge the greatest euidence they haue of these things and tymes, from them, soe particularly as before, registringe both the necessitie of the Popes approbation and confirmation to bee such, that the Legates themselues were enforced to go frō hence to
Rome to procure it, and returned not hither for a finall settlinge of all things, vntill the Pope had confirmed and approued them at Rome. And this illimitated and supereminent Power, both claimed and exercised by this holy Pope, was not confined in and with his proceedinges with this kingedome, soe happily conuerted to the faith by him, but to shew himselfe by these Protestants, as his his holy predecessors before haue beene pro∣ued by the same allowance, to bee the su∣preame and highest commaunder, and go∣uernor of the church of Christ in all places on earthe, hee generally proceeded accor∣dingly, makinge and ordeyninge decrees, for all parsons and places, and times, as these Protestants thus assure vs. (Robert Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Eleutherio.) Hoc tempore Lucius Britanniae Rex, Christiano caetui cum suis subditis adiungi, à Pontifice petijt per lite∣ras. In this time of Pope Eleutherius, Lucius Kinge of Britanie desired of the Pope by his letters, that hee and his subiects, might bee ioyned to the Christian companie: as though S. Eleutherius then Pope, by power of that nam & place had such power ouer the whole
company of Christians, that none that is a kinge or greate prince, on whose publick conuersion together with his people, so ma∣nie matters requiring the consent and con∣firmation of the highest Pastor, & supreame Iurisdiction depended, might bee admitted to bee a Christian, without the Popes Ap∣probation. And to confirme this highest power spiri∣tuall in him, as in his predecessors before, they further tell vs. (Rob. Barns. supr.) That generally in the cases of Bishops, which is the greatest, hee decreed that nothing should bee defined in their cases, but by the Pope him∣selfe. Accusationem contra Episcopos intenta∣tam, Episcopos audire permisit: sed vt nihil, nisi apud Pontificem definiretur, cauet. And againe that any preist might appeale from his Bis∣hop to the Pope of Rome, if the sinceritie of the other iudge his Bishops was suspected. Vt nemo Clericum accusatores, pertraheret ad alterius dioecesis Episcopum, sed accusaret eū apud suum Episcopum: Si vero Iudex Clerico suspectus es∣set, appellandi facultatem dedit Reo. Where hee euidently by these Protestants maketh him∣selfe & his Successors in the See Apostolick of Rome, supreame Iudge in spiritual thin∣ges,
and reserueth appeales to them in such affaires from all other Iudges. THE VI. CHAPTER. How this moste renowned Pope Eleutherius, did by these Protestants, and antiquities al∣lovved by them, clayme, exercise, and settle here, for him, and his Successors, as am∣ple prerogatiue, and Iurisdiction, as Ca∣tholicke Scholes doe, and Catholicques may giue to Popes. ANd because there is greate difference betweene Catholicks and Protestants, concerninge some priuiledges which the former commonly yeeld, and the second as vsually in England denye vnto him, and eyther of them would bee thought to reue∣rence and embrace the opinion, and prac∣tise of that blessed Pope Eleutherius, and those vnspotted times, especially as they are interpreted by themselues, lett vs now take counsaile and aduise of these Protestāts their persecutors in this kinde, whether this moste blessed Pope Eleutherius,
whoe soe conuerted this nation, and was soe blessed, and worthie a Saint with these men, was not by their Iudgements, and te∣stimonies, as far ingaged in this matter, as Pope Gregorie, the fifteenth of that name, now is; or Kinge Lucius that ho∣ly kinge and Saint, the holy Bishops, and cleargie, and all the Christians of this land, at that tyme did not giue to the Popes of Rome then, as much in this kinde, as anie English preist, or Catholicke now doth, and by the present Roman Religion may giue, and allowe to this present Pope, or any other. This is euidently proued, and inuinci∣bly made manifest vnto vs before, not onely by soe many our best Antiquities, but generallie by the best learned English Protestant historians, iointly and with an vniforme consent, agreeing in this, that at the settlinge of manie Archbishops, and Bishops in this Iland, by the highest Pa∣pall power of Saint Eleutherius, by the same alsoe the whole kingedome of Scot∣land, with the Northern Ilands, were made subiect to the Archbishopp of Yorke, in spirituall thinges, as I haue proued before
by the best historians, Catholicks & Prote∣stants which haue written of this matter. Which alsoe agree, that these kingedomes were at that time, longe before, and vntill the vnion of them by our present Soueraigne kinge Iames, not onely distinct, and diuers kingedomes, vnder diuers kinges, lawes, and gouernments, but ordinarily, as then they were, at open warres, and hostilitie in ciuill and temporall respects; Therfore it was neyther Kinge Lucius, whoe to vse the words of Hector Boethius. (Scator. histor. l. 5. fol. 83. Godwyn conuers. of Britanie pag. 22.23) aggreing with our English Pro∣testants, and others in this, was but a kinge by curtesie of the Romane Emperors and their Authoritie. Lucius Britonibus Caesaris bene∣uolentia & authoritate imperitabat. Therefore hee neyther had, nor possibly could haue his power, and principalitie extended further, then that of the Romans was, which went noe further then the wall of Adrian, which diuided the kingedomes, makinge Scotland a distinct kingedome, and neuer subiect to the Roman Emperors. Which could not al∣lowe to kinge Lucius more, then they were Lords and Masters of themselues, for accor∣dinge
to that lawe maxime, vsed by manie Protestants, and a grownde in the lawe, and light of nature it selfe; Nemo potest plus Iuris in alium transferre, quàm ipse habet: Noe man can giue more power to another, then hee himselfe hath. For soe hee should giue that which hee hath noe right or power to giue, beeinge a thinge vnpossible. Therefore kinge Lucius, nor the Roman Emperors, hauinge any power, or right at all spirituall, or temporall, ouer the Scots or Britans, or any people then dwellinge be∣yond that Wall, in the kingedome now cal∣led Scotland, they could not by any possibi∣litie giue such spirituall power, to the Arch∣bishop of Yorke to commaund in that con∣trie, nor commaund the inhabitants of Scot∣land, in noe respect subiect vnto them, to bee subiect to the Bishop of Yorke, their sub∣iect in temporall respects. Neither did, would or could the kings of Scotland, then pagans subiect, and submitt their people and contry to the Archbishop of yorke of an other king∣dome, now enemy to them, both in spirituall and temporall respects. And it is directly against all Protestants professions, confes∣sions, or churches, that any Protestant Prin∣ce
or other whosoeuer clayminge or preten∣ding supreame spirituall Iurisdiction among them, should challendge or presume to ex∣tend it further, then their temporall ditions and Gouernments, as is euident in all places where the new Religion is admitted, as En∣gland, the Lowe contries, the cantons of Switserland and the rest, where the spirituall Iurisdiction which they claime, is limited and confined within the circuites of their temporall Dominions, without any further progresse. Parlam. 1. Elizab. 1. Iacob. Scotic. Confessiones Heluet. Gallic. Saxonia. Belgic. Therefore this highest supreame directing spirituall power (which established at that time, and longe after, the subordination and subiection of Scotland and the Ilands to the Archbishop of Yorke) must needs by these Protestants, and all Antiquities, bee onely peculiar to the Pope of Rome, whoe and that alone effected these things: as soe ma∣nie Protestants and others haue proued be∣fore, and others from our best antiquities af∣firme, that all ecclesiasticall thinges were ordered here, according to the commaundment of Pope Eleutherius that blessed man. Secundum iussum beati Eleutherij Papae. (Annal. Landaf.
apud Io. Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. p. 90.) Which is an euident demonstration, that this holy Pope had this supreame spiri∣tuall power ouer all this Iland at that time; for without such a power, these things could not haue beene performed. And demonstra∣teth alsoe, that noe other power on earth, could haue duely performed it, especially any temporall Kinge, Prince, Emperour or Lieutenant whatsoeuer, for soe, contra∣rie to the names, offices, and powers of such Rulers, they should bee Emperors, Kin∣ges, Rulers, Regents and the like where they haue noe Empire, Kingedome, Rule, Regiment, soueraigntie or any sub∣iects, a thinge in the light of nature of it selfe, imployinge contradiction, and im∣possible. And lett noe man say, that accordinge vnto some, as namely Giraldus Cambren∣sis, this Iland was diuided into fiue pro∣uinces, Britannia prima, Britannia se∣cunda, Flauia, Maxima, and Valentia, which now is Scotland, and that there was an Archbishop there. (Girald. Cambr. l. de Iure Metropol. eccl. Meneu. apud Park. antiq. Britan. pag. 24. & Io. Pris. def. hist. Brit.)
For I answeare, this diuision was made longe after this, as the twoe laste prouinces, Maxi∣mia & Valentia proue in their owne names. For the same Author saith, that Maximia was soe named, of Maximus the Emperour, Maximia. Ab Imperatore Maximo vocata, and Valentia now Scotland, was soe called of Va∣lens the Emperour. Valentia à Valente Impera∣eore sic dicta est. (Girald. Cambr. Parker. & Pris. sup.) Both which Emperors Maximus and Valens, were longe after this time, and Scotland not vnder the Romans, to bee made a prouince by them, and besides soe many Protestant Authors and Antiquities before, that there were but onely three Archbishops here at this time, nor after diuers hundreds of yeares, the Scottish histories, and all Pro∣testants agree, that Scotland had neyther Archbishops nor Bishops, perhaps longe af∣ter this time. The testimonies of these things ar to ma∣nie to bee produced, therefore I will onely instance in the present Protestant Archbi∣shop of Canterbury and his deputy, in wri∣tinge the booke, Intituled of the Consecra∣tion of the Bishops of the church of England, who speake in this maner: (Frāc. Mason epist.
dedicat. and l. 2. c. 3. pag. 54) The Romans be∣fore this time of Kinge Lucius his receauinge the faith, had diuided Britanie into three Pro∣uinces, one of them was called Maxima Caesa∣riensis, the Metropolis whereof was Yorke. An other, Britannia prima, the Metropolis whereof was London: the third Britannia secunda, the Metropolis whereof was Caerlegion. And pro∣uinge, besides soe many other Authorities before cited; both by Asseruius Meneuensis schole-master to Kinge Alfred, Ptolomeus Lu∣censis in the life of Eleutherius, William Reade, (De vit. Pont. in Eleuther. pag. 3.) and Iohn Leland, (M.S. Leland. in assert. Arthur. fol. 36.) that the Archbishops of this Iland, were on∣lie seated in those three Metropolitane cy∣ties, of London, Yorke, called also Maximia or that prouince, wherof it was Metropolis, and Caerlegion. To answeare fully this ob∣iection thus they add: Georg. Abb. & Fraunc. Mason supr. pag. 54. Although Britanie was after the Nicen. councell diuided into fiue Prouinces, Valen∣tia and Flauia Caesariensis beeinge added to the former, yett there were noe new Arch∣bishopricks erected. The reason whereof was, because those two new Prouinces.
(Notitia Prouinc. Occid. pag. 117.) were ta∣ken out of the former; and consequentlie could not haue Bishopricks, without the diminishinge of the authoritie of the for∣mer, in whose Iurisdiction originally they were, which was not sufferable, because it was against the canon of the Nicen coun∣cell (Can. 6.) decreeinge, that in Antio∣che and in other Prouinces, the dignities, prerogatiues, and authorities of churches should bee maintayned. And for S. An∣drewes in Scotland to haue beene alwayes subiect to Yorke, or when Yorke had noe Archbishop, as at the cominge of the pagan Saxons hither, and driuinge the Archbis∣hop from thence, to the Pope himselfe, immediately these Protestants proue vnto vs, by the auncient Antiquitie called Notitia Prouinciarum, which they cited before: for in that thus wee reade: S. Andreae Episco∣patus est Domini Papae. The Bishoprick of S. Andrewes belōgeth to the Pope of Rome, where the Annotation is: olim in Scotia nullas erat Archiepiscopatus, adeoque Episcopatus Scotiae Domino Papae in spiritualibus immediatè sub∣erant, vt in manuscriptis exemplaribus no∣stris notatur. In auncient tyme there was
noe Archbishopps See in Scotland, but the Bishops of Scotland in spirituall thin∣ges, were immediatelie subiect to our Ma∣ster the Pope, as is noted in our manu∣script copies. Notat. Episcopat. in Scotia edit. per Aubert. Miraeum. Aubert. Miraeus in annot. in illum locum. Which first immediate subiection to the Pope, and not the Archbishop of Yorke, did begin but in the time ot Kinge Wil∣liam of Scotland, as Roger Houeden and others proue, setting downe the Popes de∣cretall letters thereof at lardge, but had continued vnder the Iurisdiction of Yorke, by the first institution of Pope Eleuthe∣rius a thousand yeares, and besides the te∣stimonies of many Authors both late and auntient, Catholicks and Protestants, set∣tinge downe the whole proceedinges at lardge, how Pope Clemēt did onely exempt it from the See of Yorke, and subiected it immediately to the See of Rome, because of the continuall, all moste, wars betweene these twoe nations. This matter is public∣klie confessed and acknowledged by Kin∣ge William of Scotland, and Dauid his Brother, Richard Bishop of S. Andrewes,
with others in their publick Charter, in pu∣blick councell in the church of S. Peter at Yorke, as Houeden and others sett downe at lardge. Epistol. Clementis Papae ad Guliel Sco∣torum Regem apud Roger. Houed. part. histor. in Henric. 2. & epist Papae Caelestini apud eund. in Richard. 1. & Thom. Walsing. in Eduard. 1. Polydor. Vergil, Angl. histor. l. 13. l. 9. l. 24. Guliel. Malmesb. l. 3. de Regib. Godwyn Cata∣log. in Yorke in George Neuill. Roger Houeden Annal. part. postr. in Henric. 2. And when Scotland after a thousand yea∣res subiectiō vnto the Archbishop of Yorke by the Popes ordinance, neither was nor could, notwithstandinge soe many dissen∣tions betweene these kings, and nations, bee exempted from that obedience, but by the Pope himselfe, and yet with this reseruation, to bee immediately subiect to the Pope of Rome, as the words of the Popes decree thus testifie. (Epistol. Clement. Papae apud Rog. Houed. supr.) Clemens Episcopus seruus seruorū Dei, Charissimo in Christo filio Willielmo illu∣stri Scotorum Regi praesentis scriptis pagina du∣ximus stastuendum, vt Scotticana ecclesia Apo∣stolicae sedi, nullo mediante debeat subiacere. Clement to his most beloued sonne in Christ
William the Renowned kinge of Scots. Wee haue thought good to decree by this our pre∣sent writinge, that the church of Scotland, shall bee immediatly subiect to the See Apo∣stolicke. Soe that it is most euident by all te∣stimonies, that this kingedome of Britanie, was from the first conuersion thereof to Christ, euer subiect to the See of Rome in spirituall things, as farr as the Pope of Rome now requireth, or Catholicks attribute vn∣to him. Which these our Protestants of England, and from Authenticall Antiquities, as they say, will more Amply proue vnto vs, and in the highest degree of papall priuiledges. For they tell vs, that kinge Lucius did not onely receaue the Christian faith, Iuridicall dire∣ction, and settling of all spirituall and meer∣lie Religious affaires, by the authoritie of the Pope of Rome, but the same holy Pope, not onely with the good likinge and consent of Kinge Lucius, but by his suite and peti∣tion interposed himselfe, in the ordeyninge alteringe, or correctinge and settlinge, the very temporal lawes thēselues in this kinge∣dome, to gouerne Rule and direct it, euen in ciuill and meerely humane thinges, as is ma∣nifest
in a certaine Epistle which these Pro∣testants, with generall consent asscribe to S. Eleutherius himselfe, written to kinge Lu∣cius, as responsory, and satisfactory to some letters, which this kinge had written vnto him to such purpose, to haue temporall lawes from him to gouerne this kingdome by: Pe∣tistis à nobis leges Romanos, & Caesaris vobis transmitti. You require of vs (writeth this holy Pope to king Lucius) the Romane Lawes, and the Emperors, to bee sent ouer vnto you, vvhich you vvould practise, and put in vre, vvithin your Realme: the Romane Lawes and the Emperors, vvee may euer reproue, but the Lawe of God vvee may not; you haue receaued of late through gods mercy, in the kingedome of Britanie, the Lawe and faith of Christ. You haue vvith you vvithin the Realme, both parts of the scriptures, out of them by gods grace vvith the councell of your Realme, take you a Lawe, and by that Lavve by gods suffe∣rance, rule your kingedome of Britanie, for you bee gods vicar in your kingedome. Epist. Eleutherij Papae ad Lucium Reg. Britan. apud Foxe to. 1. Iuel contra Hard. Franc. Mason l. 2. Godwyn. Conuers. of Brit. pag. 38. Lambert. in leg. S. Vsuardi. Stow in Lucio.
Thus these Protestants translate that part of that Popes Epistle. Whereby first it is ma∣nifest, That Kinge Lucius now a Christian did not, and in conscience coulde not, write for, or absolutely desire the Imperiall Lawes, the Emperors then beeing pagans, and their Lawes accordingely mayntaining the Ido∣latries of the gentiles, but as they should bee moderated and corrected by the Lawes of Christ, which noe man could with more au∣thoritie and better performe, then the holy Pope, hauing then the supreame place in the church of God. For otherwise he should haue beene an enemy to Christ, & his lawe which hee now professed: and beeing in soe high grace, and fauour with the Emperor, and Roman Senate, as these Protestants and o∣ther antiquities tell vs, hee might & should with farr more honor, loue and likeinge, haue receaued these Lawes from the Empe∣ror himselfe, the Senate of Rome, or manie Romans here in Britanie, whoe then liued accordinge to those Roman and Imperiall Lawes, then from Pope Eleutherius, whoe liued not as those Lawes commaunded, but soe farr otherwise, that hee and all the Po∣pes of Rome before, and many after him,
were both persecuted, and putt to death for christian Religion by those lawes. Therefore kinge Lucius requestinge such Lawes from Pope Eleutherius, must needs hereby acknowledge, that as by sendinge soe farr vnto him, to be instructed in the faith of Christ, and all such matters spiri∣tuall to bee settled and ordered here by his highest power: soe in his temporall procee∣dings which to bee iust, & holy must needs haue a subordination vnto spirituall, and the iudgement ouer Lawes. Whether they ar holy iust and such as Christians in con∣science and Religion ought to vse, and bee directed by, is to bee made by them cheifly, whoe haue the greatest knowledged, and commaunde in such cases, and iudgements, which bee the gouernors and Bishops of the church of God, hee thought noe Lawes to bee vncontrolably warrantable, but such as the cheife pastor of the church of Christ, the Pope of Rome should giue validitie vn∣to, by his confirmation and allowance. For amonge soe many Lawes, as soe ample, and greate a kingedome was to bee ruled and gouerned by, there must needs bee many, which of necessitie were thus to bee exami∣ned
by the Lawe of God, and cheifest in∣terpreters thereof. Which Saint Bleutherius warned Kinge Lucius of, when hee prescri∣bed vnto him, to haue his Lawes warranted by the scriptures, and taken forth of them by the councell of the Realme, and by that Lawe to Rule the kingedome: where it is euident, that hee appointeth the Lawe of Britanie to be conformable to the Lawe of God, and to bee secure it should bee such, it to bee enacted and concluded by the best councell of his Realme in such things, which were the Bishops, cleargie and learned diuines, cheifely which S. Eleutherius had settled here, for they were the onely or principall Interpreters of holy scriptures here at that time: and others in a maner, concerninge such things, Catechumenes, to bee instru∣cted themselues, and not to drawe Lawes out of scriptures, to instruct, and direct o∣thers. And so a Protestant Bishop with such publick warrant expoundeth it in these wor∣des: By the aduise of the cleargie of their do∣minion. Bridges def. l. 16. pag. 1355. And S. Eleutherius takinge vppon him∣selfe, as Pope of Rome, the supreamacy ouer the whole church, as these Protestants haue
told vs, cannot by any but carelesse or igno∣rāt of truth bee interpreted, to giue any such preeminence to a newly become Christian temporal prince, but calleth him onely the Vicar, or Vicegerent of God, as all princes Christians and others ar, or should bee to see iustice performed to all within their domi∣nions, which is sufficiently expressed in this very epistle it selfe, where that holy Pope tel∣leth Kinge Lucius, what is the dutie and of∣fice of a king, the wordes by Protestant trās∣lation ar: The people and nations of the kinge∣dome of Britanie is yours, such as ar diuided, you should gather them together to the Lavve of Christ, his holy church to peace and concord: & cherish, maintayne protect, gouerne and defend them from the iniurious malicious, and their e∣nemies. A kinge hath his name of gouerninge, and not of his kingedome, soe longe you shall bee a kinge, as you rule well, otherwise you shall not bee soe named, and loose that name vvhich God forbid. God graunt that you may soe rule your Realme of Britanie, that you may Reigne vvith him euerlastingely, whose Vicar you ar in the said kingedome. Epistol. Eleuther. apud Godwyn.Conuers. pag. 23. Foxe tom. 1. Stowe and Hovves histor. in Lucius. Bridg. def. p. 1355.
Ieuel. ag. Hard. Lambard. de legib. Theater of Brit. and others. Where wee see, in what sence this holie Pope called Kinge Lucius the Vicar, or Vi∣cegerent in his kingdome, to see iustice mi∣nistred, the church of Christ to bee defended from wronge, and the priuiledges thereof to bee kept inuiolable. Which this holy king moste christianly performed, for when all ecclesiasticall matters were settled here by the Popes authoritie, and these Lawes here appointed for this kingedome, first here cō∣cluded, and then with the rest confirmed by the Pope: cuncta quae fecerant à pontifice con∣firmari impetrauerunt: Then this kinge ac∣cordinge to the direction and instructions of the holy Pope to speake in Protestants owne, words: endowed the churches of Britanie with liberties, Lucius Rex, ecclesias Britanniae liber∣tatibus muniuit. Which ar to many to bee re∣lated, and ar sett downe in the Brittish histo∣rie, Matthew of Westminster and others. (Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine. Galf. Mon. lib. 4. histor. Reg. Britan. cap. 2O. Matth. Westm. an. 186. Protest. Annot. vppon Matth. West. an. 187. Galfrid. Monum. sup. l. 4. Matth. West. an. 187.) And in this sence our best Brittish and
christian Saxon kings, who were most obe∣dient euer to the church of Rome, were from that time, and by vertue of that donation, of Pope Eleutherius, giuinge Lucius the Title of the vicar or vicegerent of God in his Kingdome, soe called and enioyed that Ti∣tle as a Protestant Lawier, and Antiquarie thus deduceth. (Selden Analect. l. 1. pag. 40) Ex quo non solum Britannorum, sed ettam An∣glorum subsequentes Reges, hoc nomine vicarij Dei sunt potiti. From which time, or the graunt of Pope Eleutherius, the kings that followed, not onely of the Britans, but En∣glish alsoe obteyned this name of the vicars of God: and citeth the auntient Lawyer Henry Bracton, for the same. But wee neede not demurre vppon the authorities of pri∣uate Lawyers, or Antiquaries for this mat∣ter. For wee haue Lawes themselues of good kinge Edward, which William the Bastard af∣terward confirmed (a Protestant Lawyers or rather the words of the Lawe, to confirme & warrāt this: Where the very words of the Lawe thus auntient and confirmed, are these. Leges S. Eduardi apud Gul. Lamb. fol. 126. pag. 2. leg. 1. cap. 17. & leg. 77. Rex autem quia Vicarius summi Regis est,
ad hoc est constitutus, vt regnum terrenum & populum Domini, & super omnia sanctum ve∣neretur Ecclesiam eius, & regat & ab iniurio∣sis defendat, & maleficos ab ea euellat, & de∣struat & penitus disperdat. Quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, verum testante Papa Iohanne nomen Regis perdit. The kinge because hee is the Vicar of the highest king, is constituted for this to rule the terrene kingedome and people of God, and aboue all things hee ought to reuerence his holy church, and defend it from iniurious people, and to pull from it, and destroy and wholly ouerthiowe euill doers Which except hee performeth, the name of a Kinge shall not bee appearinge in him, but as Pope Iohn doth wittnes, he loseth the name of a kinge, or Ruler. Where wee see by the publicke Lawes themselues, that the Kinge is not called the Vicar or Vicegerent of God in respect of spirituall but temporall affaires, to reuerence and defend it, and suffer noe wronge to bee done vnto it, or priuiledges taken from it; which is more plainely ex∣pressed in the same Lawe in this maner: (leg. S. Vsuardi supr.) Debet Sanctum Eccesiā regni suicum omni integritate, & libertate iuxtae
constitutiones patrum & praedecessorem seruare, fouere, manutenere, a kinge ought to keepe, foster, & maintayne the holy church or his Kingedome, with all integritie, and libertie, accordinge to the constitutions of the Fa∣thers, and predecessors. Which a kinge ought to sweare in proper parson vppon the ghos∣pels and relicks of Saints before the laietie, preists, and clergie, before hee is crowned by the Archbishops & Bishops of the kingdom: hither to this holy law of our auntiēt kings. I haue insisted vpon this Epistle of Pope Eleutherius the longer, because with Pro∣testants it is in soe high esteeme, soe auntient and certaine, that a Protestant Bishop wri∣teth: Wee haue seene the Bishop of Romes owne letter to kinge Lucius, that is reputed to bee the first christian kinge of Britanie. (Iohn Bridges def. of the gouernm. in the church of Engl. l. 16. pag. 1355.) The Theater writers say, it is in the custody of Syr Robert Cotton Baronet of Conington in Huntington shire, (Theater of greate, Brit. l. 6. c. 19.) Others say it is likewise founde, in the old historie called Brutus. (Caius antiquit. Cantab. l. 1.) Stowe writeth: I finde the same entered in a booke intituled, Constitutions, pertayninge to the
Guilde hall of London. (Stovve histor in Kinge Lucius.) And it is founde alsoe a∣monge the old Lawes of Saint Edward our kinge and others before him, and placed & receaued as a part of our Lawe, both by our Saxon kinges, and Norman alsoe, as namely kinge William the first, as the Protestant publisher of them him else, a lawyer and an∣tiquarie is witnesse, vvith all moste all wri∣ters, plaeri{que} scriptores omnes, as hee testifieth: (Williel. Lambard. lib. de Prisis Anglorum legib. fol. 1. ante praef. fol. 126.131.) There∣fore I may boldely terme Pope Eleutherius the first Christian Lawe maker, and first director, and confirmer of Lawes in this kingedome. Which how it can stand to bee iustly done, as all these our kinges, their nobles, clergies, lawyers and these Protestants auouche, without as greate a preeminent power as the Popes or these times doe clayme, or commonly Catholicks ascribe vnto them, I leaue to the quickest sighted Protestants to distinguish. And yet this schole of Protestant antiqua∣ries, doe reade a lesson vnto vs, to clymbe a stepp higher in such affayres. For they assure, from the same publick lawes or our
auncient Saxon and other kinges, and from the same Pope Eleutherius his owne dona∣tion, that hee declared to be annexed to the crowne of this kingedome, all the Ilands betweene vs and Norway, and that our kings should haue care thereupon, to enioye them. The words of that auncient Lawe by Protestant publishing, and allowance pu∣blick ar these: (Leges Edowardi Regis c. 17. apud Lumbard. supr. fol. 130 pag. 2.) Debet de iure Rex omnes terras & honores, omnes di∣gnitates & iura & libertates coronae regni hu∣ius in integrum cum omni integritate, & sine diminutione obseruare, & defendere, dispersa & delapidata, & amissa regni iura in pristinum sta∣tum, & debitum virioius omnibus reuocare. Vni∣uersa vero terra & tota, & Insulae omnes vsque Norwegiam & vsque Dariam pertinent ad co∣ronam regni eius, & sunt de appendicys, & dig∣nitatibus Regis, & vna est Monarchia, & vnum est regnum, & vocabatur quondam Reg∣num Britanniae, modo autem vocatur Regnum Anglorum, tales enim metas & fines, & praedi∣ctae sunt, constituit & imposuit coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa sententia sua, qui primo destinauit coronam benedictam Britan∣nia, & christianitatem Deo inspirante Lucio
Regi Britonum. The kinge of right ought with all integritie and without diminution obserue, and defende all lands, and honors, all dignities, and Rights, and liberties of the crowne of this kingedome, wholly, and call backe againe al the Rights of the kingdome that bee dispersed, dilapidated, & loste, with all his power vnto their auncient and due state. And the whole and all the Land, and the Ilands euen to Norway, and Denmarke doe belonge to the crowne of his kingdome, and ar of the Appendicies, and dignities of the kinge, and it is one monarchie and one kingedome and it was anciently called the kingedome of Britanie, & now is called the kingdome of the English men, for our Lord the Pope Eleutherius did by his sentence cō∣stitute and appointe such limites, and boun∣des to the crowne of the kingdome, first sending by the inspiration of God, a hallow∣ed crowne and Christianitie to Britanie to Kinge Lucius. Hitherto this soe auncient & publicke authoritie and antiquitie, now, seeing all writers, Catholicks and Protestāts agree, that both S. Eleutherius, which made this declaration and confirmation of soe ma∣nie Ilands and Rights, and Kinge Lucius
which accepted it, was in the like degree, and all our kings soe many hundred yeares after, many of them holy Saints, which by this declaration esteemed these territories to bee their owne, to keepe them all, or any of them, declarer or receauers from horrible and damnable vsurpation, as of necessitie by these Protestants wee must doe, what way is there to end this difficultie, except wee al∣lowe, of the Popes Authoritie in such a de∣claration. But to yeeld a greater, and more auncient honor, and priuiledge, to this kingedome, and the kings thereof, then many Prote∣stants, enemies to our Brittish Antiquities, will allowe vnto it, not onely to compre∣hend al these Northren Ilands vnto Norway, vnder the name of, Insulae Britannicae, the Brittish or Britons Iland. But that the kinge∣dome of Denmarke was subiect and tribu∣tary to Britanie, diuers hundreds of yeares before Christ, and soe consequently the ad∣iacent Ilands, which by Ius gentium, belon∣ged to the Continent, next adioyninge, wee shall by this exempt this kingdome from re∣ceauing any thinge by a free donation from Pope Eleutherius in this kinde, claiminge
by this, that hee only adiudged the old Right and Title of Britanie to bee true and lawfull in this case, not giuing any new prerogatiue by that confirmation. Yett this will not ex∣empt either kinge Lucius from embracinge, or Pope Eleutherius from assigning and con∣firminge that diuision, and preferringe the Title of kinge Lucius before the Scots and others, which by their histories had then en∣ioyed longe time diuers of those Ilands, and soe wee must still acknowledge that both E∣leutherius the Pope, and kinge Lucius, then thought, the decision of such things, did in some respect in conscience belonge to that See Apostolick, otherwise neither would the one haue made it, or the other sought for, or accepted it, in that maner, both of them beeing worthie and renowned Saints in the church of Christ. M. S. pr. Regnum Britan∣niae in Gurguntio. Ioh. Rom apud Stowe in eod. Stowe and Howes histor. in Gurg. an. ante Christ. 375. Ioh. Lydgate in Cantab. Ioh. Har∣ding Chron. c. 34. fol. 29. 30. Caius Antiq. Can∣tab. 1. Matth. Westm. aetat. 5. c. 5. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. Giral. Cāb. ap. Stow. supr. And into the same laborinth we fal, by these men denying power in the Pope of Rome, to giue pardōs,
or Indulgences to mitigate, or release the punishments of sinnes, if wee should harken vnto them; for they greately commend vnto vs the Epistle ascribed to S. Patrick the Irish Apostle in the antiquities of Glastenbury, to bee of greate authoritie, and yett in this wee reade. Quod sanctus Phaganus & Deru∣uianus ab Eleutherio Papa qui eos miserat, decē annos Indulgentiae impetrarunt. That S. Pha∣ganus and Deruuianus, obteyned of Pope Eleutherius that sent them, ten yeares of In∣dulgence for the pilgryms visiting that ho∣lie place, a greater power in the Pope then the other, by these Protestants. And thus much of this hundred yeares. Theater of great Britanie lib. 6. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britanie cap. 2. pag. 10. Ioh. Leland. in As∣sert. Arthur. Antiquitat. Glaston. in tabula lignea. Capgrau. in Catal. in S. Patricio. & M. S. Antiq. in eodem.
THE THIRD CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE. THE VII. CHAPTER. How the Popes of Rome in this third Centurie, or hundred of years alsoe, by our Protestants and others, ruled and gouerned here in Bri∣tanie in spirituall things, by their supreame power therein. NOw hauing ended this second hundred yeare, when there was soe generall an acceptance of this highest papall Authoritie in Britanie by the kinge, his Nobles, three Archbishops, soe many other Bishops, and the noble cleargie and others here, wee may bee more breife in ages followinge: for it is a common consent of the Protestant writers of England, that the same faith and Religion in all materiall points (such as this is) con∣tinued firme and inuiolable here at the least vntill the cominge of S. Augustine hither in the later end of the sixt hundred yeare. And it is a veritie granted by all, followinge S. Bede, susceptam fidem Britannie vsque in tem∣pora
Diocletiani Principis inuiolatum integrum∣que quieta in pace seruabant. The Britans kept the faith which they receaued in the time, of kinge Lucius, inuiolable and whole in quiet peace vntill the times of Diocletian. (Bed. hist. eccles. l. 1. c. 4.) Whoe did not begin his Empire, vntill the yeare 285. & his perse∣cution longe time after about the yeare 296. And no man can thinke, but amōge soe ma∣ny Archbishops, Bishops, and cleargie men, which together, with the whole christian Religion, embraced the papall power, liued, and gouerned the church of Britanie here many yeares in this age, in the same maner and order, as it was commended vnto them by the Romane supreame spirituall Autho∣ritie, of S. Eleutherius and his Apostolicke Legates. Therefore to bee breife, the next Pope which was in the beginning of this hundred yeare, Scotland (as hereafter) a greate por∣tion of this Iland, and then a distinct greate and inuincible kingedome, vnto the most powerable Romane Emperors, was conuer∣ted to the faith of Christ. The very name of this holy Pope and Martyr carieth spirituall supreamacy with it, in all the Christian
world, Asia, Africk, and Europe, by the mouthes and pennes of all Protestants and others. A Protestant Bishop for all shall ans∣were in these words. Pope Victor excommuni∣cated all churches both greeke and latine, which differed from his church, in the obseruation of Easter. (Morton. appeale l. 1. cap. 9.) Which noe man can question, but it was the high∣est act, to haue and exercise such power ouer all churches, and yett moste iustly and lawfully, and hee a blessed man, which both a Protestant Archbishopp and his maiestie kinge Iames shal testifie for all. The church of Rome was then a Rule to all, saith our Kinge. (Kinge Iames in parlam.) The other saith: Victor was a godly Bishop, and a martyr, and the church at that time was in greate puritie, not beeinge longe after the Apostles times. (Whit∣gift Answ. to the admonition p. 80. sect. 4.) Wherfore Kinge Donalde of Scotland now moued by the example of Kinge Lucius, his neighbouring Sociate in terrene principali∣tie, and his whole kingedome, and beeing assured by this supreame power spirituall ex∣ercised by S. Victor ouer all churches, that it was his right, and the surest waye in time of controuersies (as that was in the obseruation
of Easter) to adhere vnto the cheife and commandinge church of Rome, hee sent to this holy Pope, to bee instructed in the faith of Christ, a longe paineful & trouble∣some iorney & labour on both sides, soe ma∣ny Bishops now beeing in Britanie, Fraunce, and in all places betweene Scotland and Rome, if kinges & kingedomes could haue beene conuerted to the faith of Christ, and matters of the church with them ordered, without his direction or confirmation. For as truely write the Scottish historians. Pope Victor sent preists, in extremam Albionem, to the vttermoste part of Albion, or the vttermoste Albion, to preach the doctrine of Christ. (Hector Boeth. l. 5. Scot. histor. fol. 89. p. 2. Boeth. supr. p. 1. Buchan. Rer. Scotic 1. 4. Reg. 27. Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. in Donald. Ed. Grymst. p. 20. in Scotl. §. 17.) the narration whereof is this. Talem dederat Donaldo Regi animum, pacis Princeps & author Christus Dominus quod ve∣ra pietati, aspernato malorum demonum cultu, sese paulò ante addixerat. Nam Seuero Impe∣rante Romanis, apud Victorem Pontiscem ma∣ximum qui quintus decimus post Petrum Eccle∣siae praefuit, per legatos obtinuit, vt viri, do∣ctrina & Religione insignes, in Scotiam ab eo
missi, se cum liberis & coniuge Christi nomen profitentes, baptismate insignirent. Regis exem∣pla Scotica nobilitas sequuta, auersata impieta∣tem, Christique Religionem complexa, sacr fonte est abluta. Fuit annus ille quo Scoti ad lu∣men vera pictatis, Dei Optimi Maximi benig∣nitate vocati sunt, & recepti; ab eo qui primus fuit humanae salutis tertius supra ducēte simum: à Scotorum Regni institutione quingente simus tricesimus tertius. Christ our Lord prince, and Author of peace, gaue such minde to kinge Donald, that castinge aside the wor∣ship of wicked deuils, hee had a litle before addicted himselfe to true pietie. For when Seuerus was the Romane Emperor, hee ob∣teyned of Pope Victor the fifteenth after S. Peter, that ruled the church, that men re∣nowned for learninge and Religion, sent from him into Scotland, might baptise him, with his wife and children, professinge Christ. The Scottish nobilitie followeinge the example of the kinge, forsakinge im∣piety, and embracing the Religiō of Christ, was baptized. This was in the yeare of the Incarnation of Christ, two hundred and three, and from the beginninge of the king∣dome of the Scots, fiue hundred thirtie and three.
And a little after speakinge of the renow∣ned leardned Christians, of that time, hee addeth. Incipere & nostri tum primum, sacras colere literas, Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus ad Christi dogma propalandum, in extremam miserat Albionem. At that time our Scottish men first began to study diuinitie, hauinge for their Tutors, those preists which Pope Victor sent to teach the Religion of Christ in Albion, the vt∣termost country in this part of the world. And againe: nostri qua fide & pietate insti∣tuti semel fuerunt, hactenus erroribus asperna∣tis, perseuerant. Our contrimen (of Scotlād) perseuer at this day (it was written in the yeare 1526.) in the faith and pietie wherein they were then instructed. (Hector Boeth. in fine praefat. Bal. centur 5. in Hector Boeth.) And a Protestant of England in the yeare 1615. writteh: Scotland receyued the faith in the time of Pope Victor the first, in the yeare 2O3. Celestin the first sent Palladius thither, to roote out the Pelagian heresie, which be∣gan to increase there, vnder Eugenius the second, whoe died in the yeare 460. since this time the Realme continued longe in the profession of the Romish church, vntill these
later dayes. (Edward. Grimston. Booke of Estates pag. 20. cap. 17.) Hee meaneth the dayes of this our Soueraigne kinge Iames the first of England, and sixt of that kinge∣dome. Therfore it is a thinge without que∣stion, that this holy Pope, soe earnest for the spirituall supreamacie of his Aposto∣licke See, settled it with other doctrines in this Iland, where with the rest it still continued vntill these times, as these Pro∣testants haue declared. Which is euident by all histories, not any one affirminge, but rather denyinge, that hee altered a∣nie thinge of that constitution of Pope Eleutherius, submittinge the whole na∣tion of Scotlande, to the Archbishopp of Yorke in spirituall affaires. And if kinge Donald and the nobilitie of Scotland then had not beene assured, that this supreame spirituall power, in disposinge and orde∣ringe church matters, in such cases, had be∣longed onely to the Popes of Rome, of all people and places in the world, they would not haue appealed to Rome, for those thinges at that time in the Empire of Se∣uerus, when aboue all others, there was the greatest enmytie and warrs betweene
the Romans and Scots, that euer were testi∣fied by all their histories. Bed l. 1. histor. c. 5. Hect Boeth. lib. 5. Scot. hist. Bucan. Rer. Scotic. l 4. Holinsh. hist. of Scotl. in seuerus. In an other point alsoe wee are assured, that S. Victor whoe had by his highest au∣thoritie excōmunicated soe many churches, both greeke and latine, as these Protestants haue told vs before, for their wronge kee∣ping of Easter, settled the right obseruatiō thereof in Scotland at this time. For to speake in Protestants wordes of this Pope: Hee confirmed the ordinance of Pius, touching the celebration of Easter vppon the Sonday. Soe did Pope Eleutherius before him, and soe consequently alsoe amonge other Chri∣stian doctrines, by his legates taught and de∣liuered it here in Britanie . And wee are taught by these learned Protestants, that in the first generall councell of Nice: De obser∣uatione Paschae antiquus canon sancitus est, ne porro in hac re Ecclesiae variarent: The old ca∣non of the obseruation of Easter was de∣creed, least the churches should afterward differ, about it. (Ed. Grymston p. 436. in Vi∣ctor. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pont. Rom. in Victor. Bal. lib. 1. de act. prat. in eod. Magdeburg. cen∣tur.
3. & in Eleuther. Damas. in Eleuther. Barns in Siluestro. Magdeburg, cent. 4.) And that wee had Brittish Bishops there, which consented to this decree, and receaued it for Britany, they testifie in these termes. (Thea∣ter of greate Britanie l 6. cap. 9. pag. 206 n. 19.) The Britannes continued constant in christia∣nitie, and the censures of their Bishops, for the greate estimation of their constancie, pietie and learninge, were required, and approued in greate points of doctrine, amonge the assemblies, of some generall councells, as that of Sardis (Where appeales to the Pope were decreed) and Nyce, in the tyme of greate Constantine, vvee had our Bishops present. And all men of rea∣dinge are assured of this both Constantine the Emperor in his epistle to the churches, and S. Athanasius in his Apologie write plainely, that this our Britanie receaued the councell of Nice. Epist. Constāt. apud Theo∣doret. Athanas. Apolog. Therefore it is a very idle and ignorant coniecture, or rather malitious error of some Protestants, to seeme to write as though Bri∣tany had receaued the faith frō some of the Asiatical churches, because some of the later Scots and Britans die erre in that obserua∣tion,
but this error of the Britans as diuers haue proued allready was quite differēt from that or some part of Asia & greeke. And the first gretian that came hither, except some sent by Roman Authoritie, that I finde was S. Regulus Albutus borne in Achaia, whoe came into Scotland, when Augustinus was kinge, allmost two hundred yeares after this, and longe after the controuersie of kee∣pinge Easter was ended, and brought thither holy relicks of S. Andrew the Apostle, vvhoe coming into Pictland, and the same of this knowne, very many came to reuerence the holy relicques of the Apostle, and made offerings there, and the kinge of the picts Hirgustus re∣ceaued by him with procession and lyinge vp∣pon the grounde, vvith much reuerence, kissed the holy relicques, and after masse ended hee bequeathed his palace to Saint Andrew, and to Regulus and the Preists to serue God in. Huius rei fama per Pictorum regiones delata permultorum animos ad visendas venerandas que sacras Apostoli reliquias attendit. Con∣fluxerunt ergo illuc vndique donaria Chri∣sti Apostolo pretiosa asserentes. Affuit & Heir∣gastus Rex eorum, quae fama ad eum detu∣lerat, visendi cupidas. Venientem ad se Re∣gulus
cum sociijs pio apparatu cum Sacerdo∣tum ac Monachorum religiosa deductione in hymnis & canticis excepit. Rex humi pro∣enmbens, sacras reliquias multa veneratione osculatus, vbi sacra Christiano more, curus ipse Heirgustus erat obseruantissimus, erant peracta, regium palatium amplis structuris ornatum diuo Andreae, Regulo, ac Sacerdoti∣bus ibidem deinceps Optimo Maximo Deo famu∣laturis, liberè erogauit, struxit & haud procul à Palatio, sacram aedem diuo Apostolo dicatam: and builded an other church not far from the pa∣lace, dedicated to the holy Apostle. And thus much of S. Victor. Next to him succeeded Pope and S. Ze∣pherinus, whoe to proue hee still maintay∣ned this Romane supreamacie, as his prede∣cessors before, ouer all Bishopes, Primates, Patriarckes, and whomsoeuer, or wheresoe∣uer of the cleargie, or others, did generally decree as these Protestants tel vs. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Zepherin. hee cal∣leth him seuerus.) Sine Romani Pontificis au∣thoritate accusatum Episcopum, nec à Primate, nec à Patriarcha, nec à Metropolitan), in Iudicio condemnandum esse. That a Bishop
accused, should not bee condemned, neyther by the Primate, nor Patriarcke, nor Metropolitane, without the authoritie of the Pope of Rome. By which is euident, that euen the Archbishops themselues of Britanie, to whome all others were subordinate in thinges spirituall, were subiect to the Pope of Rome at this time. Pope Calixtus succeeded next, and to speake in a Protestant Doctors wordes: (Powell. 1. of Antichrist. pag. 130.131.) Ca∣lixtus Pope defined, that all Bishops though ga∣thered in a generall councell, shall fulfill the vvill of the church of Rome. They which doe not this are pronounced to keepe a conciliable, & not a councell. And to bee short in this mat∣ter, the Protestants of England proue vnto vs, that this busines of the spirituall power of that See ouer all other churches, is the cheife scope of many of their Epistles decre∣tall. (Rob. Barns in vit. Vrbani, Antheri. & Dovvnam. lib. 1. Antichristi. cap. 3. pag. 35.) And to giue some particular instances here∣of more in Britanie, in this age: wee finde in histories. (Matth. West. an. 257.258.) that Pope Stephē about the yeare of Christ 257.258. or 259. When S.Mellon, then noe Christian, was sent from hence by publick
authoritie to Rome, about the temporall af∣faires of this kingedome, conuerted him to the faith of Christ, made him preist, and soone after Bishop, exempting him from his ciuill imployments of this his country, and by his Apostolicke power sent him Archbis∣hop to Rhoan in Normandie. (Petr. de Nat. de vit. 51. Vincent. in. Specul. l. 11. c. 74. Mar∣tyrol. Rom. 22. Octob. Ioh. Capgr. in 5. Mel. M. S. antiq. in eod. & Catal. Episcop. Rothmag. Matt. West.) And amonge others our glo∣rious men and martyrs herein this age, it is the common opinion, that S. Amphibalus whoe conuerted S. Alban. (Matth. Paris p. 178.179. Lidg. in vit. eius. Engl. Martyrol. 25. Iun.) both was a Britan borne, and con∣secrated at Rome, some say by Pope & Saint Zepherinus, what and how glorious his hi∣storie is, for his preaching and martyrdome with vs, all histories of that time are full: and how renowned hee and others of his holy company, sent by that Apostolicke See were at the same time in Scotland, namely Modocus, Prisus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambia∣nus, and Carnonus, both Scottish and English histories wil witnesse. Where S. Amphibalus was the first Bishop they had, and in Mona the
Iland: Amphibalus Brito vir insigni pietate primus Antistes ibi creatus. Hector Boethius Scotor. histor. lib. 6. fol. 102. Bal. centur. 1. in Amphib. Holinsh. hist. of Scotland in Chraknt. Veremund. apud Boeth. supr. And soe honored was he of that most wor∣thie Kinge of Scotland Chrathlintus, that to shew the honor hee yeelded to this holie Legate, and his companions, and somewhat to behold the Religiō of that time, the Scot∣tish historie thus speaketh vnto vs. (Hector Boeth. supr. Holinsh. hist. of Scotlād in Chrah.) Chrathlintus Rex sacram Antistitis aedem mu∣neribus ornauit amplissimis, calicihus, patenis candelabris, alijsque similibus ad sacrorum vsum commodis, ex argento, auroque fabrefactis, al∣tarique cupro & aere clauso: prouentus ad ea ex agris in sacrae aedis vicini constituit. Fuit id templum omnium primum, Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex sacerque magistratus sedem ha∣beret primariam, inter Scotos, cuius no∣stri meminere scriptores dedicatum. Kinge Chrathlint did adorne the Holy Howse, of the Bishop Amphibalus, with most ho∣norable guifts, chalices, patens, candlesticks, and others seruinge for the vse of Masse made of syluer, and gold, and an Altare,
inclosed with copper and brasse, and ap∣pointed reuenewes for them out of the country adioyninge. That was the first Christian church where a Bishop and holy magistrate had his cheife See, amonge the Scots, that is remembred by our writers. Thus were the Bishops and preists conse∣crated at, and sent from Rome, honored in this nation at that time. When wee reade further the See of Rome to haue beene here in such high honor, that the Brittish writer, and witnesse of S. Albans life, li∣uinge then, writeth. (Compilator vitae S. Albani apud Capgrau. & M. S. antiq. in vit. eiusd.) Romam proficiscor, vt illic veniam me∣rear delictorum, libellum quoque islum offe∣ram Examini Romanorum: vt si quid in eo secus quàm debuit fortè prolatum fuerit, hoc per cos dignetur in melius commutare. I goe to Rome, that there I may deserue for∣giuenes of my sinnes: and I will offer this booke to the Examination of the Ro∣mans, that if any thinge be vttered therein otherwise then it should, it may bee a∣mended. And that all spirituall power and iuris∣diction then in Britanie, was subordinate
vnto, & dependinge of the Popes of Rome, in that time, the Antiquities and Antiqua∣ries, Protestants and others, both of Cam∣bridge and other places doe plainely testifie, whoe amonge other euidences for this mat∣ter, produce vnto vs the auntient Bull of Pope Honorius, dated at Rome the 20. day of Februarij in the yeare 624. (Bulla Honorij 1. Papae an. 624.20. Februar. apud Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. Accad. p. 75 76.77.) Wherein hee affirmeth that hee followeth the example of Pope Eleutherius, of whome I haue spoken before: Pope Fabian who li∣ved in this age, and others who beeinge likewise holy Popes, had done the like which hee did towardes the vniuersitie or schoole of Cambridge, and concerninge his power spirituall ouer all parsons in this nation, thus it is. Honorius Episcopus seruus seruorum Dei, dilectis filijs doctoribus & scholaribus in vni∣uersitate Cantabrigiae studentibus Apostolicam benedictionem. Dilectissimi in Christo filij, nō absque labore, & plurima perturbatione didici∣mus, quomodo nonnulli propriae salutis imme∣mores luporum faucibus, & vulpina facie, liber∣tates & priuilegia, qua vobis & pradecessori∣bus
in eadem vniuersitate studentibus gratiosè indulsit sedes Apostolica, moliuntur eneruare: Ita quod plures ecclesiarum praepositi absque ra∣tionis Iure minùs iustè in vos iurisdictionem in. debitam, & insolitam vsurpantes, quamque non consueuerunt hactenus, ad vniuersitatem vestram accedunt, materiam perturbationis, & discordiae seminantes, correctionis, emendatio∣nis aut reformationis ibidem officia exercentes, contra inhibitionem sedis Apostolicae. Volentes igitur, vt tenemur iustitia suadente, paci & tranquillitati vniuersitatis vestrae paterna sol∣licitudine salubriter prouidere. Praedecessorum nostrorum Romanae, Ecclesiae Pontificum, Eleu∣thery, Fabiani, Leonis, Simplicij, Felicis & Bonifacij vestigijs debitè inhaerentes, authori∣tate omnipotentis▪ Dei districtius inhibemus, sub poena excommunicationis, quam veniens in contrarium ipso facto incurrat, ne quis Ar∣chiepiscopus, aut eorum officiales, seu visitato∣res generales aut speciales à Sede Apostolica deputati, audent in aliquem vestrum suspensio∣nis vel excommunicationis, seu interdicti sen∣tentias inferre, aut vos familiares vestros mo∣lestare praesumat. Honorius Bishop, seruant of the seruants of God, to his beloued sonnes the doctors &
schollers of the vniuersitie of Cambridge sendeth Apostolicall benediction. Wee haue learned not without labour and much sor∣rowe, moste beloued sonnes in Christ, how some vnmindfull of their owne saluation, like greedy wolues, and craftly foxes goe about to weaken or euacuate the liberties & priuiledges which the See Apostolicke hath graunted graciously to you, and your prede∣cessors students in the same vniuersitie. Soe that many Rulers of churches without right of reason, vsurping, vniustly ouer you vn∣due iurisdiction, and vnaccustomed, and which hitherto they haue not vsed, come to your vniuersitie, sowing matter of trouble, and discord, exercising there the offices of correction, emendation, or reformation, a∣gainst the inhibition of the See Apostolick. Wee therfore willing, as wee are bound by iustice persuadinge it, with a fatherly care safely to prouide for the peace, and quiet∣nesse of your vniuersitie, duely followinge the steps of our predecessors, Popes of Ro∣me, Eleutherius, Fabianus, Leo, Simplicius, Felix and Bonifacius, by the authoritie of almightie God, doe strictlie forbid vnder payne of excommunicatiō ipso facto bee
incurred by the cōtrary doer, that noe Arch∣bishop, or their Officials, nor the visitors ge∣neral or speciall deputed from the See Apo∣stolicke, shall dare to inflict the sentences of suspension or excommunication, or inter∣diction, against any of you, or presume to molest you, or your seruants. By which it is euident, that in this age the Popes of Rome, exercised the highest spiri∣tual iurisdictiō in this kingdome, limited (as they thought good) the power of Bishops, and Archbishops, subiecting them to their cēsures, and made exemptions from them, & all others, except the See of Rome it selfe, & had their visitors here to such purposes, ex∣cept these Protestants doe deceaue vs. Which further testifie, that this Pope Fabian, in that time miraculouslie chosen Pope, and liuing & dying an holy Saint, made diuers decrees, generally bindinge all Christians as: That euery Christiā should cōmunicate thrise a yeare, that is to say, at the feasts of Easter, whitson∣day, and the birth of our Sauiour, that preists should not bee punished in prophane courts. And the like. Ed. Grymston. in Fabian. Pope. Rob. Barns l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Fabiano.
THE FOVRTH CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE. THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proued likewise by the Protestant diuines, and Antiquaries of England, that the Popes of Rome, euer claymed and ex∣ercised, this their highest power here in this Age. NOw wee are come to the fourth hun∣dred yeare, in the beginninge whereof, Diocletian the persecutinge Emperor dy∣inge, although hee had put euen in this I∣land, diuers thousands of Christiās to death, and one thousand in one time and place, Lichfeild, (Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. Stowe histor. in the Rom. in Coill.) (taking there∣vpon the name of a Feild of Blood:) yet hee was soe farr from extinguishinge the name of Christ, that wee had a continuall suc∣cession at that very time of Bishops, preists, religious, and other cleargie men, without intermission deudced from this Roman in∣stitution in this kingedome. And this testi∣fied
by the best Antiquities wee haue, S. Gil∣das, S. Bede, and allmoste all after them both Catholicks, and Protestants. (Gildas l. de excid. & conquet. Brit. cap 8.) The words of Saint Gildas ar these, as Protestants pu∣blish him. Bilustro supradicti turbinis necdum ad inte∣grum expleto, emercesentibusque nece suorum Authorum nefarijs decritis, laetis luminibus omnes Christi Tyrones quast post hyemalem ac prolixam noctem, temperiem lucemque serenam aurae celestis excipiunt, renouant ecclesias ad solum vsque destructas, Basilicas Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt, persiciunt, ac velut victricia signa passim propalant, dies festos celebrant, sacra mundo corde, oreque conficiunt, omnes exultant filij gremio ac si matris ecclesiae consoti. When ten yeares or the said persecu∣tion were not wholly expired, and the wic∣ked decrees were now voide by the death of their Authors, al the souldiars of Christ with ioyfull countenance, as it were after a win∣ter longe night, receaue the temper and cleare light of the heauenly ayre, they renew their churches destroied euen to the ground, they build churches of the holy martyrs, fra∣me, and perfect them, & as it were publick∣lie
sett forth euery where their victorious Ensignes, they celebrate holy dayes, they perfect their sacrifices, or sacred things with a cleane hart, and mouth, they all doe re∣ioyce, as it were children fostered in the lap of their mother the church. The very same hath S. Bede whoe addeth (Bed. histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8.) Progressi in pub∣licum fideles Christi, qui se tempore discrimi∣nis, siluis ac desertis, abditisque speluncis occul∣tauerant. The faithfull seruants of Christ shew themselues now in publick, whoe in the time of the daunger had hidd themselues in woods, and wildernesses, and hidden dens. And then hee writeth as S. Gildas be∣fore. By which publick and hierarchicall Acts and offices of Bishops, and preists, as founding and dedicatinge churches, to the honor of holy Martyrs, that had late suffe∣red in that persecution, in institutinge and celebratinge their festiuities, renewing and consecrating other defaced churches, which none but Bishops might doe, and sayinge Masse, which hee expressely by perfecting their sacrifices or sacred rites, with a cleane hart, and mouth, the preistly office and fun∣ction, it is moste euident, that diuers both
preists and Bishops, with other cleargie men escaped in this persecution, and soe still con∣tinued the hierarchicall succession or Arch∣bishops and Bishops, soe vniuersally establis∣hed here before by the Popes of Rome, and with the same dependance which they had before. For noe historie maketh mention, of any chaunge, neyther of our Bishops then putt to death, except S. Amphibalus, vnlesse wee wil coniecture without warrant, that S. Angulus suffered martyrdome in this time. And notwithstanding soe many losses, and desolations of our Antiquities, wee haue te∣stimonie of some Bishops in particular then liuing, the persecution being ended. For whoe can thinke but some of those. which fledd into Scotland, whether the per∣secution extended not, with S. Amphibalus, remayned there still in the Episcopall See of Mona, which kinge Chrathlinte, had soe ho∣norably endowed to that purpose, and longe after was an Episcopall See? I haue named diuers of these renowned men before, of whome some one in all probabilitie after the returne of Saint Amphibalus into these parts, supplied that place and dignitie there. And here in England it is euident by
those antiquities wee haue left, that wee had preserued from the fury of that persecu∣tion, many both Bishops, and Archbishops. To exemplifie in London, wee haue the na∣mes of Sixteene Archbishops there, before the cominge of S. Augustine hither, as both Iocelin of Furnes, the Protestants, Stowe, Godwyn and others collect them. (Iocelin Catalog. of British Bish. Stowe histor. in Lu∣cius. Godwyn. Catalog. in London, 1. concil. Arelat. in Subscript. tom. 1. concil. Stowe & Godwyn supr.) And it is manifest that either Restitutus which was Archbishop of Lon∣don, and was present at the councel of Arles in Fraunce, in the yeare 326. soone after this, or Thedred, or Hillary supposed to bee his immediate predecessors, was then Archbi∣shop. And soe because euery Archbishop in∣ferreth inferiour Bishops vnder him, that wee had Bishops alsoe. I will instance onely in Winchester, where wee ar informed both by an old Manuscript Author, and a new Protestant Bishop. (Godwyn Catalog. of Bish. in Winchest. 1. old M. S. apud eundem supr.) That one Constans was Bishop there in this time, and in the yeare 309. or 310. did vpon the 15. day of march, hallowe and dedicate
vnto the honor & memory of S. Amphiba∣lus, that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution, a church there reedified with such wonderfull forwardnes and zeale, as within one yeare and thirtie dayes, both it and all the edifices belonginge vnto it, were quite finished in very seemely and con∣uenient māner. And that Deodatus was Ab∣bot of this new erected Monastery. Thus this Protestant Bishop from an old Manuscript. By which, and that which is spoken be∣fore in this chapter, it is euident, that En∣gland this part of Britanie then had both Bi∣shops, and Archbishops continuinge in the same order and maner as they were first in∣stituted here by the See of Rome: neither did they now begin to depart or seperate themselues from obedience to that See Apo∣stolicke; for soone after this, the first gene∣ral councel of Nice beeinge called, these Pro∣testāts haue told vs, wee had Bishops there, and most euident it is, that it was receaued in this kingdome. And yet the canon of that councell is soe manifest for the Popes of Ro∣me supreamacy, at the least ouer this western world, wherein England is, both in the time of this holy councell, and before, that
a Protestant Bishop doth thus confesse it. (Feild. l. 3. p. 60.61.) In the time of the Nicen councell, & before, as appeareth by the Acts of the councell limitinge their bounds, there were three principall Bishops, or Patriarkes of the christian church: namely the Bishop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. Soe wri∣teth the Protestant Archbishop Whitgift, Foxe and others, whereof one saith. (Whit∣gift def. of the Answ. p. 331. Foxe tom. 1. pag. 12. Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Rom. in Siluestro.) Sollicitudinem ecclesiarum, pro recepta consue∣tudine veterum habendam esse statuerunt. The fathers of the nicen councell did decree, that accordinge to the custome receaued from them of old, that the three cheife patriarkes of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, should haue chardge of the churches. Soe that if wee would seeke noe further then to these great enemies themselues of the Romane See, yett they confesse vnto vs, that it was not onely decreed in this nicen coun∣cell, where, as our Protestants haue told vs, wee had Bishops consentinge, and our kinge and contriman Constantine the great Em∣peror alsoe submittinge himselfe vnto it, but that it was the old custome and tradition of
the church, that the Bishop of Rome was the principall Bishop, and commaundinge Pa∣triarke of all westerne churches, amonge which this of our Britanie was euer, now is, and of necessitie must bee one, and if wee will bee members of the church of Christ, except wee can remoue Britanie from the vttermost part of Europe, to lepp to Alexan∣dria in Africke, or Antioch in Asia, wee must needs by this councel as it is glossed by our Protestants, bee subiect to Rome, as wee euer were by the old custome before that councell. The words of these Protestants Whitgift and Foxe are these. (Whitgift Def. pag. 331. Foxe tom. 1. pag. 12.) The councell of Nice which was the yeare of our Lord 340. and in the sixt canon of the said coun∣cell wee finde it soe decreed, that in euery prouince, or precinct some one church or Bi∣shop of the same, was appointed and sett vp, to haue the Inspection and Regiment of other churches about him, secundum morem antiquum, that is after the auncient custome, as the words of the councell doe purport. Soe that the Bishop of Alexandria should haue power of Libia, and Pontapolis, in Egipt, for as much as the Bishop of Rome
hath the like or same maner. Therefore seeing there is none named ei∣ther by the councell, or custome related by that councell, but the Bishops of Rome, An∣tioch, and Alexandria to haue this high Re∣giment and power ouer the churches, wee must needs adhere and appeale to Rome by these men, as wee euer did by the old cu∣stome from the beginninge of our first life in Christ: otherwise wee shall fall into er∣rors and conclude inualidate things euen in the highest matters, these men assuringe vs, that at this time there were but three cheife Metropolitane churches before reci∣ted, and that to vse their words. (Whitgift def. pag. 359.) The church of Rome is cal∣led all that is subiect to the Bishop of Rome: And (Whitgift Answeare to the Admonit. cap. 2.17. diuision.) that notable and fa∣mous councell of Nice must be, and is of all wise and learned men next vnto the scriptu∣res themselues reuerenced, esteemed and em∣braced, in the sixt canon of that councell it is thus written: This councell doth deter∣mine him to bee noe Bishop, which is made without the consent Metropolitani Episcopi, of the Metropolitane. Which cheife Metro∣tropolitane
to vs then as these men haue told vs, was the Bishop of Rome; soe that it is eui∣dent by them, that we could not here haue any Archbishop, or Bishopp mane without his allowance. And yett these our Protestant Bishops  Doctors must needs eleuate this power spi∣ritual higher, then to make it onely cheife ouer Britanie, those West nations and Eu∣rope, and giue, it the highest place in the whole church of Christ, for soe all that can bee pretended by these Protestants, to haue had interest in such things at that time, whe∣ther the Pope himselfe S. Siluester and others, our kinge and Emperor Constantine, or the Bishops of Britanie, and other nations; for all these in those daies acknowledged the Su∣preamacy in the Romane See ouer all chur∣ches. S. Siluester Pope with the consent, and Subscription of the Emperor Constātine his Mother S. Helena, and 284. western Bishops, and 45. preists, decreed. (Concil. Roman. su Syluestro can. 20. to. 1. Concil.) Nemo udua∣bit primam sedem: quoniam omnes sedes a priuia sede desidernt temperari, neque ab Auguste, neque ab omni clero, neque à Regibus, neque à populo Indox indi. abitur. Noe man shall iudge
the cheife See (of Rome): because all Sees desire to bee gouerned by the cheife See. The iudge (Pope of Rome) shall not bee iudged, neither by the Emperour, nor by all the cleargie, nor by kings, nor by the people. Where wee see the Pope of Rome to bee by all consent the highest iudge, and subiect to noe others iudgment, whosoeuer. The honor and reuerence which Constantine yeelded to Saint Siluester then Pope, is sufficiently knowne by Eusebius in his life and others. (Euseb. de vita Constantini.) I will onely exemplify by the warrant of an english Pro∣testant Bishop, how this greate dutie and Reuerence of him to that holy Pope, and en∣dowinge that Apostolicke See with honor and ritches, was such, that it was longe be∣fore foretold by an Angell from heauen, to S. Blasius. saying (l. 1. de Act. Rom. Pontif. in Syluestro.) That in the time of Constantine, Idolatry should cease by his meanes, and this Constantine for his honor to the See of Rome, should translate the seate of his Empire from thence, into Thracia, and there settle it at the mouth of the Riuer Bosphorus, and leaue Italy and Rome to the Pope, Christs vicar there. Ad∣ueniet Princeps, sub quo pacabitur orbis: &
finem accipiet veteram cultura deorum. Con∣stantinus apud Thraces, qua Bosphorus aequor Thracius Euxinis Aegaeum ingurgitat vndis, constituet sedem Imperij: latiumque relinquet Christo & Romuleam septem in collibus vrbem. Now for the Bishops of Britanie there can bee noe question, but they gaue this prima∣cie to S. Siluester: for first it is most proba∣ble some of them were present at this Roman councell, soe great, consistinge of the we∣sterne Bishops. Secondly in all Iudgments they must needs acknowledge this suprea∣macy either in the Pope, or Emperor; But not the Emperor which yeelded it to S. Sil∣uester. Thirdly because the next Pope Saint Marke, who was Pope but three yeares, clai∣med for the Romane See to be, mater omnium ecclesiarum, the mother of all churches, and priuiledged from heresie. (Marcus epist. ad Athanas. & caeter. Egipti Episcopos.) And as these Protestants tell vs, his successor S. Iulius appointed appeales to the See of Rome, and taught noe councel could bee kept lawfully with∣out his consent. (Rob. Barns in vita Pontif. Ro∣man. in Iulio.) And two other Protestant Bis∣hops speaking of this time affirme: The canō of the primatiue church made euery thinge
voyde that was done without the Bishop of Rome. (Bilson true differ. pag. 66.67.) And againe: The canon of the primatiue church forbad any councell to bee called, without his consent. (Morton Appeale pag. 286.) And to make all sure in this matter, that the whole cleargie of Britanie and Christians vnder them, at this time attributed this spirituall supreamacie to the Pope of Rome, our Pro∣testants haue told vs before, which aunciēt Authorities alsoe affirme (Theater of greate Britanie l. 6. Sulpit. Seuer. sacr. histor. lib. 2. Athan. apol. l. 1. cont. Ar. Concil. Sardic. can. 4.7.) that wee had of this nation diuers Bishops in the generall councell of Sardis, a cytie of Lydia in Asia with 300. Bishops; and therfore this kingedome with the rest, ac∣knowledged the supreamacie of the Pope of Rome in all places, and that Appeales were to bee made to him as highest iudge. And whereas the councell of Arles in Fraunce in the time of S. Siluester, in the subscription of the Bishops there, many Pro∣testants and other Antiquaries assure vs, (Concil. Arelat. in subscript. Theater of Brit. lib. 6. Stow histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. catalog. in London. 1.) that Restitutus our Archbis∣hop
of London was present there, and sub∣scribed for this nation, that place beeinge soe remote from London, wee must needs say, that hee was called thither by the Pope of Rome, or doe that, which neuer any yett would allowe, to graunt a superioritie vnto the Bishops of Fraunce ouer them of this kingedome. And soe for those our Bishops which were at the councell of Ariminum in this time, for noe others medled in these affaires in those dayes. Which wee are fur∣ther taught by the Example of our holy Bishop S. Ninian, (Capgrau. in Catal. in Ni∣nian. Bed. hist. Anglic. Theater of greate Bri∣tanie. lib. 6. Bal. centur. 1. de script. in Niniano Bernini.) whoe towards the later end of this centurie of yeares, was made Bishopp at Rome by the Pope there, and by him sent Apostle to the Western parts of Britanie, to people there which had not yett receaued the faith of Christ. Where hee conuerted the nation of the Picts, preached the ghospell through the contryes of the Britans, Scots, and Picts, ordeyned there preists, consecra∣ted them Bishops, and diuided the contry into parishes, as both Catholicks and Pro∣testants are witnesses. Audicus Pontisex Ro∣manus
quosdam in occiduis Britanniae parti∣bus necdum fidem Christi suscepisse, ad Episco∣patus gradum Ninianum consecrauit. Concre∣ditum à Deo talentum per Britannorum, Sco∣torum, australium Pictorum terras, ad senium vsque latissimè profudit. Ordinauit presbyte∣ros, Episcopos consecrauit, & totam terram per certas parochias diuisit. And liuinge in this preachinge vntill hee was very ould, as a Protestant Bishop writeth, (Bal. centur. 1. in Ninian. Palladio Patricio.) he died in the yeare of Christ 432. before which time S. Palladius, S. Patricius, SS. Germanus and Lupus were sent hither by S. Celestine Pope of Rome. And yett that hee came hither in the fourth century, it is euident: for in his cominge hither from Rome, hee came by S. Martin Bishopp of Tours, in Fraunce as Capgraue and others writte, (Ioh. Capgr. in S. Ninian.) and yett by Sigebert and o∣thers, S. Martine died within the first 400. yeares. (Sigebert. in Chronic. ad an. 399.) In which time alsoe wee had Coelius Sedu∣lius of this nation, scholler (as a Protestant Bishop writeth) to Hildiberthus a learned Bishop of Scotland, (Ioh. Bal centur. 1. in Coel. Sedul.) after whose death hee trauailed
many nations for learninge sake, as Spayne, France, Italy and Asia, and beeinge excel∣lently learned returned to Rome, where hee longe time continued, and was soe learned holy and gratefull a man to the Popes of Rome, that Pope Gelasius (to vse the Prote∣stants words) in the decrees distinct 15. cal∣leth him, venerable Sedulius, and much pray∣seth his writings. Neyther can wee thinke otherwise of his Master, Bishop Hildibertus, of whome hee was instructed, and directed in these cour∣ses. And this Sedulius himselfe alsoe was a Bishop, as both Sigebertus, and Bostius our contryman, and the Protestant Bishop Bale from them, are wittnesses. (Sigebertus & Bostius apud Bal. centur. 1. de Script. in Coel. Sedul.) In which time alsoe liued S. Kebius our Cornish Bishop, successor, though per∣haps not immediate, to S. Amphibalus in the Bishoprick of Mona. (Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kebio. Harpesf. histor. pag. 26. Pits. in Kebio.) Whoe liued longe time with S. Hilary Bis∣hopp of Poicters in Fraunce, that worthie piller of the true Catholick faith, and ho∣nor of the church of Rome, and Successor of Saint Peter there, that hee calleth him.
(Hilar. ad Psalm. 131. & in Matth. can. 16.) Ecclesiae fundamentum, caelestis Regni Ianitor, cuius arbitrio aeterni aditus traduntur, cuius terrestre iudicium praeiudicata authoritas sit in coelo: Foundation of the church, porter of the kingedome of heauen. The happy foun∣dation of the church, the blessed porter of heauen, to wose will the eternall passadges are committed, whose iudgement on earth is preiudicate authoritie in heauen. Such a tutor, pedagoge, and consecrator alsoe had this our happie contryman Saint Kebius, in those turbulent hereticall times of the Arrians, and their opposition against the Romane church, a greate meanes by this our holy Bishop, S. Restitutus, Fastidius, Priscus, our Archbishops then, and other godly Bishops of this nation, to preserue this kingedome in the true faith, and obedience to the Pope of Rome, in soe much that S. Hilarie himselfe, (lib. de Synodis aduersus Arr.) commendeth the Bishops of Britanie for the sinceritie in those times, to their eter∣nall honor. Hee dyed, as our Protestants write, in the yeare of Christ, 370. And in this age alsoe was that renowned S. Vrsula, with her glorious company of Bishops, other
cleargie men, Virgins and others, as those Protestants ar witnesses, whoe as both Pto∣lomaeus Lucensis, Capgraue, the Antiqui∣ties of Collene, and the German histories testifie (Baleus centur. 1. in Vrsula. Cynosura an. 390. Stowe histor. an. 394. in Theodosius. Martyrolog. Roman. die 21. & 22. Octob. & Beda hac die & Vandelbert. Baron. in annot. Ptolom. Lucens. in S. Vrsula. Capgrau. in S. Vrsula. & Annal. Coloniens. &c.) made that their moste holy pilgrimadge to Rome, and at their returne receaued the crowne of Martyrdome at, or neare Cullen in Ger∣manie, where, as alsoe in the whole Chri∣stian world, and both to their honor and the glory of our country, they are celebra∣ted in the most auncient Martyrologes, in which sacred company, as Capgrauius and diuers others testifie, there were manye Bishops of this kingedome, as namelie Willielmus or Michael, Columbanus Ywanus, Eleutherius and Lotharius. Which I rather name, that wee may know, how this kinge∣dome at that tyme, both was soe replenis∣hed with Bishops, that it might spare soe manie to bee sent from hence, with those holy Virgins, and to giue euidence how
deuoted and respectiue, the Bishops and cleargie, with the rest of the Christians of this kingedome, were towards the See of Rome, in these dayes. THE FIFTE CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE. THE IX. CHAPTER. Shewinge by these Protestants of England, how both the Popes highest spiritual power, was still here continued, and a perpetuall succession of our Bishops and Cleargie alsoe in Britanie from the See of Rome, as in the other Ages before. NOw wee are come to the fift Century, in the beginning whereof the first Fa∣thers of Heresie, and Opposers against the holy Apostolick See of Rome, which I finde to haue beene of our Brittish nation, were the monstrous rebellious Hereticks Pelagius and Timotheus, not that I finde them more formally & directly opposite to the See Apo∣stolick then other Hereticks were, but as the
nature and necessitie of heresie is, to bee euer contrarie and disobedient to their cheife iudge, and commaunder in such cases, the Pope of Rome, with councels assembled: for as our Protestants tell vs, diuers Popes of Rome both by themselues, and in councels had condemned Pelagius for an hereticke, and yett hee obstinately persisted in his con∣demned errors. Innocentius the first condem∣ned, Pelagius the monke, and Coelestius of he∣resie, for preferringe free vvill before the grace of God, and sayd the vvil of man by it selfe, was sufficient & able to fulfill the cōmaundements of God, and tooke avvay the necessitie of Baptisme and faith in Christ. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Rom in Innocent. Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptorib. in Pelagio heresiarcha) Innocentius primus Pela∣gium monachum, & Coelestium haereseos dam∣nauit: quod liberū arbitrium gratiae Dei praefer∣rent, dicerent{que} voluntatē per se sufficere, ad im∣plenda Dei mādata, praesul ordinatus Pelagius sui nominis haeresim fabricabat, asserens hominem sine peccato nasci, ac solo voluntatis imperio si∣ne gratia saluari posse, vt ita nefarius baptis∣mum ac fidem tolleret. Pelagius after hee was made a Bishopp, framed an heresie of his name, affirminge that man was borne
without sinne, and by the onely com∣maunde of his wil, without grace by Christ, might bee saued, that the wicked man might soe take away both baptisme and faith. Pope Sozimus alsoe, as these men tell vs, condemned this hereticke, and to vse their wordes. (Rob. Barnes sup. in Sozimo Papa.) That Sozimus might declare, that nothinge was in any place ratified, that was done in holy things, except it were done by the Popes autho∣ritie, hee sent Faustinus a Bishop, & two preists, to the councell of Carthadge. The decrees of the councell were brought to Pope Sozimus, which beeinge by him approued, the Pelagian heresie was condemned euery where. Vt Sozimus decla∣raret, nihil vsquam ratum fore, quod in rebus sacris ageretur, nisi id Romani Pontificis au∣thoritate fieret, Faustinum Episcopum, & duos presbyteros, ad Cathaginensem Synodum misit. Synodalia decreta ad Sozimum perlata sunt: quibus approbatis, Pelagiana haeresis passim damnata est. Thus wee see by these Prote∣stants, that the Popes of Rome, euen in this time, when they were moste afflicted, and Rome it selfe taken, and sacked by Gothes, in the time of this Pope, (Barns supr,) beeinge Pope but one yeare 3. moneths and twelue dayes,
Sozimo Pontifice, Roma à Gothis capta est: They still exercised and practised this hi∣ghest spirituall power in all places, euen in Africk, as these Protestants assure vs, and not onely in Europe where our Britanie is: In which they shewed, and exercised this their highest supreamacy in many and di∣uers matters in that time. And first in this Busines of Pelagius, the monke or Abbot of Bangor, in Wales; Thus writeth a Protestant Bishop with consent of Antiquities. (Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptor. in Pal∣ladio Graeco. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l. 7. fol. 132.133. Holinsh. histor. of Scotland. Ed. Grym∣ston cap. Relig. of Scotland pag. 20. Prosper. in Chronico.) Palladius Graecus à Caelestino Ro∣manorum Pontifice Antistes mittebatur, vt Pe∣lagianam haeresim, quae tunc magnam Britan∣niae partem inquinauerat, à Britannorum gente arceret, atque Scotorum populum ad veram pie∣tatem, à qua continua bellorum atrocitate pau∣lùm aberrarit, rite reduceret. Hunc ferunt con∣cionibus pijs à quibusdam gentilium superstitiū∣culis ecclesias illas purgasse, atque ob id in ho∣diernum vsque diem, Scotorum Apostolus ap∣pellatur. Palladius a Graecian was by Cele∣stine Pope of Rome, sent a Bishop, to driue
from the nation of the Britans, the Pelagian heresie, which then had defiled a great part of Britanie, and rightly to reduce the Scots to true pietie, from which by the continuall crueltie of wars they had erred. The saying is, that with his godly sermons, hee purged those churches from some superstitions of the gentiles, and soe is to this day called the Apostle of the Scots. Here wee see it first left to the Popes Iudgment, what was heresie to bee condemned, what was error to bee recalled, superstition to bee reformed, and in his power spirituall (the temporall Romane then hauinge nothing to doe in any part of this Iland) to assigne, and send a Bi∣Bishop, and Apostle to that nation, which was neuer subiect, either in temporall res∣pects, to the Romane Emperors, whoe soe performed the highest sacred duties, and authoritie in that church, that, as before, and by all writers hee is called. Scotorum A∣postolus, the Apostle of the Scots: as iust∣lie hee deserued it, settling all things there, by his legatine power, makinge a Bishop, an Archbishop, and the like matters of grea∣test Iurisdiction, as namely S. Seruanus Bis∣hop of the Orchads, and S. Teruanus Archbishop
of the Picts, Palladius Seruanum Episcopum ad Orchadas Insulas missum, vt Populum rudem christiana pietate institueret, creauit, & Terua∣num quem Infantē lustrico lauerat fonte, Picto∣rū Archiepiscopum constituit. Palladius created Seruanus a Bishopp, and sent him to the Orchads Ilands, to instruct the rude people, in the christian faith, and hee appointed Teruanus, whome hee baptized when hee was an Infant, to bee Archbishop of the Picts. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l. 7. folio 133. pag. 1. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scoticar. l. 5. Rege 42. pag. 146. Polidor. Verg. hist. Anglic. l. 3. pag. 58.59. Thus the Scottish histories teach vs. By which it is euident, that the whole state of the church of Scots, and Picts alsoe, was then settled by the Authoritie of this Roman Legate, and that the other Gouernors which he appointed in it, were alsoe sent from Rome, for, if Teruanus whom hee appoin∣ted Archbishop of the Picts, was baptized when hee was but an Infant, as these Scottish historians tell vs, hee was baptized at Rome or those parts where S. Palladius then liued, & not in this kingdome, where it is confes∣sed by all antiquities, that S. Palladius liued
a verie short time. And S. Teruanus beeinge made by him an Archbishopp amonge the Picts, it both informeth, that there were o∣ther Bishops there vnder him, els he could not bee Archbishop, cheefe of the Bishops there; and maketh probable, that S. Ninian, whoe as a Protestant Bishop writeth, (Bal. cent. 1. in Ninian. Bernic.) died about this time, was alsoe Archbishopp there, and now dyinge Teruanus was by Palladius his legatine power ordeyned his successor: or that both these were Archbishops of Yorke, soe ap∣pointed by the See of Rome, and named Bis∣hops of the Picts, because they with other prouinces, were subiect to the Archbishops See of Yorke, a subordination neyther alte∣red by S. Celestine or any other Pope vntill such time, as I haue before declared, except in such extraordinary cases, of special legats sent immediately from Rome, with cheife authoritie, such as S. Palladius was, whoe by that prerogatiue exercised this iurisdiction extraordinarily, in consecrating and institu∣ting Bishops, within the limitts of the Me∣tropolitane of Yorke, which ordinarily be∣longed vnto his See, by the order of Pope Eleutherius from the beginning of our pub∣lick
receauing of the faith of Christ. And the same care and chardge which S. Cele∣stine then Pope of Rome tooke of the Scots, and Picts, at this time, the same alsoe hee had, and as cheife pastor performed, both to this kingedome of Britanie, and Ireland alsoe. Concerning Britanie, these Protestants as∣sure vs, that when Pelagius was dead before, and his heresies by many Popes and coun∣cells condemned, yett it beeing maintayned here by Leporius Agricola, a very learned Hereticke. (Bal. centur. 1. de scriptor. in Lepo∣rio Agricola & l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Ce∣lestino. Rob. Barns l. de vita Pontif. Roman. in Caelestin.) That Saint Palladius of whome I haue spoken, the Popes Legate in Scotland, informed S. Celestine Pope hereof, whoe there∣vppon sent the twoe french Bishops, Germanus and Lupus hither to strengthen the Britans in the true doctrine of heauēly grace, and to cōfute the wicked doctrine of the sufficiency of mans vvorkes vvithout the grace of Christ. Quod per Palladium audiēs Caelestinus Pontifex Romanus, Germanum Antissiodorensem, & Lupum Tra∣cafessum, Gallicanos Episcopos illuc misit vt Bri∣tannos, in fide gratiae caelestis solidarent, & im∣piam
atque Hipocriticam humanorum operum doctrinam confutarent. And that wee may bee fully informed, that S. Celestine the Pope did not send these two holy Bishops into Bri∣tanie onely to suppresse the pelagian heresy, but to supply the spiritual wants in this king∣dome, this Protestant Bishop and greatest enemy to the See of Rome, will tell vs more plentifully, where hee describeth that holy Pope and his doctrine in this maner. (Balaeus l. 2. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Coelestino. Robert. Barns in vit. Pont. in Coelestino.) Caelestinus Campanus, Introitum graduale, Responserium, tractum, & offertorium papisticae missae inseruit: atque vt Sacerdotes pontificum Canones scirēt, arctè praecepit. Germanum in Britanniam, Pal∣ladium in Scotiam, & Patricium cum quodam Segetio in Hiberniam, vt pelagianas haereses extirparent, Episcopos misit, obijtque anno Christi 435. Confessorum numero asscriptus. Pope Celestine borne in Campania, did put to the Papisticall masse the introite, gra∣duale, responsorie, tract, and offertorie; and streightly commanded, that preists should knowe the canons of the Popes, hee sent Bishops, Germanus into Britanie, Palladius into Scotland, and Patricke with
one called Segetius into Ireland, to roote out the Pelagian heresies. And hee died in the yeare of Christ 435. in the number of Confessors. An other interpretinge this addition hee made to the masse, saith. (Barns supr.) In ini∣tio sacrificij, vt Psalmus Iudica me Deus & dis∣cerne causam meam &c. à sacrificaturo diceretur, ordinauit. Graduale in missa ordinauit, vt Sa∣cerdotes canones sacros tenerent, praecepit. Pope Celestine ordeyned, that in the be∣ginninge of the sacrifice, when a preist was to sacrifice, hee should say the psalme which beginneth, Iudge mee o God, and discerne my cause &c. hee did order the graduale in the Masse, & cōmaunded that preists should vnderstand or keepe the holy canons as before. And the Protestant Archbishopp Whitgift. (Whitg. Answere to the Admoni∣tion pag. 44. sect. 1.2.) Speaking of this ho∣lie Pope writeth: Celestine was a godly Bishop, and the church of Rome at that time, had the substance of the Sacraments: accordinge to gods word: neither was there any superstition mixed with them, the Introite that hee appoin∣ted, was one of the psalmes. The like hath
Master Foxe, (Foxe tom. 2. in Queene Mary pag. 1401.) whoe affirmeth, this vse of a psalme before the Masse was vsed longe be∣fore in the Greeke church. And it is the common opinion of our English Protestāts, their Bishops, Antiquaries, and doctors that the Religion which these holy Legats of Rome SS. Germanus and Lupus taught here, was in all things, veritatis praedicatio, doctrina sincera, sincerissima, purus Dei cultus, qùalis ab Apostolis mandato diuino Christiano∣rum Ecclesiis traditus erat. The preaching of truth, sincere doctrine, moste sincere doc∣trine, the pure worship of God, such as by the commandement of God, was by the A∣postles deliuered to the churches of Chri∣stians: and soe it continued here in this pu∣ritie longe after. Matth. Parker Antiq. Bri∣tan. pag. 6.45.46. Goscelin. histor. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pontif. Rom. in Greg. 1. & l. de Script. centur. 1. in August. Dionatho. Godvvyn. Con∣uers. of Brit. Povvel. in annot. in lib. Girald. Cambr. de Itinerar. Cambr. c. 1. Foxe pag. 463. edit. an. an. 1576. Fulk. Answ. to a count. Ca∣thol. pag. 40. Midleton Papistam. pag. 202. Stovve histor. in Ethelb. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. cap. 21. pag. 102.
Therefore wee may not now make any doubt of any thinge, done here by these holy Bishops, by power from the Pope, either in causinge the decrees and canons of the Popes soe much dignifyinge the highest spirituall power in the See of Rome, generally to bee vsed and receaued here, by all preists, and cleargie men, as this holy Pope had com∣manded, nor in consecratinge Bishops, and Archbishops, with limitation of their Iuris∣dictions, and the like, but they were moste Iustely, and religiously performed. (Matth. West. an. 446. Matth. Park. antiq. Brit. Ho∣linsh. hist. of Engl. Sigibert. an. 428. Stowe and Howes histor. in Theodosius. Bal. centur. 1. in Leporio Agricola.) And yett besides their powerable, and authoritatiue condemninge of the Pelagian heresies here, together with the Timothean Hereticks, they ordeyned and consecrated soe many Bishops in this nation, that some writers amonge Prote∣stants. (Godvvin Conuers. of Britanie pag. 25.) are of opinion, their number was greater then of those that were consecrated here in the time of Kinge Lucius: amonge whome a Protestant Bishop writteth in this maner: I cannot but rest persuaded, that our Britanie
had very few Bishops vntill the cominge ouer of Germanus and Lupus, to suppresse the Pela∣gian Heresie: concerninge which matter, I thinke it not amisse to offer vnto the Reader, what I finde in our history of Landaff. Postquam praedicti Seniores (Sanctus Germanus Episco∣pus & Lupus) Pelagianam heresim extirpaue∣rant, Episcopos pluribus in locis Britanniae con∣secrauerunt. Super omnes autem Britannos dex∣tralis partis Britanniae, beatum Dubricium, sum∣mum Doctorem, à Rege & ab omni parochia electum Archiepiscopum consecrauerunt. Hac dignitate, ei à Germano & Lupo data, consti∣tuerunt ei episcopalem sedem, concessu Monrici Regis, Principum, Cleri & populi, apud podium Lantaui, in honore S. Petri Apostoli fundatam, & cum finibus istis &c. Which thus hee engli∣sheth: After the said elders (S. Germanus Bi∣shop, and Lupus) had rooted out the Pela∣gian Heresie, they consecrated Bishops in many places of Britanie. Ouer all the Brit∣tans dwellinge on the right side of Britanie, they consecrated for Archbishop, S Dubri∣tius, whoe was chosen for the supreame do∣ctor by the kinge and all the Diocesse. This dignitie beeing bestowed vpon him by Ger∣manus and Lupus, they with the consent of
Monric the kinge, the nobilitie, cleargie and people, appointed his See to bee at the man∣ner of Lantaui, and founded the same there, to the honor of S. Peter, boundinge the ter∣ritories thereof in this wise. &c. Then hee addeth immediately: This was about the yeare of Christ 430. about which time alsoe, Palladius did first appoint Bishops and ordeine Bishopricks in Scotland, as Buchanan hath deliuered. The words of Buchanan the puritane are these. (Georg. Buchan. l. 5. Reg. 42. pag. 146. Rer. Scotic.) Creditur Palladius primus Episcopus in Scotia creasse. Palladius is thought to bee the first that created Bishops in Scotland. Where wee are taught, by these great Pro∣testāts themselues, that the first Bishops, that euer were in this Iland, whether Scotland, or this other part of England, and Wales, were instituted together with their Sees, Iu∣risdictions, and limitts by the Popes authori∣tie, and this Protestant Bishop in translating his Antiquitie hath abused his reader, that is ignorant of the latine tonge, for where hee translateth. (who vvas chosen for the supreame doctor by the kinge and all the diocesse:) there is noe such thinge in that antiquitie, as hee himselfe alleadged it, but only that the king
consented with the diocesse to his conse∣cration in Archiepiscopall dignitye by the Popes Legats, or at the moste that they did choose him rather then any other: for that hee was a cheife doctor here longe before, and that by the Popes approbation, I will shew herafter. And it seemeth to bee certayne, both by himselfe, and others, that this Protestant Bishop where hee speaketh of the kings and peoples election, did add it of his owne Inuention, for both by others, and himselfe alsoe in other places, there is no such thinge in this narration. Iohn Capgraue whome this man much commendeth, thus relateth this history. (Godwin Conuers. of Brit.) Cum Sanctus Germanus & Lupus haeresim illam (Pelagianam) extirpassent: Episcopos in pluribus locis Britanniae consecrarunt: & dex∣tralis partis Britanniae beatum Dubritium, sum∣mum Doctorem & Archiepiscopum statuerunt: & Landauensem ecclesiam in honore beati Petri fundatam, sedem cathedralem collocarunt: col∣latis autem ecclesiae Landauensi à Rege multis possessionibus & ecclesijs, Dubricius discipulos per ecclesias diuisit, quasdam nouas ecclesias fun∣dauit, Danielem in Episcopum Bangerensem, & Sanctum Iltutum in loco ab illo Lanitut, id est
Ecclesia Iltuti vocatum ordinauit. (Ioh. Cap∣grauius in Catalog. in S. Dubritio.) When S. Germanus and Lupus had rooted out that (Pelagian) heresie, they consecrated Bishops in many places of Britanie: & they appoin∣ted blessed Dubritius, cheife Doctor, and Archbishop of the right hand part of Brita∣nie, and placed the church of Landaffe foun∣ded in honor of S. Peter the cathedrall See, and many possessions and parishes being gi∣uen by the kinge to the church of Landaffe, Dubricius diuided his disciples by the chur∣ches: builded some new churches. Hee or∣deyned Daniel Bishop of Bangor, and S. Il∣tutus in a place called of him Lanitut, that is, the church of Iltutus. The very same words without any word added or detracted, ar in the life of S. Dubritius, in the greate old Manuscript of many Saints, written di∣uers hundreds of yeares since. (Manuscript antiquum & permagnum pr. gloriosi ac Deo di∣lecti. in S. Dubricio.) And both these Anti∣quities teach with all others, that Aurelius Ambrosius kinge, was here at that time, with generall commaund, and that hee with the whole cleargie, consented to haue S. Du∣britius Archbishop of Wales, and S. Sampson
of Yorke, their words bee: Sancti Episcopi praedicti consentiente Rege Ambrosio Aurelio, necnon & omni clero, Dubritium Archiepisco∣pum consecrarunt. The twoe holy Bishops (S. Germanus and Lupus) the kinge Ambrosius Aurelius, and all the cleargie consentinge, consecrated Dubritius Archbishop, and a∣gaine: Impositum est Diadema capiti Regis Au∣relij Ambrosij, & de communi consensu sedem Eboracensem contulit Sampsoni viro Sancto, vrbis verò Legionum Archiepiscopatum inclito Dubritio dedit. Aurelius Ambrosius was crowned kinge, and by common consent (of the Legats and cleargie) hee bestowed the See of Yorke on Sampson an holy man, and the Archbishoprick of Caerlegion on renowned Dubritius. Soe that it clearely appeareth, that if there was any such kinge, as Monric at that time, he was but a little Regulus in the cōtry about Lantaui, and perhaps temporall Lord of that place, and soe his consent for the set∣tlinge of the Archbishops See there, by the Legats was requisite, and graunted, and in noe other sence. For this Protestant Bishop himselfe. (Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauies. Ro∣ger Houeden. Matth. Parker antiquit. Britan.)
Producer of this Antiquitie, is wittnes, with all writers, that at this time, and at the co∣minge of S. Augustine soe longe after, the Bishopricks of Exeter in Deuonshire, Bathe in Sommersettshire, Hereford, and Worce∣ster, which could not belonge to any petty Prince or Regulus, were subiect to that Ar∣chiepiscopall See, therefore such things were rather done by the direction, or cōmaund of the Legats, Iubente Sancto Germano, as our Protestants publish in their Brittish history. (Galfrid monum. histor. Reg. Britan. lib. 6. c. 14.) And as much confessed by this Prote∣stant Bishop himselfe, in diuers others pla∣ces, and in these plaine termes. (Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauids in Dubritius.) Du∣britius was made Archbishopp of all Walles, by Germanus and Lupus, twoe Bishops of Fraunce that were entreated by Aurelius Am∣brosius, the Kinge, or Ruler of Britanie, to come ouer, and yeeld their best helpe, for ex∣tinguishing the Pelagian heresie, that had then taken great roote in this contry And they ap∣pointed his See to bee at Landaff, which soone after was remoued to Caerlegion vppon Vske in Monmoutshire. And in an other place thus hee writeth. (Godwyn. Catalog. in
Landaff. 1. in Dubritius.) The cathedral church of Landaffe is reported to haue beene first built in the time of Lucius, about the yeare of Christ 180. But I perceiue not, that any Bishop satt there before Dubritius, that by Germanus Bis∣hop of Altisiodore, and Lupus of Trecasia (tvvo Bishops of Fraunce) vvas first consecrate Arch∣bishop of those parts, and sate sometimes at Caerleon, sometimes at Landaffe. Where hee quite forgetteth his kinge Monric, attribu∣tinge all to the Popes Legates. And a little after, citinge the very same booke of Lan∣daffe which hee did before, hee produceth many Bishops of that See, to haue excom∣municated the kinges or princes of that con∣try; of which hereafter. Godvvyn. Catalog. of Bish in Landaff. pag. 518.520.521.523. & edit. an. 1615. Soe that there is not the leaste suspition left, eyther by the booke of Landaffe, or any antiquitie, but the cheife spirituall power and iurisdiction in this kingedome, was euer acknowledged generally, to be in the holy Apostolick See of Rome, and at this time executed here by those holy Legats from thence. Which more appeareth in this holy Archbishop S. Dubritius, whoe was not on∣lie
thus consecrated and disposed of in those highest spirituall affaires, by authoritie from Rome, but was alsoe himselfe the Popes Le∣gate here in Britanie, as Robertus Caenalis the french Bishop, the Brittish history and other witters say. (Robert. Caenal. Gallic. hist. l. 1. perioche 6. Galfr. monum. l. 9. cap. 12. histor. Brit.) Ex Vrbe Legionū, Dubritius hic Britaniae primas, & Apostolicae sedis Legatus, tanto re∣ligione clarebat, vt quemcumque langore gra∣uatis orationibus suis sanaret. Dubritius Arch∣bishop of Caerlegion, Primate of Britanie, and legate of the See Apostolicke, was soe holy, that hee healed all sick parsons by his prayers. Therefore beeing the Popes Legate, and liuinge here soe longe vntill the yeare of Christ 522. as two Protestant Bishops tell vs. Godwyn sup. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubricius.) And Primate of Britanie, there can bee noe doubt of the Popes power here in this time, if wee had noe other instances and Argu∣ments to Insist vpon in this matter for those daies. But these Protestant Antiquaries. Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Britan. l. 6. c. 13. Io. Cap∣grau. Catal. in S. Dubritij Manuscript. of Saints old in Dubrit.) and others tell vs, that these
Legats thus sent from the Pope, did not co∣me hither onely to extirpate those here∣sies, but to preach the true Religion in all o∣ther things, for the christianitie of the Britans was then corrupted, not onely by the Pelagian heresie, but by the Pagans which the kinge had brought hither, and by the preachinge of these blessed men (the Popes Legats) the Reli∣gion of true faith was restored amonge them. In tempore illo venit S. Germanus Antissiodo∣rensis Episcopus, & Lupus Trecensis Episcopus vt verbum Dei Britonibus praedicarent, cor∣rupta namque fuerat christianitas eorum, tum propter Paganos quos Rex in societatem eorum posuerat, tum propter Pelagianam haeresim. Beatorum igitur virorum praedicatione, restitu∣ta est inter eos verae fidei Religio. And in par∣ticular besides the common Pelagian here∣sies against the necessitie of Baptisme, and grace of Christ, it seemeth the Pelagian preists and Bishops, contrary to christian Religion, in all churches, had women, whom they called their wiues, for wee reade that Leporius Agricola, the greate promoter of that heresie here, was the sonne of Seuerianus a Pelagian Bishop, saith
one Protestant. (Stowe histor. in Theodo∣sius the yonger.) Seueri cuiusdam Pelagiano∣rum Sacerdotis in Britannia filius, the son∣ne of one Seuerus a Pelagian preist in Bri∣tanie, saith an other. Io: Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptor. in Leporio Agric.) And the kinge Vortiger soe countenanced the Pa∣gan Saxons, that wee heare, that many christians intermarried with them, as the kinge himselfe had done, although hee had then aliue his christian wife, by whome hee had three sonnes, to wit Vor∣timer, Catigern, and Pascentius, yett hee married the Pagan daughter of Hengi∣stus the Pagan, named Rowenna, and soe aduanced the Infidels, that the whole kingedome was endaungered, and to aggrauate these sinnes, this kinge kept in vvicked maner his owne daughter vvhich hee had by his Christian vvife, and be∣gott a child a daughter of her. (Mattheus Westminster. anno 450.) Generat etiam ex eadem coniuge filiam, quam in societa∣tem thori suscipiens, filiam ex ea proceauit. Whereupon (to speake in Protestant wor∣des.) (Stovve and Hovves histor. in Vor∣tigern.) Vodine Archbishopp of London,
a man of singular deuotion, and good life, by the aduise of Vortimer (the kinges eldest sonne and next kinge) went to Vortiger, and said to him, that hee had not done as a Chri∣stian prince, in departinge from his lawfull wife, and takinge an other woman, whose father was an enemy to the Christian faith, and alsoe went about to conquer the crowne of Britanie. Hengist hearing Vortiger make lamentation, forthwith slew the good Arch∣bishop Vodine, and many other preists, and Religious parsons, all the churches in lent were polluted with blood, the Nunnes with other religious parsons, were by force putt from their howses, and goods, & constreined to pollutiō of their bodies. The Brittās consi∣deringe the daily repaire of the Saxons into this Realme, shewed to their kinge the Ieo∣perdie that might therof ensue, and aduerti∣sed him of the daunger, but all was in vaine: for Vortiger by reasons of his wife, bare such fauour to the Saxons, that hee would in noe wise heare the counsaile of his subiects. Thus farre these Protestants. But Nennius in his manuscript history wri∣ting as a Protestāt Bishop saith. Io: Bal. centur. 1. in Nennio Bamachorensi. Nennius in M. S.
histor. in Guorthigirno Rege.) a thousand yeares since, writeth plainely, that amonge other wickednesses of this kinge, hee tooke his owne daughter for his wife, and had a daughter by her. Which when it was pro∣ued to S. Germanus (the Popes Legate) hee came with all the cleargie of Britanie to correct the kinge: And when a Synode of the cleargie and nobilitie was assembled. The kinge arose and was very angry, and sought to fly from the face of S. German, and hee was accursed, and con∣demned by blessed German, and all the councell of the Britans. Super haec omnia mala adijciens Guorthigirnus, accepit filiam suam propriam in vxorem sibi, quae peperit ei filiam. Hoc autem cum compertum esset à Sancto Germano, venit corripere Regem, cum omni clero Britannum: & dum conuenta esset magna Synodus Clerico∣rum in vno concilio, ipse Rex surrexit, iratus{que} est vehementer, & vt à facie Sancti Germani fugeret, quaerebat, & maledictus est, & dam∣natus à beato Germano, & omni concilio Britan∣num. Our english Protestants in their Mat∣thew of Westminster, as hee is published by them, (Matth. Westm. an. 450.) Thus tell vs: A S. Germano & ab omni Episcoporum conuentu est excommunicatus. Vortiger was excom∣municated
by S. German, and the whole assembly of Bishops, yet this notwithstan∣dinge, hee also went about to ouerthrow both christian Religion, and the kingdome, ioyninge with the Pagan Infidels, and ha∣uing three wiues of which one an Infidell enemy to the land, the other his own daugh∣ter▪ which & such things noe christian could or would doe, yet it doth not appeare by Nē∣nius. (Nennius supr) That hee was deposed, but straungly punished by God, neither doth the Brittish history or Matthew of Westmin∣ster say hee was deposed, but descruerunt eum. The Britans forsooke Vortigern, ioyninge with their enemies the Saxōs Infidels, wher∣by hee rather relinquished to bee their kinge, then they deposed him, although afterward they say, Vortimerum filium eius in Regem ere∣xerunt, they made Vortimer his sonne kinge to defend the kingedome, beeing driuen to those extremities. (Galfrid. monum. l. 6. c. 13. Matth. Westm. But our English Protestants, (noe vnlearned schollers in deposing kings) write confidently: The Britās vvith one mind depriued him of his roiall dignity, vvhē hee had reigned sixe yeares, & ordeined to bee their king, Vortimer his eldest sonne. (Stow & Hov hist.
in Vort. Hol. hist of Eng. Matth. Park. ant. Brit. p. 78 prot. ānot. in Matth. Westm. in Mer. ā. 454. And these men are soe far from findinge fault herein, that generally they applaud, and much commend the fact. I will Instan∣ce onely in one their first Protestant Arch∣bishop, which relatinge the continuall pre∣seruinge of true Religion inuiolate by the Britans, doth exemplify in this as an heroi∣call Act in that kinde, his words bee these. (Matth. Parker. antiquit. Britan. pag. 7.8.) Magnum est Britannorum perfectae in Christum fidei argumentum, illa expostulatio & Querela, qua in Vortigernum suum Regem vehementer egerunt: quod Hengisti Infidelis filiam matri∣monio sibi iunxisset. Quare Incensi proceres, Vrtigerno regia potestate abdicato, Vortimerum eius filium Regem creabant. It is a great Argu∣ment of the perfect faith in Christ of the Britans, that their expostulation and quarrell by which they delt vehemently against Vor∣tigern their kinge, because he had martyred the daughter of Hengist an infidell; wher∣fore his noble men beeing offended, depriue him of his kingly power, makinge Vortimer his sonne their kinge. This is our Protestants Relation, and construction of this matter.
Whoe propose vnto vs an other like example, of the same S. Germane in the case of Bulie, kinge of Powsey, in walles. (Holinsh. histor. of Engl. l. 5. pag. 84.) Whoe contemninge the preachinge of S. German, was miraculously punished with death, and a meane man a christian called Ketell, by Nennius, placed in that dignitie, and they cite Ranulphus Hi∣geden, whoe as they write citeth Gildas for the same history. But Nēnius hath it at lardg, and saith of this Ketell, soe erected. (Nen∣nius M. S. in S. German.) Et omnes filij eius facti sunt Reges, & à semine eorum omnis Re∣gio Prouisorum regitur vsque hodiernam diem. And all his sonnes after him were kings, and from their seede the whole Region of Pouis is ruled to this day. From the time of S. Ger∣man to the writinge of Nennius. And it is euident by Nennius, the Relator of this historie, that S. German was not a deposer of this wicked kinge. For first it is manifest by the history, that hee was a pa∣gan, which was in noe wise subiect to Chri∣stian discipline, or coercion, secondly hee & his kindred were miraculously destroyed and consumed by God, and noe heyre left of that linadge to inherite. Then if S. Ger∣man
man with the consent of the nobles, and people, now destitute of a Ruler, gaue way to the election of an other, a worthie and holy man, what wronge or iniurie in any opinion was here committed by him? none at al, but an action which all Religions doth allowe, and commend vnto vs. But to leaue these things to Protestants, as their propertie quarto modo in all places, & times, when they haue preuailed, and which I would not haue mentioned, but beeinge thus called vppon, by them, wee are fur∣ther taught by them, that in this time our dependance here in Britanie, was soe greate on the Popes of Rome, that not soe much as as a publick schole was here kept without his allowance, and the audience of other matters was referred to him. These things appeare to bee soe, in the case of the schole of Cambridge, priuiledged by the holy Po∣pes S. Leo, and Simplicius in this age, and S. Iltutus, that renowned Master of many moste Learned Schollers. (Honor. Papa. supr. Caius Antiquitat. Cantabrig. l. 1. p. 147. lib. vit. Sanctorum Wall. in Iltuto.) To vvhome, magistralis cura concessa est à Pontifice: The magistrall chardge was committed by the
Pope. How renowned this man was in this kinde, as alsoe S. Dubritius in the like case, hauinge a thousand schollers, as our Prote∣stant testifie. (Caius supr. p. 145.146. Bal. l. de script. centur. 1. in Dubrit. & Iltuto. God∣vvin Catalog. S. Dauid. 1. Bal. cent. 1. in Macceo.) And Macceus a disciple of S. Pa∣tricke beeinge accused at Rome, was con∣strayned to purge himselfe there, edito libel∣lo Romanae vrbis Pontifici satisfecit, and satis∣fied the Pope of Rome in his booke publi∣shed to that purpose. Neither without great cause, were these duties performed to the Pope from hence, or hee did require them singularly of the Bri∣tans in this time: for these our Protestants assure vs, that the Pope in those daies, clai∣med and exercised that their highest spiri∣tuall power, ouer all churches, and parsons how eminent soeuer, temporall or spirituall, For to insist in these mens very words. (Io: Bal. l. 2. de Act. Rom. Pont. in Hilario. Rob. Barns in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Hilar.) Hila∣rius decreta synodalia fecit, & per vniuersum mundum seruanda, publicauit. Pope Hilary (about the yeare 142.) did make synodall decrees, and published them to bee kept
throughout the whole world. Faelix Achaiū Cōstantinopolitanum episcopum vna cum Petro Eutichiano excommunicat, quod Eutichianum exilium propter haeresim pulsum, reuocauerat. Pope Faelix the third, did excommunicate Achatius patriarke of Constantinople with Peter an Eutichian heretick, because he had recalled an Eutichian, that for heresie was exiled. Gelasius Anastasium Imperatorem à coetu Christianorum exclusit, quòd Achatio & alijs haereticis faueret. (Idem in Gelasio) Gela∣sius the Pope, did exclude Anastasius the Emperor from the companie of Christians, because hee fauoured Achatius and other hereticks. And they further tell vs, (Balaeus & Barns in Anastasio 2.) how Pope Anasta∣sius the second, did alsoe excommunicate the same Emperor for the like. Soe it is euident by this our English Protestants, that the Popes of Rome in al this age both claymed, and exercised this their supreame spirituall power and commaunde in this kingedome of Britanie. And because the kingedome of Ireland is now belonging to the crowne of greate Britanie, and S. Patricke (generally called the Apostle of that nation) was borne in this our Britanie, and sent to Ireland by
the same Pope Celestine, whoe sent S. Pal∣ladius Germanus and Lupus hither, I must say some-what of him, and his proceedings in this matter. The very name of the Apostle of Ireland which is giuen vnto him in all Antiquities, and that hee was thus sent from the Pope of Rome, Saint Celestine, with that highe spirituall power requisite in such a case of the conuersion of soe greate a contrye, will sufficiently warrant the dependance of the same in spirituall things of the Apostolicke See of Rome. For to speake nothinge of his miraculous & powerable proceedings with greate opposites vnto him, remembred by the writers of his life and others, Nennius himselfe is thus farr a witnesse for this re∣nowned Saint and Irish Apostle. (Nennius in manu-scripto codice antiq. in Patricio.) San∣ctus Patricius Euangelium Christi externis na∣tionibus per annos 40. praedicabat, virtutes A∣postolicos faciebat, caecos illuminabat, leprosos mundabat, surdos audire faciebat, daemones ob∣sessis corporibus fugabat, mortuos numero vsque nouem suscitauit, captiuos multos vtriusque se∣xus proprijs donis redemit, scripsit Abegetoria 300. sexaginta quinque, aut amplius, eccle∣sias
quoque eodem numero fundauit, trecentas sexaginta quinque, ordinauit Episcopos 365. aut amplius, in quibus spiritus Dei erat, presby∣teros autem vsque ad tria millia ordinauit, & duodecim milia hominum in vna Regione Con∣achta ad fidem Christi conuertit, & baptiza∣uit, quadraginta diebus totidemque noctibus in cacumine montis Eile ieiunauit. S. Patrick did preache the ghospell of Christ 40. yeares to externe nations, hee wrought Apostolicall miracles, hee made the blinde to see, cleansed lepers, caused the deaffe to heare, draue away deuills from possessed bodies, hee raised to life nyne deade parsons, hee redeemed ma∣ny captiues of either sexe, with his owne goods, hee wrote Abegetories 365 or more, hee founded churches in the same number, three hundred sixtie fiue, hee ordeyned three hundred three score & fiue Bishops or more, in whom there was the spirit of God, hee or∣deyned preists to the number of three thou∣sande, and hee conuerted to the faith of Christ and baptized, twelue thousand men in one Region called Conacht, hee fasted fourtie dayes & soe many nights in the topp of the montaine Eile. Thus this auntient Brittish Author com∣paringe
this holy Bishop S. Patrick, to Moy∣ses in fower thinges: first for his speakinge with an Angell, in rubo, in a bushe: second∣lie for his fast of fourtie dayes and nights: thirdlie for the yeares of his age 120. fourthlie for the place of his buriall vn∣knowne. By which narration of Nennius soe auntient, and recommended an Au∣thor, that S. Patricke did consecrate soe manye preists and Bishops, especiallie a∣aboue three hundred and threescore holy Bishops, when the fourth part of them could not bee employed for these Ilands of Britanie and Ireland, it is an euident argument, that his legatine power from the See Apostolick of Rome, did not con∣fine it selfe in these Ilands, but extended it selfe to other parts farr off, which wee now call America, because neyther Fraunce nor any nation in the old continent, was then subordinate to Britanie, or Ireland, to re∣ceaue Bishops and preachers from them. And this Nennius seemeth to insinuate, when hee sayth Saint Patricke preached the ghospell, externis nationibus, to externe and straunge nations, the Popes power spiri∣tual rechinge vnto all Regions, & this is cō∣firmed
by the writers of the life of S. Bren∣dan, whoe as both an old manuscript which I haue seene (an old manuscript in the life of S. Brendan.) written diuers hundreds yeares since; and Iohn Capgraue, (in Catal. in S. Brendan.) whoe wrote longe before, (and was published in print an. 1516.) the late discouerie of America, are witnesses, founde in diuers places, manie dayes saylinge from Ireland, in America and Ilands belonging vnto it, diuers religious Christians that came thither in the time of S. Patricke, and sent or brought thither by him. And the Iland called still S. Brendan, in those parts, may seeme to haue taken, and still to keepe the name from that holy Saint, beeinge there in those his holie trauailes. Insul. Sancti Brendani in descript. Amaric. apud Abrah. Ortel. & alios. And yet to conclude the labours of Saint Patrick, and his testifyinge the spirituall prerogatiue of the Roman See here in Brita∣nie, where hee was borne, these Protestants haue before recommended his epistle vnto vs, wherein hee declareth, that as Saint Phaganus, and Deruuianus (Damianus by others) obteyned ten yeares Indulgence of S.
Eleutherius for the holy place of Glastenbu∣rie. (Antiquit. Glasten. apud M.S. antiq. Ioh. Capgrau. & al. in S. Patricio.) soe hee ob∣teyned of S. Celestine Pope, whoe sent him into these parts, twelue yeares of Indulgēce for the same place. Et ego frater Patricius, à piae memoriae Caelestino Papa duodecimo annos Indulgentiae acquisiui. And to make all cleare, that neither S. Palladius, S. Germanus, and Lupus, or S. Patricius did any thinge in these parts, nor any vnder them, but by the Popes actuall or virtuall approbation, or allowan∣ce, thus it is testified by our Protestant hi∣storians in these words. (Raphael Holinsh. Iohn Hooker histor. of Ireland pag. 53.) Palla∣dius Landed in the North of Ireland, when∣ce hee escaped right hardly with his life, into the Iles adioyninge, where hee preached the ghospell, and conuerted noe small number of Scots to the christian faith, and purged that part which was christened from the in∣fection of the Pelagians. Hee was required by the Scots that inhabited here in Britanie, to leaue the Iles, and come ouer vnto them, there to Instruct the people in the way of true saluation, to the which with the Popes Licence, hee seemed willinge enough, and
the Bishop of Rome the more redily condis∣cended thereunto, for that in the instant ti∣me, when Palladius was to depart, and Pa∣trick attended at Rome, suinge for licence to bee sent into Ireland, the Pope therefore graunted that Palladius might passe ouer to the Scots in Britanie, and appointed Patricke to goe with authoritie from him into Ire∣land. Thus wee see all ecclesiasticall things, ordered and disposed here by the Popes au∣thoritie in this age. THE SIXTE CENTVRIE OR HVNDRED YEARE. THE X. CHAPTER. Wherein the same highest spirituall power of the Popes of Rome, is still by these English Protestant Diuines and Antiqua∣ries continued, in this kingedome. IT is euident by that which is entreated before, that in the beginninge of this sixt hundred yeares, and longe after, the su∣supreame
papal power continued inuiolably in this kingedome; for S. Dubritius the Po∣pes Legate liued vntill the yeare 522. And many or moste of the renowned men in this age in Britanie were his Schollers, taught, and instructed by him: thus the Antiquarie of Cambridge writeth. (Ioh. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. pag. 148. Catal. Sanct. Wall. in S. Dubrit. In vetusto codice, cui titulus est de vitis Sanctorum Wallensium, in vita S Dubritij ista lego: creuit illius (Dubritij) fama cum v∣triusque legis notae & veteris peritia, pertotam Britanniam, ita quòd ex omni parte totius Bri∣tanniae Scholares veniebant, non tantum ru∣des, sed etiam viri sapientes, & doctores ad eum studendi gratia confluebant. These I reade in an old booke intituled of the liues of the Saints of Walles, in the life of Saint Dubri∣tius: The fame of him (Dubritius) with his knowledge both of the new and old lawe, soe increased throughout all Britanie, that out of euerie part of all Britanie schol∣lers came vnto him, not onely the ignorant, but wise men and doctors, flocked vnto him to study: cheifely S. Helian, Sampson his disciple, Vbelinus, Merchiguinus, El∣guoredus, Guninus, Longual, Artbodu,
Longur, Arguistus, Iunabin, Conbram, Goruan, Guernabin, Iouan, Elhebarn, Iud∣non, Curdocui, Aidan, Cinnarh, and with these he had a thousand clergie men seuen yeares together, in the villadge Hentlan, vppon the riuer side of Guy, in the studie of diuine and humane learninge, giuinge them example in himselfe, of a religious life and perfect charitie. Therefore these soe manie renowned men out of all parts of Britanie, and schollers to a Master the Popes Legate, and primate of Britanie, and many of them by the same authoritie, after made Rulers in the church of Britanie, and one of them S. Sampson Archbishop of Yorke, they could not in any equall iud∣gement, bee otherwise affected to the See of Rome, then that their soe glorious and re∣nowned Master, and instructor was; for o∣therwise they could not haue bee named his schollers, and beeing soe many a thousand & more in number, it is not credible but all, moste, or many of them, followed him in this, as in other doctrines. Like was the case of S. Iltutus of whome I haue breiflye spoken before, hee alsoe liued longe after this time, as a Protestant
Bishop wittnesseth, in the yeare of Christ 520. Bal. l. de Script. centur. 1. in Ilchat. Morgan. fol. 29.) Egregius iste Britannorum Magister (inquiunt Vincentius & Antoninus) ex discipu∣lis erat diui Germani. Qui omnium scriptura∣rum, veteris ac noui testamenti, & omnium ar∣tium philosophiae, cunctorum suae gentis scientis∣simus, futura Dei dono praenouit. In magno nu∣mero discipulos iste habuit, tam Gallos quam Britānos, quorum fuere praecipui Sampson, Pau∣linus, Dauid & Gildas Badonicus. This excel∣lent Master of the Britans (say Vincentius and Antoninus) was one of the disciples of S. German (the Popes Legate) whoe among all of his nation, was the moste skilfull in all scriptures, both of the old, and new testa∣ment, and in all arts of philosophie, and by the guift of God knew things to come. This man had disciples in greate number, aswell French men as Britās of the which the chei∣fest were Sampson, Paulinus, Dauid, and Gyldas Badonicus. The same is proued vnto vs by other Protestants. (Merchiannus Rex in Dipl. apud Caium antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. pag. 147. Catalog. Sanct. Wall. in S. Iltuto.) And how the Pope graunted him this priuiledge of such publick teachinge: Magistralis tibi cura
à Pontifice concessa est, as the kinge of those parts in his princely graunt with others wit∣nesse. Therefore if the greatest doctors and teachers of others in Britanie in these times, were thus licenced by the Popes, their Le∣gates, and schollers of their legats, wee can∣not question, but such as the Masters, such likewise the schollers and disciples were, es∣pecially when wee find their cheifest Schol∣lers S. Dauid, S. Sampson, made Archbi∣shops by the Poopes Authoritie, and this former primate of all Britanie, by the Po∣pes graunt as hereafter. Matth. Westm. ad An. 727. And that the scholers of Britanie were not then allowed, without the Popes priui∣ledge, doth further appeare by our Prote∣stants, Hardinghe, Lydgate, and others. (Ioh. Hardinge apud Bal. in praefat. ad l. de Script. Stow histor. Ioh. Caius l. 1. antiq. Can∣tabrig. Brian Twin. apol. Oxon. l. 1.) testifying, that in the tyme of S Gregorie, the vniuersi∣ties or publick Scholes of Stamford, Caer∣legion and perhaps some others, were inter∣dicted by the Pope for some errors they held at this time. The Antiquaries of Cambridge contend (Caius sup. l. 1.) that their vniuersity
was then Innocent, and soe preserued and priuiledged. (Brian. Twyn. apol. l. 2. pag. 143.) They of Oxord seeme to graunt and glory in it, that S. Germanus the Popes Legate, did confirme the orders and constitutions of the vniuersitie of Oxford, and alledge As∣serius Meneuersis to that purpose. (Asser. Meneu. apud Brian. Twyn. supr.) Diuum Ger∣manum Oxoniam aduenisse, annique dimidium illic esse moratum, qui ordines & instituta il∣lius loci mirum in modum comprobauit. Saint German came to Oxford, and stayed there halfe a yeare, and greately approued the or∣ders and institutions of that place. And to proue that all the Christians of this Britany then in this age, acknowledged this power, of the Pope of Rome, and their dependance of him in spirituall things, the Archbishops See of London beeinge wasted and persecu∣ted by the pagan Saxons, moste swayinge in the prouinces subiect vnto it, wee doe not reade of any Archbishop of London after the martyrdome of S. Vodinus, vntill Theonus Bishop of Glocester tooke charge thereof in the yeare 553. as a Protestant Bishop wri∣teth in this manner. (Godwyn Catalog. of Bish. in Lond. in Vodinus and Theonas. Stow.
histor. in Lucius.) I finde onely one of them named, viz. Theonus, that beeing first Bishop of Glocester, forsooke it, and tooke the chardge of London vppon him, in the yeare 553. soe write other Protestants. Therefore wee must now seeke to the other two Archiepiscopall Sees, Caerlegion and Yorke. For S. Dubricius, hee was both consecrated by the Popes Legate, S. Germanus, and hee himselfe alsoe both the Popes Legate, and Primate of all Britanie. Bri∣tanniae Primas, & Apostolicae sedis Legatus. (Galfrid. Monum. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12. Godwyn. Catal. in S. Dauids 1. & Landaff. 1.) Soe that there is noe question of him, but hee acknowledged this highest spirituall power in the See of Rome, whose Legate hee was then in this kingedome. Neyther can there bee any doubt of the Archbishop of Yorke in this behalfe, at this time, for S. Sampson was then Archbishop there, whoe as before, was both scholler to S. Dubritius, soe earnest a patrō of the Romane See, and alsoe of S. Iltutus, as before, scholler to S. German, the Popes Legate, and warrā∣ted to bee publick professor, & teacher here, by the Popes allowāce, & to giue more cer∣taynety herein, this holy man S. Sāpson was
miraculously chosen of God, as Capgraue and others write, to the Archiepiscopall See of Yorke, (Ioh. Capgrau in Sampsone.) and was consecrated by S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, and primate of Britanie. Therefore there cannot bee the least suspition, but that both hee, and the prouinces both of the North of England, and Scotland alsoe, then vnder his iurisdiction, were of the same o∣pinion in this matter. And if the Metropoli∣tan See of London a little before destroyed, as our histories tell vs. (Galfrid. mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap 9.) by the pagan Saxons, with other churches of that prouince, had then any Archbishop, whose name is not remembred, noe man of indifferent iudge∣ment will thinke, that he differed in opinion in this matter, from those glories of this kingedome, and church thereof, S. Dubri∣trius the Popes Legate and S. Sampson con∣secrated by him, by whome alsoe, & whose authoritie from the See of Rome, if London then had any Archbishop at this time, hee was likewise consecrated, noe others then beeing to intermedle in that busines. And our kings of that time Vortimer, Aurelius Ambrosius. Vther Pendragon and Arthur
crowned kings by these holy Archbishops, Legats, patrons and knowne mainteyners of the priuiledges of the Apostolicke See of Rome. Kinge Vortimer belonged to the age before, therefore I onely here say of him, as I am directed by our Protestants in the Brit∣tishe historie, as they approue it. (Galfrid. Monum. l. 6. cap. 14. Matth. Westm. an. 454.) That after hee was chosen kinge and obtey∣ned victorie of the pagans, soe soone as it was in his power, hee did all thinges, espe∣cially apperteyning to Religion, by the di∣rection or rather commaund, as the words be, of S. Germanus the Popes Legate: Victo∣ria potitus Vortimerus caepit reddere possessiones ereptas ciuibus, ipsosque diligere ac honorare, & Ecclesias iubente Sancto Germano renouare. Vortimer hauing obteyned victorie, began to restore the possessions, that were taken from the citizens, and to loue, and honor them, and by the commaundement of S. German to renewe the churches. Neyther can wee make it a straūge thing, if wee will follow soe manie Protestant gui∣des to leade vs, as before, that kinge Vorti∣mer followed the commaundement of Saint German the Popes Legate, in such affaires,
when they haue assured vs, that by his dire∣ction and order, both his Father Vortigern kinge before him, was deposed, and this man by the same power, and order was chosen and erected to bee kinge. And the same is the condition and case of Aurelius Ambrosius, by the same power and procee∣dings made kinge, as these Protestants tell vs, when Vortigern was deposed the second time. (Protest. Catalog. Regum Britan. Stowe histor. in Vortiger. Aurel. Ambros. and Vterp. Holinsh in eisd.) Soe likewise of Vterpen-dragon his brother both of them made kings by cōmon consent of the cleargie, & nobles, the line of Vortigern beeinge quite disinhe∣rited, and hee himselfe (to write in Prote∣stāt words (burnt in his castle in Wales by Au∣relius Ambrosius & his brother Vter. (Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap. 2.17.) But Nennius writeth, that one opinion is, which is in libro S. Germani, in the booke of S. Ger∣man, that hee with his wicked wyues or concu∣bines, was burned with fier miraculously from heauen. An other opinion there is, that hee wandered vpp and downe vagrantly, and his hart burst in sonder. The third, that the earthe miraculously opened & swallowed him vp aliue.
All agree that for betraying the country to the Infidels, and his other moste horrible sinnes, hee was iustly and greeuously punis∣hed by God, and died miserably with eter∣nall infamie: and the others were renowned patrons and obedient children to the church of God, which had aduaunced them, to the regall dignitie. Matth. Westm. an. 465.466.488.490.498. Nennius in M. S. histor. in Guorthigurno. And if wee will followe Nennius the best Author wee haue of these thinges, S. German omitted noe meanes to procure kinge Vor∣tigern to penance, & when nothinge would preuayle, notwithstanding the most hor∣rible sinne of him with his owne daughter, hee baptized the sonne soe begotten naming him Faustus, hee brought him vp and soe instructed him in pietie, that hee was a glorious Saint. (Nennius supr.) Quartus filij Guorthigirni fuit Faustus qui illi de filia sua natus est, quem Sanctus Germanus baptizauit, enutriuit, atque docuit: vnam habuit filiam quae vt diximus, mater fuit Sancti Fausti. Next to these was kinge Arthur, whoe allthough hee was by birth disabled, as our Protestants say, ex fur∣tiuo concubitu Vtheri & Dulcissae Cornubianae
natus. Yett to speake in Protestants words. (Protest. Index in Galfrid. monum. V. Arthu∣rus. Galfrid. mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. c. 19. Stowe histor. in K. Arthur.) Arthur the sonne of Vther, at the age of fifteene yeares, was crow∣ned kinge of Britanie by Dubritius Archbishop of Legions, the Popes Legate, as before. And this was not the sole Act of that Saint, but of all the Bishops, and nobles of the kinge∣dome: Defuncto Rege conuenerunt Pontifices cum clero Regni, & populo, ipsumque more re∣gio humauerunt. Quo facto Dubritius vrbis Le∣gionum Archiepiscopus, sociatis sibi Episcopis, & magnatibus. Arthurum filium eius iuuenem quindecim annorum, in Regem magnificè ex∣ercuit. (Matth. Westm. an. 516. Galfrid. mon. lib. 9. cap. 1.) Kinge Vther beeing deade, the Bishops assemble together with the clergie and people of the kingedome, and bury him in kingely maner. Which beeinge ended Dubritius Archbishop of the citie of Le∣gions, the Bishops and Nobles beeing asso∣ciate vnto him magnificently erect for king-Arthur his sonne, a yonge man of fifteene yeares old. And yett this worthie prince soe by byrth by himselfe disabled, and for age vnfitt
to manadge soe many and greate matters, yett made kinge by the power I haue related before, and followinge the direction of the Pope in matters requisite, and his Legate, and Bishops here, became soe renowned & glorious a kinge as all histories report. This kinge, besides the common benefites hee bestowed on the church of Christ in Brita∣nie, then allmoste desolate by the rage of the pagan Saxons, hee did in particular, to shew his gratefull and due dependance on the Popes of Rome, With the consent and counsaile of all the Bishops and peeres of the kingedome, and with licence of the See Aposto∣lique, graunt priuiledge to the schoole of Cam∣bridge, to bee exempt and free from publick vec∣tigals and burthenous workes, and this hee did for the loue of the heauenly kingedome, and re∣medy of the soules of his Auncestors: as the Protestants of Cambridge produce vnto vs out of his owne charter beginninge thus. Charta Regis Arthuri de priuileg. Cantabr. apud Ioh. Caium lib. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. pag. 68.69.) Arthurus regali à Deo fultus dignitate, omnibus suis salutem pro amore caele∣stis patriae, remedioque animarum antecessorum meorum Britanniae Regum, pro augmentatione
insuper Reipublicae Regni mei Britanniae, ac profectu spirituali Scholarium in lege Domini iugiter Cantabrigiae studentium, consilio, & assensu omnium & singulorum Pontificium, & Principum huius Regni, & licentia sedis Apo∣stoliae, statuo praesenti scripto, & firmiter de∣cerno, vt ciuitas Scholarium praedicta, à publi∣cis vect. galibus & operibus onerosis absoluātur. Where wee see the Popes licence requisite, and first obteyned of this kinge, euen from freeing that schole in tēporal respects. This licence as it seemeth, beeing obtey∣ned from Pope Iohn the second, for the Charter beareth date, anno ab Incarnatione Domini 531.7. die Aprilis, in ciuitate Londoni, the yeare of Christ 531. the seuenth day of Aprill in the citie of London, at which time Iohn the seconde, is cōmonly thought to haue beene Pope. How many Popes con∣firmed that schole and exempted it from all other iurisdiction but the See Apostolick I haue written before, and now add from Pope Sergius the first, (apud Caium lib. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. accadem pag. 78.79.80.) shewinge how his predecessors in the See Apostolick had done the same: Sergius E∣piscopus seruus seruorum Dei, praesentium au∣thoritate
decreuimus, vt nulli Archiepiscopo, seu Episcopo, alijue ecclesiasticae personae, vel se∣culariliceat, vniuersitatem vestram, aut ali∣quem vestrum suspendere, seu excommunicre, vel quolibet sub interdicto ponere, absqu summi Pontificis assensu, vel eius mandato speciali: prohibemus infuper, ne quis priuilegia, à sede Apostolica gratiosè concessa, vel indulta, ausu temerario infringere, seu restringere praesumat, vel attemptet, nulli igitur heminum omnino li∣ceat, hanc paginam nostrae concessionis, & exemptionis infringere, vel ei quouismodo con∣traire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpse∣rit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, & beato∣rum Apostolorum Petri, & Pauli se nouerit in∣cursurum. Sergius Pope seruant of the seruāts of God. Wee haue decreed by the Authoritie of these presents, that it shall bee lawfull for noe Archbishop, Bishop, or other parson spi∣rituall or secular to suspend, or excommuni∣cate, or any way to interdict your vniuersi∣tie, or any of you, without the Popes assent, or special commandement Wee further for∣bid, that noe man by temerarious boldnes, presume or attempt to infringe, or restrict the priuiledges gratiously graunted & giuen by the See Apostolick. It shall bee lawfull
for noe man at all, to infringe or contradict, the tenure of this our graunt and exemptiō, if any man presume to attempt it, lett him know that he shall incurr the indignation of almightie God, and the blessed Apostles Pe∣ter and Paul. Where wee see all parsons in Britanie then, subiect and subordinate in spirituall iurisdiction, to the Pope of Rome. And this testified by our Protestants thē∣selues. (Wil. Lamb. in l. de leg. Reg. in Legib. Edward. fol. 126. Ingulph. histor. in fine.) Whoe goe furher in such things, and assure vs from the common lawes themselues of our auncient kings S. Edward the confes∣sor, and others, and confirmed by king Wil∣liam the first, both as Ingulphus and our Protestant antiquaries acknowledge, that this kingdome at that time, and kings ther∣of, did acknowledge as great power in the See of Rome in matters concerning this na∣tion, as any catholick now may yeeld vnto it: for our auntient publick lawes warran∣ted by our Protestants thus Instruct vs (Le∣ges S. Eduardi titul. de iure & appendicijs co∣ronae Regni Britanniae. Guliel. Lamb. sup. p. 137.138. Hackluit booke of trauailes, pag. 244.) Im∣petrauit
temporibus illis Arthurus Rex à Do∣mino Papa, & à Curia Romana, quod confir∣mata sit Norweia in perpetuum coronae Britan∣niae, in augmentum Regni huius, vocauitque illam Arthurus Cameram Britanniae. Hac vero de causa dicunt Norwegienses se debere in reg∣no isto cohabitare, & dicunt se esse de corpore regni huius, scilicet de corona Britanniae. Thus in english by a Protestant minister. kinge Arthur obteyned in those dayes of the Pope, and Court of Rome, that Norway should bee for euer annexed to the crowne of Bri∣tanie, for the enlardgment of this kingdome, and hee called it the chamber of Britanie. For this cause the Norses say, that they ought, to dwell with vs in this kingedome, to witt. that they belonge to the crowne of Britanie. And if wee would bee as little beholding to the See of Rome, for confirming Norway to this kingedom, as to Pope Eleutherius be∣fore, to the Ilands, and say kinge Arthur claymed Norway, by a former Title, as Dē∣marke was before, or Iurebelli, as a conque∣ror, and the Pope did nothinge, but confirme these, or one of these Titles, it sufficeth to asscribe the iudgment of that question to the See Apostolicke.
This seemeth to mee, to confesse and ac∣knowlege greate, and ample prerogatiue in the Pope of Rome in spirituall maters, and directing also of temporal to a spiritual end, as Catholicks now attribute vnto him, or hee demaunde. And yett wee are by these Protestans (whoe freely acknowledge the Popes and church of Rome then to haue beene holy) assured that the holy Pope and court of Rome, soe practized it. That our kinge, Christianus optimus fuit, kinge Arthur was an exceeding good christian, who sought, & accepted it, & both he the Bishop & clear∣gie and the whole kingedome soe approued thereof, that it was by publick authoritie re∣ceaued for a lawe in this nation, and ratified both by our Britās, Saxons, & Normans after them. For it is set downe in this lawe before, that from that time the Norses or Norwe∣gians claymed priuiledge to bee free here, by those proceedings. Which is more plainly ex∣pressed afterward in the same lawe in these words by Protestants translation: The people of Norvvay may, and ought from henceforth, dvvel, & remaine in this kingdome, vvith vs, as our louinge and svvorne Brethren. Qua de causa possint & debent praedicti de caetero nobiscū
cohabitare, & remanere in regno sicut coniurati fratres nostri (Guliel. Lamb. in leg. Eduardi sup. Richard Hackluyt p. 245.) And the mo∣tiue whereupon the Pope then soe procee∣ded, in annexing and confirminge the king∣dome of Norway to the crowne of Britanie, seemeth to bee the very same, the spirituall good both of that contrie, this kingedome alsoe, and the church of God, in ordine ad spiritualia. Which the present Pope and Catholicque diuines alledge ordinarilie, for priuiledges of the See Apostolicke, in such causes, the spirituall good and helpe of all, or many, and hurt of none at all. For besides many histories of those times soe testifyinge, and to bee passed ouer, it is recorded in these verie lawes themselues soe warranted by Protestants and antiqui∣ties. (Leges S. Edwardi supr. titul. de Iure & Appendicijs.) Fuerunt gentes ferae, & indomitae, non habuerunt legem Dei, nec proximi, fuerunt autem ibi Christiani occul∣tè. Arthurus autem Christianus optimus fuit, & fecit eos baptizari, & vnum Deum per totam Norweiam venerari, & vnam fi∣dem Christi semper inuiolatam custodire.
caperunt vniuersi proceres Norweiae vxores suas de nobili gente Britonum tempore illo, vnde Norwegienses dicunt se exijsse de gente, & san∣guine regni huius. They were wilde and bar∣barous nations. They had not the lawe of God, nor neighbour, but there were Chri∣stians there secretly. But kinge Arthur was an exceeding good Christian, and caused them to bee baptized, and throughout all Norway to worship one God, and to receaue and keepe the faith of Christ inuiolably, all the noble men of Norway tooke wiues of the noble nation of the Britans. Whereuppon the Norwegians say, that they ar descended of the race and blood of this kingedome. And then immediatly followeth that which is cited before: The aforesaid kinge Arthur obteyned in those daies of the Pope and Court of Rome, that Norway should bee for euer anne∣xed to the crovvne of Britanie. Whereby it seemeth by these Protestants, the motiue of the Pope to ioyne Norway to the crowne of Britany, was the spiritual good of both king∣domes, and the church of God, kinge Ar∣thur soe worthie a christian, hauing procu∣red soe straunge and happy an alteration in the kingedome of Norway; his victories
there against the barbarous giuing free liber∣tie and accesse to such christian preachers, as by the Popes licence, and allowance were directed thither. For S. Kentegern, made Bishop by S. Palladius the Popes Legate, if wee may beleeue the puritan historian of Scotland: vvent seuen times to Rome, and the Pope sent him to performe the worke of the ministry enioyned him by the holy ghost. Vir Dei septies Romam adiens, sanctus Papa il∣lum virum Dei & Spiritus sancti gratia plena intelligens, in opus ministerij à Spiritu sancto illi iniuncti destinauit. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scotic. l. 5. Rege 42. pag. 146. Ioh. Capgr. in Catal. in S. Kentegerno. And as our Protestants with others testi∣fie this Apostolick man, thus warranted and priuiledged, sent of his disciples some to the Orchades, to Norway, and Island, that they might receaue the light of faith by their in∣structions. For hee had in his colledge at El∣guel in Walles, three hundred, sixtie, and fiue learned men, allwayes soe prepared to preach. (Bal. l. de Scriptor. centur. 1. in Kenteger Elguensi. Cap. supr. cod. Hector Beeth. Scot. hist. l. 9) Ex discipulis suis quosdam ad Orcha∣das, ad Norwegiam & Islandium mist, vt eo∣rum
instructionibus fidei lumen reciperent, nam in Elguensi collegio, trecentos & sexaginta quinque literatos viros ad id semper paratos ha∣bebat. And to add further to the honor of the See Apostolick of Rome, by the example of this moste blessed man S. Kentegern, hee neuer beeing but an ordinary Bishop somti∣mes in Walles, sometimes in Scotland, yett by the priuiledge hee had from the Popes of Rome in that kinde, besides his labors here in Britanie, Norway, and the remembred o∣ther places, to write in a Protestant Bishops words. (Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. in Kentegerno in Elguen.) Formam primitiuae seruauit Ecclesiae, Apostolico more pedes ad praedicandum porrexit, plaerosque ad fidem conuertit, Apostatas reuoca∣uit, Pelagianos eiecit, nondum renatos bapti∣zauit, simulachra subuertit, Ecclesias constru∣xit, aegrotis ministrauit, languores curauit, atque in magna vixit abstinentia, praedicabat ad flumen vsque Fordense, & ad mare Scotium, Caledonos, Athalos, Horestos ac vicinarum Albainae regionum Incolas, docendo, mouendo, hortando, ad verae pietatis obseruationem insti∣gauit. Hee kept the forme of the primatiue church, after the maner of the Apostles goinge on foote to preach, hee conuerted
very many to the faith, recalled Apostats, cast forth Pelagians, baptized those that wanted baptisme, ouerthrew the Idols, buil∣ded churches, ministred to the sick, cured diseases, and liued in great abstinence: hee preached euen to the riuer of Fordne, & the Scottish See, hee incited by teaching, admo∣nishinge, and exhortinge to the obseruation of true piety, the Caldoniās, Athals, Horests, and the inhabitants of the Regions neare to Albania. This holy Bishop beeing first Bis∣hop of Glascow in Scotland, came into Wal∣les about the yeare of Christ 560 and there settled an episcopall See, hee beeing the first Bishop thereof by the riuer Elwy, and not∣withstandinge hee was at the first resisted therein by Malgo, or Malgocunus a Brittish kinge in that contry, yett his authoritie and power soe preuailed, that to speake in a Pro∣testant Bishops phrase. (Hector Boeth. hist. Scot. in Kentigern. Godwin. Catalog. in As∣saph. 1. The kinge at last was content to allow the same church to bee an episcopall see, and moreouer to bestowe vppon it, diuers Lord∣ships, manners, immunities, and priuiledges. Kentegern hauinge stayed here some num∣ber
of yeares gaue ouer his Bishoprick vnto a disciple of his named Assoph, a man of greate vertue and learninge, whoe writ the life of his Master Kentegern; and besides that hee was disciple to soe greate a patron of the Apostolick Roman See, to giue Eui∣dence that hee himselfe was soe alsoe affec∣ted, notwithstandinge there were then many Bishops, and Archbishops alsoe in Britanie, yett a Protestant Bishop writeth. (Bal. cen∣tur. 1. in Asapho.) à Pontificis Romani discipu∣lis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritate & vn∣ctionem accepit. Hee receaued both authori∣tie and consecration from the disciples of the Pope of Rome, that came into England, and liued vntill the yeare of Christ 590. claruit anno à communis salutis origine 590. Within foure yeares of S. Augustines coming hither. Before which time alsoe and in this age S. Iuo a Persian by birth, and an holy Archbis∣hop, was sent by the Pope of Rome into this our Britanie or England, together with Si∣thius his Nephew, Inthius his Kinsman, and others of whome the Towne yet called S. Iues in Huntington shire, where about hee moste liued tooke the name, dyinge after many yeares in the yeare of Christ 600. or
there about, beeinge here longe time by the Pope of Rome his mission before S. Gregory his sendinge S. Augustine hither. Iohn Cap∣grau. in S. Iuone. Flor. Wigorn. an. 600. Andr. Leucand. & Gotzelin. in vita eius. Neyther were our owne Archbishops that liued in this age after S. Dubritius, Vodi∣nus and Sampson otherwise affected in this matter. First S. Sampson beeing driuen by the pagans from Yorke, Pyramus, or Pyran∣nus, chapleyne to that greate freind of the Romane See, kinge Arthur was Archbishop there, conuocato Clero & populo, with com∣mon consent, and consecrated by S. Dubri∣cius the Popes Legate, and primate here then, noe other beeing to consecrate him. (Galfrid. Monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 9. cap. 8. Matth. Westm. an. 522.) The immediate successor to S. Dubricius, bothe in his lega∣tine power from the See of Rome, and pri∣mate Metropolitane here, in those times by common consent of writers, Protestants and others was, (Godwyn. Catalog. in S. Dauids. 1.2. and Landaffe 1. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubrit. and Dauid. Capgrau. Catalog.) that glorie of this nation, S. Dauid, to vvhome S. Dubritius resigned in his life, liuing as an Eremite. Re∣licto
Episcopatu eremiticam vitam elgat ac te∣nuit. S. Dauid by his legatine power transla∣ted the Archbishops See from Caerlegion, where it was instituted by Pope Eleutherius, to Meneuia, S. Dauids, of this name, where it after remayned. (in S. Dubrit. & S. Dauid. Giral. Cambr. itinerar. Cambr. Capgrau. in S. Dauid.) Wee reade of this our holy and lear∣ned Metropolitane, that hauinge expelled the Pelagian heresie, and restoringe the true faith, Saint Dauid was constituted Archbishop of all Britanie, and his citie dedicated the Me∣tropolitane See of all the contry, soe that who∣soeuer should gouerne it, should hee Archbishop: Therefore all heresie beeing expelled, all the churches of Britanie, receaued the maner and Rule by the Romane Authoritie, monasteries ar builded in all places, and S Dauid vvas made the highest protector, cheifest preacher, from vvhome all receaued the Rule, and forme of well liuinge. Hee vvas an order, correction, and imitation to all: learninge to the Readers, life to the needy, norishment to Orphans, a susteyner of the naked, the head of the contry, a Rule to monkes, life to seculars. Expulsa haeresi, fides sanis pectoribus roboratur, & sanctus Dauid totius Britanniae Archiepiscopus constituitur,
necnon ciuitas eius totius patriae Metropois de∣dicatur, ita vt quicumque eam regeret, Archie∣piscopus foret. Expulsa itaque haeresi, omnes Britanniae Ecclesiae modum & regulam Roma∣na authoritate acceperunt. Monasteria per loca construuntur, & sanctus Dauid summus protector, summus praedicator, à quo omnes nor∣mam atque formam rectè viuendi acceperunt, effectus est. Ipse cunctis ordo, correctio, imitatiu, legentibus doctrina, egentibus vita, orphanis nutrimentum, nudis fulcimen, patriae caput, mo∣nachis regula, secularibus vita fuit. The Archbishop of London in this time, as our Protestants tel vs. (Matth. Parker. anti∣quitat. Brit. pag. 7. Godwyn. Catal. in London in Theonus. Stowe histor. in Lucius. Holin histor. of Engl. Matth. Westm. an. 586. Gal∣frid. Monument. hist. i. 11. c. 10.) was Theo∣nus, or Theanus, vvhoe takinge the chardge of London vpon him the yeare 553. the yeare 586. hee vvith Thadiorus Bishop of Yorke, ta∣kinge their clergie, and reliques of Saints, with them, gett them into Walles and Cornwall to the rest of their contrymen, whom the Saxons had drovven thither. Soe that except these Protestants deceaue themselues and others, this Archbishop of London and Thadiorus
of Yorke alsoe must needs bee of the same minde with the others before for the Roman spirituall power in this nation; for these Pro∣testants, (Godwyn Catal. in S. Dauids 1.2.) telling vs, that S. Dubritius liued vntill the yeare of Christ 522. and S. Dauid which succeeded him, sate longe, to vvit 65. yeares, they both must needs bee made Bishops vn∣der him, and their flyinge into Walles and ioyneninge with the Britans there, dooth planely conuince, that they were of that o∣pinion: for if S. Dauid was now deade, which cannot appeare, yet moste manifest it is, that both S. Kentegern and S. Asaph, those moste worthie Bishops cheifest then in those parts, and all Britanie alsoe, if S. Dauid was deade, were longe time liuing & ruling after this, and yett such patrons of the Romane spirituall power, with their whole cleargie, as before is euidently pro∣ued by these Protestants, that noe Catho∣lick may yeeld more to the See of Rome in these, then they did in those dayes. And if S. Dauid was deade; yett the next successors of him in that Archiepiscopall See, which were Cenauc and S. Teliaus or Eliud, must needs alsoe succeed him in that opinion of
him towards the Roman See: for though little is written of Bishop Cenauc, but onely that hee was Bishop of Patern and after suc∣cessor to S. Dauid in the See Archiepisco∣pall of S. Dauids, this sufficiently conuin∣ceth it, for the Bishoprick of Paterne beeing then vnder the iurisdiction of S. Dauid▪ wee cannot thinke that the Bishop thereof was otherwise affected in this matter, then his soe holye and learned Metropolitane, to whome hee owed obedience. And his very beeing Archbishop of Me∣neuia immediatly after S. Dauid doth proue the same by these Protestants before, (God∣wyn. Catal. in S. Dauids. Girald. Cambr. itiner. Cambr. antiquit. eccles. Meneuen. apud God∣wyn. supr.) whoe haue tould vs, that by the power of the Romane See, Meneuia was made the Metropolis, and this Bishop did not, nor could accept it in any other sence, or by other Title, of S. Teliaus the matter is more manifest, more beeinge written of him by Protestants and others, that hee was Scholler to S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, the vndiuided companion of S. Dauid, in their holy pilgrimadge, not onely soe farr as Rome, but to Hierusalem it selfe where hee
was consecrated Bishop, and after his re∣turne home, and the death of Cenauc, beeing Archbishop of Meneuia, then had principali∣tie ouer all the churches of the west Britanie vnto the end of his life. Principatum super omnes ecclesias occidentalis Britanniae vsque ad finem vitae suae tenuit. (Godwyn in Landaffe. Girald. Cambr. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. pag. 146. Catal. Epis. Landaf. Ioh. Capgr. in Catal. in S. Theliao. Engl. Martyrol. die 25. Nouember.) And was Archbishop there at, and after alsoe by some, the death of S. Au∣gustine. For it is euident by the Brittish hi∣storie, as it is allowed by our Protestants, and by their owne chronologie of the kings of Britanie, that S. Dauid himselfe liued within 16. yeares of S. Augustines coming hither. (Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 11. cap. 3.) Tunc obijt sanctissimus vrbis Le∣gionum Archiepiscopus Dauid Meneuia ciui∣tate, intra Abbatiam suam, & iubente Malgo∣ne Venedotorum Rege in eadem Ecclesia sepul∣tus, pro eo ponitur in Metropolitan sede Kincos Lampaternensis Ecclesiae Antistes, & ad altio∣rem dignitatem promouetur. Then Dauid the moste holy Archbishop of the citie of Le∣gions, died in the citie of Meneuia within
his owne Abbey, and by commande of Mal∣go kinge of Northwalles, was buried in the same church. Kincus (hee which by others before is called Cenauc) Bishopp of the church of Patern, is placed in the Metropo∣litane See, and promoted to an higher digni∣tie. For as these Protestants, Matthew of Westminster, and others are witnesses. (Pro∣test. Catalog. Rer. Britan. in Malgo. Matth. West. an. 586 581.) this kinge began his Reigne in the yeare of Christ 581. or 580. so that by this calculation, there cannot bee from the death of S. Dauid dyinge in this kings time, and the coming of S. Augustine hither by all accompts in the yeare 596. aboue 15. or 16 yeares at the moste. Soe that wee either must say, these two Successors of S. Dauid liued a very short time, after they were called to that dignitie (the contrarie whereof is sett downe before) or that S. Te∣laus this patrone of the See of Rome, and a canonized Saint of that church, was liuing in the time of S. Augustines preaching in this kingedome. Which is the more confirmed by all those histories, which relate the opposition of some Brittish Bishops and religious men
against S. Augustine. (Bed. lib. 2. histor. cap. 2. Galfrid. mon. lib. 11. hist. Matth. Westm. an. 603. Capgrau. in S. Augustino.) and speaking of an Archbishop of the citie of Legions, and yett not anie one of them maketh the least mention, that any Archbishop did ei∣ther resist S. Augustine, or pretend the least dislike of the spirituall supreamacie in the See of Rome, or gainesay any order or de∣cree of the blessed Pope S. Gregorie which sent him hither, nor any Protestants though diuers of them name the Bishops as they coniecture which resisted S. Augustine, (Matth. Parker ant. Britan. in August. God∣wyn. Conuers. of Brit. Stowe histor. in Ethelb. Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Rom. in Gregor. 1.) doe once name S. Telaus, or any Archiepiscopal See, at S. Dauids, or anye other place in Walles at that time, to haue consented to that opposition. Hardinge in his Cronicle maketh this matter playne, that the Britans which gain∣said S. Augustine did not deny the supreame spirituall power of the Pope of Rome in Bri∣tanie at that time, but rather defended and maintayned it, and thereby alsoe, as they thought, did iustely refuse S. Augustine, for
when hee demaunded obedience of them thus they answeared by this Author: Ioh. Hardinge Chronicle cap. 88. in Ethelbert kinge of Saxons fol. 83.84. To which Britōs answeared that they not knew That hee had such estate in all Britanie, For they had three Archbishops, to obeyu, Of Caerlion, London and Yorke citie By Bishops of Rome graunted to vs & ordinate Full longe afore yee had such dignitie Wherefore wee will obey noe nevv primate And specially none English nevv prelate, For Englishmen and Saxons haue vs noyed, And haue our Land and all our kyn destroyed. Where wee see the Britans were soe far from disallowinge the Popes Authoritie in such things, that by the same they both claymed, and maintayned the power, and prerogati∣ues, of three Archbishops, amonge them, now foure hundred yeares since But these Protestants themselues with o∣thers acknowledge, that the moste renow∣ned Bishops that were in this kingedome at that time, both receaued the Authoritie of the Pope of Rome, and submitted themsel∣ues to S. Augustine his holy Legate. Of the holines and learninge of S. Assaph, I haue
spoken before, yett a Protestant Bishop saith of him, (Bal. centur. 1. in Assaph.) A Gregorij Pontificis Romani discipulis Angliam aduentan∣tibus, authoritatem accepit, hee receaued au∣thoritie from the disciples of Gregorie the Pope of Rome that came into England. S. Asaph in the life of his Master S. Kētegern. Capgraue and others after, affirme as much of S. Kentegern. (S. Assaph & Ioh. Capgrau. in vit. S. Kentegerni.) that hee did acknow∣ledg this high power in S. Gregory the Pope, and receaued power, and confirmation from him. All our histories with generall consent affirme the same of S. Lethardus, the french Bishop that liued with Queene Bertha in Kerit. I haue proued the same of S. Iuo the Persian Archbishop, that then preached in Huntington-shire. Of S. Telaus alsoe the Archbishop of Walles, sufficient is said all-ready. And yet these were onely the cheife holy, and learned Bishops here in that time, not anie one comparable to the meanest of these mentioned in any writer I can finde, to haue resisted either the Popes ordinance, or his Legats authoritie. And to satisfie a vaine obiection of some Protestant writers; That S. Columbanus the
holy Irish, or Scottish Abbot, whose autho∣ritie some Britans in the tyme of S. Augu∣stine pretended for defence of their error in obseruing the feast of Easter, & not presently submitting thēselues to the cōmaund of the church of Rome, it is euident by auntiēt hi∣stories, that both this S. Columban, and the cheifest of them, submitted thēselues wholly vnto it, & receaued both instruction and iu∣risdictiō frō thence. For it is testified in a ve∣ry old Manuscript cited by Surius, that both S. Kelian, which was the most renowned of them, and that S Columbanus and S. Gallus, submitted themselues with their associats to the Pope of Rome in all thinges at that time. Thus it testifieth of S. Keliā, made Bis∣hop of Herbypolis Wirtzburg in Franconia by the Pope. (Sur. in vit. S. Kel. M.S. peruetust. apud eund. supr.) Praedicationi abstinuit, donec Romano se Pontifici praesentaret, quatenus apud Romanā sedem & integrū christianae Religionis dogma, & licentiā praedicādi acciperet. Hibernia siquidem olim Pelagiana faedata fuerat haeresi, Apostolica{que} censura damnata. Hee abstayned from preaching, vntil hee presented himselfe vnto the Pope of Rome, that hee might re∣ceaue frō the See of Rome, both the sownd
doctrine of Christian Religion, and licence to preach. For Irland (his contry) was aun∣tiently defiled with the pelagian heresie, and condemned by apostolick censure: and there sheweth how hee had companions both of his iorney and submission, amonge others Saint Columbanus, and S. Gallus, leauing the first in Italy, and the other in Almayne. The like hath Iohn Capgraue, and a verie old manuscript which hee followeth, if not the same with that of Surius. (Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kilian. M.S. antiq. pr. gloriosissimus Rex Eduardus in S. Kiliano.) In oppido orientalis Fraunciae quod Wirttzburch eorum lingua di∣citur, cum aliquo tempore sub silentio stetisset, Romam profectus est, & officio praedicandi à Papa recepto, Episcopus ordinatus: socijs eius Columbano scilicet in Italia, & Gallo in Alma∣nia remanentibus. Saint Kilian stayed in a Towne of east France, called in their lan∣guadge Wirtzburch, and when hee had beene there some time in silence, hee went to Rome, and receauing from the Pope power to preach, and beeing ordeyned a Bishop, returned, leauing his Companions, Columbanus in Italy, and Gallus in Al∣mayne. Where it is euident not onely these
Scottish Saints did not onely submitt them∣selues to the Pope in all matters both of do∣ctrine and iurisdiction, but the Pope at that time extended and exercised that his su∣preame spirituall power, both in Italie, Fraunce, Almayne, Britaine, and Ireland, both to censure a whole nation, and to dis∣able any to preach or exercise spirituall fun∣ction without his licence. And although the kings of Britanie after Kinge Arthur euen to the desolation of the Britans, were by all histories euen of their owne as Gildas, Nennius, the Brittish histo∣rie, and others, moste wicked men, and such that by all testimonie of Protestants, and o∣thers, their kingedome was ouerthrowne by God for the sinnes of them, and their peo∣ple, yett not anie one of them by any histo∣rie did denie this power of the See Aposto∣lick, but euen their last kinge Cadwalla∣dar, as their owne historian writteth. (Gil∣das de excid. Britan. Galfrid. mon. l. 11. histor. cap. 3.4.5.6.7.8. monum. histor.) beeing ad∣monished from heauen: Nolebat Deus Brito∣nes in Insula Britanniae diutius regnare: that God would not haue the Britans reigne any any longer in the Iland of Britanie, went as
hee was admonished on pilgrimage to Rome, submitted himselfe to Pope Sergius, and died an holy Saint, in soe much that our Prote∣stants thus note of him. (Galfrid. mon. l. 12. cap. 17.18. Bed. l. 4. histor. & in Epitom. an. 688. Matth. Westm. an 688.689. Protest. an∣not. in Matth. Westm. an. 688.) Regnum relin∣quens propter Deum, Romam venit: leauinge his kingdome for gods sake, hee went to Ro∣me. An other saith. (Stowe histor in Cadwal∣lader.) Cadwallader forsakinge his kingely authoritie, went to Rome, whoe after be∣came a monke, and was buried in S. Peters church at Rome, hee was the laste kinge of Britanie, saith Geffrey. (Galfrid. Mon. l. 11. cap. 12.) And for the Archbishop of Walles to whome some British Bishops in the time of S. Augustine said, they ought obedience, cum suum Archipraesulem haberent, there is not the least colour, or pretence of any title by these Protestants themselues, how hee or his See could bee exempted from the Popes Authoritie: for as these men haue told vs before, it was first instituted by Pope Eleu∣therius, in the time of kinge Lucius, and by the succeedinge Popes and their Legats here as is before declared, confirmed and
ratified, they receaued their Palle, the signe of an Archbishop from Rome, and after their vnion with the Saxons and disciples of Pope Gregory, in the time of S. Theo∣dore Archbishop of Canterbury vsed it, and Archiepiscopall Authoritie in all de∣grees, and by the Popes permission and allowance, fiue and twentie Archbishops successiuely from S. Dauid to Archbishop Sampson, and had seuen Bishops subiect vnto them vntill this Sampson, flyinge the contry in a time of sicknes carried away the Pall into little Britanie. Amonge ma∣nie others a Protestant Bishop thus rela∣teth this matter. Girald. Cambren. in Itine∣rar. Cambr. Antiquit. eccl. S. Dauid apud God∣win S. Dauid. Matth. Park. antiquit. Brit. Rog. Houeden. Godwin Catalog. in S. Dauids in Sampsone. In the time of Sampson the See of S. Dauid had seuen Bishops Suffragans subiect vnto it, as the Antiquitie of the church of S. Dauid declareth, to witt, Exeter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, S. Assaph, & Furnes in Ire∣land. Roger Houeden, vvhich I accompt more likely, reckoneth these, Landaffe, Lanpatern in Cardigan shire, Bangor Saint Assaph,
Chichester, Hereford, and Worcester. While hee was Bishop it hapned the people of all that contry were wonderfully vexed, with Ianudise, soe as great numbers of them died daily of that disease. By the importunitie of his clergie and disciples, hee was induced to flie the contry, and sailed into Britanie, where the Bishoprick of Dola beeing voide, hee was straight way elected vnto the same. Hee had brought thither with him the Archiepis∣copall Pall of S. Dauid, and vsed it duringe his life, as did alsoe his successors there, for many yeares, vntill they were compelled by the Pope, at the suite of the Archbishop of Turon, to leaue it, and make profession of obedience vnto him, as in former times. By this occa on it fell out that the Successors of Sampson in Saint Dauids, what for want of their Pall, or for pouertie, or negligence, or some other occasion, loste their Title of bishop, and to this day neuer recouered the same. Howbeit they vsed all authoritie be∣longinge to an Archbishop by consecratinge of other Bishops; and neither did they euer make profession of subiection vnto Can∣terburie vntill the time of Henry 1. Kinge of England. (Godwin supr. in Bernard. 46.)
When Bernard Chaplaine vnto King Henry the first, and chauncellour to his Queene, was consecrate by the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Iulij 12. 1115. not chosen by the clergie of Walles as hitherto had beene accu∣stomed, but forced vpon them by the Kinge of England. And there with others decla∣reth, how this Bernard tooke vppon him the title of Archbishop, but Theobaldus Archbishop of Canterbury, prouinge before the Pope in the councell of Rhemes, by wit∣nesses, cum suam fidem & obseruantiam cantua∣riensi astrinxisse: that Bernard had promised obedience vnto the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, the cause was by the Pope adiudged against Bernard, and the See of S. Dauid. Match. West. an. 1115. Matth. Par. an. 1115. Godwin. supr. Girald. Lambr. in Itiner. Camb. & Topogr Harps. secul. 12. cap. 46. Soe it is euident, that from the beginning thereof to the endinge of the same, the Ar∣chiepiscopall See of Walles depended of the Pope of Rome, and it was not hee, but the Acts of their owne Bishops, which ouer∣threw the dignitie & priuiledges of it, which the Popes had graunted and confirmed. Of the Popes power here after the cominge of S.
Augustine there is noe denial amonge Prote∣stants, all generally consentinge that from that time now aboue a thousand yeares, the Popes supreamacy euer ruled here in spiri∣tuall thinges, hee chaunged the Metropoli∣tone See of London to Canterbury, consti∣tuted that of Yorke, interdicted our vniuer∣sities, constituted Bishops in places as see∣med best to him, Kinge Ethelbert chaunged his lawes, and receaued the customes of the Romans: cassatis paternis legibus, nouas Sa∣pientum consilio iuxta Romanorum consuetudi∣nes Anglorum sermone constituit. (Bal. centur. 1. in Ethelberto.) The greate flaterer of King Henry the eight, whoe first denied the Po∣pes supreamacy, and tooke it to himselfe, Po∣lidor Vergil, speaketh of that parlament. (Polidor Verg. l. 27. pag. 689) Habetur con∣cilium Londini, in quo ecclesia Anglicana for∣mam potestatis nullis ante temporibus visam in∣duit: Henricus enim Rex caput ipsius ecclesiae constituitur. A parlament is held at London, in which the church of England did put on a forme of power, neuer seene in any time before: for Kinge Henry was made head of the church. The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury speaking of the lawes of that
parlament plainely confesseth. (Matth. Par∣ker. antiquit. Britan. in Tho. Cramner pag. 329.) His legibus potentia papalis quae nongen∣tis amplius annis in Anglia durauit facile con∣cidit. By these lawes the power of the Pope, which had continued here in England aboue neyne hundred yeares, was easely ouer∣throwne. The present Protestant Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, director to Francis Ma∣son, and hee with others in their booke of pretended consecration of Bishops, speaking of the same Matthew Parker. (Fran: Mason Booke of consecrat. 3. cap. 4. pag. 131. vit. Matth. Parkeri.) say: Concerninge Archbishop Parker beeing the 70. Archbishop after Austin, yett of all that number, hee was the onely man, and the first of all, which receaued consecration without the Popes Bulls. To this, this man himselfe, together with their Protestant Bishop, God∣win, Goceline and others, in the liues of the Archbishops of England doe plainely testi∣fie; to this all antiquities and antiquaries agree, none dissenteth. Matth. Parker in an∣tiq. Britan. Godwin Catalog. in Canterbury and Yorke, Goceline in epist.
THE XI. CHAPTER. How by these Protestants the Britans and Scots which opposed against S. Gregories disciples, did take vpon then greater or as ample power in Princes matters, as euer the Popes of Rome or their Legates did in this kingedome. BEcause our Protestant Antiquaries and writers of England doe with a common consent agree in this, that the Britans at the coming of S. Augustine hither, from S. Gre∣gory, did truely and inuiolably keepe in all points that holy Religion which was plan∣ted here in the Apostles time, especially they which at the first opposed against the pro∣ceedings of that our holy Apostles. (Matth. Park. antiq. Britan. pag. 1. Godwin Conuers. pag. 43.44. Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pont. Rom. in Gregor. 1. Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. Dauid Povvel. in annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. cap. 21. pag. 102. Fulk. Ansvv. to a count. cath. pag. 40.) therefore to walke still by their directions, lett vs now learne of them, what was the opinion and practice of those Scots,
and Britrans in this question of Iurisdiction in spiritual Rulers, claimed and deriued from whome soeuer they will, or any of them shall please, though it is euidently proued in all ages before, that neuer any such was practi∣zed here, but that which was deriued and approued from, and by the Apostolick Ro∣man See. And wee shall plainely see, that these their soe much by them commended gayne-saiers to S. Augustine, and the Pope alsoe, as many of these men contend, did further intermeddle with Princes and tem∣porall affaires, then the Popes of Rome, or any their Legats in this kingedome: our Pro∣testant Antiquaries with others, write of Kinge Frequahard or Frechard the first of Scotland sonne to Eugenius, in this maner. Hect. Boeth. lib 9. fol. 179. pag. 1. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. lib. 5. Reg. 52. pag. 160. Holinsh. histor. of Scotand in Frequa∣hard pag. 112. Frequahard besides other his vvicked beha∣uiours, vvas alsoe infected vvith the erroneous opinion of the Pelagian heresie. Which suspition vvas the more increased, for that hee vsed to haue sondry Brittish preists in his company: the vvhich nation had beene euer noted vvith the
spot of that damnable infection. The nobilitie of the Realme moued herevvith sommoned him to come to a councell, vvhich they had appointed to hold of all the states, that they might there vnderstand, if it vvere true or not, vvhich vvas commonly reported of him. But hee refu∣singe to come, they assembled together, and be∣seiged him in a castle, vvherein hee had inclo∣sed himselfe, and vvinning the place, got him into their hands, and immediately thereuppon committed him to safe keepinge. This done they consult together for the administration of the Realme, vvhether they should quite depose Frequahard, or restore him to his place. Then it followerh how they deposed him, and sent to S. Fiacre his Brother then an Eremite in Fraunce, to gouerne the kingedome, but hee refused it. Then these Protestants add. (Ho∣linsh. & Buch. supr. & Hect. Boeth. supr.) The Lords of the land assembled themselues together in Argile, about the choosinge of a nevv kinge, vvhere by common consent, Domoald the third sonne of Eugenius beeing called thither vvith Bishop Conan, out of the Ile of Man, vvas inuested kinge vvith greate ioy, and triumph. Where wee see that S. Fiacre though next
heire liuinge in Fraunce, where the Popes Authoritie was generally embraced, would not consent to the deposition of kinge Fre∣quahard, to gaine a kingedome, when his Brother Domoald and all those Scots which by these Protestants then opposed against the Popes Authoritie, performed this with great Ioy and triumphe. Of kinge Frequahard the second they write in this order. (Holinsh. hi∣stor. of Scotl. pag. 114. Buchan. Rer. Scoticar. l. 5. Reg. 54.) Hee was couetous, wicked to∣wards God, a Tormentor of the iust and righ∣teous people, insatiable in all vnlawfull affections, such of the prelates, as hee vnderstood to bee wealthie, hee rested not till hee had picked one matter, or other vnto them, vvhereby they vvere suer to forfeite all their Treasure vnto his coffers. Buchanan addeth, which I am asha∣med to translate. (Buchan. supr.) Eandem in suos furorem vertit, Iugulata vxore, & stu∣pratis filiabus, ob haec scelera communione chri∣stianorū fuit exclusus. For these wicked offen∣ces hee was excluded from the communion of Christians. (Holinsh. supr.) The Bishops of the Realme, namely those tvvo reuerend Fa∣thers, Colman, & Finnan perceyuinge such wic∣kednes in the prince, blamed him sharply sondry
times for the same: and at length because they savv hee regarded not their admonishments, hee vvas by them excommunicated. Thus con∣tinuinge certaine yeares in his vvickednes, at length the nobles began to conspire against him, soe that they vvould haue deuised a meane hovv to haue ridd him out of the vvay, if Bi∣shop Colman, had not forbidd them that prac∣tise. Then followeth how beeing miserably punished for his sinnes, and beeinge at the last penitent, hee was absolued of his excom∣munication by the same Bishop Colman: whoe was that great opposer against the disciples of Saint Gregory, and Saint Augu∣stine, and disputant for the Scots against S. Wilfride. And the Bishops of Walles which were in the same opposition to the disciples of S. Gre∣gory the Pope, were in the same case by these Protestants: One a Bishop and antiquary a∣monge them writeth, from the antient an∣tiquities of that nation. (Godvvin Catalog. in Landaff. Annal. eccles. Landaffen: in Oudo∣ceus. 3.) Kinge Morcant hauinge killed one Frioc his Vncle, beeinge therefore excom∣municate by the Bishop, vppon his absolu∣tion, besides a graunt of diuers priuiledges
vnto the church of Landaff, gaue Cynciril and certaine land called Cynfall, as alsoe the churches of Ythat-Haffern. (In Gur∣uan. 10.) Bishop Guruan excommunicated Tendur king of Brechinianc, for killing En∣gistill a kinge of that contry trecherously, & for absolutiō had from him the guift of Lan∣nihangel tref. ceriāc. Guoderec slew his owne Brother Merchion. (In Greciclus.) for which deed, hee was by Bishop Grecielus excōmu∣nicate, and enioyned by way of penance be∣fore hee might bee absolued, to spend a yeare in pilgrimadge to the church of Dola in lit∣tle Brittanie. Garcan the sonne of Guinā (In Berthygion 14.) kept his owne stepmother, and beeing excommunicate for that Incest, gaue to the Bishop Marchywis. (In Bish. Ce∣renhir 18.) Houel Kinge of Glewissig by per∣iury circūuented Gallū the sonne of Cidrich, for which hee was held vnder excommuni∣cation, by the space of a yeare, at the time of his absolution hee gaue Merthir-buceil, Mer∣thirminor, & Tircollan. Like was the case of Ili the sonne of Conblus whoe vpon the like occasion gaue Gulipe. Aquod sonne of Ioua falling out with the Bishop, draue him and his men into the church of Landaff, & threw
stones at them into the very church, for soe doinge hee was excommunicate, and to bee absolued, was glad to giue Pennoun, with the church of Lautilul, and certaine other Lands. (In Bish. Ioseph. 28.) Monric Kinge of Glamorgan beeinge excommuni∣cate for puttinge out the eyes of Ergum, the sonne of Guriat of Gueinscot in the time of a truce, to haue his absolution gaue Painiprisc. Whoe desireth more of such proceedings by the Britans, soe recommended by Prote∣stants, may enquire thē in the auntient An∣nals of Landaffe, and this Protestant Bishop Francis Godwin, Protestant Bishop there, who in his treatise of that See, is very plentifull in such Examples. And this shall suffice for this short historie of the Popes preeminence and proceedings here, from the beginning of our first faith in Christ, by them and their hap∣pie instruments therein. By whome & whose preeminence spirituall, this kingdome from that time, hath receaued many greate and irrecomprehensible graces and benefites, both spiritual & temporal, to bynde vs euer∣lastingly to honor and reuerence, with al du∣tie, that Apostolick See, and cheifest pastors
thereof, successors to our most glorious first Fathers and founders in the faith of Christ, and our cheife Sheephards on earth, except wee will desperately runne away and cast our selues out of the blessed flock and folde of the militant church of God, out of which there is noe saluation. FINIS. Faults escaped. Pag. 42. line 1. distributor, reade, distri∣bution. pag. 52 line 19. there nowned, reade, the renowned. pag. 153. line 19. this, reade, these.
AN ADVETISEMENT. Whereas in the first hundred yeare it is as sup∣pose written in the story of S. Mansuetus, that Ireland was neuer plainely cal∣led Scotia, I wish it thus to bee qualified. pag. 34. For if we graunt as some few write, that Ireland hath beene called Scotia, or Sco∣tia Maior, Scotland, or the greater Scot∣land, yett that is very seldome found in histories, but it is commonly called in them auntient and late, Hibernia, Iuernia, Inuer∣nia, and Ierne, Iris, and Ogigia little Britta∣nie, and by the Irish themselues, Erin, when the part of great Britanie, after the name of Albania ceased, is commonly in all histo∣rians named Scotia, Scotland. Aristotil. l. de mundo Pompon. Mela l. 3. Solinus Poly. histor. c. 25. Strab. l. 4. Iuuenal. Satyr. 2. Claudian. l. 7. Stangh. Hunfrid. Lhuid. Stow Holinsh. hist. Hect. Boeth. Buchan. Capgr. in Catalog. Gryimst. in Ireland.
