4527.6 29644263 28054
¶To Dauid Dicars when. ¶To him that doth dreame, Dauid Dicars when, And euen so from hym, to such other men. FRom when vnto when, to come to this when. Whē fooles of your folly, wyl worke lyke wyse men And know theyr owne fautes, & leaue faulting other And fyrst mende them selues, & thē warne theyr brother, Enuiyng none, for that theyr sorte is not Such as they would be, lyke others I wot. Goddes of degree, to rule and beare swaye, Whose maners mete not, to stand in such stay, And yet wold haue mouthes, to rore lyke the Lyon Beyng but Asses, brute of condicion.Esopus de asino ruēte Forgettynge that order doth thus aske and craue, That eche should hym selfe in order behaue. As beastes of lowe sorte, to be meke of theyr mynde, To those that be hygher, and greater of kynde. The Bore not to bragge, to stryue wyth the Lyon. The Hart not to stand, wyth the Bull in contencion, The Oxe that doth draw, to thyncke hym selfe able, To runne for a wager, wyth the Horse of the stable. It grees not, it cordes not, nor orderly fyttes That men should fynd fault, wyth Gods and theyr wyttes. Iupiters seate standes somewhat to hye For vs to iudge it, that come it not nye. And iudgementes of gesse, in any such sorte, May serue to the Gods, for a laughter and sporte. To se how Iudas, would fayne become Iuda, To iuste at the life, of Iuli apostata. Let Beastes that be meete, for carte and caryage, Leane to theyr laboure, as manne to hys maryage. And synce we be members of one common wealthe. Let vs ioyne aptly, as fyttes for our health. The eye as the eye, let hym stare and looke, And let the leg learne, to bowe and to crooke. Let the hand answere, to helpe and to dooe. As the wyl of the hert, shall wyll hym vnto. And let not the foote, make murmur and cry. To aske why our head is placed so hye. Our instrument iarres, it makes no ryght melody. If we thus tune not to order our armony. Then mayster when, when bothe you and I, And euery man els wyl learne to applye, To our ryght metyarde, and kepe oure iust compasse, And looke not so deepe in an other mannes glasse. And leaue dreaming dreames of dead Dauid Dicar, And send such whens home, to our person or vycar. And therwyth remember, thys verse of Cato, Whose wysdō doth warne vs, with these wordes I trowe Que soles culpare, ea tu ipse: ne feceris. when wee marke this nipse, And leaue drawyng dialles, on other mens dooyng And learne for to looke to our owne woorkes and brewynge, Then I say then, when you agayn when: wyll say well your selfe, and suche other men, And all folke wyll doo well. Lo thus I ende then, All thynges shall be well, whiche god graunt. Amen. Domine saluum fac Regem & da pacem in diebus nostris. Quod T. Camel. Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwellyng in Poules Churchyarde, at the sygne of the blacke boye.
