4574 99852230 17543
A NECESSITIE OF SEPARATION From the Church of England, prooved by the Nonconformists Principles. Specially opposed vnto Dr. AMES, his Fresh Suit against humane ceremonies, in the point of Separation only. Also Dr. LAITON, Mr. DAYREL, and Mr. BRADSHAW, are here answered, where∣in they have written against us. With a Table in the later end, of the principal occurrents in this Treatise. By IOHN CANNE, Pastor of the ancient English church, in Amsterdam. Prov. 31. 8. 9. Open thy mouth for the dumbe, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction.—And plead the cause of the poore and needie. Ioh. 13, 17. If ye know these things, happie are ye if ye doe them. Printed in the yeare 1634.
To every one, that seeketh after the truth in sincerity, Salutations. THere are extant allready so many bookes in the defence of our cause,Our A∣pologie. Mr. Bar. refutation of Mr. Gif∣fard. A treatise of the minist. of the Church of England. Mr. Ro∣binsons Iustifi∣cation of Separ. Mr. Penry of the mi∣nistery of England. An answ. to Mr. Stone. (which never yet received any answer) that it hath been in my thoughts a long time, not to enter publickly the lists of contention about it with any man; but to imploy that smal portion, which I have in the knowledg of holy things, more peaceably otherwise; Not with standing perceiving of late, the general fame, which was given forth of Dr. Ames his booke, and namely in his answer to the point betweene the Nonconformists and us, as that it was so learnedly and absolutely done, that it gave all men satis∣faction (the Separatists only excepted) and that no man would ever be able to make any sound reply therein vnto it. I thought it requisite, to take a thorow view thereof; which, when I had so don, and saw the sleightnesse of it, (to say no worse I mean only in the point of Separa∣tion, for in other things he bath an∣swered. D Burg. fully, and laid him flatt on the groūd.) I conceived with my selfe, that this common bruit must need arise, either from some ignorant people, who can∣not judge of things which differ, or from such as have mens persons in admiration, and so like the shadow will follow them where ever they goe, be it right or wrong. It is knowne to those, which know the controversies be∣tweene the formal Protestants in England, and the Re∣formists, that the Principles of the later, by the former are
said to be the direct and plaine grounds of Separation; sundry arguments and reasons they allege for it, as the rea∣der may see in their several treatises.Hooker Eccles. Pol. pref. p. 34. Whitg. 2. Treat. c. 1. div. 2. p. 81 Sutclif. treat. of Disc. c. 15 p. 165. D. Bils. perpetual Goverm. ch. 15. p. 339. Bancr. Surv. of Disc. c. 33, p. 430, 431, 432. Loe Quaerimon. Ecclesiae. p. 59 60. Answ. to the Petition by the Vice Chanc. & Heads of Oxf. p. 15. D. Morton, D. Burg. This thing by the o∣ther is not only denyed, but withall they proclame themselves the main refuters of the Separatists, and doe affirme, that theyRepl. to D. Mort. Sect. 14. p. 31. Defence of Petition to the K. p. 103. never saw any Prelate to confute their opinions any otherwise then by rayling words; But how wel they have confuted us, it will appeare in the following dispute, un∣to which I referre the reader: Only I thinke good in breefe to give him here a sight of most of their weapons, which they draw out vsually against vs, and whereby they indeavour to conquer and quel us quite. 1. Vile calumniations, and bitter scoffes, proclaming us to the world, to be Schismaticks, Brownists, Donatists, &c. and matching us many times with the most notorious Here∣ticks Dayr. Treat. of the Ch. p. 41., and blasphemers Mr. Ni∣chols plea of the in∣nocent. p. 33, 34, that they can thinke vpon, of purpose to make our persons and profession odious to all men. 2. Raysing up many manifest lies & untruths The scurrulous Libels, pu∣blished under the names of Lawne, Fowler, Bullard, &c., & gathe∣ring together the faylings of some particular persons, which had walked with us, & casting the same as dung in our faces. 3. Braggs and boasts of victorie; a notable instance for this we have, in a certaine preface, made to Mr. Hildersh. booke on Ioh. 4. the author of it, tels his reader there, that Mr. Hild. had the best in the controversie, betweene him and Mr. Iohnson, notwithstanding it is well knowne, he never made any reply to that which the other had published against him, although he was by divers earnestly desired to doe it; and this I write
from the report of honest and faithful witnesses, who are yet alive, and will not (I am perswaded) willingly relate any thing but the truth. 4. Grosse contradictions, in seeking to justifie against us, the very things, which by sound arguments and reasons, in their writings against the Hierarchy, they prove to be evil and vnlawfull; and this we have manifested in the answ. to Mr. Bradsh. book. 5. And in a word, falsisications of our positions, cōtinual begging of questiōs, larg proofs, for what was never doubted of, but no proving of the main point in questiō, either by scriptures, reasons, or any ancient & sound writers. These, and such like arguments, have they used hitherto against vs; And it is no marvel, that they are such: for what better should we exspect from them, who seeke to put out that light againe, which hath beene by themselves cheifly revealed vnto many, I know what I say, and have good ex∣periēce of this thing; for there is not ten of▪ an hundred, which separate from the Church of England, but are moved first thereto, (I speake of outward meanes) by the Doctrines of the Nonconformists, either in word or writing, taught to the people: And indeed, vpon their grounds, how can any one doe lesse then separate, if his heart be tender against every sinne, seeing they confidently affirme, that their ministery, worship, and discipline, is from Antichrist, and in their Church are swarmesSerm. on Rom. 12. p. 65, 66. of Atheists, Papists, Erroneous, & Hereticall Sectaries, Witches, Charmers, Murtherers, Theeves, Adulterers, Lyars, &c. Moreover, All PoperySold. Bar. (say they) is poyson, the roote, stalke, and branches; and we cannot be said sincerely to have repented ofAbridgm. p. 23. the Idolatry, or superstition, whereby we or our fore∣fathers have provoked the Lord, unlesse we be ashamed
of, and cast away with detestation all the instruments and monuments of it. Againe, whosoever partakesCartw. Catechis. p. 315. 316. in the sinnes of Rome, are also under the same curse: So that we cannot in any sort communicate with them in their errours, unlesse we will beare them company in their destruction also. These are their owne testimo∣nies, and we know they are true; and therefore in obedience to God, and care of our pretious soules, we have left our vn∣sanctified standings in their Assemblies, and through the Lords mercy to vs, doe walke in the holy order of his Gospell, although dayly sufferers for it, of manifould afflictions;Rev. 16. 15 Notwithstanding all these things offend us not: for we know whom we serve, and are most certaine, if we watch, and doe Christs worke still in his owne way. We shall have a sure reward for it at the resurrection of the just. And to speake now a word or two vnto such as are com∣monly stiled Professours of the Gospell; whether vncon∣formable, or not; The thing truely, which I most wish vnto them, is, tender consciences, and that the Lords house, and his ordinances may be deare to their soules, and that they may be able to deny the profitts, and pleasures of this life: for if these things be in them, and abound, my hope is, that by their judicious reading-over of this treatise, there will follow much reformation. When some men take a little Phisick, they have their health by it soone restored: but if the same, and a great deal more, be ministred to others of an other con∣stitution there followes not the like effect: It is even so in the cause of the soule, such as vnfeynedly desire to know the truth, and have a conscionable resolution towalke in it, doe receive much profitt by the fruitfull counsell, which is given
them, either by word or writing. But on the contrary: Those which seeke the truth with no better affection than PilateIoh. 17. did, neither purpose to obey the same more then did the dis∣sembling Hypocrites in Ieremie: Certainly good adviseChap. 42. & 43. given to them, is but as Pearles cast before swine and dogs; therefore my desire is, that the former sort may be viewers only of these lines; and to them I say, in the words of the A∣postle: consider what I say, and the Lord give under∣standing in all things. The following Principles (touching a true Church, Mi∣nistery, Worship, and Government, as also hew quite contrary hereto the English is,) are not taken out of our wri∣tings, but from the Nonconformists, yea even from the cheifest of them, which for learning, Zeale, judgement, holi∣nesse of life, &c. have ever held that cause. Moreover they are not barely affirmed, but sufficiently confirmed; and therefore it standeth every one vpon, to take them the more to heart; for else, not one, but many of themselves, even Prophets of their owne, will condemne them. I know, the devill vseth many meanes, to keepe people in cursed ignorance; and among other, one specially is, by dis∣swading them from hearing such persons, and reading such books, which might shew vnto them their evil & sin; and this he doth vnder a pretence of doeing good vnto them. Oh! (saith he he speaks thus by false mi∣nisters.) you must beware of false Prophets, and not hearken to that counsel, which causeth to erre, avoyd the companie of all deceivers, and not once looke into their books, &c. Now, by such Syren songs, the crafty Ser∣pent keepes them fast asleepe, till he have brought the poore soule into the pitt of endlesse perdition▪
We would thinke that man to be sencelesse, who (taking his enimies counsel) would shutt all his doores & windowes, in hope to get the more light into his house thereby. The devil dayly makes many thousand worse fooles in the world, in cau∣sing them to shutt close their eyes against the saving light of the Gospell, in exspectation that their soules by this meanes shalbe filled with the more wisedom and spiritual vnderstan∣ding. It is not my meaning, that any one should beleeveProv. 14. 15 things suddenly & rashly, but I would have him as Salomons counsell is, to looke wel to his going; and as we take gould by weight, Corne, Cloth, &c. by measure, so to receive the doctrines of every man by due examination; And this is onely the thing which I doe request of thee (good reader) whosoever thou art, be thou but pleased to put the Principles & infe∣rences here written, vpon their proof, & to hold that only fast, which (after good triall by the scriptures) thou findest to be good and it is sufficient, and I have my desire of thee to the full. One thing more I desire others to take notice of, namely, That I judge not my self bound so much, to justifie their Principles, as our Inferen∣ces from them. Jf therefore any shall deny them to be true, my purpose is to give place to such, whome it more nearly concerneth to write in the defence thereof.Yet we beleeve their prin∣ciples to be true, & is there be no Nonc. that will defend them, we will. But if any shall oppose vs in the Conclusions, I would have them (leaving all by matters) to follow the truth in love, without gall and bitternesse, that so things may come to a happy and speedy issue. It is wel said of a Heathen man,Magis veritas e∣lucet, quò▪ saepius ad manū ve∣nit. Senec. lib. de ira. the oftner truth com∣meth to hand, the more the l ght therof appeareth. I hope this wil∣be verified in the point now in controversie: for howsoever I doubt not, but we have said here enough, to justifie the matter undertaken; notwithstanding much more I could have alleged from their writings, concerning these things, but for the present I content my self herewith, till there be a further just and necessarie occasion given thereof. I. CANNE.
A MANVDVCTION To the following TREATISE. HOwbeit not any religion should be jud∣ged the lesse true, because few embrace it: neither the sooner to be followed, for the generall good liking and approbation which it hath among men: notwithstan∣ding having now so just and necessarie an occasion to vrge men to practise what they professe; I shall in∣deavour (by the grace of God) clearely to prove, that this our Waye is of the Apostolique primitive in∣stitution, even frō their Tenets, which walk contrary to it. Among other crimes charged upon Nonconformists, (as they are called) by the Prelates and their Favo∣rites, one chiefely is, that their Principles layd downe against the churches of England, doe lead vnto separa∣tion, and therefore if they were true to their owne grounds, they should not▪ communicate in the church as∣semblyes
of England. Many of the Bishops parasites heretofore have thus accused them, and of late one Doct. Burgesse most confidently maintaines the same against them. The which by Doct. Ames is vtterly denyed. Now which of these two Doctors in this thing have the truth, J hope it shall evidently be de∣clared in this treatise following. CHAPT. 1. DOctor Burgesse, having read, and sereouslie (as it seemes) examined the nature, & true consequence, of the many particular arguments, published to the world by the Nonconformists, against the great abuses in the ministerie, worship, and Church government ofPag. 5. England. Affirmed in his Rejoinder to D. Morton, that the same are the maine grounds of separation, and for his part, if he beleeved them to be true, he would (in all good conscience he protesteth) proclaime separationPag. 232. from idolatrous worship and worshippers before he slept, and not halt as these men (by their owne positions doe) betwixt idolatrie and religion: Doctor Ames in his new booke, intituled a fresh suit against Ceremonies denyeth that any such thing can be necessarilie con∣cluded from their principles: but I will here shew by evident and sound reasons, that the former assertion is true and certaine, and all the arguments brought by the other to the contrary, are of no weight or force to
make good his deniall thereof. And because I much desire, that the reader may well understand our points in dispute. I shall therefore (if God will) write in or∣der, of them. And first I will begin with their mi∣nisterie: and touching it will lay downe 4 things. 1. How the Nonconformists doe describe a true mi∣nistery. 2. How far that of England by their owne con∣fession differs from, and is contrary to it. 3. I will shew what inferences and conclusions doe necessarily follow upon it. 4. Answer the reasons, brought by Doct. Ames, in defence of their ministerie. NOt to speake of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists,Necessit. discip. 38, 73, 74. which were extraordinary ministeries, and therfore (as themselves say) are now wholy ceased. The ordinarie Offices perpetually belonging to all true churches, are onely these five, 1. a Pastor or Bishop, which is theOffer. cō∣fer. pag. 2. T. C. l. 1. p. 22. & l. 2 pa. 3. & p. 5. 15. Demonst. discip. 46▪ Mr. Bates 27. highest ordinarie Ecolesiasticall Officer in any true constitu∣ted visible church of Christ, and they are all equal by Gods institution: and are forbidden to exercise authoritie one over another; or exspect any such title as may im∣port it, or affect preeminence. His giftes, properties, and conditions in doctrine and manners, are distinctly set downe in scripture. He must be apt to teach & exhort, no yōg scholler, able to devide the word aright. Have a continuall care to watch over the soules of those, for whom he must give an accompt.
Discerne their diseases, and apply the word, according to every disease, and every time and occurrant. BrieflyInformat. frō Scott. p. 28, 29. Necessity discip. 71. Defen. ag. Slaund of Bridg. 127. Forme ec∣clesias. go∣vern. p. 123, 124, 125, &c. Demonst. discip. 53, 54. he must love, cherish, & defend his sheepe frō ravenous beasts, feed them in greene and wholesome pastures of the word, pray for them, and seale up to them the pro∣mises of God by the Sacraments. Secondly, the Lord hath ordained, that there should be in every congrega∣tion Doctors: which is an Office (they say) different from that of the Pastor; the reasons which they give, are these, 1. Because the Apostle doth so distinguish them one from another Rom. 12, 7, 8. Ephes. 4. 11. 2. Their giftes appeare to be divers, 1 Cor. 12. 8. 3. The Pastor is commaunded to take one course in teaching, the Doctor another, Rom. 12, 7, 8. 4. This distinguishing of them makes more for the building of the church, then to unite and makechem one. His office is to deliver sound and wholesome doctrine,Inform. frō Scott. pag. 30. convince the gainesayers, preserve knowledge, and build vpon the rock (which is Christ Iesus) gold, silver, and pre∣cious stones, &c. The third Officers, as they name them from the scriptures, are Governors or ruling Elders, who are toForme ec∣cles. Go∣vern. 128, 129, &c. Rom. 12, 8  Cor. 12, 28. 1 Tim. . 17. Mr. Bate 89, &c. look to the manners of the people, and to be assistant to the minister in Government. This Office was esta∣blished by the Apostles in all churches Act. 14. 23. and it serves to helpe forwarde the building thereof, 1 Cor. 12, 28. and without it the body can not be intyre, Rom. 12, 4, 8. To justify this office, many scriptures, reasons, & testimonies taken from the learned, are alleged by them, Ignat. ad Trall. Tertull. de Baptist. Ierom. cont. lucrf.
Ambr▪ upon 1 Tim. 5. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Bucer de reg.Demons. disc. p. 56. Chr. l. 1. Pet. Mar. vpon Rom. 12. Cal. instit. l. 4. c. 3. Sect. 8. These must be men of wisedome, knowledge and sound iudgment, sober, gentle, modest, loving, tempe∣rateInform. from Scot. p. 13. &c. Able to discerne, and all wayes vigilant, for the quietnes, wellfare, peace, purity and good order of the Church. Eccles. gover. p. 9. Fourthly there ought to be in every congregation certaine deacons endued with those qualities whi the word of God describeth. That is, they must  men of good report, indued also with the Holy Gho▪ grave, temperate, not covetous &c. To prove this office these Scriptures are alleged Act. 6. 1 Tim. 3. 6. Rom. 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Phil. 1. 1 And also these reasons for it, 1. the Lord takes care both for the bodies and soules of men, and therefore insti∣tuteth, such offices peculiarly serving for that purpose. 2. That the faythfull may be the more free from feare, and follow their owne callings diligently. 3. That the Church may be the more inriched with heavenly, and spirituall blessings, for she receives grace and gifts for the discharge of each calling. 4. That men may be stirred vp to help the poore the more willingly, considering that the Lord hath appointed a speciall office for that purpose. 5. That their should be no com∣plaints,M. Bates p. 117. but that all the poore might be comforted against their poverty, and wants. Their office onely consisteth in receiving the liberality of the saints, and distributing the same vnto the necessity of the poore: and howsoever the English booke of ordering Preists,
Answ. to Bancr. ser. p. 14. T. C. l. 1. 190. 2. Admo. p. 61. &c. Makes this a degree of the ministery, yet the Non∣conformists, professe that that practice is naught and vnlawfull, and the deacons office is (not to medle with the word and sacraments but) onely to collect the be∣nevolence of the faithfull, and faithfully to distribute the same, and to prove this, they render these reasons.T. C. l. 1. p 190. disc. Eccles. 119 Infor. Scott. 31▪ demonst. discip. 61. 62. &c. 1. By the Apostles institution these were onely to attend vpon the provision for the poore. Act. 6. 4. The Scripture maketh it an ordinary & distinct office  others in the Church, and not to be mingled with any other. Rom. 12. 8. 3. No man can in any tollerable measure discharge the office of a minister, and deacon also. Act. 6. 2. 4. The ministeries of the word be perfect without it. They have also to prove this thing, the learned generally on their side. Concill. constant. cap. 16. Chrisost. vpon Act. 6. Bulling. decad. 5. ser. 2. Buc. de reg. Christ. 14. Pet. Mar. Rom. 12. Cal. inst▪ l. 4. cap. 3. sect. 9. Beza. confess. cap. 5. sect. 23. Sixtly widowes, or deaconesses whose proper office is to looke to the weake, impotent, and poore strangers, and specially to helpe such who in their sick∣nessesD. Chat. Rom. 12, p. 64. M. Bates. p. 66. have neither friends nor kins folkes to admini∣ster vnto them. This office is proved of them by these Scriptures. 1. Tim. 5. Rom. 12. 8. Rom. 16. The grounds or reasons, which they bring for it are these. 1. Wisedom, to imploy such, as being to receive maintainance, from the church, are fit for nothing but this, and fittest for this. 2. That none may lack any thing for their good and preservation. 3. That men may be the rather incouraged to goe about the chur∣ches
businesses, having such to attend them. TheseDef. of dis. p. 59. 68. Def. coun. 124. Eccle. Gov. p. 7. are the necessarie and onely ordinarie functions, and offices which our saviour hath ordained in his church, vnto the due administration whereof, he hath promi∣sed his blessing to the end of the world, and these are perpetuall and to continue for ever, and beside these it is vnlawfull, for men (following the devises of their owne braine) to institute and ordaine any in the Churches of God. Now the election and ordina∣tionAdmon. 1. p. 3. Off. of confer, p. 2. of these officers, must (as they say) necessarily  made, by the free choyse of the congregation wherein they are to administer: The Elders going before, the rest are to manifest either by some outward token, or else by their silence, their allowance, if they like of the action, or gainesaying, if they judge it not just and vpright. Yea not onely may they gainesay it: But ifNecessit. Discip. 28. there be just cause of dislike make it altogether voyd and of none effect, vntill at the last a meet one be chosen, by the authority and voyces of the Elders, and allowed of by the generall consent and approba∣tion of the rest of Church. And this was, the Churches continuall practice inT. C. l. 2. p. 1. 193. Eccles. disc. 40. first book discip. 27. 29. M. Bates. 66. Demonst. Discip. 24. 25. &c. the time of the Apostles, and therefore an ordinance of God to be followed for ever. Moreover the thing appertaineth vnto all: And it is a course most effectuall to bring the people to obedience, when they shall see him teach or rule, whom they themselves haue cho∣sen. Yea this procureth greatest reverence of the peo∣ple to their officers. It is also affirmed that this man∣ner of chusing and making officers, continued so long
T. C. l. r. p. 59. in the Churches of God, as there was any light of the knowledge of him, so that indeed it ought to be per∣petuall,Forme Chur. Gou. p. 40. and vnchangeable, and may not at any hand either by Church, or Magistrate be altered: For it is a greater wronge to haue any Ecclesiasticall officers forced upon a people against their will, then if theyEng. Pu∣tan. p. 6, 7. should force vpon men wives, or vpon women hus∣bands against their will and liking: Here also generall counsels and many old and new writers are brought∣in by the Nonconfor. to speake for them in this thing. Concil. Nicene Test. Theo. Conc. Const. test. tripart. hist. l▪ 9. c. 14. Concil. Carth. can. 1. Con. Toletan. test. dist. 50: Concil. Gabil. Can. 10. Cyprian. l. 1. Ep. 3. Amb. Epist. 82. Ierom. ad Ruffin. Basil. Epist. 58. And whosoever condemnes the making of ministers, after this sort what doe they else, but open their mouths against God and against the truth. Defence of admon. p. 2. T. C. l. 2. p. 1, p. 174 Eccles. dis. 35. D. Am. cas. cons. l. 4, c. 25. Inform. Scott. 26. Ioh. 10. 1, 2 Moreover every officer in the church must be or∣dained by imposition of hands of the Eldership, the whole Church joyning with them in fasting and prayer; and without a lawfull calling no one must presume to exer∣cise any spirituall function, or ministery, nor dare to enter in any other way, then by the doore. A notable Example for this purpose, is rehearsed by Moyses in Numb. 16. Whereby it seemeth, that the Lord meant to ratifie the Law of a necessity of a true vocation for ever. For there we see, that neither the heavens could abide to see, nor the earth beare so shamelesse boldnesse, but the one melting consumed
with fyer, such as without a calling would take vpon them the presthood, and the earth gapeping, opened it selfe and swallowed them vp alive, which ought to be a lesson to vs for euer, that no man presume to pervertNecessit. disc. 10, 11, &c. T. C. l. 1. 54, 63, or alter that order which God hath established in his Church, nor arrogate to himselfe that honor which he hath by no right and lawfull calling obtained: &c. Moreover none must be ordained vnto any officeT. C. l. 1, 61, Neces. dis. 19, Demonst, dis. p. 16, in the Church, vntill there be such a place voyd for him, as is meet, and fitt: for as the Apostles did in planting of Churches, so must it be don in the building thereof for ever: but they ordained neither Pastor., Teacher, Eder, nor deacon, but to some certaine congregation, that had present vse and need thereof. A roving andTabl. div. Rea. in Camb. demo. id. vnsettled ministrie therefore, is a new and false ministerie, meerely, instituted by men. And never read of to be practi∣sed, but by idolaters. Iudg. 17. 8. Againe great care must be taken, before consent be given, vnto any calling in the Church, that it appeare by sufficient trial, and due examination, that the per∣son is qualified with those gifts which the word ofEccle. dis. foll. 44, T. C. l. 2. p. 1, p. 368, Tit. 1, 9, Hos. 4, 6▪ God requireth, in one of that place: For else there will follow a manifest breach of Gods commaunde∣ment: Besides, God will not owne his ministery, thirdly, if he want abilityes, he cannot doe the things required of him. As to divide the word aright, espy theDemons. dis. p. 35, 36. enimy, and give warning a forehand to the people how to resist him: But contrarywise will lead himselfe and his people into hel fyer. The truth is, no vnskillfull or vnlearned man, may be called to the steering of this
ces. of disc. pa. 47. 6. helme, vnlesse we would have the shipp not onely to be in daunger, but willing, to runne it vpon the rockes. These officers chosen, and made as aforesayd: ought to execute the office committed vnto them, with allT. C. l. 1, p 65. faithfull diligence, and consequently must be conti∣nually, resident vpon their charge. This later position, to wit, the necessity of perpetuall residence, & the vnlaw∣fulnes of Nonresidence, is confirmed of them by goodDem. disc. p. 20. 21. D. Tayl. Tit. 3, 11, Dr. willet 1. Sam. 14, 28▪ reasons. 1. A minister is a sheepheard and his charge a flock, now a sheepheard hath a flock to feed it conti∣nually. 2. Wheresoever God placeth a man, there is dayly need of his labour and care. 3. The people are in daunger of harme if they be not watched over day and night. 4. The Church requireth an officers resi∣decy with her as a duty of him. 5. If they do otherwise, they cannot give their people a good example, neither will there be love, and familiarity between them. &c. Breifly, they hold it, as great an injurie, to force a con∣gregation, or Church, to miantaine as their Pastor, with tiths and such like donations, that person, which either is not able to instruct them, or that refuseth inEng. puri. 20, 21, his own person ordinarily to doe it, as to force a man to maintaine one for his wife, that either is not a wo∣man, or that refuseth in her owne person to doe theDem. disc. p. 21. duties of a wife vnto him. And thus much for the first point, wherein we and they in iudgement doe accord, but our practise as yet is contrary each to other.
SECTION. II. NOw it followes that we truely relate, the present state of the English ministery, how far it disagreeth,Defene. Godly minist. ag. Bridg▪ 2. pref. adm. & p. 1, 27, 47. (by their owne Testimonies) in every particular thing from the positions, before named, & touching it in ge∣nerall, they affirme confidently, that it is a base mini∣sterie which God never erected in his Church, but came wholy from the Pope, for say they, not onely is the calling of the Hierarchie, but also their dependent offices all vnlawfull andSyons plea. 3, Antichristian, observe the largnesse of their speach, how they comprehend, and so consequently here cōdemn all their Ecclesiasticall functions▪ for indeed they take all their originall of one roote, namely the Praelarey, from it I say, they have their ryse, and by it onely they administer vnto the people. And whosoever shall deny this, may with as much reason, deny that fyre is hott, the sea salt, the sunne shines. &c. But let us heare what reasons they give, to prove their ministery false and Antichristian; and every way contrary to that true ministery, of which we have be∣fore spoken; First, they say, that the Church of Eng∣land, Wanteth her Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, and Elders: For which cause she hangeth downe her head, for heavinesse; her eyes be bleared with teares; her cheekes be defiled with the water of her eyes, her heart is heavy with sorrow, her bones are withered with drynesse, her whole body is clothedDoct. Chat. on Rom. 12. 33. with sackcloth, shee lyeth in caves and dens, being ashamed to shew her face, haveing so deformed and maimed a body; If
her case and state be so, she hath reason enough to greive: For to want these true officers, and to have counterfeits placed in their stead, is one of the heaviest and fearfullest miseries, that can possibly befall anyEsa. 3. people. Yet this thing is affirmed by others of them also. Of which more hereafter. Bright. Rev. 3. p. 168. Chr. Mar. p. 41. Admon. p. 2. Sol∣dier. Bar. M. Bates pag. 60. Now concerning elections & ordinations. In these their church standeth vnder a Romish regiment, and hath not left Babylon, but partaketh of her sinnes, in the choyse of Ministers. For neither are their Ministers proved, ele∣cted, called, or ordayned, according to Gods word: But their entrance into the ministery is, by a Popish and vnlawfull vo∣cation, strange from the scriptures, and never heard of in the primitive church. All authority is give into the hands of the Prelates alone, & their booke of ordination, wher∣byAdm. p. 14 Act. 13. 45 & 14, 23. Def. of Godly mi. ag. Br. 124. they make Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, is against the very forme of the ordination of the ministery, pre∣scribed in the scriptures; and nothing else but a thing word for word, taken out of the Popes Pontificall, wherein he sheweth himselfe to be Antichrist most lively. It will not be amisse if I here briefly relate, in what manner, and forme, their Bishops make ministers, as the Nonconformists doe describe it. When the time (say they) of giveing orders draweth neere, the B. Bull is sett upon the Church doore, to give warning, rhat if any be minded to receive orders, that he repaire to the Prelate at such a time and place. Now this Bull is in latin, so that the people can not understand the sound of the trumpet, neither indeed are they desired to come, and object against the persons to be ordained, &c. When
the day of ordination is com, after an exhortation made, and the communion celebrated, the Epistle & Gospell read, and the Hymne veni creator sung, or sayd, the Arch∣deacon presents to the B. all those that are to take on the order of Priesthood that day, with these words, Reve∣rend Father in Christ, I present to you the persons here pre∣sent, to be admitted to the order of Priesthood. Then after some demaunds and answeres, of the B. and the other, who are to be admitted, he demaundeth of the people, who are present there, if they know any impediment, which may hinder any of these present to be admit∣ted, to the order of Priesthood, which is a manifcst mockage. For it may be, that none there present either heard or saw any of them, or all of them before that day, &c. Then after the oath of the Kengs supremacie is taken, there followes an exhortation again, with other demaunds and answeres. After this the people, who are present, are desired secretly to commend the busi∣nesse to God: For which cause they are all silent for a little space. This don, the B. readeth a prayer, which beeing finished, they who are to be ordained, sitting on their knees at the Bishops feet; the Bishop and the rest of the Priests, who are present, lay handes severally up∣on the heads of every one of them, the B. uttering these words, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sinnes thou dost forgive▪ y are forgiven, & whose sinnes thou dost retaine, they are retained, and be thou a faithfull dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments in the name of the Father, &c. Thus he commaundeth the ordained to receive the Holy Ghost, as our Lord & Maister did.
Now as well may they imitate his breathing, as to vsurpe these words. Is any of their curats after the pronouncing of these words either the holyer or more apt to teach: And whereas he puts a Bible into their hands, he might rather put their service booke: for either they are ignorant and cannot preach, or if they can, yet may not, till they procure by mony a li∣cenceAlt. dam. 165. from them. When all this is don the company sing the creed, and receive the communion together. But it must here be observed that they ordaine not any man wholy at once to the office of preisthood: but lead him by degrees vp to the pulpit: for they must first be deacons (as they call it) for a yeare, that is to say, they must receive authority to say prayers, read the Scriptures: but in no wise administer the sacraments, or preach, without further licence: then at last he isNecel. dis. p. 81. Against Brid. 125. Def. disc. 133. Id. p. 33. Admo. 15. Alt. d. 161. Necessit. discip p. 20. Eccles. Gov. 127. made a full minister. This practise is professedly affir∣med of the Nonconformists, to be a vaine invention of mans braine, taken from the manner of Popish orders, and cleare against the expresse appointment of the Scriptures. Moreover, they will make mini∣sters in their Galleries and Cloysters at their plea∣sure; give orders to whome, & to how many they list, without any triall, either of their judgment in Reli∣gion, or of their honestly in conversation: and some∣time make 60, 80, or a 100 at a clap, whereof o one is called or desired to any particular congregation, and when they have done, send them abroade as rogues, vagaboundes, or maisterlesse servants, into the country, giveing them their bull to preach in others mens char∣ges
where they list, or else get benefices by freindship, mony, flattery, where they cā catch them, or if this faile, they may goe vp & downe like beggars, & fall into ma∣ny vile follies or sett vp bils (as many have don) at Pauls, the Royall exchange & such like publick places, to see if they can heare of some good master, that will hyre them, and vse their labour, or to conclude, tary in their colledge to lead the lives of loytering losels so long as they live. What a horrible and wicked doing is this! Indeed such times are spoken of in the stories of the Iudges, when Ionathan the Levite, wanting a high place and an Altar, went roving vp and downe to let out his service to any that would hyre him. But it is added in the same place, that there was no King in Israel O Not without cause may they say (if these things be true) that all reformed Churches blush, and are a∣shamedBright. Reve. 3. 181. of them. Yea and I am perswaded that if they were fully and truely informed hereof, they would no more communicate with their ministery, then they doe with that of Rome: For if they did, it would be certainly their great sin, seeing both of them appeare to be false and vnlawfull. Thou hast heard (reader) who makes their ministers: and allso how they are made: now in the next place, thou shall heare what they say touching their gifts, and qualificatiōs & if thou wilt in this beleive the Noncon∣formists:2. Admo. p. 47. Sold. Barw. Church Polic. 236. 237. Boyes and sencelesse asses are their common mini∣sters for the most part. yea notorious idolaters, halting hypo∣crites, openly perjured persons, idle bellied Epicures, manifest Apostates, old munks and friars, drunkards,
Abstr. 83. ideots, idols, such as know not a B. from abattle dore: or the Lords prayer from the articles of faith, nor how many sacraments there are: For he that will weare a surplesse, a cloake with sleeves, a gowne, a cap, a tippet (ornaments fitt enough for such deformed coxcombs), read a gospel, Church women, bid fasting dayes and holy dayes, Prophane the sacramēts, pray at the buriall of the dead, pronounce a curse against sinners vpon Ashwensd∣day and at no time else, ordaine a new sacrament of the crosse in the Prophanation of Baptisime, visit the sicke with a wafer cake, and a wine bottle, readExhortat. Gover. Wal. 42. homilies, pray for the prosperity of theeves, pirats, murderers, yea a Pope, a Cardinal, an Archbishop, a Lord B. or any other enimy of God and his Church: he is a creature fitt enough to receive their orders, and by his outward calling is bound to doe no more. There are besides these, others of them which wit∣nesseNeces. dis. p. 81. the same, to make ministers according to their fa∣shion, is nothing else but to make a service sayer, or a readerBrigt. Re. 3. p. 187. of prayers out of a booke, so that a starke foole, or an arrant knave, may fulfill all the conditions which they require ofPrefa. p. 3. him. It is certaine sayth Mr. Gilby, he that will vse An∣tichrists ragges, may be made an English Priest, be he never such a dolt or villaine. The truth is the conditiō of those men, whome the Prelates for the most part thrust into their ministerie, is so contemptible and base, as they affirme, that Ieroboom never made worse PriestsEccles. Gover. 127 of the refuse of the people to serve his goulden Calves. Nay they say more, If the devill did make and send forth ministers, he could not finde worse men upon
the earth: and if he would have worse, he must bringDial. str. Ch. p. 82. them out of hel. Mr. Cartwright sayth of a certainty, that all the Ecclesiasticall histories extant, are not able to fur∣nish vs of so many vnworthy ministers, chosen by all the churches throughout the world, which have beene since the A∣postles time, as have swarmed these few yeares, out of the Pa∣laces (as out of the Troian horse) of that small number of Bbs, which are in England▪ &c. and there is as much diffe∣rence betweene them and the ministers, chosen in other con∣gregations2. Rep. 1. p. 537. 148. beyond the sea, as betweene gold and copper, or any other refuse mettal. I have not yet declared what the Nonconformists write, touching the most ungodly courses, used by their Priests, to procure benefices, and how extreamely they tyrannise over the poore people, and will be offi∣cers to them, though they consēt not unto it, nay how∣beit they be wholy against it, & have good reasō for it, yet if the Patron (whether Popish prophane or religi∣ousPreface dioc. T. Fres. suit. l. 2. p. 412. all is one) & the Bishop doe accord in the businesse: they must necessarily put their necks under the yoak of this wicked usurper, or remove their dwelling, though it be to their utter undoing: beside the congregation knowes not, what the conversation is of him, who by the arme of flesh is forced upon them, neither his fitt∣nesse in gifts for the ministery: This cannot be denyedAssertion. Christ. Ch. pol. p. 252. (say they) that there is not any one man or woman amongst 40, in any one Parish among 40, that can tell that ever he, or she, did see, or heare of the minister appointed, & sent by the Ordinary to be parson, or vicar of the Parish vacant, before such time as he or shee did heare, or see the Parish Clarke
t trudge with the Church do kee to let in the Sxtin, to ring the bells for the sayd parson or vicars induction, and reall possession. Oh intollerable bondage! that men should be thus bought and sould like beasts; and yet there is little hope of reformation, in regard too many will rather submitt to those slaughterous & in∣humane courses, then seeke to redeem their pretious liberty, by good and lawfull meanes. And for that base and shamefull beggerinesse, which they use to gett benifices, it cannot be better shewed, then Mr. Brightman hath truly done it. Thus he writes▪ Vpon the Apoc. ch. 3. p. 181. Edition. 3. Let vs take a view and make a generall muster as it were of the whole Cleargie, and if you will let vs begin at the basest vnder lings. The Curates, as they cal them are both in very deed, and in all mens account a company of beggarly fellowes▪ In whom a man may see that veri∣fyed, which was threatned against the family of Eli men bowing themselves to the ground for a pecee of silver and a morsell of bread, and craving to bee put into one of the Priests offices, that hee may have a snappe at a crust of bread▪ 1. Sa. 3. 36. Now for the rest, those that by meanes of their more full purses walke more lustily, such as wee call sturdy beggars, what running vp and down is there among them, what bri∣bing what importunate and impudent begging▪ what flatte∣ring offers do they make of all their obeisance▪ and all duetifull complements, that they may come by these Ecclesiasticall promotions? You may see many of them that post vp to the Court, or to the house of the right honourable. The Lord keeper of the great Seale: For ▪these two places are like
the beautifull Gate of Salomons Temple, Act. 3. 2. Men come in by this way apace, thicke and threefold, and they are in great hope to carry away some good releife. Others there are that become followers of Noble men and Peers of the Land, whose Chaplines they become, either hou∣should, or retayners, as I may call them, that live vnder their potection; for what end trow ye? Even for this and no other, that assoone as any Benefice, as they call it, shall fall voyd, they might enioy it by their Lords gift. And doth not this I pray ye soeme to be an honest way to get a Church∣living, no such base and beggarly one, as you speake of? But is not this currying of favour meere beggary? Is it any whit a lesseiltsy thing, to come to a Rectory, that is of Gods appoint∣mēt, by favour, then by money? If wee will iudge indifferently, it is all one fault to creepe inc, whither it bee by bribing and Symony, or by fawning and flattery. The rest of the rout in the Country are diligent in attending the common sort of Patrones; whose thresholds they by watching at, whose wyves they brave and court as if they were their Mistresses, whose children they cogge with, whose servants they allure with faire words and promises to bee their Spokesmen, and in every place and point they play the partes of miserable beggers. Some there are that begg more craftily; like to those that sit in the high wayes or in places where two wayes meete, and there they offer pilled roddes to passengers, to get a peece of money therewith, as it were a penniworth for a peny: So do these men make way for their suits, by large giving of money in hand, or els by com∣pacting to give some of their yearely Tithes for a gratifica∣tion▪ But some man will say▪ all this is not the corruption
of lawes, but the corruptnes of men. Nay surely, as long as that manner of conferring Ecclesiasticall charges taketh place, which hath been in vse among vs to this day, there can bee no remedy applyed to cure or prevent, this beggerlines. Doe wee not sufficiently finde it to bee true in experience? In the late Parliament, lawes were enacted severely against it; but what came of that? Nothing truely; but that it made men deale more closely and cunningly to cosen the law. Wee must not think to do any good with our laws, where Christes laws are not observed, But to proceede, when once the living is by beggery obtayned from the Pa∣trone, what a deale of begging worke is there to come, for those Sir Iohn Lack-latines, that Institution might bee had from the B b. Here hee must supplicate, not onely to the right reverend Lord B b; but to Master Examiner, to my Lords Grome of his Chamber, his Register, the yeoman of his Buttery and Larder, yea the meanest that belongeth to him. Not that want of latin and learning will keepe him from entrance into his benefice, but that hee that hath neede of more favour for dispatch, or speach with my Lord, or the like, must fee the servantes the better, whose gaine cometh trowling in this way. There is no Castle so defenced, which a latin-lesse Asse laden with golden metall may not scale and conquer. Neither is there any almost so vnfit that hath the repulse, but by what engines hee prevay∣leth, let them looke to it. The like is the condition of Prebendaries, Archdeacons and Deanes, Nay are the Lord Bishops themselves cleare of this base beggery? What meaneth then that continuall haunting of the Court, and banging vpon the Nobles?
Why doe they not stay and wayte, till they bee sent for? Yea why are they not rather pulled away from their studyes against their wills? Nay rather if a man should appeale to their consciences, whither are not some of those fat demeasnes of their Bishopricks let out of their own accord, to such as they seeke and sue to, that they might farme and hire them, or els are there not other large bribes covenanted to bee given to such as shall stand them in stead, for attayning of these dignities? But are they onely thus beggerlike in their ambitious suing for theyr promotions? Nay truely; Some of them are grown so extreemly base this way, that if they be to change their Sea, they pay not their first fruites, but by raking together in a filthy fashion an almes from the poore Vicars, which yet must go vnder the name of a Benevo∣lence to make a cleanly cloake withall. Pref. dioc▪ Tri. Thus (reader) thou seest how wickedly and base∣ly they come buy benefices, and yet thou hast not heard of all their abomination▪ For the Nonconformists will tell thee further: that after they have gotten one liveing, they will take another if they can: yea, & in spight too of that congregation, to which they were first, and are still personally tyed; And after all this they may beDefen. Godl. mi∣nister ag▪ Brid. p. 5. Nonresidents, abiding or preaching at none of their ma∣ny liveings. But forsake their Flocks, moneths, yeares, yea sometime for ever, and leave them to hyrelings & unlearned men. Yea they may chop and change, sel, & buy like marchants, so they doe it closely; which is suchSo they are in Rev. 18, 11. 12. an abomination, as Rome & Trent condemneth, and hell it selfe will scarse defend. And as the people are in bon∣dage thus to their ministers, so they are intollerably to
Def, disci. 92. the Prelates. For all power and authority is taken from them, as that they may not preach to their people except they have their licence; and if they have that,Alt▪ dam. 175. yet their preaching is hedged in with penalties, injunc∣tions, caveats, canons, advertisments, that they may not deliver the whole counsell of God. Besides, they can not receive the best of their congregation to communion, if he be censured in the spirituall courts: though it be but for not paying of sixpence be the man otherwise never so innocent, nor keepe one from the commu∣nion, that is not presented in those courts, or beeing presented, is for mony absolved though he benever soDef. Pet. for Refor. p. 206. scandalous. Thus are they the Chancllours and Officials slaves to doe what they commaund them: If not they thēselvs must hurry up presētly to their spirituall court, there to stand with cap in hand, not onely before a B. but before his Vassalls, to be rayled on many times at their pleasure, to be censured, suspended, and deprived, for not observing some of those Canons, which were of purpose framed for snares▪ when fart more ancient & honest Canons are every day broken by these judges themselves for lucre sake: as in the making of viopian ministers, who have no people to minister unto, in their holding of commendams, in their taking of monyPref. dio. Tri. even to extortion for orders, and institutions, in their y∣mony as well by giveing, as by taking▪ and in all their idle, covetuous, and ambitions pompe. I omitt heere to relate the innumerable prophane scoffes, and re∣prochfull names, given (as they say) by their Prelates, to their gravest Ministers, when they are brought be∣fore
them, for they shall be called asses eese, fooles, dolts princock boyes▪ beardlesse bayes yeaster dayes bayes, new com out of▪ the shel, &c. And after much rayling in this sort silenced▪ and put out of their meanes, to the utter un∣doing of themselves, their wvies, children, and others. As I read these things in their writing, I thought up∣on the great slavery of the Iewes under the Philistins,1 Sam. 13 22. when there was not a sword found amongst them in the day of battle. I confesse in this their condition & case was miserable & bad: but alas, both the ministers and people of the Church of England (as these men report) are in a case ten thousand times worse▪ For the Prelates▪ under whose Antichristian bondage they are have quite unfurnished them of the chieffest weapons, needfull for the Lords battle▪ yea▪ and have so fast tyed them up, with their▪ Romish Canons Articles, excommunications, imprisonments▪ &c. that they can not or at least dare not give a blow against their spiritual enimies▪ though there be a necessity thereof and theire soules other∣wise are likely to perish▪ Now I wish that these people were senceable of these things and that Gods house & his ordinances were deare to their soules▪ then doubt∣lesse they would breake asunder those chaines of un∣righteousnesse: shke Antichrist of, and make any shift▪ to come out of Babylon, for to enjoy that light and liberty, which Christ hath so dearely purchased, with his precious blood. Neces. dis. p. 86▪ But to the point in hand. By the former passages it plainely appeares, that the reformists not without great cause, have made humble suites unto Princes, & Parlia∣ments,
for a lawfull ministery to be established, throughout the realme, and that their present ministery mought vtterly be abolished, with the rest of Romish abominations; For2 Admon. Exhort. to Bish. and their Clearg. P. 27. not onely have they indited their Cleargy, to be fol∣lowers of Antichrist, and avouched their ministerie to be from the Pope: But also they prove this (as we have shewed from their writings) by infallible and undeni∣able reasons; so that every upright & sincere person (if he well understand what they say) must necessarily consent unto it. I could produce many others of them, which affirm the same thing, but it needs not, seeing enough hereof hath beene allready spoken. Notwithstanding it can∣not be amisse to sett downe the words of one more: because the Author was a Nonconformist of note: gene∣rally well beloved, and not undeservedly: now thus he sayth, What a miserable pickle are our ministers in, when they are vrged to give an account of their calling: to a Pa∣pist indeed they can give a shifting answer, that they have or∣dination from Bishops, which Bishops were ordained by other Bishops, and they or their ordayners by Popish Bishops, this in part may stop the mouth of a Papist: But let a Protestant, which doubteth of these matters, move the question: & what then will they say? if they fly to Popish Bishops, as they are Bi∣shops, then let them goe no longer masked vnder the name of Protestants: If they alledge succession by them from the A∣postles, then to (say nothing of the appropriating of this suc∣cession vnto the Popes chaire, in whose name, and by whose authority our English Bishops did all things in times past) then I say they must take a great time for the satisfying of a
poore man concerning this question, and for the justifying of their station: For vntill that out of good records they can shew a perpetuall succession from the Apostles vnto their Diocesan, which ordained them, and vntill they can make the poore man, which doubteth perceive the truth and certainty of these records (which I wisse they will doe at leasure) theyPreface Dioces. Trial. can never make that succession appeare. If they fly to the Kings authority, the King himselfe will forsake them, and deny that he taketh vpon him, to make or call ministers. If to the present Bishops and Archbishops, alas! they are as farre to seeke as the other. The effect of his speach is: that those which receive their ministerie from the Prelates (as all doe in the church of England) they can not any way justifie the same to be lawfull; For howso∣ever they may say, this or that in the defence of it: not∣withstanding, it is all either falshood or vanitie, which they say, and herein doe wholy deceive them∣selves, and every one that beleeveth them. And thus much in generall be spoken concerning the second point; namely, the differences manifested by the Nonconformists, betweene a true ministerie, and the mi∣nisterie of England; as also their judgment of it, that it is Popish & false, and the many reasons, which they shew to prove the same. Now in this we and they doe al∣so accord, and our difference stands onely in practice; For they thinke (as it seemes) that a people may com∣municate lawfully in a false ministery: But our judge∣ment and practice is otherwise, both which I under∣take here to prove. 1 by scripture. 2 by reasons. 3 by the testimony of the Learned: And so we come to the
third point, which is to lay downe our inferences & con∣clusions, which necessarily doe follow upon their principles, to wit, that our seperation from their ministery is (by their owne grounds) warrantable and ho∣ly; the same beeing (as they themselves acknowledge) false and Antichristian. SECTION. III. ANd first of the Scriptures. To communicate in a false ministery, is certainly a breach of the second commaundement. For what doe they, but indeed sett vp an idoll, yea and bow downe vnto it, which serve God in, and by, a devised or vsurped ministerie. In Song. 1. 7. 8. The faithfull intreat Christ to be shewed where he, by his ministery, with his spirit, word, seales, censures, &c. feedeth his flock, that there they might place themselves for instruction and government, and not turne aside to the flocks of his companions, that is, theMatth. 24. 5 24. congregations of false Christs and false Prophets, which come in his name saying, I am Christ and deceive many:Hos. 4. 17. see Iunius on the place. Againe. Ephraim is joyned to idols, what were they? among other, the new Preists which Ieroboam, ordai∣ned for the high places: what followes? let him alone, that is, have no communiō with him either in his falseIer▪ 23. 6. Pro. 5. 3. Mat. 7. 15. Ioh. 10. 4. 5. Phil. 32. ministerie, or other idolatrie. Often do the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, forbid men to heare those which thrust themselves into ministeriall offices not beeing sent of God and from the Church. Secondly the reasons. 1. To communicate in a false
ministery is to doe a vaine worship: and therefore vnacceptable altogether to the Lord. 2. In this, menIoh. 4. 23. Rom. 12. 1. 2. Numb. 10. Psa. 50. 18. Tim. 5. 22. doe abet the party in his sin, and so make it their owne by imputation, and inwrap themselves in the same guilt with the offender. 3. God hath promised no blessing to his word but in his owne ordinance, though I confesse he may, yea and doth grant oft times that, through his infinite goodnesse, which no man can chalendge by an ordinary promise. 4. To doeMat. 28. 20. Luk. 10. 16▪ 2. The. 2. 2. 3. 4. Rea. 13. & 14. 9. 12. & 18. 4. otherwise, is to rebel greivously against the Lord, and to vphold what in vs lyeth that which the Lord will consume, therefore as no good subject should assist or communicate with any person in the administra∣tion of civil justice to the Kings subjects (no not though he administred the same never so legally, justly, impartially) except the same person had a commission from the King so to doe: so neither ought the sub∣jects of Christs Kingdome, to partake with any person whatsoever in the dispensation of any spirituall ordi∣nance (though in it selfe never so holy) without suffi∣cient warrant and commission from the most absolute and sovereigne King of his Church Christ Iesus. 5. Such as have spirituall communion in a false ministery, doe embrace the bosome of a stranger, and so committ spiri∣tuall whoredome against the Lord. 6. Christ settethIoh. 10. 5. it downe as a property of his sheepe to be observed, that they follow not strangers, but flee from them, for that they know not their voyce. Thirdly, the Learned generally doe affirme this same thing. Pars in his Commentary upon Mathew,
Chap. 7. 15 sayth: that all those without doubt, are to be taken for de∣ceivers, who take vpon them the office of teaching without a true calling; and a little after he sayth, that so much being discovered: a Christian must shutt his care against them, and fly from them as from wolves. Musculus on the place sayth the like: One note of a false Prophet is, that he comes, not beeing lawfully called and sent, and whereas Christ bidds us to beware of such, he meanes, sayth he, that we should not heare them, but avoyd them as most certaineIn Pro. 10. 20. plagues. Cope, a learned minister in France, speaketh as much: and gives this reason for it, because they destroy both bodies and soules of as many as either beleeve or reve∣rence them. And thus much is acknowledged of theRhemist Tost. Ioh. 10. An. 1. Papists; For thus they write, whosoever taketh vpon him to preach without a lawfull sending, breaketh in by force or fa∣vour of men, and by humane Lawes, he is a theef and a mur∣derer.2 Ioh. 10. And how men are to walke towards them, they shew in another place of that booke: In matter of religion, in praying, reading their bookes, hearing their ser∣mons presence as their service, partaking of their Sacra∣ments, and all other communicating with them in spirituall things, is a great damnable sinne to deale with them. And heere it is to be observed, that Mr. Cartwright on this place in Answere to the Rhem. Test. grants all this to be true. Exhort. Gover. W. p. 46. Admon. p. 27. Other Testimonies I could alleage, but it needs not; For the Nonconformists affirme as much: We may not (say they) adventure to goe vnto him for those things, which he hath no commission to deliver. Another sayth, that whosoever preacheth by an unlawfull calling:
ought not to be heard, although he speaketh the truth, no more then the devill was to be suffered, although he professed Christ. As the firmenesse of the seale, standeth not in the print or forme it maketh: but specially that it be sett on by one that hath authority therevnto: So much more it is in the case of the Sacraments: for to receive the same in a false ministery, is to deny Gods ministery, and to give the glory ofNote. it there, where he hath not given it: and to deprive our selves of this comfort; that our hearts may say: Gods solemneFenner Doct. upō the Sacra▪ p. 127. voyce speaketh, his solemne hand offereth and giveth, which is here the lively stay of our fayth. By this it appeareth, that the daunger is marvelous great, to communicate in a false ministery, a man would pull a sore punishment upon his head, if he should have a hand to putt by a Princes lawfull officer (whether Iudge, Mayor, Bayliefe, &c.) and sett up a re∣bel in the roome thereof, and come to him for justice. He that receives in a false ministery denies Gods ministe∣ry, sayth the former Author; And so puts a traitor in his place, and takes the holy things from the handes of a traitor, which is a fearfull transgression, and surely will procure extreame wrath, without true and sound re∣pentance. From all that hath beene before spoken, we may here frame this Argument. None may heare or joyn in spirituall communion with that ministery, which hath not a true vocation and calling: by e∣lection, approbation, and ordination of that faithfull people, where he is to administer. But the present ministery of the ecclesiasticall assemblies of England hath not a true voca∣tion and calling, by election, approbation, and ordination of a
faithfull people, where they administer. Therefore none may hear or joyne in spirituall communion, with the present mi∣nisterie of the Ecclesiasticall assemblies of England. Which of the propositions the Nonconformists will deny I know not: but sure I am, they are both Theirs: Howbeit (it may be) they doe not so well weigh their owne principles, as they should; And hence it is, that their practice is not strictly answereable to their pro∣fession, and therefore doe give just occasion (I speake it with greife) unto the Prelates and their Parasites, to insinuate against them, hypocriticall ends, in condem∣ning so greivously the ministery, worship & government of the English Church, and yet to partake in the knowne evills and abuses thereof. But for my part I am other∣wise minded then the Bishops in this thing, and doe thinke, that they doe of conscience condemne the state of that Church: But doe not maturely consider the re∣sponsive conclusions, which follow upon their prin∣ciples. For which cause I haue written of purpose this treatise, to prove that they cannot justify their Tenets against that Church, and stand members lawfully thereof. Concerning their ministerie, I have shewed before, that by their owne confession it is false, and so not to be joyned with. And if I should here end the point, I thinke every indifferent reader would suffi∣ciently be satisfied. But because I judge the same to be of importance, to justifie a seperation from them: and also that their ministers, are of sundry sorts & degrees, therfore I will speake a little more thereof and prove
further from their writings that every kind & degree of their ministery is false and Antichristian. Preface▪ before the forme and man. of ord. B. P. & D. According to the Prelates Canons, their ministers are divided into. 3. Heads or orders. Namely Bishops, Preists, and deacons. The first comprehends the superiour, the other two the inferior ministers. What the supe∣rior are, few but know, viz. Archbishops, and Lord∣bishops, against whose courses and callings, whole books have beene written, to manifest the same to be evill and vnlawfull. I shall onely here breifly lay downe some of their passages touching both, referring the reader for more full satisfaction, to that which is publi∣shed at large by them. As for their Bishops if they be as the Nonconformists report of them, surely they are not fitt for Church or common wealth, for they oppose (say they) with tooth and nayle every thing that is good. TheySyonsple p. 216. have had their hand in all the great evils that hath befallen their Church and state: never any good thing prospered that they put their hand too, the King & state stood never in need, but they allwayes deceived thē: & if oppertunity serve, they will make peace with their head (he meanes the Pope) if it be with the losse of all their heads, if they continue their places: And hence it is that all the professed enimies of state and Church make vse of them to effect their evill ends as David sayd of Goliahs sword, there is none to that, fo sayth the Pope, Spaniard, and Arminian, for overturning ofId. 232. a state, and making havock of a Church, there is none to a Bishop, give them that. To the same purpose others. They are the greatest and most pestilent enimies that the state hath, and are likely
Hay any work. p. 14. &c. 2. Admon. to parl. 54. Syons pl. 342. & 337. & 292. Alt▪ Dam. 35. Rep. to Mor. p. 21 Pref. Ans. Bancr. Pref. offer for conf. Demonst. dis. 79. Mart. Epist. & 33. 37. M. Bates 84. D. State Chu. 20. Offer for confor. 20. 7. 4. Syons pl. 292. Curt. Ch. pow. 49. Fall Bab. 22. to be the ruin thereof. Take them for better who will they are no other then a remnant of Antichrists brood, a viperous generatiō, Caterpillers, Moaths, Canker wormes, sonnes of that monstrous Giant the man of sinne, men of bloods, base fel∣lowes, murderous tyrants, vsurpers, time servers, cages of vn∣cleane birds, vnnaturall, false, and bastardly governors, Lordly Epicures, proud, Popish, presumtious, perfidious, Pro∣phane, Paltry, and pernitious Prelates, open enimies to the sincere preaching of the gospell, the scepter of Christs Kingdom, and the glory of the Land, men con∣tented to be bawdes vnto all kind of sinnes, and there∣fore all the professed and notorious, Atheists, Papists, blashemers, adulterers, drunkards, and most infamous per∣sons in the Kingdom are with them, they have further with them the counsell of Achitophel, the courting of Shebna, the roaring and brawling of Goliah, the cruell pride and vanity of Hamon, the flattery of Amaziah, the falshood of Samaiah, and the bloody cunning of Doeg, these wax worse and worse, and growe to a height of iniquity, greiving at the encrease of good men, and persecute nothing more then holinesse, they care not for King, country, nor their own souls, but for a Bishoprick. And therefore if they can by flatteries invectives, whisperings, or other evill courses, keepe the King and counsel, so ignorant and blind as to be firme on their side, they care for no more, to be short, the best of them, in some sort are the worst, because, they hold vp the reputation, of that vnlawfull office and make way for more wicked successours and their traditions.
Much more then this, yea and worse too, is sayd ofRead Mar∣tin Mar-Prelates works. their Bb. but I passe it over, as blushing to speake it. On∣ly I here thinke of that saying in the Proverbes, when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn. It was just so with the Israelites, when Pharaoh sett cruell tas kemai∣stersPro. 29. 2. Exo. 2, 23. over them: And it seemes their case is much like unto it: indeed some difference there is, for the Egyp∣tianDef. peti. 261. Epist. Syons plea &c. p. 26 Lords, onely beate the Lords people; But their Pre∣lates (say they) imprison and kill them also. I should won∣der at such horrible injuries, committed in any com∣mon wealth; but that the scripture sayth, the Kings of the earth shall give their strenght and power to the beast;Revel. 17. 13. The truth whereof many can witnesse by wofull expe∣rience: For Princes generally in those dayes, have gi∣ven so much authority unto the Hierarchie, that they have scarse left themselves power to defend many times, the innocent cause of their best subjects, or to punish justly the vilest offender: We would thinke him a man sencelesse, that should give up willingly his weapons into the hand of his enimie; For to doe so, were to be murdered himselfe, and to be accessarie to it: The Bishops are proved to be the greatest enimies that the King and State hath; Surely then (with reve∣rence be it spoken) it is not wisely done, that any power is given unto them. For by this meanes in all likelihood many will be killed: and not in their bodies only, but in their soules also. But enough of their persons: Let us heare what they speake of their callings: The offices (say they) of Arch-Bishops and Lord Bishops, &c. be rather members and
part of the whore and strumpet of Rome, then of the pure vir∣gin D. Chad. Ser. Rom. 12. p. 33. Vdal. Diol. 2. stat. Ch. p. 20. Offer con∣fer. 2. 1 Admo. p. 13. T. C. li. 1. p. 88. Curt. Ch. po. 76. Disc. of a∣bus. Ch. 71 & 91. Defen. disc. 71. D. Ch. ser. Rō. 12. 37 Curt. Ch. po. p. 64. Repl. to Mort. 85. & spouse of the immaculat Lamb. Their calling indeed is meerly Antichristian, false, divelish, contrary to the word of God, taken out of the Popes shop, with their names also; yea it came frō the bottomlesse pit. I say frō heathens, frō darknesse, & the devil, a thing degenerate, and grown out of kind, a humane creature, an addition, an insti∣tution, an ordinance of Kings and Princes; As it began with oppressing the onely lawfull pollicy and administration of the church, so the end of it hath been the most proud and ambitious tyranny that ever was in the world. It is as clear as the light, that they are no brā∣ches of Gods engrafting; their ministery hath no root in Christs testament, but of the earth, new devised, and which can doe no good. As for the Apostles they never knew them, Syon hath not heard of them, Ierusalem, which is above, will not acknowledge them, and no marvail, for Antichrist, and they are of one, and the same brood and offspring, of one and the same foundation, his rysing was their rysing &c. and their traditions and ceremonies are his,Syons pl. 69. they had them from him, they are installed, after the same manner of Popish Bishops, creäted with the most of the same ceremonies, they are trimmed up with the same trappings, they have the like attendants, the like armes and observancy, they vsurpe the same power & jurisdiction, and exercise the like tyranny over mini∣sters and people. All their principall reasons broughtDef. disc. p. 165. to prove their standing, are the same that Turrianus & other Popish writers alleadg for the Popes supremacy,
as indeed they must stand or fall together. It is evi∣dent therefore, that they are no ministers at all in the Strife of the church Prefa. Reprofe of Mart. Iunior. Mr. Bates 55. church of Christ, but have and doe usurpe and invade the name and seat of the ministery, beeing doubtlesse very theeves, robbers, wolves, and worriers of the Flocks: The Magistrate therefore is to doe to them as our Saviour dealt (Ioh. 2.) in whipping out buyers, and sellers, and mony changers, those might better come into the Temple then these Bishops into the church of God, and had more necessarie use: but they had abused holy things, and made it a den of theeves. Not only is this barely affirmed of them: but also they doe lay downe many singular arguments and reasons to prove it; To instance these. Those offices and callings are Antichristian, without which all forms of Go∣vernments are perfect, save onely the government of the Kingdome of Antichrist. But such are the callings of Lord Archbishops and Bi∣shops, as all forme of Governments may be perfect without them, save onely the Antichristian Kingdome where in no case they can be missed. For the Government both of the Church and common wealth can well spareAnsw. to Bancr. Ser. p. 30. T. C. 85. them, and be never a whitt the more unperfect. Therefore the callings of Archbs. and Bs. doe only belong vnto the Kingdome of Antichrist. Those Governours are justly called Antichristian, who areSyons pl. 11. assistant to the Pope in his vniversall government. But Bishops, Archbs. &c. are assistante to the Pope in his vniversall Government. Therefore Bishops, Archbs. &c. are justly called Anti∣christian.
Demonst. disc. p. 12. 13. That ministerry, which all Christian men and women are bound to submitt and yeeld obedience unto, is to be found in the word of God. But the ministery of Archbishops, Bs. is not to be found in the word of God. Ergo, there ought not to be obedience yeel∣ded to it. He that desires to see the Prelates arguments answered, and soundly refuted, which they alleadge to uphold their vnsanctifyed places and standings. Let him read Mr. Baynes his Diocesans triall, the first and second reply to Doct. Downenams Sermon, Mr. Parkers Eccles. Polit▪ and there he shal receive satisfaction to the full. Preface demonst. Defen. Ec. gov. ag. Bridg. p. 88. Protest. Scott. p. 11 T. C. l. 1. p. 96. D. Cha. Rō. 12. 33. Second book. dis. p. 85. Moreover such is their certainty of this thing, that they have often chalenged, yea dared the Prelates vnto disputation: offering to adventure their lives, if the other would but their Bishopricks, to prove that they are neither Pastors nor Teachers, but officers erected against the word of God, the ancient fathers, & the moderne most learned, and godly divines: And the like they speak of Archdeacons, deanes, prebanes, canons, and the whole Hierarchye: of which more hereafter. If this be so, then by the reasons before shewed, it is evident, and most certaine, that no man can lawfully cōmunicate, at any time, in the ministery of these men, and so much they acknowledge. Why should GodsSyons plea p. 283. people of what degree soever subject their neck to a Babilonish yoke, should they not stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ hath set them free? if they sit not in Moyses chayr, why should they heare them? If they bring not a lawfull warrant of their calling,
why should they be obeyed? to heare and obey Christ, coming in his fathers name, and Antichristian Prelates coming in their owne name, cannot subsist together. But because the thing is allready sufficiently pro∣ved, we will therefore proceed to a second sort of their ministers. Yet by the way I desire the reader to take knowledge of one thing. To weet, that the Noncon∣sormists, by these positions laid downe against their Pre∣lates, doe herein certainly condemne their whole mi∣nistery allowed by the Lawes of the Land: for if the calling and office of their Bishops be (as they say it is) of the earth, false, divilish, Antichristian, &c. Then it followes, that their calling and office, must necessarily be of the same qualitie, nature, and condition, to weet, of the earth, false, divilish Antichristian, which is wholy derived from it, which receives (I say) and takes its life and beeing of it onely: and no where else. For if their Bishops have not a right power in themselves, then can they not transferre it to an other, as the Law saith, nemo potest plus juris transferre in alium, quam sibi competereRex Iu∣ris. 79. dignoscatur. No man can give more to an∣other then he hath himselfe. If Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, when they vsurped the Preisthood and Gover∣mentNum. 16. of the Church, should (by that false power which they assumed) have ordained some of the people vnto the Preists office: no doubt all the Israelites which feared the Lord, would have judged their place and standing vnlawfull: and why: because they which made them had no commission from God so to doe: the case of their ministery is just so. And it must needs
be vnlawfull, seeing it is made by them, who like the rebels before named, doe vsurpe the Preisthood and Government of the Church: and therefore have no more authority to give an Ecclesiasticall function vnto any man: then the former had, and so much is testi∣fyed by themselves, for they say that their Priests and Deacons, Bishops and Archbishops, are not made according to the word of God. And they give rea∣sons that it is not lawfull for any one to be ordained by them. Cathol. confer. p. 130. Yates mod. of div. p. 257. See Mr. Masons booke of succession of Bishops, published by autho∣rity Anno 1614. And here I must confesse that the conformists, keepe much better to their grounds then the other doe: for they professe downeright that their ministery is from the Church of Rome: so that if the Popish Bishops, Preists and deacons, be good: theirs are good also, they beeing from them. Now no doubt these men doe wel per∣ceive that their ministery cannot possibly be justified, vnlesse it be by this way of dispute: in this respect their judgment and practice is one, and so far they are to be commended, and I verily thinke, that if they were sure that their ministery brought into the land by the Prelates from Rome is false and Antichristian, as the Nonconformists affirme it to be▪ that many of them would not hereafter ever have any spirituall commu∣nion with it. Truely it would make a man admire, if he should vnderstandly compare together, the wri∣tings of these two companies, touching a church ministery, for in their opinions about it, they are as contrary each to other as light is to darkenes, Christ to Belial, righteousnesse, to unrighteousnes, notwithstanding though
so different in judgment, yet they will communicate together in one ministery, but one of these against knowledge offends surely, and let them look well to it. for to him that knoweth to doe good and doth it not, toIam. 4. vlt. him it is sinne, that is, his fault is so much the more, and proportionablie his condemnation shall be without repentance. Modest. off. Adm. 10. Eccles. Gor. 45. Syon pl. 107. T. C. l. 134. pref. dem. de Eccles. 60. 47. 50. 39. Rem. imp. D. C. 277. We come now to their inferiour ministers, and will begin first with their bare readers: these poore creatures the Nonconformists doe call idle idols, yea bastardly idols, greedy curres, dumb dogs, slayers of the people, wolves, igno∣rant asses, silthy swine, such as are not worthy to live in a well ordered common wealth, foolish sheapheards, vnsaverie salt, good for nothing, but to be cast out to the dunghill, cankers of their Church, a swarme of caterpillers, the trash and riffe∣raffe of their nation, a wofull crew, a ragged regiment, which have even covered the Land like the frogs of Aegypt, leading many thousands with themselves into the ditch. It can hardly be expressed how base and vileAtters. Phile. v. 6. p. 136. these are generally reputed, indeed they are held no better then theeues and murderers, which live by the ruin and spoyle of the people. Somtime ye shall heare them in their pulpits so terribly spoken against, that one would thinke they would rather returne vnto their old former occupation of husbandry, cobling, coo∣ery, &c. then ever come againe to their Churches or to read, mattens, and evening song. And touching he Prelates they are esteemed as base and contemptible, very way for putting such dunsticall and vnlettered r. Iohns in their ministery: I could relate many instan∣ces
of their infamous caryages therein but it is not my purpose to rake into their dung. The Nonconformists have don it sufficiently, in so much as they doe stinke horribly for it in the nostrels of the people. But to our purpose: If things be so, is not the ministery then of such men to be left? Yea surely. A man that is fallen into the hands of theeves & murderers, if by any means he can escape with his life from them, shall therein be justified by the Law of God, of nature, and nations, now by how much a spirituall life is better then a cor∣porall: by so much are they to be commended above the other, which come away from these soule slayers, and place themselves vnder the ministery of true and lawfull Pastors. And for further proofe of what I say, I desire the reader to marke well, what is sayd first against the cal∣ling of these men. 2. what, against that worke and service which they doe. Their calling, is sayd to beAdm. 15. 16. Eccl. Gov. 44. Neces. dis. 45. Exh. Gov. 10. 14. M. Bates p. 155. from the Pope a meere human invention, taken vp with∣out any warrant from Gods word, and brought into the Church by the boldnesse of men. And to prove that these are vnlawfull ministers, many reasons are rendered for it. 1. Because they want the very life, essence, and beeing, whereby a minister, is a minister. 2. The common law, Provinciall law, civill law, and statute law, pronounce all with one voyce and consent, that they have no approbation or allowance, no favour or enter∣tainment from them, or by their authority &c. But beeing found culpable they are by definitive sentencs on the part and behoofe of the law, not onely to be
adjudged guilty of voluntary intrusion into the right and possession of others, but also to be punished forAbstr. p. 16. 19. Eccl. Gov. 46. 47. T. C. l. i. p. 70. Eccles. Gov. 46. First book of disc. 30. 31. taking vpon them offices without any lawfull calling. 3. They can doe nothing, which appertaineth to the charge and office of true and faithfull sheepheards, and therefore justly called idols. For they stand for that, and make shew of that which they are not. 4. It is a like to have no minister at all, as to have an idol in the place of a true minister, yea and in some case it is worse, for those that be vtterly destitute of ministers will be diligent to search for them: But those which have a vaine shadow, doe commonly without further care, content themselves with the same, and so re∣maine they continually deceived, thinking they have a minister when in very deed they have none. For we cannot judge him a dispensator of Gods misteries, that in no wise can breake the bread of life to the fain∣ting and hungring soules, neither thinke we that the sacraments can be rightly administred by him, in whose mouth God hath put no sermon of Exhorta∣tion.Sol. Barw. Adm. p. 47 T. C. l. 1. p. 33. dia▪ str. Ch. 93. 5. God rejecteth them and pronounceth that they shall be no ministers to him. Hos. 4. 6. The re∣tayning of such is a manifest token of the vengeance of God against all them which do it. 7. Their name & office is taken only of the Pope that Roman Antichrist, never by God erected in his Church. Many other reasons they give, to prove them to be vnlawfull and false Officers, not sent ofDef. per. for ref. 98. 99. 106. Christ (forall whome he sendeth he furnisheth with gifts) no better then Ieoboams Preists. And there∣fore
vtterly to be removed, if ever such a reformation be minded as God shall be therby glorified and his Church edified. If any should object that the Prelates, have layd their hands upon them, and therefore they are ministers. ToT. C. l. 1. p. 61. this the Nonconformists doe answere, that when the Bishop hath laid his hands on them, that then, they are no more ministers then they were before. But there is no need, to spend much time, to proveM. Bates 154. these mens ministerie, false and vnlawfull: seeing none will replie for thē, that have any spark of pietie to God, or pittie towards his people: onely some non-residents that keepe poore vnderlings, or greedie Patrons, that would have the light of the gospell die: or poore igno∣rant people that would live at their owne wils, in all licentiousnesse, these happilie would vndertake the plea against Christ, but it were better their tongue should cleave to the roofe of their mouth, then that they should once dare goe about the overthrow of Christs ministerie. And is not this a ground of separation? yes verely, and if the Nonconformists will stand to it, I will hence prove a necessity to separate from all spirituall communion, with the greatest number of their parish assemblies: and thus I reason. A dumb ministerie beeing vnlawfull and false, is to be seperated from: their ministers for the greatest part are dumb ministers: therefore it is lawfull to seperate from the greatest part of their ministers. The proposition is manifest and cleare, and I dare say they will not deny it: For be∣sides
the reasons already given, it is confidently by them affirmed that a reading ministery cannot deliver the Lords holy seales vnto the people without great sacrilege, nor the people, receive at the hands of such without dread∣full sinnes, and whosoever listeth to read the place, heExhor. Gov. W. 26. shall see many effectuall arguments laid downe by the author to prove it, and this is not the judgment of one alone, but others of them affirme it to be an vnlawfull thing, to joyne with reading ministers in any ministeriall duty, either in praying, or administringMr. Bates, p. 159. 160, &c. the sacraments, and he gives 10 worthy reasons for it. The assumption I prove also by their owne testi∣mony: For they say, that generally throughout the LandRepl. to Powel. 74. Petit. Q. 5. there are six reading Preists to one preacher. Yea others of them doe affirme, that where the Bb. ordaine one minister that can preach, they make twenty that can not; so that there are many thousand churches in England with∣out preachers, (Defenc. Pet. for refor. 130.) and in some shyres, people must goe 14 or 20 miles to heare a Ser∣mon. defenc. Against Bridg. p. 49. Now, I wish them to consider well of thes things, & to labour what they can for their brethrens delive∣rance out of these spirituall robbers and murderers hands. He that should come to a deepe pitt or wel, wherein doe lye many people, almost perished, if he should see there, some of them com forth from the rest, would we not judge him an unmercifull and cruell man, if he should rather seeke to cast them in againe, then to help out the other behind in miserie: Such as live under a
dumbe ministerie (by the Nonconformists confession) are in a farre worse case; Therefore I hope here∣after they will give no more carnall counsell, to per∣swade those, which are escaped, to com back into that pitt againe, but rather will seeke to draw out the rest, as their duty is to doe. Secondly, for the work which these idle readers doe, we shall have a fit place herafter to speak of it. Only by the way, I thinke good to sett downe heere one of their passages, which is, that bare reading of the word, and single service saying, it is bare feeding, and rather an En∣glishSol. Barv. Poperie, than a true Christian ministerie; yea it is as evill as playing vpon a stage, and worse too: For players learn their parts without booke, but these (at least many of them)Admon. p. 10. can scarse read within booke; how! is their service saying as bad as stage playing? What, and worse too! truely then it is bad enough▪ and farre be it from the Lords people to heare it. For if they should doe so, they would sacrifice vnto the Lord a corrupt thing, and so be lyable justly tochap. 1. 14. that curse in Malachi. Thus much for their dumb ministerie. It followes next, that we speak of their parsons, vicars, parish preists, stipendaries, and chaplines. If you will know (say the Nonconformists) whence all these came, we can ea∣silyAdmo. p. 15, 16. answere you, that they came from the Pope, as out of the Trojan horses belly to the destruction of Gods Kingdom, It is certaine, that their names and office is wholySol. Barv. from that Roman Antichrist, never instituted, either by Christ or his Apostles. For the church of God never knew them, neither doth any reformed church in the
world know them. These are clouds without raine, trees without fruit, painted sepulchres, full of dead bones, fatted in all abundance of iniquity; Such as seeke not the Lord Iesus, but their owne bellies. Mr. Bale, in his exposition upon the Revelation,Chap. 13. speakes the same, that these are the very names of Blas∣phemie, written upon the Beasts head, against the Lord and his Christ: Their offices are not appointed by the holy Ghost, nor yet mentioned in the scriptures. Here is enough spoken for the condemnation of their calling, and for the justification of seperation from all communion therewith: From hence I might frame this argument, Whosoever he be that dealeth with the holy thinges of God, and worketh vpon the consciences of men, by vertue of an Antichristian power, office, and calling, him the people of God ought not to receive, or joyne them∣selves vnto. But all the parsons, vicars, Parish Preists, sti∣pendaries, &c. that stand over the church assemblies in Eng∣land, deale with the holy things of God, and worke upon mens consciences, by vertue of an Antichristian power, office, and calling; Therefoee the people of God ought not to receive them, or to joyne themselves vnto them. The first part of this reason the Nonconformists do yeeld willingly unto, as it is to be seen in a Treatise be∣tweene Mr. Fr. Io. and Mr. Hild, about the ministerie of England: As for the other part, I hope they will not now deny it, seeing they have published it openly and often to the world: yea and many of them suffered greevous persecutions at the hands of the Prelates, for affirming it, and other truths of this nature.
But to keepe them to their owne grounds, in the assumption: I will here lay downe another argu∣ment. If their parsons, vicars, parish Preists, stipendaries &c. Be neither in election nor ordination made ministers agreeablie to Gods word, thē is their ministerie false, vnlaw∣full, Antichristian, and so consequently they deale with the holy things of God &c. As is before sayd. But neither in their election nor ordination are they made ministers accor∣ding to Gods word. Therefore is their ministery false vn∣lawful, Antichristian, &c. Both these propositions I will prove true by their owne writings, of the first thus they say. A due examination of learning and life, going before the free consent of the Church, whome it con∣cerneth: and ordination or laying on of hands by these to whome it appertayneth is so required, as if default be made either in the examination or election, the whole action is disanulled and made voyd. I desire the reader to noteDefen. of discip. aga. p. Bridg. 109. well, what they say here: viz. so necessarie is a right election and ordination, to euery Ecclesiasticall office▪p. 108. that without the same, it cannot possibly be true and lawfull. The same they doe againe affirme, a little be∣fore the place cited. Indeed if their evill had bin onely in life (meaning Popish Preists) or in some principall points of doctrine it were somthing: but their defect is in the very calling: For Christ beeing the doore, and God that ope∣neth to the Pastors that enter by it, and all that enter other∣wise are theeves and murderers. We have also to prove the minor, their owne testi∣mony, for they say directly that not any one of the. Adm. 17 forenamed officers are either, proved, elected, called or
ordained according to Gods word, but after the old PopishPrefac. Admon to the Parl. order, and for this cause, doe confesse that they have not a right ministerie among them. It was a great fault in Pharaoh, when he had given his consent vnto the Israelites, that they should freely depart out of Aegypt, and goe vnto Canaan according to Gods appointment, that he should afterward vse all the meanes he could to gett them back into their for∣mer miserable servitude: I haue shewed by the Non∣conformists grounds, that our seperation from their mi∣nistery is with their leave and approbation: and there∣fore they doe not well to seeke our bondage and mi∣sery again, the same thing we shall prove, touching their worship, Government, and Church, in order and place. If therefore they would have vs in earnest, returne vnto them: Let them first by the Scriptures justify the things which they haue condemned, I say refute their owne bookes, and build againe the thinges which they have destroyed: and when they have made themselves transgressors: if we be not able by Gods word to prove that the things, which we refraine from, are every way as evill as they have testified, we will (by his grace) acknowledge our error and re∣turne againe vnto them, in the meane while we shall judge wel of our order and manner of walking: and put vp our dayly petitions, vnto the father our of Lord Iesus C. in behalf of all Gods elect yet in Babilon, that they may com out from that vnholy state, and doe the Lords worke in his owne way. It remaines to speake now of their deacons office,
the which (as the rest before) is wholy condemned of the Nonconformists. For they say, that those ordained deacons in their Church, Never purpose in their life, to execute any part of a deacons office, neither are chosen for that end: but onely that within a short time after they may be made Preists: nothing in the world, differing fromNote. the superstition of popery: where the office of a deacon was conferred onely as a step vnto Preisthood, as though it were necessarie, that every one which is ordained an elder should first be deacon, and yet when he is made a deacon, he is but an idoll, yea scarse an idol of a deacon, having noresemblance at all vnto a deacon indeed, but that he is a man. This pro∣phaningDis. Eccl. Gov. p. 108. of Gods institution, God will not allwayes suffer vnpunished, especially when it is not maintained of igno∣rance or infirmity, but defended against knowledge & vponTab. div. Rea. Ca. Des. dis. 92. def. Godly mi. ag. Br. 108. Adm. 1. p. 5. & l. 2. p. 61. willfulnesse. Others of them doe affirme the like: That they have thrust vpon them a counterfeyt and Po∣pish deaconship, a meere humane institution: Foolish, and made according to Antichrists Canons, without any ground for it out of the Scriptures, nothing like the ordinance of God for the releefe of the poore. And therefore they have desired that it might be vtterly abolished and taken a way. That a man from those principles may inferre a law∣full separation, from all spirituall communion in the ministerie of their English deaconship, I think every one (if he vnderstand what a principle is) will freely grant it. But if there be any that beleeves the former posi∣tions to be true, and yet will vndertake to prove by Gods word that it may warrantably be joyned with,
I shall be willing to read what he can say herein; pro∣mising (if I live) either to yeeld, or reply againe, accor∣ding to the worth or weaknesse, which I shall see to be in the writing for the thing: And because he may not want matter to begin with, I will lay downe this argument for him. If the present deaconry of the Church assemblies of En∣gland be a meere human institution, and no ordinance of God, but an office taken onely of the Pope, that Roman Anti∣christ, &c. Then it is not lawfull in the worship of God to have any spirituall communion therewith. But the present deaconry of the Church assemblies of England, is a meere human institution, and no ordinance of God, but an office ta∣ken onely of the Pope, that Roman Antichrist, therefore it is not lawfull in the worship of God to have any communion there with. The proposition is evident and certaine, and cannot be denied. for no man can lawfully joyne in com∣munion with a false ministerie. As it hath bin formerly proved, by Scriptures, reasons, and the testimony, of the Learned. The assumption is wholy taken from their owne writings. The which if they should deny: yet can we justify the same against all men. It may be some will exspect that I should write som∣thing of their Lecturers: And the rather, because they in the judgment of many, are thought to be the best ministers, of their life and doctrine I say nothing: but as for their ministerie surely it is new and strange, as King Iames, was wont to say of it. For the original of their name, manner of enterance, and administration, is vn∣knowne
wholy to the Scriptures, & I thinke never be∣fore heard of till in these later broken and confused times. Therefore it is no marvaile, when the question hathIoh. 1. been propounded to some of them, as it was by the Pharises, to Iohn, Who art thou? that they have not been able for their life to answere the point, neither could agree among themselves, what kind of ministerie it is that they have taken up; and beeing hard pressed for resolution, they have ingeniously confessed, that unlesse they be Evangelists, they could not see how their ministery doth accord with any ministerie men∣tioned in the New Testament. This I write upon my owne certaine knowledge, the persons I thinke are yet liveing, whose names for some reason I forbeare to expresse. Howbeit I can and will doe it, if I see there be a just and necessarie occasion. I doe not thinke it strange, that they should thus speake: For indeed, I know not what they can say better in defence of their standing; Pastors, I am sure, they will not say they are. For first they doe not take any particular charge of a flock upon them. 2. They performe not the office thereof: For they agree with the people only, to preach, & not to administer, either the seales, or censures to them. 3. Their comming unto the people is in a strange sort: for they make a co∣venant each with other, for some certaine yeares; and when that time is out, both parties are free, and so may leave one the other, and doe many times. But a true Pastor may not doe so; For if he should he were
worse then an hyreling, which leaves not the sheepe till heIohn. 10. 12. see the Wolfe comming. But many of these, when they see a richer lectureship comming toward them. 4. He that is the parson or vicar, is taken generally for the minister of the place; And truly howsoever their cal∣ling be false and Antichristian (as the Nonconformists say) yet in many respects they doe better resemble a true minister, then any Lecturer whatsoever; There∣fore not without just cause doe the Reformists utterly condemne this extraordinarie office of preachers, and af∣firme,Neces. disc. 74. that they are neither Pastors or Teachers, which the scripture alloweth off. And this may be easily proved. That ministerie which is instituted and sett vp besides those, which God hath appointed in his word, is vnlawfull and false: But he ministerie of the Lecturers in England is instituted and sett vp beside these, which God hath appoin∣ted in his word. Therefore that ministerie is vnlawfull and false. The proposition is plain and undeniable, and we have their owne words to confirme it; For thus they say: All the ministery is by the word of God, and not left to the will of men, to devise at their pleasure, as appea∣reth by that which is noted of Iohn, where the Pharisees com∣ming to him, after that he had denyed to be either Christ, or Eltas, or another Prophet, conclude if he be neither Christ, nor Elias, nor of the Prophets, why Baptisest thou? which had been no good argument, if Iohn might have been of som other function then of those which were ordinary in the church, and instituted of God, and therefore Iohn to establish his singular and extraordinarie function, allegeth the word
of God, whereby appeareth, that as it was not lawfull to bring-in any strange Doctrine, so was it not lawfull to teachMind this ye Lectu∣rers. the true Doctrine, vnder the name of any other function then was instituted by God. Let the whole practice of the church vnder the Law be looked vpon, and it shall not be found, that any other ecclesiasticall ministery was appointed then those officers of high Priest, & Preists & Levites, &c. which were appointed by the Law of God, and if there were any raysed ex∣traordinarily, the same had their calling confirmed from heaven, either by signes or miracles, or by plain and cleare te∣stimony of the mouth of God, or by extraordinarie exciting & movings of the spirit of God. So that it appeareth, that the ministery of the Gospell, and the function thereof, ought to be from heaven and of God, and not invented by the braine of men: From heaven I say, and heavenly, because although itT. C. l. 1. p. 83. Eccl. Gov. p. 7. Demons. disc. 7. Mr. Bat. 102. Cartw. Chr. rel. ch. 16. p. 28. be executed by earthly men, and the ministers also chosen by men, like vnto themselves, yet because it is done by the word and institution of God, that hath not only ordained that the word should be preached, but hath ordained also in what or∣der, and by whome it should be preached, it may well be ac∣counted to come from Heaven and from God. Againe, to devise any other ministery then that which God hath appointed, is condemned by the se∣cond commaundement. The assumption is thus proved, first if their Lectu∣rers, have taken ordination from the Bishops, and exer∣cise by that power onely then is their office false by the reasons before laid downe. Secondly if it be objected that they never received the Prelates orders, or have re∣pented thereof; I answere, yet this proves not that they are therefore true ministers: For as Iehu, though
he did wel to suppresse, Ahabs idolatrie, yet in that he followed the wayes of Ieroboam, he himselfe continued still a grosse idolater. Even so, howsoever som may privately report, that they stand ministers by no rela∣tion to the Bishop: yet are they notwithstanding, vn∣lawfull ministers, seeing they were never elected cho∣sen, and ordained according to Gods word: If any re∣ply that they have their calling of the people. I answere the thing is surely otherwise, as shall be manifested presently. But if this were granted, yet I deny that any Church vnder heaven, hath power from Christ to ordaine such a kind of ministerie, and therefore if any people should doe it, seeing it is against the Scripture, it must needs follow that it is an vnlawfull ministery, & so consequently not to be communicated with, and that it is so I prove it thus. That ministery is vnlawfull which none may lawfully give, but none may lawfully bestow the ministerie of a lectu∣rer.Demons. dis, 13. Therefore that ministerie is unlawfull. The propositiō is evident by their owne principles: The assumption cannot for shame be denyed if the nature of it be con∣sidered. For as we but even now sayd, their Lecturers take no charge of a flock vpon them, they make cove∣nant with the people but for a certaine time, the pecu∣liar works of a minister is not by the people laid vpon them, neither exspected of them: If any object that they preach the word; To this Doctor Ames gives an answere fully, that the preaching of the gospell is not a worke peculiar to a minister: For such as are private men and out of office, may and ought to preach
the word as occasion is offered, and not only private∣ly,De consc. l. 4. c. 25. p. 215. but (saith he) in the publick congregation, and for this thing he citeth these Scriptures, 1. Cor. 14. 23. Act. 13. 15. And yealdeth many good reasons for it also.Mr. Bates. 134. Def. of disc. ag. D. Bridg. 129. Other of the Nonconformists affirme the same thing. As the Church hath need of all mens gifts, so all ought to imploy them at publick ordinary meetings, yet so, as good order be still observed. SECTION. IIII. THus reader thou seest how the present ministerie of the Church assemblies of England, both the greater and lesser, is by the Nonconformists professed and proved to be all and wholy false. Now we com to the 4. point according to our division which is to ans∣were the reasons laid downe by Doctor Ames, in the defence of their ministerie, and they may be cast into two heads or branches. First what he speakes for it himselfe. 2. The reference which he hath for helpe to M. Bradshawes booke, entituled the vnreasonablenesse of seperation. We will first treat of the Doct owne arguments. Or rather argument. For I find but one∣ly one, touching this thing in his booke. The wordsFresh suite l. 2. p. 207. are these, we vtterly deny that the calling of our ministers doth essentially depend vpon the Bishops calling. I know the word our here hath in it a misterie, which every bodie knowes not. For D. A doubtlesse meant to speake onely for som particular churches, be∣cause in his later dayes he would not vndertake to
justifie the standing, but onely of some ministers in theI have good testimony for this thing. Land, which were mostly vnconformable. Now it had been wel, if he had publickly declared so much, and shewed the differences, between the true and false, and proved soundly by Gods word, such to be true mini∣sters whome he so judged: For a little of this kind of writing, would have profitted more the professors in England, than a multitude of wordes, and yet all but one thing, about 2. or 3. foolish ceremonies, and which are the least evils of many hundreds among them. There are others of them to my knowledge in this thing of the D. mind, to weet, that some few mini∣sters onely in the land are true, and privately they doe expresse so much. But in the meane time the people are ignorant hereof, and therefore walke disorderly, and so greivously sin against God, and their own soules: But of this enough elsewhere. Therefore to the matter. I wish the D. had declared what the ssence is of a mi∣nister in his judgement, and whence the calling of his ministers doth essentially depend, if not upon the Bishops calling. For then to use his owne words, this question would easily be decided: but seeing he thought it best in this to be silent. I answere directly: 1. The mini∣stery of England, as it is established by law, doth certain∣ly depend vpon the Bishops calling wholy, & no mans else; & if any in the Land stand otherwise, he cannot properly be said to be a minister of that church, but rather is a schismatick from it, according to the formall consti∣tution of it. And for this we have the testimony of an∣other
other Doctor, and a man better experienced then ever Mr. Ames was in the making of English Preists, and Deacons. If you (sayth he writing against Mr. Penry)D. Somes last Treat. c. 10. p. 123. repel the vnpreaching minister, because of his outward cal∣ling, you may by the same reason discharge the worthiest mi∣nisters in the land of the holy ministery; For all have one, and the same externall calling in the church of England. This witnesse is true: all their ministers indeed have one & the same outward calling. I say their best preachers no other then their ignorant asses & idols have; the diffe∣rence betweene them is onely in their qualification for a calling, and in the execution thereof, and not in the outward calling it selfe. For in this respect, if any ministerie be false and Antichristian, there is never a ministerie then true among them all. And so much D. Ames seemes to acknowledge in p. 410. for there he saith, that power of ordinatiō is not given (by our lawes) to individua vaga, that is to say vagrant men, of whome the law taketh no notice, such as were wont to be called, Hedge-preists, but to authorized Prelates. Now if none by their law have power to ordaine, but Bb. then are his ministers, either made officers by them, or else (as I said before) they are not of that church, and so he speakes not any thing to the matter in hand. Secondly, there is not any congregation in the land that hath any power to ordaine a Church-officer, neither is this either formallie (nor I thinke intentially) any where practised; For the most free Parish hath but only a liberty to admitt of a minister, before made by the Bishops, so that the people give him not any part,
much lesse the substance of his calling, as Mr. Paget vn∣truely speaketh, but a bare permission, onely to exerciseArr. ag▪ Br. 93. by vertue of that calling, which he had of the Prelates: Such therefore doe horribly abuse the people, which ascribe that unto thē, which they neither doe, can doe, nor intēd to doe, we blame justly the Familists, for their idle pretence of inward devotion, they manifesting no outward obedience, whereby we should judge well of them. Yet truely as bad as they are, this in them, can better be justified, then Mr. Doct. new principle, to wit, that the calling of their ministers doth essentially de∣pēd vpon the peoples calling. For so I know he meanes: for it is so palpably false, as there cannot be a leafe found to cover the nakednesse of it; For as I said, how can it with any coulorable shew be affirmed, that the people should doe that thing, concerning which they neither doe, nor intend to doe any thing belonging to it, nay more, which they make account, is done before, and not only so, but doe thinke (at least most of them) that it doth not at all appertain unto thē. Vpon this ground a man might devise and say any thing, but I spare to urge it further, because the man is not alive to answer me. If any list to make a rejoinder, he shall heare morePro. 25. 8. in my next answer. But before he goe forth hastily to strive, let him first make diligent search among all the Parish assemblies in the land, whether there be any that doe make their own ministers, according to Gods word; that is, choose them by a generall and free consent, or∣daine them by imposition of hands, with fasting and prayer, &c. For about this is our question, and not of their
fittnesse to be ministers, neither of the leave, which the people give to administer among them, after they are made ministers by the Bishops. Moreover I thinke, that D. Ames in pag. 412. doth contradict himselfe, his words are these. If the rejoyn∣der, would have brought a fitting example, he should have shewed vs, that Paul, or Barnabas beeing at Ierusalem, or∣deyned a minister, and sent him to Antioche, Iconium or Listra, signifying by letters, that such a man was appointed their Pastor, though they never knew or heard of him before: for that had been somthing like vnto the practice of a Bi∣shop who vpon the Patrons praesentation, wheresoever he be, sendeth his minister, from the place, or Palace of his residence vnto a congregation, 20. 30. or 40. miles of, which poore despised people, must be content with towling of a bell, as sufficient notice given of their ministers fittnesse, and their necessitie to acknowledge the same: he speaketh so gene∣rallie, as I take it, his ministers are here comprehended, and I have good reason so to thinke, in regard of a busines which he writes of his experience: I was (saith he) once, and never but once, I thanke God before a Bishop, and beeing presented vnto him, by a cheife Magestrate of an incorporation, for to be a preacher in their towne, the lowly man first asked them, how they durst choose a preacher without his consent? you (said he) are to receive the preacher that I appoint you. For I am your Pastor, though he never fed them. And then turning to me, how durst you (said he) preach in my diocesse without my leave? so that without any other reason, but meer Lordship, the whole incorporation, and I, were dismissed, to wait his pleasure: which I for my
part have don this twenty yeare, and more. By this little the reader may judge, whether the calling of their ministers, doth essencially depend vpon the Bishop, or peoples calling. 3. If it should be granted that the Doctors ministers, have their calling onely from the people: yet what is this to the point betweene him and the rejoinder, I may use his owne words, truely the answere doth not looke towards the question. Now marke all readers that have sence, it is affirmed by Doct. Burgesse, whereas the Nonconformists say the calling of their Bishops, and conse∣quently of the ministers is Antichristian, that separation must herevpon necessarily follow. How is this answered? not at al: if the proverbe be true: as good never a whit, as never the better. For D. Ames speakes of a certaine ministerie which the separatist never to this day, yet saw in their assemblies, neither have they left any such. If therefore he would have answered the rejoin∣ders charge indeed, he should have proved that those ministers, whose calling doth essencially depend vpon the Bishops calling: which have, I say, no other election nor ordination, but what they had from them, in a word, which doe administer to the people only by that power and authority, may (notwithstanding for for all this) warrantably by scripture be judged true mi∣nisters, & be lawfully cōmunicated with in their mini∣sterie, & yet the Nonconformists grounds, published against them, all just, true & good. This is the very point indeed: for such ministers we have onely left, and we know no other. If there be, let them be manifested to
us; tell us their names, their places; And if we finde by scripture their ministerie to be lawfull, we will surely have communion with it, as occasion serves. Till then, we purpose by Gods grace to live as we doe, and to practise that which the Nonconformists professe to be the order, and way which the Lord commaunds all his servants to walke in. 4. If the Doctor speake here truth, then have the Nonconformists greatly abused the princes and state of England, in complayning so often to them, against the Bishops, and for what thinke you, forsooth because the Prelats take away the powr of the people, make mini∣stersDefen. Admon. alone, hēce none are either proved, called, or ordaind according to Gods word, &c. Now how doe these things agree together? Is not this yea and nay? It is so indeed. But imagin, there should be a Parliament againe in England, and the Nonconformists should there petition: that the calling of their ministers might not essentially depend any more upon the Bs. calling, would not the Bb. have matter to persuade both houses, not to harken unto them, yea to reprove them sharpely, for mo∣ving this thing, seeing they confesse they have it all∣ready? But it may be they would say some congre∣gations doe not ordaine their ministers; to this the Pre∣lates might reply, that is then their fault; For they give liberty and power to all alike, and that is none at all; I am sory they have laid such a snare, whereby to undoe themselves. But usually, this is their course, when they have any hope, to have the Magistrates helpe for reformation, they will truely declare the a∣buses
and corruptions among them to the full, after∣wards (nothing being amended) when they are put in mind of their principles, that is, if such things be true, then necessarily must they leave the church of England; what doe they, but goe quite from them againe, as I shall in convenient place, prove it clearely; And is not that a miserable case, which cannot be maintained, but by grosse contradiction. I may well here use the Doc∣tors owne words, Such turning, winding, and runningFresh suit l. 2. p. 132. against walls, you shall seldome see an ingenious man to vse in a good case. Lastly, howsoever Doct. Ames thought to have crossed much the course of the Separatists; yet if his words be understandingly weighed, he hath justified them, and made way to a generall departure from their ministerie. For thus I reason: None may heare or have any spirituall communion with such a ministery, whose calling doth essentially depend vpon the Bishops calling. But the calling of the ministers of the church assemblies of England doth essentially depend vpon the Bb. calling. Therefore none may heare or have any spirituall communion with the ministerie of the church as∣semblies of England. Neces. efor. 1. The proposition by good consequence is the Ds. own; and herein he agrees with the rest of the Nonconformists; For in opinion they all hold this thing, as we have from their writings manifestd. And whosoever should deny the assumtion, mought with as much reason deny that there is any idolatrie at Rome, although it is there both taught and practised: therefore I thinke no man
will have the forehead to oppose it. But have not now the people of the Land good cause to looke about them seeing those who count themselves the only men to refute the Separists, are come to that streigth, as that they will not justifie it to be Lawfull, for to joyne to any ministery in the land, but to that, which a man should not find among them, if he sought all theirZep. 1. 12. Pro. 14. 15 Churches with candles, as the Prophet speaketh. I hope Gods elect yet there, will take Salomons counsell, which is, to looke well to their going. And thus much for answer to the Doct. reason: now next we should speake of Mr. Bradshews booke, but because I have been long vpon this chapter, and the reply to it will be large. I will leave it therefore till last, and handle other things in the mean time. SECT. V. BEfore I end this point I thinke it convenient to answere breifly to a few objections, which I have often heard some to make in the defence of their standing. Object. 1. Compassion towards the people con∣straineth many preachers to keepe their places: For if they should not, alas what would the people doe? Ans. 1. we may not doe any thing against the will and pleasure of God, vnder pretence to shew mercyEphe. 4. 32 1 Pet. 3. 8. 1 King. 20 42. to others. But we are bound to doe that which is good and honest, by just and lawfull meanes: that pitty which Christiās are to shew, must be  rightly bowelled, that is required of God, both for the matter and manner of it.
2. God needs no mans lie. For he hath power enough to accomplish his owne purposes. He may thus say:Psa. 50. If I be hungry I would not tel thee, that is, what need I thee, or any thing thou canst doe? I am Allsufficient. 3. The truth is, the people are not holpen by this meanes, but rather hindered: For if they ceased from preaching in their vnlawfull offices, the godly generally throughout the land, would seeke where Christ feedeth his flock, and so their state would be much better then now it is. Object. 2. Though they will not plead to justify their mi∣nistery, yet they hope to glorify God by preaching Ans. so thought the Leper when he published abroadMar. 1. the matter of his healing, but he not beeing called to do it, sinned greatly therein therefore it is certaine, that▪ men doe then glorifie God, when (leaving theirIohn 15. 8 owne, wisedome) they doe whatsoever they are commaunded, for as M. Perkins saith, the intention toFirst. vol. p. 699. 1 Sam. 2. 30. honor God is not good, vnlesse it be an intentiō to honour him by yeelding that obedience which he commaundeth, now seeing these refuse to keepe strictly his order and ordi∣nances: they take not the right course to honour him. And in this respect can have little assurance to receive glory and honour of him. Therefore it is better a man never preach then doe any evil in preaching. Rom. 3. Object. 3. But they hope to doe much good by staying in their places. Ans. 1. The least sin may not be commit∣ted if one were sure the whole world might be saved thereby. 2: It is a great dishonour to God to doe any sin to a good end, as though he could not provide
for mens soules without sining against him and ser∣ving the devil. 3. Although we invent a 1000. wayes, yet we have no reason to thinke that we shall profit others, but onely by those meanes and instru∣ments which he hath appointed for his worke. For with those his blessing is joyned: but if we passe the bounds sett by God himselfe, and institute of our own head, meanes and instruments to doe good by, not onely may we feare the want of his blessing, but the fearefull exspectation, both of temporall and eternall judgments. Object. 4. But the people doe much desire that they would retaine their office. Ans. Beit so: yet seeing God com∣maunds them to leave it, they ought to obey him ra∣ther then men: If one had borne armes a while against his prince, yet should he doe wel, to lay them downe, though his father, mother, and a thousand more should counsel him to the contrarie. I leave the application of it to others. It was worthily answered by Gideon when the Kingdome with the Alteration of the Go∣vernment which God had sett over his people, wasIudg. 8. 23 presented vnto him: I will not rule over you, &c. The Lord shall rule over you, to weet, according to such or∣der, as he hath appointed. Such a holy answere should they give the people. We will not stand over you by an Antichristian authority, but exhort you to forsake the false wayes of the world: and to make a covenant with God, that so Christs Iesus may raigne, as King, Preist, and Prophet over you. 2. Let it be consideredGal. 6. that every one shall beare his owne barden. Though Adam
took the womās counsel, & she the devils, to sin against God, yet they both in their owne persons caried the just punishment thereof. 3. The people vnderstand not so generally the vnlawfullnes of their ministerie as the others doe: for if they did, I thinke they would as much perswade them, yea more, to leave it by repen∣tance, then they ever vrged them to retaine the same. Object. 5. many of them have good gifts, great learning, and able to preach the word profitably: therefore in this res∣pect they may be true ministers. Answ. 1. Be a man never so godly, never so learned, indued with never so many lively faculties of the ministery, yet he is no minister indeed, vnlesse he have the ordinance of God vpon him, by a true outward calling. He which vnderstands wel the office of a justice, and could sufficiently exe∣cute the place, yet is he not a lawfull justice of peace,Heb. 5. 4. except he be rightly called thervnto? even so &c. 2. If gifts onely make men ministers, then many of the Popish Preists are true Pastors. For they (as the Non∣conformists acknowledge) have great learning and gifts,M. Dayr. pref. trear. of the Ch. very great knowledge and skill in the arts, and in languages: are of excellent vtterance, exprt and ready in holy Scrip∣tures; can speake and write truely agreeing with the Scrip∣tures, of sundry of the serets of the Kingdome of heaven: as of God, his nature, persons, attributes, of Christ Iesus his in∣carnation, his birth, life, preachings, sufferings, coming to judgment, of the resurrection, of the life to come, with many other of this kind. The like may be said of many La∣wyers, Phisitians, &c. These by the former reason are ministers also.
Lev. 4. 27. 28. & 19. 17. V. 51. 26. Mal. 3. 16. Mal. 18. 15 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. Es. 53. 1. 2 King. 17. 13. 14. Object. 6. many are converted by their doctrine, therefore it seemes they are true ministers. Answ. 1. men in no office may, and often doe turne their neighbours from much euill. If this be not so, to what purpose should privat persons exhort, instruct, and reprove, any vpon any occasiō whatsoever. 2. Good Prophets have seene little fruit to follow their labour: Therefore if this had argued a true note of their cal∣ling, they might have been judged false. 3. If fruit be a signe of a true minister. Then are many of the Bi∣shops in England, and Rome too, true ministers. For with∣out doubt some of both have been instruments vnder God of mens conversion. 4. It hath been the man∣ner alwayes, of wise and learned men, to esteeme of things by the causes, and not by the event, and that specially in matters▪ of Religion: for if they should be esteemed of the event, who would not commend the midwives lying vnto Pharoah, for much good fol∣lowed amongst the Israelites: But what if the Lord give his blessing vnto his word, is it to be thought ther∣fore, that he liketh wel of a false calling? nothing lesse, but rather a man might reason thus: for as much as those which preach in an vnlawfull office, doe somtime edifie their hearers: surely then such would doe much more good, if they stood in a right and true calling. 5. To convert is not the most proper worke of a Pa∣stor: but to feed Christ sheepe, with sound and whole∣some doctrine: and therefore if it should come to passe, that he never converted any, yet his ministery neverthelesse would still be true and lawfull.
Object. 7. Many worthy men did never leave their ministerie in England, and yet dyed comfortablie. Ans. 1. Without doubt they never saw fully the vnlawfullnesse of it. 2. Men must doe as they are further inlightened and guided by the spirit of God, who from step to step leads his people. 3. Many of the fathers vnder the law had many wives at once, the which thing if any now should practice he could not exspect the mercy which they obtained, because they did it ignorantly. 4. No mans xamplie must be fur∣ther followed then the same agrees with the Scripture, for where David, Peter, &c. doe differ from the truth, therein we ought to differ from them. 5. Had they duly considered the conclusions of their owne grounds, layd downe against the abuses of their Church, I am perswaded they would have changed their course. Object. 8. But many have their gifts tried by some godly ministers, and so have their consent and allowance▪ and this gives them (they thinke) the true substance of a true calling. Ans. 1. These must consider, that it is against rule, to make that which is in question, the ground of the thing in dispute. For we doe deny, that those here intima∣ted, are true ministers, and therefore their consent and allowance is nothing to make the thing warrantable, 2. If they were ministers, yet is their officiall power confined within the freedom of their owne church, and so have no authority delegated to them from Christ, to give the substance of the ministers calling
to another people. For to doe thus, were to be like unto the Pope and Prelates, the which practice in them they doe abhorre. 3. It is a fearefull moc∣king of God▪ and a high prophanation of his ordi∣nance. When men will take a holy worke in hand, & pretend they doe it, and yet doe nothing touching the true substance thereof. A man which hath but a little path to keepe, and great sea lying on both sides of him, would surely be drowned, if he should turne out of his way, but a little, either to the one hand or other; the like may be said of Gods pathes, and institutions: if a man keepe not full in the way, doe not every thing according to the patterne. It is all one, whether turning on the left hand, he em∣brace the idolatry of the Bishops, or turning on the other hand, follow the new devises of mens foolish braines, for utter destruction certainly followes them both. Now for conclusion, if these lines, by Gods provi∣dence, shall come to any of your hands, which stand at this present ministers in the church of England: my desire truly is, that you willbe pleased ingeniously to consider the things here written, and specially how the Nonconformists (such as you cannot but much reve∣rence and love for their learning and graces) have by invincible reasons and arguments proved clearely your offices to be false, vnlawfull, & Antichristian. Now if you cannot justifie your standing before men, ah how doe ye think that ye shall be able to stand comfor∣tably before the holy God, if you stand longer therein. The Lord give you eyes to see how exceedingly you
have broken the sacred order of the Gospell, and hearts tender against every sinne, that the evill may be put away. And thinke not scorne (I pray you) to take any fruitfull counsell of me; but harken to the Lord that it may goe well with you. And looke as the men which had maried them wives of the Heathen, did put them quite away, at Nehemiahs commaund: Even so, seeing you have taken upon you a strange ministery, put it away at Gods commaund, and doe not continue one houre in it. If you say, what shall we doe for the hundred talents? how shall we? our wives and children be re∣leeved?2 Chro. 25. 9. if we leave our benefices, our stipends, freinds, & benefactors. I answer you as the man of God did A∣masiah, the Lord is able to give you more then this. Christ sayth (as you know well) he that will forsake father and mother, house and land, for his name sake, shall receive a hundred fould in this world, beside the possession of life and glory hereafter. Truly there is a great reward in this promise, & me thinks you should value it to be much more worth then all the personages, vicarages, Lecture-profitts, &c. in England. Mind well therefore (good freinds) what a large offer the Lord makes, tobuy ou out of your vnsanctifyed places, whereas he might cast you forth headlong, and inflict upon you many visible and sencible punishments, as he did on Corah, vzziah vzza, &c. for their usurpation and intrusion. But he offers you a hundredfould profitt, which is a great mat∣ter indeed, and therefore ye are alltogether unwise, if ye doe refuse it. I may say to you, as David to the men of Iudah: Why
are ye the last to bring home the King? Surely ye are too flow in helping forward Christ to his Kingdom. YouAnsw. Banc. ser. p. 17. doe indeed complaine, that the office of Christ, as he is King, is no wise acknowledged vnder the jurifdiction of your Bishops in many places of the Land. But are not you in part the cause thereof, in walking hand in hand with the rebellious Prelates, to support that divised ministery, which they have received from the Pope, and doe thrust upon the people. Thinke therefore, oh what a blow it would give to Antichrists Kingdome, and how it would even shake and overthrow the very foundation of his house: if such as you would breake the bonds of iniquitie, & draw your necks out from the Bishops yoke, and bring your learning and other good gifts (as the people did the Lords Vessells, which had beene a long time kept in Babilon) to the building and beautifying of Sion: This would make your faces to shine, and make your names to florish in all ages after, as those doe in our generation, which according to that light received, did powre out their vtals upon the seat of the beast, to the great discovering of his lies and beastly va∣nities. Ye know that some, who were sometime cheif among you, have layd downe their ministery, as un∣lawfull: For it beeing a dependent office of the Hie∣rarchie, they found it by scripture unwarrantably to beEphe. 4. 12 used for the edifying of the body of Christ. If you have these for an example, you shall doe wel, otherwise, if either for cafe, profit, credit, liberty, or other worldly respects, you retaine still this iverie of Antichrist and Popes creature, you will loose that ho∣nour
and reward which the other (if they make straight pathes for their feet) shall vndoubtedly obtaine: not∣withstanding as Mordecay sayd to Esther: enlargement and deliverance shall arise to the Iewes from another place.Esther 4. 14. For God surely will fulfil his word, in abolishing vtterly that great scarlet whoore, and all the accursed offices and ministeries, which she hath devised, in spight of all hu∣mane policie and power to the contrarie, and establish one day his owne ordinances more largely and per∣fectly, to the singular joy and comfort of all true be∣leevers both Iewes and Gentiles. Moreover let it be considered whether those mini∣sters, which have taken orders, and offices of the Prelats, and stand by their power and authoritie, are not in this, transgressors against the King and the Lawes. Yea and might be legally executed for treason and felony if the King and state were not pleased to interpret the statute, contrary to the very letter, form, and truth of the same. The words of the statute. (Eliz. 27. 2.) are these. It shall not be lawfull, for any Seminary Preis, or other Preist, or Ecclestastic all person whatsoever, made, or ordained with∣out or within any of her Majesties dominions, by any au∣thoritie derived, chalenged or pretended from the sea of Rome, by or of what name, title, or degree soever the same shallbe called, or knowne, to be or remaine in any part of her highnesse dominions. And every person so offending shall be judged a traitor, & shall suffer as in case of high treason. And every person which shall wittingly and willingly receive, releive, comfort, and or maintaine any
such Preist or Ecclesiasticall person, shall be judged a felon without benefit of Clergie, and suffer death, loose and forfeit as in case of felony. CHAP. II. IN this Chapter we will speake of the outward wor∣ship, vsed in the assemblies of England, the summe where∣ofM. Bates. 203. Hows. ser. in psal. 118. p. 18. Can. 19. Syon pl. 326. (as the Nonconformists say) is contained in their commu∣nion booke, and hence the same is called divine service, (as for preaching, it is held to be no part thereof) we will follow here the same method. And first I will shew what a true divine worship is, according to their owne discription of it. 2 How farre that in the Church of England, by their owne confession differs from, and is contrarie to it. 3 Lay downe arguments to prove our separation lawfull by the former grounds. 4 Answer D. Ames reasons alleaged to the contrary. M. Bat. 19. Fresh suit l. 1. p. 210. It is certaine that the Lord hath given a perfect platforme and absolute rule, how he will be worshipped, in the time of the new Testament, an excellent directionM. Dike six Evang. Hist. p. 306 M. Perk. Idol. las. in last. vol. p. 698. M. Brins. truewatch p. 28. for vs, how we may acceptablie performe the same vnto him, is laid downe in Iohn 4. 23. 24. Two things are there mentioned: spirit and truth, first it must be a true matter of worship grounded on the word, it must be no devised worship. For nothing may goe vnder the name of the worship of God, which he hath not ordained in his owne word, and commaunded to vs, as his owne wor∣ship. All the parts and meanes thereof, must be don ac∣cording
to his revealed will: Even as the service which is given to an earthly prince by his attendants at court, must be onely according to that Kings com∣maundement: so the outward solemne worship to beRom. 12. 1 Cart. Hist▪ Christ l. 1. p. 211. Elton upō Colos. p. 308. performed vnto the King of Kings, ought to be that onely, which he alone is the author and institutor of. As for rules given by men not grounded on the Scripture, in case of Religion, matters of faith &c. They are not of any moment, neither are we bound to the observation of them. For the truth is, whosoever vseth those wayes and inven∣tions in worshipping God which are not commaunded of God in his word, but be devices of men, Christ saith that they worship him in vaine &c. If it have no further beginingRev. 22. 18 then mans braine, God will give no blessing to it: but sends a curse vpon it; for cursed is he that addes any thing to the word of God: God will ad so much to his plagues, and the reason is, because he makes himselfe wiser or better then God. For if God be perfectly wise, then he knew best what worship would please himselfe; and if he be perfectly good, then he would reveale vnto vs, what ever he knew fit for vs to practice: A gaine it is a great injurie offered to God, when we will let his deadly enimies have the ordering andNote. appointing of his service rather then himselfe. A King would thinke it a great indignitie that his servaints, should not yeeld to his direction, but some base person that were a pro∣fessedRom. 87. enemie, should set downe what service he must have, and in what manner he must be obeyed who shall be his at∣tendants, and what his provision. But much more absurd and injurious it is, that we will let the wit and will of the fleshYet so is it where L. Bb. rule, as it is in Rome & England. bear sway in Gods worship: for these two doe joyne with
the devil, and are enmity to God. And if we will have thisM. Dod vpon comman. 2. preheminence in our houses, that our servants must doe as we bid them, not what they themselves thinke good (for he is a good servant that doth his masters will, not his own) then why should not we thinke it right, that God must be Lord in his house, and we must doe his service after his ap∣pointment, and not our own. And not onely doe they teach these wholesome and good doctrines: but also doe lay downe sundry effectuall reasons, to prove that men may not worship God otherwise then he hath appointed and revealed in his word. 1. Because we can have no true comfortM. Hern. vpon Psa. 51. p. 4. M. Bates 18. 212. Deu. 16. 21 Chap. 4. 34. in our devotions so long as they be but limmes of that which Paul termes voluntary Religion: so long as they are onely taken vp by vs, and not prescribed to vs, make we never so great a shew of zeale in the performance of them: yet it is nothing. 2. All worship devised by man is abhorred by the Lord: for he likes nothing but what he appointeth himselfe. 3. It is against his expresse commaunde∣mēt, that men should bring any of their owne devising, neare his ordinances: because he will have no more don in his worship then he teacheth and commaundeth in his word.Park. of the Crosse l. 1. p. 62. Colos. 2. 10. 243. Exod. 20. 24. 25. Ba. 205, 257. Syons. pl. 279. Therefore whatsoever is added, that we are to esteeme, to be an Image, which he detesteth and abhorreth. 4. Because whatsoever God would have vs either to know, or doe. he hath fully revealed it by Christ. 5. It is the property of superstitious anddolatrous things to infect the places and persons where they are. 6. It argues certainly that men doe not love the Lord and his commaundements, but hate rather both: when they
worship God otherwise then he commaundeth, for although every wil worshipper will say that he loveth God, yet God witnesseth in the second commaunde∣ment, that he is a liar, and that he hateth God, in that he hateth the worship which he commaundeth, in the love whereof, God will have experience of his love. 7. The Lord will blesse the true worshippers of himCart. Chr. relig. cha. 16. p. 103. vnto many generations: both in themselves, their children, and posterity, and in whatsoever belongs vnto thē. 8. We must learne to proportion our worshipM. Dike sixe Evan. Histor. p. 312. D. Tayl. vpon Tit. 3. 10. pag. 7. 15. to Gods nature, which is simple, in that which is sim∣ple there is no composition or diuision, therfore in our worship there must be no composition, it must be vayd of mixture, a linsey woolfey patch worship sau∣ced, spiccd, sophisticated with humane inventions, doth nothing sort with the spirituall simplicity of theExhort. to the kirk of Edenb. pag. 10. divine essence. 9. God promiseth his presence onely in his owne worship, and therefore neither ac∣cepteth nor blesseth a worship, that is not directed by his owne word. For conclusion: worthily speaketh M. Perkins, The second way of erecting an Idoll is, whenFirst vol. Idol. last times p. 674. 675. Ang. de consen. sa. Evang. l. . 18. God is worshipped otherwise and by other meanes then he hath revealed in the word. For when men sett vp a devi∣sed worship, they sett vp also a devised God. Augustine saith of the Gentiles that they refused to worship the God of the Hebrewes, because if their pleasures were to worship him in another sort then he had appointed, they should not indeed worship him but that which they had faigned. The Samaritans worshipped the God of Abra∣ham, Isaac & Iacob, and they waited for the coming of the
Ioh. 4. 22. Messias: & yet Christ saith of them. Ye worship ye know not what: because they worshipped the true God by a wor∣ship devised of old, & set vp by men. The Lord saith to the Israelites ye shall call me no more Baali: whereby he sig∣nifiethHos. 2. 16. with Deut. 12. 4. that because the Iewes did somtime worship God in the same manner, with the same images, rites and names, whereby the Heathen worshipped the false God Baali, there∣fore they made him indeed to be even as the Idol Baal, &c. Againe Iohn saith in his first Epistle, chapt. 2. vers. 24. If that which ye have heard from the beginning re∣maine in you, ye shall continue in the father and the Sonne. Hence it followes, that those which abide not in the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, but set vp other formes of worshipping God, abide not in the sonne and the fa∣ther, Gods worship must be according to his nature, heavenly, divine, and spirituall; but all devised worship is according to the nature and disposition of the deviser, foolish, carnall, vaine &c. Therefore when God is worshipped not according to his owne will, but according to the will and pleasure of man the true God is not worshipped, but a God of mens in∣vention is set vp. Thus he. Secondly, there must be a true manner of worship: which is to proceed from the very heart▪root, and toPsa. 103. 1. be performed with the will, the affections, and all that is within us; For this gives life, and welbeeing to divine service: as a well proportioned body, if it want breath, offends us, and we desire to have it taken out of our sight; For the noysome smel which it maketh in our nostrels: even so every worship (how outwardly glo∣rious,Esa. 1. and formall soever) voyd of uprightnesse, dis∣pleaseth
the Lord greatly, and he bids such hypocrites, to cary the same away out of his presence, because it is noysome and abominable unto him. Let every man therefore looke to this maine thing, to wit, that he worship God in the truth and sincerity of the inward man; For in this God onely taketh delight, and with∣outPsa. 51. 8. this maine qualification he cannot abide, either the person or action. It is a thing common with men, when they take a peece of worke to doe for an other, and exspect to have a good reward for their la∣bour,Mr. Dike six Evang. hist. 311. 312, &c. Mr. Hern. in Psa. 51. 157, &c. to be carefull so to doe it, as the Mr. for whome they doe it, may have good content therein; the like should be our care, whensoever we take in hand any service of God▪ and hope to be recompenced, to per∣form the same in that sort, as the Lord may be pleased to accept graciously of it in Iesus Christ. In all this we do fully agree with the Nōconformists, & are persuaded, that no man can rightly beleive, that his service is well pleasing unto God, unlesse it be per∣formed, both for matter and manner, as they have be∣fore truly expressed; and therefore to our power we are carefull allwayes thus to doe; And so much the more, because herein we know our masters will, and have promised to doe it; so that, if we neglect it, bothLuke 12. our trespasse and punishment will be the greater. SECT. II. IN the former Section we have heard, what a true wor∣ship is: Now it followes, that we describe the wor∣ship
of the English Assemblies, according to the testimony given thereof, by the Nonconformists. This worship (for the matter of it) is contained wholy (as was said) in their Church Leiturgie, in the hand∣ling whereof, for the readers better information. I will first shew what they say of the whole booke, and after∣wards of the particular parts and peeces thereof. Touching the former, they write thus: The whole forme of the Church service, is borrowed from the Papists,Sold. Bar. T. C. l. 1. p. 131. Abridg. 89 Adm. 1. p. 9, and 2 Ad. 41. Fall of Bab. 29. Altar. Da∣mas. p. 612 613. Syons pl. 29. Perth As∣semb. 64. Syons pl. 30. peeced, and patched together without reason or order of edifi∣catiō; yea not only is the form of it taken from the church of Antichrist, but surely the matter also; For none can deny, but it was culled and picked out of that Popish Dung∣hill, the portuis and vile Massebooke, full of all abomina∣tions: From three Romish Channells, I say, was it raked together, namely the Breviary, out of which the common prayers are takē, out of the rituall or book of rites, the ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, burial, matrimony, visitation of the sick are taken: and out of the Massebooke, are the consecration of the Lord Supper, Collects, Gospels, and Epistles. And for this cause it is, that the Papists like well of the English Masse, (for so King Iames used to call it) and makes them say: Surely the Romish is the true and right re∣ligion, else the Heretikes in England would never have re∣ceived so much of it; For some have avouched it to my facep. 40. (saith the author of the Curtaine of Church power) that the service there, is nothing but the Masse in English, others, that it wants nothing but the Popes consecration. These things thus retained it was also thought, that Po∣pish Kings and Princes, would be the lesse offended; what
marvell, seeing the Isuites themselves are so well pleased with the ceremonies and service, that I heard one of them (God is my wittnesse herein) make it his hope that the main∣tenance of them against the puritans, would make England the sooner returne to Rome in the rest. Mine eyes andQuo vadis Sect. 4. eaes (saith Bishop Hall) can wittnesse with what ap∣proofe, and applause divers of the Chatholikes royal (as they are termed) entertayned the new translated Lyturgie of our Church. Which is the lesse wonder seeing Pope Pius, the 4. sending Vincentio Parpatia, Abbot of S. Saviours to Queene Elizabeth offered, to confirmeCambden in An. 1560. Fresh suit l. 1. 203. the English Lyturgie by his authority, if she would yeeld to him in some other things. Indeed it pleased them so wel, that for the first eleven yeares of Queen Eliza∣beth: Papists came to the English Churches and ser∣vice, as the Lord Cooke sheweth: others of them, affirmeL. Cooke. de Iure Regis Ec∣clesiastico fol. 34. Syon pl. 90. 91. the same thing: namely their Churrh service pleaseth marvelous well the Romish beast, and his vngodly fol∣lowers. Witnesse the pacification of the devonshire Pa∣pists, in the time of Edward the 6. when as they vnderstood it was no other but the very masse booke put into English, wittnesse also the assertion of D. Carryer a daungerous se∣ducing Papist. The common prayer booke (saith he) and the Catechisme contayned in it: hould no point of doc∣trine expresly contrary to antiquity, that is (as he explai∣neh himselfe) the Romish service, onely hath notConsider. pag. 45. Sec. 8. 9. enough in it: and for the doctrine of predestination, sacraments, grace, free will, and sinne, &c. The new Catechisme and sermons, of the puritan preachers, runne wholy in these against the common prayer and
Mot. pref. to the Ans. Catechisme therein contayned, &c. And therevpon he comforteth himselfe, vpon the hope of supply of the rest, to this effect speaketh Bristow and Harding. If these things be right why not the rest? It shall not be amisse to marke one accurrence in Q. Elizabeths time, who beeing interdicted by the Popes Bull, secretary Walsing∣ham, tryed a trick of state pollicie to reverse the same. He caused two of the Popes intelligencers at the Popes appoint∣ment, to be brought (as it were in secret, into England, to whome he appointed a guide (beeing a state intelligencer) who should shew them in Canterbury and London, service solemnly sung and said, withall their pompe and procession, which order, the Popish intelligencers seeing, and so much admiring, they wondered that their master would be so vn∣advised, as to interdict a prince or state whose service and ceremonies so Symbolized with his owne: So returning to the Pope they shewed him his oversight, affirming that they saw no service, ceremonies or Church orders in England, but they might very well have been performed in Rome, where∣vpon the Bull was presently called in. Moreover such is the vnholinesse of this idol booke,2 Admon. p. 56. Def. Ad. p. 4. 1. Admo. p. 3. as the Nonconformists, generally have refused to sub∣scribe vnto it affirming it, to be such a peece of work as it is strāg any will vse it, there being in it most vile & vn∣allowable things. And for this cause they have besought the peeres of the realme, that it might be vtterly remo∣ved,Syon pl. 342. 318. 314. M. Gilby p. 29. and many reasons, they have given in severall trea∣tises, to prove their condemnation of it, just and law∣full▪ first because it is an infectious liturgie, oish stuffe, a devised service, and in it are many Religions mixed toge∣ther
of Christ and Antichrist, of God and the devil, besides2 Admon. 57. 1 Adm. 3. a booke full of fancies, and a great many thinges contrary to Gods word, and prayers which are false, foolish, superstitious, and starke naught &c. 2. They cannot account it praying, as they vse it commonly, but onely reading or2 Adm. 5 saying of prayers: even as a child that learneth to read, if his lesson be a prayer, he readeth a prayer, and doth not pray: even so it is commonly a saying and reading prayers and not praying. 3. In all the order of it there is no edifica∣tion but confusion. 4. We read not of any such liturgy1 Ad. p. 14 in the Christian Church in the dayes of the Apostles,Alt. dam. 178. nor in many ages following till blindnesse, ignorance and lazinesse, occasioned a prescript forme, to be made for idle and dumb Preists. 5. If this were not, many would make more profession of love to preaching, and hea∣ring Gods word, but by this meanes it is neglected,Against Bridg. 43. Curt. Ch. pow. 42. 45 and despised, for worldings, vsurers, drunkards, whoremon∣gers, and other earthly and Prophane people, away with nothing so well as English Masse, and why? but because it doth not sharply reprove them of their sins,Learned dis. Eccl. Gover. 68. Mart. Sen. p. 2. Practice of princ. addit. nor disclose the secret of their hearts, but that they may continue in all kind of voluptuousnesse, and all other kind of wickednesse, and therefore rightly is it called their sterve-vs booke. 6. God hath no where appoin∣ted, that the Church should be tyed, to read the booke of common prayer for his worship: and therefore to doe it, is an high transgression before him, as great as the sinne of Nadab and Abihu, and such are liable vnto the like or greater punishment. 7. If this were praying, and there were never an ill word nor sentence in all the
prayers, yet to appoint it to be vsed, or to vse it as Pa∣pists did their mattens and evening song, for a sex service to God, though the words be good, the vse is naught, the words of the first chapt. in Iohn be good, but to be put into a tablet of gould, for a soverainge thing to be2 Admon. 55. worne, the vse is superstitious and naught, and so is the vse of this service. Sundry other arguments of this nature are used of them, to prove their Service-booke a false, idolatrous, & unlawfull worship, the which I purposely omitt, be∣cause enough already hath been said about it. Yet there is one thing, which I thinke good here to note, namely a comparison, which they make betweene the Papists and Prelates, in forcing the practice of this foolish stuffe:Questions concern. churching of women p. 11. 12. Welfare the Papists (say they) for they shall rise up in judgement against you, (it is meant of the Hierarchie) who like good fellowes, yet in plain and open termes, even bare faced, as it were, doe seeke to reduce vs, and to draw vs to their false and idolatrous worship and service in poperie, as namely by their Masse, mattens, ensong, purification, and other such like, whereas you must daungerously, and even vn∣der a maske or visard, as it were, and not vnlike to him that transformeth himselfe into an Angell of light, doe goe a∣boutNote. to draw and allure vs to the selfe same worship and ser∣vice, but by cleanlier names and honester titles, &c. Marke (I pray thee) reader what they speake here, touching their likenesse and unlikenesse with the Papists: For their worship & Service, it is (they confesse) the selfe same false worship, used in Popere; The difference stands in their Bishops beguileing of the people; For they
doe lay more cunning snares & baites then the other, to have their idolatrie submitted unto; as for an in∣stance: The Papists call their trashe, Masse, &c. the o∣ther call it divine service, &c. And why have they left out the first title, but because they thinke few people would come to it, if it did cary still the ould name of the Beast upon the forehead of it. Nothing have the Nonconformists here said against that idolatrous book, but we also doe assent wholy ther∣to. Indeed in practice we agree not; For they will be present where the same is used, whether they thinke it lawfull so to doe, I know not, but this I know, that by their grounds laid downe against it, every true be∣leever is necessarily bound to separate from it, and not upon any occasion to joyne in communion there∣with; and this I will prove, 1. By precepts. 2. Examples. 3. by reasons. 4. by the testimonies of the learned. Of all which we will treat in order in the Section folowing. SECT. III. Abridg. Linc. Min. p. 22. THe Lord in scripture, hath laid it as a straight charge upon all the faithfull, to separate themselves from Idolaters, and to be as unlike to them as may be, specially in their religious observations and ceremo∣nies. The second commaundement proves this ef∣fectually, for there is absolutely forbidden all partici∣pation in any feigned service, whether it be to the true God or any other. When Ieroboam had set up a false worship, we reade
that the good Prophets of that time, and after, called the godly Israelites away from it, and bidd them in plaineHos. 4. 14. 15. Am. 5. 5. termes not to joyne therewith, but on the contrary to keepe Gods commaundements and statutes, appointed for his service, without adding any thing to them, or taking any thing from them. And this they must doe, although the King had confirmed his new religion, by act of Parliament or Counsell, and therefore no doubt would persecute most grievouslie all the refusers ther∣of.Out of which is the En∣glish ser∣vice booke taken, as the Non∣conform. say. See Iob 14. 4. Mat. 7. 18. Iam 3. 11. See Mr. Bale on the place Esa. 52. 11 The great Whore (much spoken off in the Reve∣lation,) hath devised an vncleane service, to worship the true God by; but what counsell gives the Holy Ghost to the elect concerning it? very profitable, even in these words, come out of her my people, Rev. 18. 4. that is, forsake her detestable religion, communicate in none of her vile & odious devises, what coulorable reasons soever, her unblessed followers make in defence thereof. Againe as this is a duety, so the faithfull in all ages have practised it, a memorable example whereof we have in 2 Chro. 11. 14. 16. There it is said that the Preists and Levites, and after them of all the tribes of Israel such as sett their hearts to seeke the Lord &. Came to Ierusalem to sacrifice, the like practice we read of, in Hezekiahs2 Chro. 30 11. time, divers of Asher, and Manasseh, and of Zebulun, humbled themselves and came to Ierusalem. All will con∣fesse, these were good separatists, and they did lawfully forsake the body, whereof they stood formerly mem∣bers, notwithstanding if we take a strict view and inquiry of that ministerie, worship, and Government, which
they left at Dan and Bethel, it will appeare evidently, that the same was not more false, idolatrous, and vnlaw∣full, then the present ministerie, worship, and govern∣ment, of the English assemblies is by the Nonconfor∣mists affirmed to be, and because none may thinke that I speake more than can be proved, I will therefore here lay down, an Apologie or pretext, which an Idolatrous Israelite, might frame in the defence of the Kings Reli∣gion, takē out of their own writings: & if D. Ames phraseFresh suit l. 2. p. 80. be tollerable I will pawne my head, that there is never a Nonconformists, this day in the world (let him keepe to their groundes) that is able to give more pretty reasons, and coulourable shews, to justifie the Religion of the Church of England; for thus they write: Course of conformi∣ty p. 161. When the Preists and Levits; according to their duety, resisted the novation, as liking better of their better warran∣ted old profession: both they, and some of all the Tribes of Israel following the voyce of God in their mouthes, were hardly intreated, whereupon there arose a great schisme: The men of Iudah and some of Israel, objected that they had for∣saken God; but the most part of Israel judged them to be ren∣ters of the vnity of the Kirk, rebells against the King, who was advanced by the Lord beside all expectation: was their lawfull Prince peaceably disposed, contenting himselfe with his own Kingdome, providing for the good estate of his own people, and vsing all meanes that they follow not other gods; and esteemed them to be superstitious Precisians in standing out against so gracious a King, commanding nothing against any article of faith, against any fundamentall point of salva∣tion, detesting the Gods of the Nations, and all kinde of ido∣latry.
The matters he vrged were but circumstantiall, ri∣tuall and variable, and such as the best Kings, having the Lords approbation, had changed before. They could say that the worship was the same in substance, that they served the same God who brought them out of Egypt, with the sacrifices and observation of all the statutes kept by all the fathers since the beginning of the world. That their Bullocks, which Precisians called idols, were similitudes representing the onely sacrifice of the Messiah, in whom they looked for salvation. Were there not Cherubines in the Tabernacle and Temple, and twelve Oxen or Buls of brasse appointed by the wisest King? The Lord forbiddeth such images onely as have di∣vine worship done vnto them; like the Calse in the wilder∣nes, turning the glory of God into the similitude of a bullock that eateth grasse. But they could say, that they worshipped not these Calves more then the images of the Cherubines. Are we so grosse when we say, Behold our Gods, as to think that they brought vs out of Egypt? We speake figura∣tively, as the Arke was called the King of Glorie, and the holy Lord God. Wee will rather give our lives, lands, libertie and all, then commit Idolatry for the pleasure of any Prince; and doe abhorre the abuse of Images, which is to bow down and serve them; albeit we be not of that mind but we may have them and worship God by them; because we know no place of Scripture to the contrary. The place of worship is but a circumstance; and to tie Gods presence to any place, who is neere in all times and places to them that call upon him, is superstition. The Arke was not ever in one place but often removed. In Salomons own time there was two publick places of Gods worship, and Salomon sacri∣ficed
in them both. Is not the whole land holy? The pro∣mise made to Salomon of a speciall presence at Ierusalem, was tyed to the condition of keeping his Statutes and Iudge∣ments, wherein he hath failed. And therefore as his Throne is thrown down, which the Lord at the same time promised to establish, so hath the place lost the priviledge of holinesse. We may plead from Antiquity: for heere is Bethel, so famous for that glorious testimony of his presence given to Iacob, from whom we this day have the name of Israel, Rehoboam is no wiser then his father, he may fall into his Idolatry, and so Israel by resorting to Ierusalem may be sna∣red. All danger of Idolatry would be prevented, the poore people eased of their tedious journies, and both Prince and people saved from Rhehoboams conspiracy. All this dinne and division proceedeth of the humours of some con∣tentious and avaritious Levits, seducing the simple people, making them to thinke that God cannot be served but in Ie∣rusalem, after their fashion in every circumstance and parti∣cular ceremony: and of the doting of some persons of the wea∣kest wit and ox, delighting to goe abroad, to be talked of for zeale, and more pleased with any worship then that which they have at home. The observation of the Feast of Taber∣nacles vpon the 15 day of the 8 month, is but the change of a circumstance of time. The day was made for man, and not man for the day. It was lawfull by Gods own warrant to keep the Passeover on the 14 day of the second month; he ca∣reth not for the month so the day be kept. It is presumption to alter things substantiall in matters of faith or doctrine: but superstition to stand vpon circumstances and variable ceremonies. What can be done, the Lords worship cannot
be neglected. If the Priests of Levi make it nice, will still prove contentious, and lead a faction with them for streng∣thening the Kingdome of Iudah, vpon warrant of Antiqui∣ty, before the distinction of Levi was made for orders sake, others of other Tribes, as well qualified as themselves, must be put in their places, and they put away as Abiathar was by Salomon, because he had his hand with Adonijah. It may be when they see their places well filled, and the charity of profuse people, which cannot last long, to decay, that their gid∣dines will go away, and they returne to their right wits. The Prophet that came to the King when his hand dryed vp, might have beene a Witch comming with lying wonders, for he was slaine by a Lyon: and howsoever he threatned destruction, he condescended vpon no time, lest he should have been convinced of a lye. Ahijah dealt not with the King in meeknesse and sincerity as became a Prophet; but by his bitternesse and passion declared that he was partially inclyned to Iudah. Abijah dyed not before his day. All things come a like to the godly and to the wicked, to him that sacrificeth and him that sacrificeth not. Or if his death was vntimous, it was rather for his secret intentious crossing his fathers courses, then for any good that was in him towards the God of Israel, as the Prophet would have it. 2 King 19. 18. In Elias time, there were seuen thousand in Israel which bowed not vnto Baal. That is refused to joyne in that vnholy worship, which was don vnto him. I might2 King. 18. 4. Exod. 20. 5 Ioh. 2. 16. Psa. 119. here instance Daniels forbearence of the Kings meats because they were defiled by idolatry. Thirdly the reasons are these. 1. It sheweth that the love and zeale of God, is much in vs, when our care
is to worship onely in his own ordinances, and to leave the contrarie. 2. Men offer a blind and lame sa∣crifice, when they communicate spiritually in a devisedMal. 1. Rom. 12. 1. 2. service: who would be so foolish to cary trashe, and dung for a present vnto a mighty Prince, and hope to re∣ceive a favor of him, what is a false worship, but very dung and trashe, yea worse too: and therefore not ac∣ceptable to God. 3. So long as men are willworship∣pers, it argues they are vnregenerate and wicked, and have not repented of their sinnes: for one infallibleEsa. 30. 22. evidence of true conversion, is to see the filthinesse of idolatry, and to cast away the same with reproach, and disgrace, and to goe from it as farre as it is possible.Rev. 3. 4. 4. To communicate in a false worship causeth pollu∣tion to the soule. If we would avoyd that whichEze. 43. 7, 8. would make the body to be full of scabs, and biles and so to be lothsome to mē: much more, should we detest2 Chro. 11 15. Eze. 20, 5. Deu. 7, 25, 26. See Pareus in Am. 4, 2 Levit. 10, 1. 2. Zep. 1. 4. 5 Rev. 18, 4. Lev. 18 3. & 9. 7. Col. 2. 10. 2 King 21, 4, 7. 2 Cor. 6, 16 17. this great wickednesse, which causeth spirituall botches and sores to the soule: and so is odious, before God. 5. By this meanes, Gods holy name is Prophaned. 6. Christ not suffered to reigne as King over the whole man, but rejected. 7. Such service is don to the devil. 8. The Lord hateth vnspeakeablie all de∣vised worship. 9. Wrath and vengeance without repentance willbe inflicted upon all the doers therof. For society in sinne brings fellowship in punishment. 10. In a word, let Gods puritie and holinesse be con∣sidered, and his charge given unto us, to be unlike ido∣laters, when we performe publicke service unto him; And last of all, if we joyne to no false worship, but
serve God, according to his revealed will, then isRev. 14. 4. Christ obeyed as our King and Lord; the reward wher∣of willbe glory & immortall happinesse. Sermon upon Ps. 16. 4. 4. In this we have the consent of learned men ge∣nerally. Calvin sayth, we are bound to seperate from all superstitions, which are contrrry, as well to the service of God▪ as to the honour of his Sonne. And a little after, Let vs hold this rule, that all the inventions of men, which are sett vp to corrupt the simple purity of the word, and to overthrow the service which God demaundeth, and alloweth they are very sacrileidges, wherewith a Christian man may not communicate without blaspheming of God, that is toIn 1 Cor. 10. 14. Chap. 18. 4 Dial. of serving the time. say, without treading his honour under foot. Pareus to the same purpose sayth, that all kinds, occasions, and instruments of idolatrous service, must be avoyded as a most abominable and hurtfull Plague, with the mind and body. Bullinger upon the Revelation sharply reproves those which willbe present at false worship, and saith, that eve∣ry ones duty is to fly from the same as farre as it is possible. We must forsake (saith Museulus) the society of all un∣lawfull and superstitious services, and joyne our selves with those that walke directly in the true religion of Christ. The like speakethIn 1 cor. 10. 21. Piscator,In Apo. 18, 4. In Mat. 18 fol. 143. Artopeus,In Cen∣sura cap. 9 fol. 471. Bu∣cer,In Psal. 16. 4. p. 79, 80. Pomeranus,Paraph. in 1 Cor. 10, 14. Erasmus,De unit. cc. nu. 2. Cyprian,In Hos. 11, and Am. 8. Hieron,De civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 5. Au∣gustine,In Levit. 18. 3. 4. Pelican, &In Hos. 4. 15, p. 156. and vers. 17, p. 158. Rhe. Test▪ in 1 Cor. 10. 21. Rivetus. To this the Papists assent also; For speaking of false services shifted into their Churches, in stead of Gods true and only worship, they say, that all Catholike men, if they looke to have any fellow∣ship with Christ and his members in his body and blood, &c.
must absteine from them, &c. And among other reasons, they give this, viz. because Christ will acquit himselfe of all such as joyne in communion therewith. But I need not to spend time, to seeke abroad for witnesses; For the Nonconformists doe grant the thing: We may not (say they) have any religious communion, orDarrell. Treat. Ch. 17. Trial sub∣script p. 6. Mr. Gilby preface. Refutat. Rast. 720. upon 2 Com. Idolat. last time 690. T. C. l. 1. p. 131. partake in divine worship, with idolaters in their false ido∣latrous worship (no not in body be present at idolatrous service,) but we must absteine from all participation of idolatrie, yea from all shew thereof, Heathen or Anti∣christian, & must separate, and com out from among them. The like speaketh D. Fulke, Brinsley, Perkins, Cart∣wright, &c. and the author of the Post-script to Mr. Perkins Expositiō vpon Iude renders this as a reason of it, not to absteine from communicating with them in their ido∣latrous services, &c. were no other but to expose and lay our selves open and naked to all manner of daun∣ger, of infection of our Soules, defection from our God, and in the end of all destruction, both of body and soule. Now from the last two Sections we may frame this argument. If the worship of the English Service booke hath no war∣rant in Gods word, but is a devised, false, and idolatrous worship; then is it vnlawfull to be communicated with. But the worship of the English Service-booke hath no warrant in Gods word, but is a devised, false, and idolatrous worship; Therefore is the worship of the English Service-booke vn∣lawfull to be communicated with. I need not here take D. Laitons compasse, to fetch the Bishops Major, and the Se∣paratists▪Syons p. 85. minor, to make vp an entire Syllogisme of separatiō;
For both parts of this argument are the Nonconformists, And I thinke they will stand to the justification ther∣of, if not against us, yet against the Prelates, if occasion serve: But if any part be questioned, I know it will∣be the assumption, and therefore in the next Section I will further prove the same by more of their owne testimonies. SECT. IV. HOwsoever by the grounds of the Nonconformists, laid downe in the second Section, separation must necessarily follow, from all communion with them, in the worship of their church service book: yet to have the point more fully proved. I will here shew that every particular part thereof, is affirmed of themselves, to be idolatrous, false, Antichristian. Touching the booke we may consider two things: first the distinct services thereof. 2. The ceremonies vsed in, and about the same; we will speake first of their ceremonies, that is of the surplusse, crosse, and kneeling, in the act of receiveing the Lords supper. Against these many treatises have bene purposely written, I will here onely observe some of their speaches, referring the reader to their bookes, if he desire more satisfaction. Of all these cere∣monies thus they say:anatomy of cerem. made by M. Sprint before def. of Pet. to the King. They were inspired by satan, inven∣ted by man, commaunded first to be practised by the Beast, and his Bishops: Therefore they are Idols of Rome, Ba∣bilonish
rites,Alt. da. 189. part of the scarlet woman her inventions,a Park. cr. l. 1. 28.Trial. subscrip. p. 7. Popish fooleries, accursed remnants, and leaves of the blas∣phemous Popish Preisthood, knowne liveries of Antichrist. God never planted them, nor his spirit inspired them, the holy Apostles never taught, nor practised them, all sincere professors, are offended with them, and de∣testd Gilby p. 5. 14. 17 40. them.Anato∣my of Ce. Fr. suit. l. 2. 27. Anat. Cer. The defenders of these carnall and beggar∣ly rites, are tyranous proud Prelates, Romish Champions & Apostates, Covetuous chancellors, dignifyed chaplins, alias choplivings, ambitious pluralists, Symonicall patrons, alias Latrons, and the approvers of them they say are impious Atheists, scandalous nonresidents, dumb homilists powling registers, proctors, paritors, &c. And all other Prophane livers and wicked haters of God. Moreover we find many vnanswereable arguments vsed, in their wri∣tings to prove, this trashe to be against the word of God, exceedingly idolatrous, and so ought not to have any place in Religious worship, to instance a few. All addition in Gods worship is directly forbidden in Gods word,Syon pl. 3. 19. both in the old & new Test. Deu. 12. 32. Rev. 22. 18. But these Ceremonies are an addition in Gods worship to the word, as they doe not deny. Ergo, they are directly forbidden by the word: All spirituall communion with those Idolitours amongst whome we live in the misteries of their Idolatrie and supersition is sin. To vse those Ceremonies in divine worship is a spirituall communion with Idolatrous Papists, in the misterie of their Idolatry and superstion. Ergo to vse those Ceremonies is to sin. M Bradsh. 12. Arg. 6. 7. To mingle Prophane things with divine is to sinne: to vse these Ceremonies in divine worship is to mingle Prophane
things with divine. Ergo, to vse those Ceremonies in di∣vine worship is to sinne. Another thus. All things in the Church ought to edifie, these things doe not edifie, therefore they ought not to be in the Church. Offences and supersti∣tions ought to be avoyded, these rites offend and are supersti∣tions,Sold. Bar. therefore they ought to be avoyded. No idolatrous remnants, nor monuments must be reteyned; these are idola∣trous monuments and remnants, therefore they may not be reteyned. Nothing may be thrust into the Church contrary, or besides the scriptures: these are contrarie and besides the scriptures. Therefore they may not be thrust into the Church.Ans. to the Exam. p. 32. offer for conf. p. 17. T. C. rest of Second rep. 173. park. cross. lib. 1. p. 38. I could name many others of this kind. But here is enough, to shew the reason, why the Nonconformists say, that these Ceremonies are not to be received, though all the Princes in the world doe commaund them, no good Christian must yeeld any way to them. But rather avoyd them, more then the Ceremonies of the Turkes, and to thinke no otherwise of them, then of the devil himselfe. Thus much for their Ceremonies in generall: now a few words of them in particular, and so to another point. The surplusse is called of them the popes crea∣ture,Admo. 1 17. a lowsy rag,Sold. Bar. Popish apparel,Necess. disp. 70. the whore of Babilons smocke,Proposit. about Kneel. 3. park. cross, . 1. 9. id. 187. 71. 1 Adm. 4. Neces. Dis. 69, a filthy Idol, e charactor of Antichrist, and the divel, one of the pedlerie wares of popery, and the cast apparel of the harlot of Rome, devised by Pope Adrian in the yeare: 796. Who borrowed it as they thinke, of certaine, Aegiptian Monkes, who vpon the skinns which they vsed to weare, for their apparel, did weare linnen garments, from whence the name of surplusse seemeth to come:
sundry reasons they give to have this trashe abolished. 1. Because it serves not for comlinesse and gravitie, but rather it is rideculous & stagelike, meeter for foolesAlt. Dam. 216. T. C. l. 1, 73 def. Pet. for ref. 46. Par. cr. 17. 8. and commedians, then for ministers. 2. It hardens the hearts of the Papists, and causeth them to be stiffe in their poopery. 3. Hinders the weake from profit∣ting in the knowledge of the Gospell. 4. It is a mas∣sing garment, & therfore as vndecēt for the holy spouse of Christ, as harlots weeds are for a grave Matron, 5. Christ and his Apostles, and the fathers in the better times of the Church made no distinction in apparel. 6. The gray Amice and other Popish garments defiled withDef. Pet. for Re. 46. superstition, can make as good plea for themselves as the surplusse can. I will end this in the words of the Admonition to the Parliament. Copes, caps, surplesses, tippets and such like baggage, serve not to edification, but they cause discord, they hinder the preaching of the Gospell, they keepe the memorie of Aegypt still among vs, they bring the mi∣nistery1 Adm. 18 into contempt, they offend the weake, they encourage the obstinate, therefore can no authority by the word of God, with any pretence of order and obedience, commaund them nor make them in any wise tollerable. But by circumstances they are wicked and against the word of God. The signe of the crosse which they vse in Baptisme, they say is the marke of the beast,Sy on pl. 102. a jugglers gestureAlt. Da. 205. a magi∣call instrument,Park cross l. 1. 155. 7. 170. l. 2. 56. Fresh suit l. 1. 17. 18. a rite, and badge of the divel, a harlot which stirreth vp to Popish lust. If a maypole should be brought into the Church for children to daunce about, and clime vpon, in signe of their desire to seek things above: if a stif straw were put in the childs hand for a
signe of fighting against spirituall enimies, as with a speare, there would be no more follie in those, then in the crosse. Remove of impu∣tations from the minist, of Devonsh. & Cornw. pag. 106. Defenc. Pet. for Refor. p. 29 Againe, to prove that no such thing should be used in Baptisme, they give these reasons. 1. Because the word of God is wholy against it. 2. The Crosse is made there a very idol. 3. It is to depart from the plaine institutution of our Saviour Christ. 4. It hath been idolatrously abused in Poperie, and hath no ne∣cessarie use now. 5. It encroacheth upon the very sub∣stance of the Sacrament. 6. It is but a late devise, hatch∣ed by the Pope. 7. It is not a ceremonie pertayning to the decencie of a Sacrament. 8. It is scandalous and offensive to good Christians. Lastly, as much may beAlt. Dam. 206, Park. of the Cr. 1, 2, p. 129 said, for putting salt in the mouth of the child, an∣noynting with oyle the breast, and shoulders, and the top of the head with holy Chrisme, and to put a burning taper in his hand, &c. and for the whole waineload of such toyes, and as the proctors of the crosse can say for it. Hence it is that the strictest Inconformists affirme, that it is utterly unlawfull for parents to bring their children to be crossed, and they give many reasons. 1. Men may doe nothing to their children, but what themselves would have don to themselves, if they were to be Baptized, now what good heart could endure this idolatrie? 2. It is a speciall dishonour to the Lord,Mr. Bates 260 which men should avoyd, both themselves, and in, and by others. 3. This, as all humane inventions, hinders frō the child when it is wittingly don by the parents, the
power of Baptisme, as much as is possible. Disput. upō com∣mun. at confus. comm. 31. Syōs pl. 70 Disp. up. 73. 70 Touching kneeling in the act of receiving, they say it is Idolatrie, a spawne of the beast, a diabolicall gesture, a super∣stition which prophaneth Christs true religion, and makes the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to become an idol feast. There are many treatises extant at this day against this evill practise, now among other arguments, laid down by the Nōconformists, to prove it an vnlawfull gesture. I will breifly here repeate eight of thē. 1. Kneeling in the act of receaving the bread & wine in the Lords Supper, is aAbridg. 70 Perth As∣semb. 35 ceremonie altogether inexpedient to be used. 2. It takes away that commendable gesture, used by Christ & his Apostles in, and after the constitution. 3. The se∣cond commaundement of the Law is hereby broken,Idem 46. and idolatrie divers wayes committed. 4. This robsMr. Bat. 216. the Lord of that due worship, which he ought to re∣ceive from every one. 5. There is no direction in the whole scripture, either by precept or cōmaunded ex∣ample,Abridg. 71 for receaving any Sacraments kneeling, whereas for receaving with other gestures, there is both. 6. ThisPer. As∣sem. 54. is to conforme grosly with the Papists, even in an act wherein the life and soule, as it were of their idolatrie, standeth. 7. The primitive Churches for sundry hun∣dredAbridg. 73 1 Adm. 4. yeares after the Apostles, never used to receive the Sacrament kneeling, till Pope Honorius afterwardes de∣creed it. Lastly, this gesture of kneeling holds no pro∣portion with the cheife end and use of this Sacra∣ment,Abridg. 77 nor with that inward disposition of heart, which is then required of us. And thus much for their surplusse, crosse, and kneeling,
from all which this argument may be framed: That worship, in which a man cannot possibly communicate with∣out sinne, he is bound necessarily to separate frrom: but that worship, in which these Idols are made and vsed (viz.) the surplusse, crosse, and kneeling, a man cannot possibly com∣municate without sinne. Therefore from that worship, wherein these Idols (viz. the surplusse, crosse, and knee∣ling) are made and vsed, a man is bound necessarily to se∣parate: The Proposition is certaine, and by D. Ames inLib. 4, cap. 24. his Cases of conscience acknowledged. Although (saith he, we may joyne to that Church, in which many defects are to be tollerated, yet not to that in which we cannot but neces∣sarily partake with sinne. The Assumption is assented unto, by as Iudicious and Zealous Nonconf. as ever heldPark. Cr. l. 1. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 10, 14. that cause, and they have brought good proofes for it. First, because men must fly from Idols and Idolothites, but when they come to worship God, after the order of the congregation, where these things are practised they doe not fly from them, but draw neere unto them.Mr. Bat. 258. 2. Their bare presence argues their approbation and yeelding in shew to ceremonies. 3. Though the per∣sonall sinnes of the minister, doe not hurt the people, yet his ministeriall and publicke sinnes doe hurt, which he performes from the people to God, and so their joyning with him is unlawfull. 4. What ex∣ample can be brought, where the holy men of God have communicated with such things. P. 68. The author of the dispute vpon communicating at their confused communions, affirmes confidentlie, that the sitter is accessary to the sin of the kneeler, and he gives
many reasons for it, whereof we shall have a fit occa∣sion hereafter to speake. And now let the reader consider, if both parts of the former reason be true, as the Nonconformists say: whether this one principle of theirs, will not justifie a seperation from most of their parish meetings. For surelie I thinke, not one minister in the land of 500, but makes, and vseth ordinarilie those Idols of Rome, when their publike service is administred. Having ended with their Ceremonies, we are next to treat of the worships themselves: and because these are divers, I will speake therefore of each the more breifly: wishing the reader if he desire to know moreAl. Dam. 197. Sol. Barw. Ques. con. Chur. wo. 54 7. Lear. dis. Ec. Gover. 73. Qu. con. Ch. wom. p. 7. 22. heerin, to iniquire after their bookes. Churching of wo∣men, after childbirth they terme a superstitious service, a point of poperie, a soolish custome: indeed no other then a plaine mocking of God, and prophaninge of his name and Religion, devised meerelie of men, viz. the Pa∣pists. Moreover to prove it a false and idolatrous worship, they give these reasons. 1. In the whole forme there is no thanksgiveing at all: but a mecre Iewish or Popish purifying, and therefore it is a horri∣ble mocking of God, to pretend that they give him prayse, when there is not a word spoken, tending or lookinge that way. 2. This thanksgiveing as theyId. p. 12. Note Id. 7. 23. Id. 14. Ec. Go. 74. Q. con. Chu. 27. cal it) is even the very same, word for word (excep∣ting the title) with their purification in poperie, the dif∣ference is onely in this, that the Papists is in Latin, and theirs in English. 3. Whosoever doth this, shewes herselfe, either to be a low or Papist. 4. The primi∣tive
Churches never vsed it, neither ought it to beidem. 23. suffered in any wel reformed Church. 5: Chauncel∣lours, officials &c. Are hereby justifyed in their croo∣ked, and vnconscionable proceedings, 6. This bree∣deth and nourisheth many superstitious opinions, in the simple peoples hearts, as that the woman which hath borne a child is vncleane or vnholie, contrarie to the2. Tim. 2. Ec. Go. 74 Apostles word, Who teacheth that godly women are sanctifyed by bearing of children. Againe that it is vnlaw∣full for her, vpon necessitie to goe out of her doores, before she be Churched, that this Churching is a necessarie part of the ministers office &c. Touching the Psalme,I. Adm. p. 13. Qu. con. ch. w. 62. Def. Adm. 1. Ad. p. 13 Ec. Gov. 74. see T. C. l. 1. 67. 68. 121. appointed for that purpose, they say, it is child shlie abused, yea the words grealy Prophaned. Lastly for their other rites and customes viz. the womans lying in with a white sheet vpon her bed. her coming forth must d and vailed, as beeing ashamed to looke vp for some folly committed: her appointed offering, the Clarkes waiting her home, and the midwives going by her side forth and back &c. These they terme Bables, foolish, and superstitious things. 2 Ad. 17. 1 Ad. 13. Ec. Go. 73 Distinct 5 de conse. cap. de his vero. Sold. Bar. The confirmation of children, by laying on of the hands of the Bb. is not (say they) agreable to the word of God at all. But a meere device of man, a Popish, and peevish superstition, brought in by Pope Clement the first in the yeare 310. Who affirmed that he was no Christian which wilfullie left this vndon. Pope Melciades came after, and affirmed it to be a more worthy Sacrament, then the Sacrament of Baptisme. To prove this confir∣mation a wicked and most vile practice, these reasons
are alleaged of them. 1. Because as it is prescribed by their booke, it is made a new Sacrement beside those two which Iesus Christ ordained. 2 SeeingDef. Pet. for Refor. p. 35, Fe. on the Sacsr. Park. of the Cr. l. 1, 101, Perth Assem. 92, 9, T. C. rest sec. rep. 232, T. C. l. 1, 199, 100. Ag. Bridg. slan. p. 107 Eccles. Gov. 73, the gifts of miracles which the Apostles had, are cea∣sed, this kind of imposition of hands (which was ta∣ken vp at first from an Apish imitation thereof) must ceasse also. 3. Whereas the ministration of Baptisme is permitted to everie hedge Preist, minister, and deacon, the Prelates, doe presumptiouslie and damnablie, to appropriate this alone to themselves. 4. They doe not onely pray over them, but impose hands vpon them, that by meanes thereof they may receive strength against all the temptations of sin, which is to take that powr to them which God never gave them, & to do a thing wherof they have no promise that any good shall follow: Lastlie, this displaced chatechising brought in steed thereof, vaine toyes and childish ceremonies to the great hurt of the Church. There∣fore for these reasons it ought to be shut out, and have no place in the Church of God. The like they speake of their order and rites, where∣by matrimony, is celebrated in their Churches. TheSyon pl. 29 defenc. admon. T. C. l. 1. 199 & 2. rep. 236. Def. Pet. for Refor. 63, 64, 1 Adm, 13 forme of it is taken out of the masse booke, & there∣fore called prettie juggling trash, the ring there vsed is generallie reputed, a Popish and idolatrous practise, and no lesse superstition, is there committed in saying with may body I thee worship, for herein the new maried man makes an idol Of his wife. I omitt many other heathe∣nish and Antichristian toyes which the Nonconformists relate, to be observed herein, whereby saith the author
of the Admonition, they make rather a maygaime of mar∣riage, then a holy institution of God. As for their restraintIn Chro. Graftoni. sold. Bar. Def. Per. 216. of marriage in Lent, and other certaine times, they call it the doctrine of devils: devised by Pope Nicholas, in the yeare 871. And since vpheld by his vncleane birds, for filthie lucre sake. But here the Nonconformists, would have vs to take notise, that howsoever the Hierarchie, forbid somtime this thing; yet any man may have aAlt. Dam. 195, 196. dispensation for mony, and then those holy times shall have no pollution by marriage, such vertue mony hath with it, or such powr it hath with these base cater∣pillers. First B. dis. p. 65. Concerning Burials, this they say. All prayers either over, or for the dead, are not onely superstitious andT. C. rest sec. rep. 237, Def. Ad. Syon pl. 29, vaine: but also are Idolatrie, and against the plain scriptures of God. No such thing was vsed in the Apostles time, & as for their prescript forme of service, appointed for this businesse, it is taken wholy from the stincking portuis, and for this cause they name them∣selves Popish apes. Beside prayer for the dead is main∣tayned, and partlie gathered out of some of their pray∣ers.1 Adm. p. 1, Sold. Bar. r Adm. 13 T. C. l. 1, p. 200. Id. As for the white or balck crosse, set vpon the dead corps, & ringing a threefould peale, the practice is Popish: mourning in Black garments for the dead, if it be not hypocriticall, yet it is superstitious and heathenish: funerall sermons, they also vtterly condemne, because they are put in the place of Trentalls, and many other superstitious abuses follow thereby. To be breife the Prests meeting the corps at the Church stile, with the clarke in their surplusses, the manner of laying the dead
in the grave. viz. East and West, that he may rise withA. Dam. 199. 200, 201, Ec. Go. 75 M. Bates 183. his face to the East, the Preist offering and mortuarie, the bread and other thing, given to the poore, distinction of Burials, as some in the chauncel, some in the Church, and some in the Churchyades, all these are said to be naught, idolatrous, vnlawfull: and therefore the Non∣conformists, will have the dead to be buried in this sort, (holding no other way lawfull) namely, that it be con∣veyed to the place of Burial, with some honest com∣pany of the Church, without either singing, or reading, yea without all kind of ceremony heretofore vsed,First 600. of dis. 65. other then that the dead be committed to the grave, with such gravity, and sobriety as those that be pre∣sent, may seeme to feare the judgements of God, and to hate sin, which is the cause of death, and thus doe the best and right reformed Churches bury their dead,Ec. Go. p. 75. witout any ceremonies of praying or preaching at thē. 2 Ad. 57. We com next to their Sacraments, which are (as they say▪ sinfully mangled, Prophaned, and wickedly mini∣stred: The prescript sorme of service, whereby their Lord supper is consecrated and administred, is takenSyon pl. 29. wholy out of the Popish dunghil, the masse-boke, and such are the inventions, Prophanations, and superstitions, vsed in this ordinance, as the Nonconformists, professe that they eate not the Lords supper, but playe a pageant ofM. Gilbie pref. p. 2. their own to blind the people, and keepe them still in super∣stition, farre from the simplicitie of Christes supper: to make the seely soules beleeve that they have an English masse: (which is too true faith the author in the margent) and so put no difference betwixt truth and falshood, be∣twixt
Christ and Antichrist, betwixt God and the de∣vil. I might here lay dowe every particular thinge, which they doe herein, as the Preists standing at the North side of the table, his begining with the Lords prayer, and a collect, rehearsing afterwards the ten com∣maundements, and the creed: then reading a short exhor∣tation to those which are minded to receive: their fal∣ling downe, and rysing vp againe many times toge∣ther, their manner of consecrating the bread and wine, taking it Kneeling, the ministers going vp and downe to give it to every one with his owne hand, his spea∣king in the singular number. Take thou &c. TheyrAlt. Dam. 211. 212 213. 1 Ad. 4. 11 saying over againe the Pater noster, with singing, piping, surplusse &c. All these say the inconform: are disorders, superstitions, Prophanation of Scriptures, and don con∣trary to the practice of the primitive Churches, and just after the manner of the Papists. 1 Adm. 12 2 Adm. 57 Sold. Bar. park. cros. l. 1, 71. 1 Adm. 4. T. C. l. 1, 168. Alt. Dam. 203. 204, Des. p. for Refor. 34. T. C. sec. rep. last p. 224. 225. Gilb. end b. 1 Adm. 12 Their publick Baptisme is ful of childish and supersti∣tious toyes, and as for the prayers vsed therein, they are either foolish or false. And no marvaile seeing they are also taken out of the cursed masse-booke. The conjured font, (as they name it) was brought in by Pius the first in the yeare 147. And Pope Higinus brought in Godfa∣thers, and Godmothers, in the yeare 143. both which they call pecces of poperie, the interogatories ministered to the infant, a foolish thinge, agreat mockerie of Gods service, whereby an occasion is given to men to vtter a lie before the Lord. That the Godfathers and God∣mothers shill promise that the child, doth beleeve and doth forsake the devil &c. Is a thing wickedly
put vpon them, and baptisme by this meanes excee∣dingly prophaned. Of the crosse we have spoken before: there is yet one thing touching it, which the reformists, wish vs to observe: That is, a most wicked practise of their vngracious Bishops, these whelpes of Antichrist,Curt. Ch. pow. p. 4. 5. will have infants signed forsooth with the signe of the crosse. In token that hereafter they shall not be ashamed to confesse the faith of Christ &c. And to fight against sin &c. Now marke, what notorius moc∣kers of God these are. For if any one who is thus signed, doth afterwards confesse the faith of Christ against Arminians and Papists, and fights against the maine workes of the devill, to weet, the Popish Ceremo∣nies, goverment, worship, ministerie &c. They will surely rayse vp against him, the greatest persecution that may be, & he must either forsake his owne countrie, or they will kill him in prison. 1 Ad. 4. 11. 12. Sol. Barw. T. C. l. 1. 28. 29. 143 T. C. rest sec. rc. 144▪ 145. 146. Per. Asse, 96▪ 97. Moreover touching private Baptisme, and ministring the Lords Supper in their houses, this geare (they say) is repugnant and against Gods word, in effect like to a Popish Masse, a popish and superstitious practise, foolish∣ly and sinfully first taken up; For the Sacraments were not ordained of God, to be used thus, as Charmes and Sorceries, but left to the congregation, and necessarily annexed to the scriptures, as seales of the same, yet not tyed to the material Churches, made of dead stones, but to the church made of livelie stones: If therefore the congregation be in a wood, house, or cave, the Sa∣craments may be administred in a wood, house, or cave, but the same must be don in the sight of the as∣semblie,
Def. Pet. for Ref. 37. 38, for they are irrigiously handled when they are administred otherwise. Baptizing by women they also condemne, and hold it to be no more the holy Sa∣crament of Baptisme then any other dayly or ordina∣rie1 Adm. 12 T. C. I. 1. 144, T. C. rest last rep. 124. Sol. Barw. Alt. Dam. 188. Curt Ch. p. 121, 122 2 Adm. 57 Syon pi. 108. id. 117 Sol. Barw. Alt. Dam. 189. Sold. Bar. washing of the child. Lent fast, they say, was ordained by Pope Telesphorus in the yeare 136. and they keepe it England, for the fame end that the Papists doe. Iustlie, therefore is it named a Romish Error, a superstitious fast. The service appointed for that time, is against the seriptures, and Gods name prophaned by the curses and adjurations then used. For their other fasts, they are said to be monuments of Idola∣trie, devised of Antichrist, in all the rites and orders of them superstitious, and directlie against Gods com∣maundements. As for wendesdayes, frydayes, and sater∣dayes fasts, Bonifacius is said to ordaine them in the year 315. And Pope Calixtin in the yeare 206. ordained Imber fastes. And in the yeare 425. another Romish Beast or∣dained Saints Eves fasts. And all this trash & dung wasFirst rep. 80. Sy. pl. 108. first devised by Montanus, that notable Heretick, as Mr. Cartw. observeth from Eusebius: and for what use serues all this trumperie: but only to keepe out, andAlt. Da. 182. T. C. I. 1. 151. 1 Adm. 11 M. Iac. Art. 22. Scarpius Cru. The. de Ec. Tri. p. 40. 41. hinder true fasting indeed. The observation of holy dayes: as Christmasse, Circum∣cision, Epiphanie, Purification, and all other of the saints, is a breach of the second commaundement; and here∣in, some part of the abominations of the Romish reli∣gion is practised; Such therefore as impose this upon mens consciences, doe it without any warrant of Gods word, and therefore the same cannot be kept lawfully▪
Many good reasons for this, are shewed in their wri∣tings,Per. Ass. p. 63. to 87, as the reader may see (if he please) in the places noted. Sol. Barw. Moreover they doe affirme, that the whole prescript service appointed for these Saints dayes is idolatrous, An∣tichristian. Of the same nature are all their ordinarie col∣lects, Pope Gregorie & Celasius, they say, ordained them; and they have them word for word, as they stand in the Blasphemous Massebooke. I might here shew howAg. Banc. 38. curt. ch. pow 41. 2 Adm. 56 57. Alt. Dam. 185. Abrid. 94. 2 Adm. 57 some of their Collects are charged with Arianisme, others with Poperie & Arminianisme; Many with lies, and manifest contradictions. But to be short, they tell us in one word, that the saying of them is not Praying, but indeed wicked pratling. As for the Letanie well na∣turing the name of a laborious service in the dust and durt (for so Homer and others useth the same) it is bor∣rowed from the practise of the Heathen, as Causabon out of Dionysius Habicarnasse observeth; And is in very∣deed nothing, but an impure Masse of conjuring and char∣mingExercit. p. 27. Hist. trob. frank. p. 30 Atar. Da. 638. 639. Syon pl. 316. 317. Def. Ad. 4. Cartw. ag. Rhe. Test. p. 2. Battologies, whereby the name of God is highly prophaned, his house and worship abused, Gods people by it abandoned the sanctuarie, and the prophane love no worship so well as it. The Epistles and Gospells read in their Churches, is a practise taken wholy from Rome, and they use the verie same which the others doe. This chapping & hacking of the scriptures, this rending of it a peeces one from an∣other, is contrarie to the order which God hath or∣dained, and his churches practised from time to time, and therefore the Nonconformists have desired that it
might be taken away as an evill thing. Againe, inSee de∣fence of the minist. reasons, for refusal of subscrip to the booke of com. pr. first and second part, pa. 14, to 21. those Epistles & Gospells, which the Prelates cause su∣perstitiouslie thus to be read: There are sundry words and sentences of holy scriptures left out, which were given by divine inspiration, for the profit of the whole church: and many words and sentences of their owne foolish braine added to the text, as parts of it, yea in many places, such absurd things are put, as no reason∣able sence can be made thereof. Besides very often the meaning of the Holy Ghost is perverted, by a false in∣terpretation of the text, and sundry places applyed to the countenancing, of some points of false doctrine. All this is shewed largely by the ministers of Lincolne in the Abrigement, and the like they say of the Psalmes in the booke of common prayer: the prescript numberSold. Bar. Tabl whereof and Lessons, as the English Preists now ob∣serve, were devised by Pope Gregorie the seventh in the yeare 1073. That any of the Apocrypha should be publikely read, the Nonconformists hold it utterlie unlawfuli, 1. Be∣causeCartwr. cat. p. 98. Act. 13. 15 and 15, 22 2 Tim. 3, 16, 17. Abrid. 8. 9 Def. Pet. for Refor. 92, 93. to use any word publikelie in the church, beside the written word of God, contayned in the Canoni∣call scriptures, is condemned by the second com∣maundement. 2. In the church of the Iewes, in the Apostles time, only Moyses and the Prophets were read. 3. The scriptures are sufficient, both for doctrine, and manners, and were given to that end. 4. It is the proper office of Christ to be the teacher of his church, and therefore no writing may be appointed to be read in the congregation, for instruction of manners, but
only such as have been indited by his spirit. 5. ManySecond part of the defence of minist. reas refus. subscrip. Mr. Brought. treat. of Apo. p. 23 to 35. by this meanes are brought into a great error, thinking that the same is scripture. 6. These Apocripha bookes containe a number of shamefull lies, horrible blasphemies, vaine vanities, plaine contradictions, ridiculous fooleries, Athean Impieties, Fables, fitter for Tlmachus and Ae∣neas, then for Gods people. Notwithstanding though these bookes be thus false, wicked, and abominable, yet in their assemblies many of them are commaunded to be read, for first lessons, yea under the name of the ho∣lie scriptures of the old Testament, without any note of difference from the Canonicail, as the lying story of Susanna under the name of Daniel 13. and in as great a measure for their proportion as the other. Moreover many of the Apocryphall chapters are to be read twise in one yeare, and some thrice, but so are not any of the Canonical chapters of the Old Testament; but a great partA bridg. p. 7. of thē & of the New also, by the order which their cō∣mon prayerbooke prescribeth, are not to be read at all in their churches. Lastly, the Nonconf. tell us, that these idle Legends are read upon their great holy dayes, whenThey meane in the opiniō of the Bb. the church assemblies are wont to be best frequented, and oftimes the holy scriptures must give place to them, as tending more to edification, and therefore may not be so well spared as the other. Alt. Dam. 193. 2 Adm 47 T. C. I. 1. 196, 197. Neces. dis. 52. 53. Eccl. Gov. 49. Reading of Homilies in the church (which is a cu∣shion for idle and blind Priests to rest upon) is said to be foolish, fond, and vnlawfull; a practise never heard of in the church in the Apostles time, neither indeed is it a meanes to beget faith, but the instrument of foolish and
Park. Cr. l. 1, 192, &c. Nu. 10. 28 D. Chader. Sermon upon Rō. 12, p. 53. Let such as have been plea∣ders, for humane formes of prayer, answere this if they can. idoll sheapheards. As the Prophets therfore might not in calling the people together, blow any trumpets, but those which were made and set a part for that pur∣pose, by the commaundement of God, so ought not the ministers of God, to expound or read openly in the congregation any writings, but onlie the Canonicall Scriptures, which the Lord hath set a part, and sancti∣fyed for that use. Here by the way I wish the reader to note well the last words, viz. that no writings, ought to be read in the congregation, but the Canonicall Scriptures. This Position is often affirmed by the Learnedst of the Nonconformists, namely Mr. Cartwright, D. Chaddrton, &c. Hence then it must follow, that all formes of Prayer, devised by men, are unlawfull to be read in the congre∣gation; and therefore where ever this is practised, men ought necessarily to abstaine from joyning there∣with. Def. ag. Brid. 16, 117. Abridg. 97, 98. But to proceed: not onely is the reading of Homilies vtterlie condemned, but also it hath bene proved by the Nonconformists, that those which the Bishops com∣maund to be read in their assemblies, have in them many things doubtfull and of daungerous construction, yea sundrie erronious points of Doctrine, and things most evidentlie false and vntrue. I have beene more large in the former points, then I purposed at the begining, I will therefore in the rest1 Adm. 14 2 Adm. 55 be the shorter, touching nunc dimittis, benedictus and magnificat, which they vse to read and sing in their Churches, the Nonconformists say, it is a Prophaning of the Scriptures, palpable folly and vaine pratling. Their
minister saying one peece of prayer, and the people with mingled voyces to say another, is Babilonish confu∣sion.Eng. Puri∣tan. p. 20. The Lords prayer also is horribly abused by their often and vaine repetition of it, beeing said not lesse then 8 times at some meetings: other shreds and shortAlt. Dam. 191. cutts, they handle in this manner. viz. let vs pray, glory be to the fathers &c. Lord have mercy, &c. Christ have mercie, and many like, which is meere babling, and cannot be more justlie defended, then the Papists beads. Vncovring the head, making a leg & scraping on the ground, & such like curtesie, whē Iesus is named, is176, 177. counted a superstitious foolish and unlawfull device,Fall of Bab. 65. a mocking of God, and a beggarlie signe of obedience, no lesse is standing at the Gospell, a thing wickedly devised by Anastatius the Pope, in the yeare 404. TheirSold. Bar. good fridayes service, is vtterly disliked, so the holy weekeAbridg. 91 before Easter, the observation of Gang dayes, or rogation weeke, is wholy Popish, invented by Hillarius the greatSol. Barw. Fresh suit l. 2. 404. Def. Pet. for Refor. 74 75. Antichrist, in the yeare 444. Organs and other Church Musicke they call idoll service, because it serves not to any edification, but drawes the mind to carnall de∣light: besides, this was a part of the Levitticall service, which is now ceased in Christ, and for many hundredAlt. Dam. 156. Fall of Ba∣bel 48. Sold. Bar. Tab. 1 Adm. 15 yeares after the Apostles, musicall instruments, were not knowne to the Church, till in the yeare 653. the old serpent by Pope Vitalianus, brought vp the Organs, and to have them goe, about the same time, that beast with Gregory, & Gelatius, (two monsters like himselfe) ordai∣ned descant, foreward and backward, plane song, and pricksong, and thus was the Musick made vp: just as
the divel would have it. Ringing of curfewes vpon Hal∣lowe eves, is like the rest: yea the bels themselves as they are vsed in their assemblies, are put vnto Popish vses. Sold. Bar. Tabl.He that first ordained them was Sabinian the great Pope, in the yeare 603. And much vertue is attributed to them in popery, as to stirr vp mens devotion, perserve fruites: put enimies to flight, still tempests, drive away all wicked spirits and devils, &c. I doe omitt to speake of many particular thinges, vsed in their Cathedrall dens or Closters, partlie because the reader may guesse what there is, by that which hath bene said: and part∣lie because the dung & trash there, is so vile and loth∣some, as I am not willing to blot paper therewith. But there is one thing which I had almost forgotten: viz: their visitation of the sicke. Not that it is lesse supersti∣tious and naught then the other, for the Nonconfor∣mists, affirme the prescript service of it, to be taken as the rest, out of the masse booke, and it is such stuffe, as hePag. 198. which wrot the Altar of Damascus, made himselfe merrie when he described the foolishnesse of it. Thus the Assumption is sufficiently proved, the con∣clusion therefore is certaine. viz. that the worship of the English service booke is vnlawfull to be communicated with. In the next Section we shall see what D, Ames hath to say against this thing. SECT. V. FOr the readers better vnderstanding of the point to be handled in this Section: I will first lay down
the substance of D. Burgesses speach. I have seen (saith he) some of the inconformists confutations, (meaning of the Separatists) which I confesse never satisfied my consciēce, for I am and ever have beene of that opinion, that there can be no just confutation of them, made by such of the Noncon∣formists,232. as have given them their maine principles (what these principles are he afterward declares. viz that no∣thing may be established in the Church but what God hath commaunded in his word: that all formes of worship not prescribed and all mere Ecclesiasticall rites are will wor∣ship &c. That our ceremonies are idolatrous in the vse of them &c. Which principles if I did beleeve to be true, I pro∣fesse in Gods presence I would proclame separation from Idolatrous worship and worshippers this day ere I slept, and not halt as these men (by their owne positions doe) betwixt Idolatrie and Religion. D. Ames answereth to this effect. The confounding of mere rites with formes of worship is not ours, but onely by the rej. his fiction. That every Church is to be vtterly condemned, and so to be separated from, that hath any thing in it by participation Idolatrous, is made Scismaticall by a Scismaticall conceit of the Rej. &c. His profession of sepa∣ration (this day before he stept) is nothing but a Rhethoricall flourish which he would twice recall, before he would sepa∣rate, from those that bow to the Altars, or even those which worship an vbiquitarie body in the Lords supper, though these are more palpablie Idolatrous (in his conscience) then the Ceremonies questioned are in ours. Here is some thing said, although not a word, to the maine point in dispute which either Mr. D. saw not,
or else (and so I rather thinke) he thought it best to let it passe in silence. The wordes which the Rej. takes from the Nonconformists are, that all formes of worship not prescribed of God are will worships. And hence in∣ferres separation, now what saith D. Ames to this? nothing at all, but talkes of the Rej. fictiō, in confounding mere rites, &c. But by his leave, I see no such thing in the Rej. but indeed the cause of the confusion is, wholie of himselfe, for D. B. layes downe formes of worship and Ecclesiasticall rites distinctly, vnto both which he should distinctly have answered, if his mea∣ning had beene to satisfie judicious & conscionable rea∣ders. I will not here vse D. Ames, comparison of 10. a Stile, and 10. a Nokes, but a more sober one▪ If a wo∣man should be brought before the Magistrate for cer∣taine crimes, as namely whoredome, and some light carriage, and for this her husband would be divorced, now imagin that she had a proctor there to plead for her, which would not mention her adulterie at all: But gives som reasons why a man should not put away his wife for everie light cariage, would any wise judge ap∣prove of such pleading? but contrariewise give sen∣tence on the mans behalfe: D. Ames carieth the mat∣ter just so: The Church of England is charged by the Nonconformists as the Rej. truely reports of false worship in it, and also of som idle ceremonies, now marke reader how he pleads for his mother, as touching the worship he saith nothing of it: but of the rites onely: which are evils a hundred fould lesse then the other▪ Againe that every Church is not to be left which hath some
thing in it by participation idolatrous. I know no man holds the contrarie: therefore I cannot tel for what end he speakes it, much lesse why he puts a scismaticall conceit, vpon the Rej. whose words if they be wel con∣sidered, have substance and weight in them, and not conceits, & to speake truely what I thinke, D. Ames his conceit, in framing this answer, was not of the best. For thus they seem to argue, a Church which hath somthing in it by participation idolatrous, is not to be separated from. The Church of England is such Ergo. Now according to this argument no false worshippers should be left, Papists, Iewes, nor Turkes. who sees not the lightnesse of it. Notwithstanding except it be this way applied, for my part I cannot tell what to make of it. If any object, he meant that the ministerie, worship, and Govern∣ment of the Eng. Assemblies is not so bad, as to be separa∣ted from. I answer this is yet to prove, the which thing lay now full vpon him to doe, if he would have taken the right point, and not needlessly to tell us of that, which no man either asked of him, or doubted of. 3▪ Though everie Church is not to be condemned, &c. Yet such may be the corrupt state of some, as separation from them, is both lawfull and necessary, the Nonconformists say as much. So the cause of sepera∣tionCart. con. Rh. T. Iud. 19. be good: the separation from a companie where with we were first vnited cannot be blamed: much lesse condem∣ned of heresie. The thing which the Rej. cheifelie in∣sisted vpon was, that the cause of separation, from the Church of England is good, if the Nonconformists
principles be true, what they are he names. D. Ames, neither saith they be true or false, nor one word to any purpose, vnlesse this be: viz. it is not lawful vtterly to condemne, and so to separate from a Church for everie thing, therefore not for any thing. 4. Tou∣ching the matter here insinuated, against the person of D. Burg. as if he meant not to practice what he pro∣fesseth, I will leave it to himselfe to answer, onely this I say, if he and others are so minded as he writes, cer∣tainly they shall find nothing in D. Ames answere, to informe them otherwise. But that they may safely retaine still the same opinion, and separate from the Church of England▪ when they doe beleeve, the Non∣conformists principles to be true. 5. I wonder what moved the D. to mention onely ceremonies, and to in∣timate, as if the difference between them and the Bb. lay now mainly in this, considering (as he knew wel) that these rites are very toyes, to other things in que∣stion, heare what they say. The controversie betwixt vs, and the Bishop is not for trifles as they would beare the world1 Adm. 18 in hand. as for a cap, a tippet, or surplusse &c. But for greatNote. matters concerning a true ministerie, and regiment of the Church according to the word, which things once established the other, would melt away of themselves. Againe, another thus: the question is not (as it is every day in publike Sermons uncharitablie upbraided) about triffles, and things of no weight, as of variable ceremonies, and matters of circumstances, which yet are to be squared byPref. Coū∣terp. the sacred Canons of holie Scripture, but about matters of no small importance, even about the great and weightie cause
of Christs Kingdome, by what lawes and offices his heritage is to be governed and protected, that is, of the whole disciplin, of the church of Christ, whether it be to be ordered by the vn∣certain & deceivable weights of humane constitutions, or by the infallible oracles of Gods most holie testimonies. Others thus: our principall greifes, about the which (alas brethren)Table div. read in Camb. Note. We have now too long and vnhappilie contended, are that all false ministeries, and false Government, devised by men, may be taken away, and a lawfull ministerie, and a right church-power restored, as for the square cap, and such other toyes, which not without cause we disalow▪ yet they doe not so sore wound vs, as those greater and weightier matters doe,T. C. l. 1. p. 71. from the which all the rest are derived and drawne. To the like purpose Mr. Cartwright and others. And are not those great and weighty things in question still? Yes surelie, and therefore for what reason D. Ames passeth them over without any words, and speakes of toyes and triffles in comparison. Let the reader judge. Moreover, he had little need to make himself so igno∣rant, what the Rei. meant by a principle? what by separa∣tion, for if he had had any list to the thing, he could easilie have understood the same, for in truth, a child may perceive, if he read the place, that D. Burg. inten∣ded such principles, as I before named from their wri∣tings, to wit, that they say, they want a right ministerie, worship, and Church-government. But the Proverbe is here true, who so blind as he that will not see? The author of the Preface to his booke, speaketh much like thereabout this point, a little there is added, namelie, that Christ (our Teacher) and his Aposiles did
joyne in the Iewes worship, vnto which were added many superstitions, as vnlawfull as their Ceremonies. Answ. 1. I may use his owne words, he doth not prove that which he concludeth; For howsoever many superstitious traditions were used by the Iewes, yet whe∣ther they were brought in, and added to their sacred worship, instituted of God, as any parts therof, is doubt∣full, and the contrary more probable. 2. To say, that Christ and his Apostles did joyne in that worship, to which many superstitions were added, is too presumptioeslie spoken; and I wish men, to be more sober, and not soFresh suit. l. 2. 321. bouldlie to affirme such groundlesse positions, to justifie a corrupt and halting practise. I know D. Ames hath the like saying, that Christ was present when the traditions of men were observed in Gods worship; But he delivers this onely upon his owne word, and therefore we may be∣leeve it accordingly. 3. He saith, these superstitions in the Iewes worship, were as unlawfull as their Cere∣monies. What testimonie brings he for it? (as before) none at all. If such arguments will passe, a man may soone have enough, to fill a cart with. But note herePag. 96. how greatly they contradict one another: they said even now, that their Ceremonies are such idolls as a man cannot lawfullie joyne with that worship, where they are used, yet here they say, that they are not worse then were the superstitions in the Iews worship, vnto which Christ and his Apostles joyned; Now which shall a man beleeve of them? not the later, for he gives no reason for what he speakes, but the others doe. 4. If it should be all granted him (howbeit he proves nothing)
yet it will not follow, that a man may communicate in the ministerie, worship, and Eccles. government of Eng∣land, unlesse he can prove, that that ministerie, worship, & Eccles. government, to which Christ and his Apostles joyned, was false, idolatrous, Antichristian, as the Non∣conconformists doe affirme the other to be. Some thought that this point would have beene more effectually answered, specially because D. Burg. pressed it home so close upon them, and tooke such a solemne protestation in it, as the like is not to be seene (I thinke) in the booke; But for my part I exspected no better; For I saw the Rei. had them at the advan∣tage, and therefore D. Ames was constrained, either to condemne their owne cheife Principles, or to justifie separation by them, or else to shift off the point, and say nothing, or (as the very truth is) nothing of it to the purpose, Before I end this chapter; I will answere briefly to some objections, which many are ready to make for their joyning in communion with this worship. Object. 1. Howsoever we doe beleeve that the same is (as the Nonconformists say) unlawfull and Antichristian, yet we think, we may yeeld our bodily presence to it, so we in∣wardly loath the same, & keepe our hearts to God onely. Answ. It is certaine the Prophane brood of the cursed familists, doe hold that Religion standeth not in out∣ward things, & therefore outwardly they will submitt vnto any, be the same never so false and vile, preten∣ding that it is not the body which can sin but the soule onely, the name of them, I know is generally
odious, although their principles are loved and practi∣sed too well: But that no good man may fall into this snare: let it be considered. 1. The Lord hath crea∣ted1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. soule and body, and by Christ they are both redee∣med: therefore it is necessarie that we should honourRivetus in Hos. 4. ve. 15. and 17. p. 156. 158. An admo∣nition of Coelius secundus Curio to all faithf. Christi. Mat. 5. 16. Scarpius symphon. proph. 238 Gal. 6. 12. Rev. 21, 8. Rom. 14. 23. him, with the whole man, for how else should the whole, enjoy glory and immortalitie hereafter. If a wife should prostrate her body to the vse of another man, shall she be excused towards her husband, by saying, that she reserved him most deare in her heart? no surely: If this be no reasonable excuse much lesse the other. 2. It ought to be alwayes our care, so to live as others thereby may have cause to glorifie God: but this cannot be, if our visible conversation be ido∣latrous. 3. This is a practice taken vp merely to a∣voyd the crosse of Christ. And therefore such dooing, bewrayeth selfe love, infidelitie, fearefulnesse &c. Sins which God will punish men extremely for. 4. What∣soever is not of saith is sin: but no man can in faith be present at that worship which he condemneth, and therefore the action must necessarily be evil. 5. The ignorant by this meanes are hardened in sinne: ForLuke 17, 1, 2. Calv. in Psal. 16. 4. pa. 60. when they shall see one that hath much knowledge, to be present at idolatrous service, they immediately thinke the better of it, and are the lesse willing to re∣ceive the love of the truth that they may be saved: we would thinke him a cruel, and most in humaneBucer in Psal. 16, 4. p. 102. creature, which should lay wood or stones in a blind mans way, at which he fals and breakes his neck, yet they doe worse, who by their evill example streng∣then
their neighbours in idolatrie, for by this meanes the soule and body perisheth vtterly. 6. This prac∣ticeMat. 6, 26. 2 Cor. 6. 17, &c. Ps. 16, 4. Dan. 3▪ 17 1 King. 19 18. cannot possiblie please the Lord it beeing wholy against his revealed will▪ and therefore the faithfull in all ages have alwayes don otherwise. 7. The Lord in this life, hath executed sundry fearefull iudg∣ments, vpon divers persons, for allowing in bodie, that false worship, which in heart they condemned: as Hof∣master in Germany, Spiera in Italy, Mr. Hales in En∣gland, all these died despearately: and are left for war∣nings: that no man sinne against his conscience: least he find it to be, a hel vpon earth, when he exspects consolation and peace from it. Object. 2. But we keepe close to God in other walking. Ans. 1. There are many doubtlesse in the Land, very strict in the duties of the 2 Table, and in the private & personall exercises of the first also, so farr as they can go with good leave: but what of all this, yet so long as upō knowledge they share their service betwixt Christ and Antichrist, they cannot by any promise of Scripture assure their soules of Gods acceptation thereof inMarke it well. Christ. 2. Sound comfort flowes from sincere obe∣dience: and therefore whosoever stocks himselfe, inSee Park. of the crosse, l. 1▪ p. 156, 17, &c. Pet. Mart. loc. com. p. 1125. any the least parts of the revealed will of God, he is as Iehu, rotten at the best, even when he manifesteth most shew of Religion. 3. Where there is the true Love and zeale of God, nothing can be indured of Antichrists, no not the name of any thing that belon∣geth to him, or is defiled by his polluted members, there I say will be no countenance given to his ido∣latric
much lesse any conformity to the least of his beastlie devises: and therfore those which bow the knee to that Idol book, want the love and zeale of God, spe∣cially if they know it to be the Popes creature, although they cary themselves strict and precise in some other respects. Object. 3. But we are perswaded herein we doe wel. Ans. so doe the Papists, Arians, and other Heriticks, yet are their courses cursed, and abominable. 2. Our1 Thess. 5. 21. duety is to prove all things, and onely to hold that fast, which we have found by evident Testimony of Scrip∣ture to be good and lawfull. 3. As a man that is out of his way, and supposeth otherwise, makes his journie so much the worse, so those which practice false wor∣ship, and yet know it not, are in a condition the more daungerous: and therfore it is nessarie, that men exa∣min the ground of their perswation, whether the same be right and sound or no. Object. 4▪ Howbeit this worship is not as good as it should be, yet we thinke it is not so bad, but it may be lawfully vsed. Answ. 1. We have shewed from the Nonconformists, writings, that the authors of it were the Popes, which were all Antichrists, now whatsoever comes fromT. C. lib. 1 pag. 204. them (they say) commeth first from the devill, and out of the bottomlesse pitt. 2. They further affirme that there is no idolatrie Cananitish, paganish, Iewish, or what else soe∣ver,Park. of the Cross 1. 1. 37. 38. worse then Popish: neither shall any suffer greater plagues, then such which offend this way. 3. Who∣soever partakes in the sins of Rome, are surely vnder
the same curse, for we cannot in any fort communi∣cateCart. Ca∣tachism. of Chri∣stian Rel. pag. 315. 316. Am. 4. 4. 5 See Bren∣tius on the place. Piscat. in 1 Cor. 10. 21. Pareus d. Act. 4 39. Protestat. of the King. sup. pag. 18. with them in their errours, vnlesse we will beare them company in their destruction also. 4. It is a daungerous thing to doe any false worship, because thereby mens transgressions are multiplied, and the divel, and not God, is certainly served. Object. 5. The Law of the Lard is, that all should come to heare this service, and therefore they will be punished which refuse to doe so. Answ. 1. Humane authority is not to be obeyed, if it commaund any thing against God: therfore every man, is to looke to himselfe, that he communicate not with the evils of the time, induring patiently what it shall please the state to in∣flict vpon him. 2. In cases of this nature, grace is best tryed: for as the skill of a mariner is most seene in a tempest, and the courage, of a soldier in a fight: so our faith, sincerity, obedience, &c. Is best discerned by the care which we take to leave such sins, and practice such dueties, as lie most open to afflictions. 3. WeRom. 8. 28 have a promise, that all things shall worke together for our good: therefore it we suffer for Christ, our wise father will so dispose of it: as it shall serve to helpe vs forward, in the holy way to life and glorie. Eze. 4. 15. Amo. 7. 10 Dan. 3. Luc. 23. 25 Ioh. 19. 12 Act. 7. 6. & 24. 5. Object. 6. We shallbe charged with sedition, schisme, heresie, obstinacie, &c. if we goe not to it. Answ. 1. They doe no more against you, in this thing, then hath beone don against our ancients and betters in former times: for so were the Prophets used, so was Christ and his Apostles served by the Iewes, for restraining their feet from iniquitie, and serving God purely. 2. It is a
great comfort to the godly, against all the reproaches and censures of the world, that their hearts are open and manifest in the sight of God, and that they are able to approve before him their owne uprightnesse; For such need not feare the calumniation of men, who have the Lord to approve the actions which they doe. 3. We have a gracious Lord and Saviour for our judge, who wil reward us one day for our obedience towards him, let men speake of us what evill pleaseth them. Object. 7. We shall quite loose the love of our friends, if we refuse to joyne with them in this worship. Answ. 1. That love and freindship will never doe a man good, which is purchased with the losse of Gods favour; He hath love enough whome God loveth, and whosoever is not beloved of God, is in a miserable condition, what reckoning soever the world makes of him. 2. Thou shalt not be forsaken of Christ, if thou be for hisPs. 27, 10. Esa. 49, 15 Mat. 19, 29. sake left of freinds. Though my father and mother (saith David) should forsake me, yet Ichovah would gather me. He meaneth, that God would be a father unto him, & so his condition should be good enough. Object. 8. But our feare is, if we should separate our selves from this false worship, that we shall not be able toRev. 2. 10. beare the troubles, which will follow therevpon. Answ. 1. If your hearts be perfect with God, feare none of those things, which you shall suffer; For surelie, he will, either keepe you out of troubles, or preserve you safely in thē, & make way thereby for your greater happinesse: So long as a father carefully leads the child in his own
hand, it needs not feare of falling, how weake of foote1 Cor. 10. 13. Ioh. 10. 28 soever it be: The Lord by the right hand of his power evermore upholdeth his people, and therefore they may be perswaded, that no adversarie strenght, shall ever be able to plucke them away from him. It remaines now, that I speake a few wordes unto you, which are Professors in England: you see how your stinted-service, devised by the Bb. and translated from the Masse, is affirmed by your owne writers, to be a false and forged worship; and that it is even so, I appeale to many of your consciences; for why doe you loath to vse the same in your families, but because you know it is not the incense made by fyre from the Altar ofI have beene an eare wit∣nesse here∣of many times. the Lord. I will purposely forbeare to relate, the in∣numerable, odious, and base termes, which you (upon all occasions) cast forth deservedly against it, onely I doe exhort you, to be true to your owne grounds, and conscionablie to practise that, which yours have publi∣shed to the world. If our servants doe that thinge which we forbidd them, and which they know is most hatefull to us, they are punished severely for it, & justly too. The Eng. Masse, you know, is an abomination to the Lord, and his commaundement preciselie is, that you should not partake therewith: Now if you will not harken to his voyce, what may you feare? Truely that his feirce wrath will fall heavily upon you. If the Separatists onely had found fault with that booke, your communicating therewith were somewhat tol∣lerable, but seeing your selves acknowledge it, to be a devised service. Oh! thinke how altogether in excusable
this your practise is now before God; In truth it can∣not, but provoke him to sore displeasure, considering how grossely those doe mock him, which professe one thing, and doe another. I would know, what assurance you can have that God is your father, seeing his promise is not to be our father, but vpon this condition that we touch no pol∣luted2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. thing: In words you confesse that Leiturgy, to be an vncleane thinge, can you then touch it, and yet be∣leeve vpon good ground of Scripture, that you are his sonns and daughters in Christ, I spare to speake mine owne thoughts▪ But I wish you, to looke wel vnto it. It may be you thinke your disliking thereof is suffi∣cient, but in truth, God loves no halfe servants. He that should goe, and ly downe in bed with an harlot, and give her the defiance, sinned notwithstanding: even so how disdainfully soever you either speake or write against that idol, yet are you still trespassers, so long as you prostrate your soules vnto it, be therefore sincere, and plaine in Gods matters, so shall you have peace, and comfort in the later end. Marvaile not that I am thus earnest with you, alas, how can I choose, the love of God constraineth mee, and truely it greeves my very soule, to thinke, of the great number among them, which are inlightened, and in their owne conscience fully convinced of this truth viz. that their service booke, is vnlawfull and An∣tichristian, and yet partake in the filthinesse thereof: surely these doe not consider, that there is no sin, in the eye of the Lord, more hatefull then idolatrie▪ for as
a man will beare with much frowardnesse and vnkind∣nesse in his wife, but not suffer her at any hād to com∣mitt whoredome, so God will beare with many sinnes in men, but he cannot indure idolatrie: spirituall whoredome and adulterie, this seldome or never esca∣peth some sencible and visible punishment. I will here end this chapter with the words of a learned Conformists. It is not enough to worship God,D. Sclater upon Rō. chap. 1. ver. 22. p. 110. 113 except we give him such worship as is seemely for his ditie, which Paul calls gloysying God as God, and if any aske, what this meet worship is, here spoken of? it is when God is wor∣shipped according to his will; secondly with worship agreea∣ble to his nature (viz:) spirituall. In this thing therefore Let vs deny our own carnall wisdome, and cleave preciselyRom. 8, 5. Mat. 15. 8. Levit. 10. 1, 2. to the word of God. How vnmeet is it that fleshly wisedome which is an enimie vnto God, should be a framer of his wor∣ship? how vnprofitable is will worship; yea how abomina∣ble to add or alter the least circumstance in the worship of God? And howsoever there may be a shew of Wisdom in vo∣luntarie Religion. Col. 2. 23. Yet beeing rightly weighed, all the devises of men shall be found foolish, vaine, yea more then sottish in the judgement of God. CHAP. III. IN this chapter we will speake of Church Govern∣ment, observing the former method, that is, first I will shew how the Nonconformists, doe describe a right Ecclesiasticall discipline. 2. How farre the present Ecclesiasticall discipline of England, by their owne Testi∣monie,
differs from, and is contrarie to it: 3: Lay downe responsive conclusions. 4. Answere to D. Ames objections, and others which may seeme to be against the same. It is certaine that Christ (our heavenly Prophet) hath set forth vnto vs in the new Testament the ordi∣narie forme, and manner of ordering Churches. For this sundrie reasons are given; 1. otherwise the ChurchProtest. from Scot. 18. (which is his bodie) should be left maymed, imperfect, and voyd of some speciall furtherances, and helpes for her edification and perfection, but this cannot be. 2. We read that vnder the Law the Lord by Moyses, ordained a certaine forme which was not altered, nor to be altered by any King or Preist whatsoever: yea from the begining of the world, even from Adam toDef. Eccl. Discip. ag. Brid. 14. 15. Christ, this ordinance the saints ever had, as agreed best with that time for which it is served, and therefore it cannot be, but that Christ coming in his owne person, (who was the day starre and sunne of righteousnes, from whence all other borrowed their light) must needs teach his Church a certaine Government for the safetie and good thereof. 3. We must either confesse this, or else spoyle Christ of his kinglie office: for what doth more belong vnto the name, office▪ andNeces. Disc. 5. 7. duety of a King, then to give Lawes vnto his Citizens and subjects and to make such decrees, and ordinan∣ces whereby all the parts of his Kingdome may beDemonst. Disc. p. 2. maintained. 4. That which teacheth everie good way, teacheth also how the Church must be gover∣ned: but the word of God teacheth every good way.
Pro. 2. 9. Therefore it teacheth how the Church must be governed. 5. No human form is sufficient, or able to governe the Church of Christ, wherein so many diseases are to be healed, and businesses to be dispatched, for the good of mens soules, and preser∣ving the people of God, and vpholding the Kingdom of Christ. 6. The Church is the house of God, there∣fore it is not to be supposed, since he requires vs toCipri. in serm. de Bapt. Chtist. Cip. de prescrip. advers. haer. Ignat. in Ep. Tral. Ierom. in Esa. 3. Aug. Epi. 137. Amb. in 1 Tim. 5. Cipr. l. 1. Epist. 8. D. Bils. Perpetu. Gover. pag. 3. Nec. Dis. 7. M. Bates 147. Dioces. Trial. 8. Protest. King. sup. 12, 13. set our families in order, and he among men is coun∣ted a carelesse vnthrift, that leaves his servants to doe what they list: that he will himselfe neglect to give order, how both steward, and children, and servants should be dealt with all, besides these reasons, the Nonconformists alleadge the Testimonies of the lear∣ned to prove the position, yea some of the Prelates best Champions. D. Bilson (who was Bishop somtime of Winchster) saith thus. We must not frame what kind of Regiment we list for the ministers of Christes Church; but rather obev and marke what manner of externall government the Lord hath best liked and allowed in his Church from the beginning, And as this Ecclesiasticall power, is common to all Churches, and ought to be in all, for as much as they are all in dependant bodies, and have privileidges alike: so it is confined and bound within the Limits onely of one particular congregation, and the greatest power ought not to stretch beyond the same, for in truth it is a great wickednesse, for any person, or persons, to take vpon them selves Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, over many Churches, much more over whole Kingdomes, and
Provinces of people. Touching the order or cariage for the execution of it, this government is committed to a fellowship or company of Elders, consisting of lawfullTab. divi. Read. in Camb. and true Pastors, Elders, & deacons, by whose common advise, according to the precise rule of the Scriptures, both the rest of the Church ought to be governed, andOffer for confer. 2. Prot. Kin. sup. p. 15. all Church matters also ordered, and determined, reser∣ving alwayes, that libertie which God hath given to his Church. Of the election and ordinatien, of these officers we spake in the first chapter, this onely mayMarke & make use of this, you that stand un∣der a self∣wild Dio∣trephes. be added, that if any of these shall sinne, he is as subject to the Censures of the rest, as any other member of the congregation. If they shall all sin scandalouslie, either in the execution of their office, or in any other ordi∣narie manner: then the congregation that chose them freely, hath as free power to depose them, and to place others in their roome. This is Christ com∣maunde∣ment: woe therfore to such as know so much and doe ne∣glect it. D. Am. de cons. l. 14. c. 29. pag. 236. And because the vse of this Church government, serves for to reforme abuses: the brethren therefore are to watch one over another, and when any one sin∣neth: If the offence be private, he must be admoni∣shed thereof secretly, and by the person alone which knowes it: for except it be of necessity the fame of our brother is not to be hurte, his mind provoked, his offence enlarged, neither suspition of reproach, & defamation needlesly published forth against him, but if he refuse to harken, then two or three other mem∣bers, must be taken for the purpose, and such as haveCartw. hist. Christ l, 2, p. 357. best judgment, most abilitie to perswade, and in grea∣test estimation with the offender, and here againe
love is shewed, seeing his amendment is still sought for, and nor his disgrace: if he will not yet acknow∣ledge his offence, then must he be brought vnto the Church, and there againe be lovingly admonished, and soundly convinced, of his fault, but if he be still incor∣rigible, & will not be brought by any means to repen∣tance, then (after long forbearance, much waiting, and great patience, with greife and sorrow of the whole Church) in the name of our Lord Iesus, he is to be castProtest. from Scot. 35. 34 out of the Church, and given over to Satan for the de∣struction of the flesh, and to be held as a heathen and pub∣lican: But if the offence be publike, there is no vse of private admonition: but it must openly be rebu∣ked, and admonished, yet so, that the same be don cir∣cumspectly, seasoned with gravitie, love, meekenesse, &c. Alwayes ayming, at the offendors safetie, and not his destruction: and speciall care is to be had, of every weake offender, with discretion of offences: If for all this, he remaine incorrigible then must the Church proceed against him as before. Yet let it be minded, that no Church governours may upon ay secret informations, or suggestions, or pri∣vate suspicions, goe about, to bind mens consciences to ac∣cuse themselves of such crimes, and imputations, as can∣notEngl. Pur. 29. by Gods word plainly be proved against them, for such a course is most damnable, and tyrannous, and a∣gainst the very Law of nature, devised by Antichrist, through the inspiration of the devill. Moreover, they ought with all patience and quietnesse, to heare what every offender can possibly say for himselfe, either for qualification,
defence, apology, or justification of any supposed crime, or er∣rour whatsoever & they ought not to proceed to censure the grossest offence that is, vntill the offender have said as muchId. 28. for himselfe, as he possibly is able; For it is an evident Cha∣racter, of a corrupt Ecclesiasticall Government, where the parties convented, may not have full liberties to speake for themselves, considering that the more liberty is granted toDef. Pet. for Refor. 198. M. Perk. vol. 3. vpō Iud. 388. Lear. Dis. Ec. discip. 92. Esa. 35. 8. Za. 14. 21. Ioel 2. 17. Rev. 21. Vlt. Psa. 10. Cartw. Histor. Christ. l, 2. 359. Neces. Disc. 96. Perk. vpon Creed. vol. 3. 212. 1 Cor. 5. 9 2 Thess. 2. 14. 2 Cor. 6. Tayl. pon Tit. 3. 10. speake in a bad cause (especially before those that are in authority, and of judgement) the more the iniquitie of it will appeare, and the more the justice of their sentence will shine. Again, excommunicatiō must not be used, but as the last and desperate remedie, even as a chirurgiō tryeth all gentle meanes, before launcing, searing, or cutting off. Indeed if the cause be great, weighty, and necessarie, then it may not be omitted. Reasons. First, for the glorie of God, that it may appeare his house to be no cage of vnclane birds, no stye of swine, no den of theeves, no stewes or brothelhouse, but the holy citty, the seat & throne of justice, the temple of the liveing God, where the chast virgin worshippeth, & where no Cananite may be suf∣fered. 2. That the worship and service of God may be kept and preserved from pollution, contempt, and prophanation. 3. For the good of the sinner himselfe, that he may see his fault, be ashamed thereof, and re∣concile himselfe first to God, and then unto the church against whome he offended, and so be saved in the day of the Lord. So long as a harlot hath freely the socie∣ty of chast matrons, she takes no shame of her adulterie but whē all honest women reject her, then at last, &c.
So a thiefe, if he be suffered to converse still with trueCartw. in the place before. men, to have his liberty in citty and country to the full, he will not be ashamed of his robberies, murders, &c. but, &c. It is just so in this cause. If open sinners be suffered in the church, and admitted to publike and private communion in the exercises of Religion, cer∣tainly then (though they declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not yet) they will not be ashamed of it, but ra∣ther, thinke they have not sinned, or it is so light and small, as they need not make any matter thereof. 4. The honour and the good name of the church is here∣by preserved, which would be lost, if vile persons were left alone therein. 5. That others may fcare, for ifDeu. 17. 13. Heb. 12. 25 this course be omitted, it may be a meanes, to embol∣den many to doe the like. A member being thus justlie excommunicated, he is not to partake in the spirituall good things, which the Lord communicateth in his church, as the Sacra∣ments, prayer, &c. yet he may be admitted to the hearing of the word, because that is a means to humble him for his sinne, and to bring him to repentance, which is the end of all Ecclesiast. Censures. Moreover, the rest ofPerk. on the Cr. vol. 3. pag. 212. Cartw. lib. 2. Hist. Christ 358. First boo. Discip. p. 52. the faithfull must avoyd all kind of familiar conversa∣tion with him, be it in eating, drinking, buying, and sel∣ling, yea in saluting and talking with him, so farre as they are not bound unto him, in any of the bands of civil right and society. I adde this, because excommuni∣cation unlooseth it not, but such as are of the family, or affinitic must performe all duties to such a one, which such a relation hath made his due, the husband
to the wife, and the wife to the husband, the child to the father, the servant to the master, &c. so an excom∣municate Magistrate, remaineth a Magistrate still, andTail. vpon Tit. ch. 3. v. 10. p. 709. 710. must of all Christians so be acknowledged; Beside all lawfull contracts and promises must be kept, and per∣formed with him, & workes of mercie shewed to him if there be just and necessarie cause. If the offen∣der afterwards shall see his sin, and desire to be takenProtest. from Sco. p. 35. againe into the communion of the Saints, the church is to assent thereto willinglie, yet so, as the partie make publike repentance, according to the proportion of the offence, a verball profession of repentance sufficeth not; ForD. Am. de consc. l. 4. c. 29. 2 Adm. 59. T. C. l. 1. 184. Tail. Tit. 3. 10. 712. see Astr. p. 165. to 205. Cart. ref. Rh. Test. Mat. 18. sect. 7. D. Am. de cons. l. 4. c. 29. 238. Protest. King. sup. p. 14. Discip. Eccles. 130. Demonst. Discip. p. 97. 98. &c. Crown. Christ. Mart. p. 10. ear. D. E. 6. 99. Discours. of abus. in the Ch. 88. 89. &c. See Aretius in Mat. 18. v. 17. so the most holy institutions of God, are exposed to the mockage of the wicked, and the action of the church placed onely in an outward forme. Therefore such evidences are required, which in the judgement of charitie doe declare true and sincere repentance, and which serve as probable witnesses of the thing. Be it here speciallie noted, that excommunication, and the absolution or reconciliation of the excommunicate, are actions common to the whole church, and not of any private person or persons: For howsoever the Elders for the peace, profitt, and good order of the church, are to administer these ordinances, yet the whole church must give their consent freely hereto. In the Apostles time, and after, till the yeare 250. every man that was a member of the church, had in the church his voyce in Ecclesiastical cen∣sures, causes, and determinations of the church. Christ doth
not say, when there is cause of accusing or Censuring any, tell the Bishops, but tell the Church; and accordinglie in theMr. Iacob Art. 6. 1 Adm. 6. times of the Apostles, and long after, as the Epistles of Ciprian doe manifest, they were judged by the word in an assemblie of presbyters and brethren, as the ince∣stious Corinthian, which shews us, that neither one man,Fall of Bab. 16. Cipr. lib. 3 Ep. 10. and Epist. 14, and 19. August. lib. 3, cont. Epist. per∣menn. Ierom. ad Demet. E∣pist. 1. Bucer de reg. Ch. l. 1. chap. 9 Calv. inst. l. 4, cap. 11 Sect. 6. Vrsin. car. pars 2, pag 532. Curt. chu. pow. 54. Fall of Ba∣bell, 30. 31 His. Trob. Fran. 62. Ans. to Bridg. 132 Neces. dis. 7. Park. de Pol. Ecc. l. 1. c. 15, p. 4▪ nor the Presbyters alone were judges in such causes, but Church, which by scriptures, either cleared, or cen∣sured any person accused, as by the word of God he appeared, either guiltie or not guiltie, &c. Many reasons are yeelded by the Nonconformists, to prove this thing, and all objections made against it soundlie an∣swered, and the testimonies of the Learned alleaged for it, as the reader may see largely in their bookes named in the margent. The like they speake touching the admission of any member into the communion of the church: that person which is to be joyned, ought publikely to com before the face of the congregation, and there to be examined of his fayth, knowledge, &c. and beeing found meet by the general consent of the people, he is joyfullie received. But of this more hereafter. Moreover if the Ecclesiasticall officers, shall refuse to doe their duety yet may the brethren notwithstanding performe Church actions, and the same are to be estee∣med good and lawfull. To come vnto a conclusion, this forme of Church government here described, is vnchangeable, ordinary, best, and perpetuall, common to all true Churches, and to which all states must be sub∣ject, as well the rulers as they that are ruled: yea and the
Def. disc. p. 16. 38. First book disc. p. 54. T. C. l. 1, 48 Park. de Pol. Ec. l. 1. p. 33. Def. disc. pag. 33. Fall Bab. 17. preachers themselves, as well as the poore within the Church, and good reason: for the same is not a thing indiffe∣rent as some thinke, but a point of the Gospell, yea of the substance thereof, a matter of faith, and of necessitie to salvation. I mean in such an absolute degree of necessitie, as is of any ordinarie outward meanes, especially to every church, and by consequence to every soule in it. And therefore as no common wealth can florish, or long endure without good lawes, and sharpe execution of the same, so neither can the churchFirst book disc. 50. of God, be brought to purity, neither yet continue in the same, without the use and exercise of this ordi∣nance, but lies open to all daunger and confusion. Whatsoever the Nonconformists have here said, about Church government, we for our parts ascent wholy to it, and through Gods mercie towards us doe comfor∣tablie enjoy the same, and wish unfeynedlie, that there were in them, such zeale of God, and love of his house and ordinances, as to practise once themselves, the good duties, which they well teach others to doe. SECT. II. THe Nonconformists in the former Section, gave us a good description of a true Church government, now let us heare what they say of their owne in England, & compare them together. In this (as in the rest) we shall find great confusion,No mar∣vail, seeing the matter is of Ba∣bylon. and therefore lest the reader should loose himselfe, I will observe some order in the handling of it, and first speake of their Ecclesiasti∣call
Officers. 2. Of their Lawes, by which they go∣verne. 3. Of their Courts, where they be executed; and lastly, of the manner how they are executed; and of all these breiflie, intreating still the reader to gett their bookes, if he be not herewith fully satisfied. In the first Chapter Sect. 3. we were shewed what their Bishops are: now some thing here is to be said of their dependant officers, which most wickedly vn∣der them minister the Ecclesiasticall discipline of their Church, namely Commissaries, Chancellours, Archdea∣cons, officials, registers, proctors, doctors, sumners, and the1 Adm. 17 Alt. Dam. 145. P. Print before T. C. l. 1. Alt. Da. 35 Pref. Ref. Answ. to Bancr. Alt. Da. 35 1 Adm. 15 Demons. dis. 40. Dialog. st. Chur. 13. rest of that, Viperous generation. All these the Non∣conformists say, are greedy Cormorants, servile varlets, a horned generation, base fellowes, trash, the ofspring of Ro∣mish Babel, murderous beasts, the scourges of all Gods peo∣ple▪ ravening rablers, which thrust away most sacra∣legiously, that order which Christ hath left to his Church, and proudly tyranize over their superiours. The Papist is on their side, because he can shelter him∣selfe vnder them, to hide his idolatry: the Atheist is tooth and nayle for them, because by them he enjoy∣eth carnall liberty: the man of most notorious life defendeth them, because he can from them, redeem the corporall punishment of his sins by mony: at a word,Dial. strif. Chur. 125. 1 Adm. 17 Demonst. disc. 76. T. C. l. 1. 188. all the rank adulterers, common drunkards, vn∣thrifts, ruffians, horrible swearers and dispisers of Gods word take part with them. And no marvaile: seeing these for the most part, are all Papists, and beside either bri∣bers, drunkards, Epicures &c. So vnmeet to be gover∣nours, as indeed they ought not to be members at all
Demonst. discip. Preface. De Eccles. disc. 137. in any reformed Church▪ Iustly therefore are they said to be the root and cause of al the ignorance, atheis∣me, schismes and treasons, in the Land, the nurses and cherishers of Recusants, and other Hereticks, and of allDemonst. disc. 40. the great iniquities and abominations that are com∣mitted therein; especially in regard they live by the faults of men: and will rather increase offences (thatSold▪ Bar. Syons plea 135. 136. Fresh suit. l. 2. 406. Learn. dis. Ecc. Gov. 99. 00. Neces. dis. 8, 9. Def. Pet. for Ref. 40, 236. Offer. conf. p. 2. Confer. p. 131. Thank. ack. p. 2. Alt. Dam. 42, 47. Abstr. 36, & 228. D. Strif. chur. 13. Mr. Bate 104, &c. Fall of Ba∣bell, p 83 Mr. Bate. p. 109, to 115. their gaine may increase) then vse meanes to lessen any: and this experience dayly sheweth. As for their names and offices, it is testifyed by all the Nonconformists that they are all derived from Anti∣christ, and are therefore false, earthly, vnlafull: and the discipline which they exercise: is not prescribed in Gods word: never appointed by the Lord Christ, but taken wholy, and every part from the Pope, and vsed in the time of the greatest darkenesse vnder him: yea and it is de∣fended by the same Canons, whereby his Popedome is supported: so that were it not for the helpe of the Papists, they have no authority either from God, or man, to helpe them either by reason, or learning. I may not here omitt how the Refor. exceedingly condemne the offices of Church wardens and side men, and prove the same to be vnlawfull and hurtfull, by many reasons. 1. Because they are counterfeyts of Gods true officers, namely Elders, & deacons, which Christ hath left in his Church by divine institution. 2. They retaine the marke of the beast in part, by ser∣ving the tyranny of the Hierarchie: so that it is not lesse warrantable to be a Masse-Preist, then a Church∣warden. 3. Their functions are devised by men and
came first from Rome: and therefore they cannotSyons pl. 136, 137, & 315. 316. Dial. St. ch. 119. exspect any blessing, or protection from God in their courses. 4. They are bound to most vnlawfull con∣ditions: and so necessarily, either they must be perju∣red: or commit horrible iniquitie, as to present their minister, if he vse not superstitious Ceremonies: so those which will not com at their devised service, kneele at the Sacrement, have their children crossed and Bishopped, women Churched, joyn with the Letanie, ob∣serve their holy dayes &c. And thus they minister mat∣ter of filthy lucre to the Harpies of the Prelates courts. For these and such like causes, every good man is ex∣horted not to touch these vnclean places: for if he doe,Learn, dis. Ec. Gover. 109, &c. he shall surely be defiled therewith. Their Collectors calling, also they judge unlawfull. 1 Admo. Pref. Syons pl. 151. Repl. to Mort. 96. Abst. 19. Alt. Da. 30. Mr. Bal. upon Re∣vel. 13. 2 Bright. Rev. 3, 195 Syons pl. 31, 36, 37. Demonst. disc. 77. 78, 79. Thus much of their Ecclesiasticall officers, now for their Lawes: these by the Nonconformists, are said to be foolish articles, slavish ordinances, lawlesse, perilous, Popish, wicked, and damnable Canons, shamefull Idolls, very devi∣lishnesse, and hypocrisie. Invented by the dragon and Antichrist, our Lords enimies, in the time of poperie, without any warrant of Gods word, yea manifestly against it: and for what end servs it now in England? Surely for no other: but to strengthen the Kingdom of the beast▪ and the power of darkenesse & ignorance: to breed trecherous Papists, nourish superstition and po∣pery, vphold the cages of vncleane birds, as Archbishops, and L. bb. seas, arches, cathedral Churches &c. And de∣stroy vtterly the Churches of God, by crossing every faithfull minister in the discharge of his duety, and
every good Christian walking in the wayes of god∣lines, and nipping in the head every good action. For these and many the like reasons the Nonconfor∣mists, have oft times desired that all their EcclesiasticallAbstr. 238 decrees, constitutions, provinciall and sinodal statutes, Fa∣therly customes &c. Might vtterly be abandoned and as froth and filth be spued out of the common wealth.Necessit. Disci. 8. 9, Yea as infectious and noysome boiles and soares, sent back again to the stincking sinckes, and channel out of which they were taken. Offer for conf. pre. Alt. Dam. 25. 26. Syon pl. 32, 33, 47, 48, M. Bat. 170, 172, Eng. Puri. 29, 30, Def. of Pet. for refor. 220, 221, Park. on the cros. Ir. 4 2. Abst. 19. Touching the oath exofficio, whereby the Popish Pre∣lates in Rome, and England, goe about to bind mens consciences to accuse themselves, and their freinds: the Nonconformists professe it to be a bloody Law, most damnable and daungerous, as cruel a racking of the mind, as the most exquisite torture of the body can be, this was invented by Antichrist, through the inspira∣tion of the devil, that by meanes thereof the pro∣fessors, and practizers of true religion might be sup∣pressed and abolished. In very deed it is a lawlesse oath, given and taken against the Law of nature, contrary to the commaundement of Christ. Mat. 18. and expresse word of God: against all equity and conscience, contrary to the common Law, the Canon Law, Counsels and impe∣riall statuts, directly contrary to the nature of an oath: Beside such as take it cannot sweare in judgment and righteousnes, but are forced, either to accuse and betray their brethren, or by perjury to damne their own soules. Fall Bab. 33, As their Ecclesiasticall officers and lawes, are all and
altogether Antichristian and vnlawfull: so also areCurt. Ch. 37 T. C. l. 1, 187, Dioces. Trial. pref. Dial Sol. Bar. Tab. div. read. in Camb. their bb. courts said to be Popish, Human devises, pre∣sumptious insolences, such as were never planted by the Apostles in the primitive Churches, but long after erected by Antichrist, against God, his Church, and the Lawfull jurisdiction of Eldeish p, & therefore as most Prophane things they ought, to be rooted out. If I were not vnwilling, to make this treatise large, I would here write particularly of their courts, that so every good man might both loath, and leave them the sooner. Howsoever, something I will say of each: al∣though but little, for a man may perceive what is in the kaske, if he tast a spoonefull thereof. Their court ofSyon pl. 313, 314. 1 Ad. 16, Sold. Bar. faculties, is said to be a Romish court a filthy quagmire, and poysoned plash of all the abominations that doe infect the whole realme, out of it are dispensations given for boyes and dls, to have many benefices. For non-residents, and such as doe not preach, dualities, tria∣lities, pluralities, tot quots, licenses to mary at any timeT. C. l. 1. 87. and place &c. Absolutions for mony: and one man to be absolued for another, breifely the Popish enor∣mities, and deformities of this bse court, are innume∣rable, for it hath full power together with the Petty Pope, the Primate of England, to dispense in all causes, dispensed heretofore by the Pope of Rome, and moreAlt. Dam. 70. 1 Ad. 3. also. Not without cause therefore have the Nonconfor∣mists, desired that might be pluckd downe, and vtterly overthrowne without hope of restitution. As for the Commissaries court, that is, a petty litle stinking ditch, which floweth out of that former great
Sold. Bar. 1 Adm. 16 17. puddle, a pack of popery a sinke of corruption, a sea of idolatry, whereby Religion and godlinesse dayly de∣cayes. In this courte as in the other, one alone doth ex∣communicate, one alone sitteth in iudgement, and when he will, can draw backe the iudgment which hee hath pronoun∣ced, having called vpon the name of God, and that for mony, which is called the changing of Penance. In this Court for non-payment of two pence, a man shall be excommunicated, if he appeare not when ee is sent for, if hee do not as his Ordinary would, from whom he had his Popish induction and institution, and to whom he hath sworne Canonicam Obe∣dientiam, Canonicall obedience, if he learne not his Cate∣chisme like a good boy without booke, when it were more meete he should be able to teach others. To conclude: if hee bee not obedient to all these Lord Bishops Officers, by and by hee must bee cut off by excommunication. And as it is lightly granted and given forth, so if the mony be paid, and the Court discharged, it is as quickly called in againe. This Court pouleth Parishes, scourgeth the poore hedgepriests, la∣deth Church wardens with manifest perjuries, punisheth wheredomes and adulteries with toyish censures, remitteth without satisfying the Congregation, and that in secret places, giveth out dispensations for vnlawfull marriages, and committeth a thousand such like abhominations. GodPres. Dio∣ces. Trial. Diol. strif. 110, 120, Learned Disc. of Eccle. Go. 132. 133. 134. deliver all Christians out of this Antichristian tyrannie. Their Bb. visitation is (as the Nonconformists say) an vngracious course, purposely devised to pick the purses of poore men, and to suppresse those which are not friends to the Kingdome of Antichrist. In very truth it is holden for no other end allmost, but to gather vp fees,
both ordinary and extraordinary, with dayly new devises, to poll the poore Priestes of their mony, which they extort for seeing the Letters of orders, for Dynners and such like mat∣ters. And yet a new invented pylage, whereby they com∣pell men to buy Bookes of them for 4 pence or 6 pence, which are too dear of a penny or two pence: and not onely such small Ware, but also great bookes, beeing such as every parish is appointed to buy, must be bought of them for two or three Shillings in a booke dearer, then it may be bought in Paules Church-yarde: yea otherwhiles, though the Parish be fur∣nished of them allready, they are not authenticall, except they be bought at Master Chauncellers & Officiall, at Master Registers hands. As for reformation of any thing in the Church, there are indeed many presentments, and men sworn to present matters, but little or none amendment at all doth follow. So that it is a common saying in the Countrie, when the presentment is once received, they shall never heare more of it. Soone after the Visitation or Synode, the petitbribing Sumner, rideth foorth laden with Excommunications which he scattereth abroad in the Country, as thicke as Hail shot, a∣gainst this parson, and that Vicar: This Church-warden, and that Side-man, whome he himselfe, when he came to summon him to the Synode, for a Cheese, or a Gammon of Bacon, had vndertaken to excuse for none appearance. But when he is once Excommunicated, there is no remedy, but he must trudg to the Chancellour or Officiall for absolution, who after he hath once absolved his Purse of a fewe Groates, giveth him his blessing, and sendeth him away. Answ. to Banc. p. 35 Ec. Gov. 134. Their Convocationhouse is held to be an vnlawfull assemblie, stuffed full of Popish, and prophane Chancellours,
Lawers and other Ravening Wolves. None are chosen to come there, but such as are knowne to be utter eni∣miesSupplic. to the Parl. p. 47. to 55 to all sinceritie; and if it come to passe, that any man there seeme to favour the cause of Christ, he is immediately banished out of their Synagogue. These Romish birds have allwayes condemned the Lords or∣dinances; and all of them, bended and linked them∣selves together, to maintaine grosse corruptions, andFresh suit . 1, p. 115, to 123. to prevent Christ from bearing rule in the Church by his owne Lawes. In memorie of man, they never con∣cluded any thing for the common good of the Church, more then by others was better don to their hands: But much evill hath come from them, and more would, if their commission had served therto. I had forgotten allmost their high Commission, which is erected (say the Nonconformists) to sup∣presse the libertie of the Church, and to maintaineAlt. Dam. p. 36, 39. the usurped power of the persidious Prelates; What is it but indeede the Spanish Inquisition? Sett me up this throne, and Satan shall sett up Papistrie, or any other Religion whatsoever in short processe of time; for they sit at the rudder, and may turne religion as it pleaseth them, and no doubt will, when they shall see a fitt oc∣casion, and themselves to have able power. We should come now to the 4. point, which is their manner of proceeding; Of this something all∣ready hath beene spoken, but certainly if I should here fully sett down the notorious vilenesse thereof, as the Nonconformists report it to be, a whole booke would not containe the same.
Curt. Chu. pow. pag. 34. & 6. Q. Chur. wom. p. 28 Def. Pet. for refor. 129. Park. Cro. l. 1. 148. Howsoever the Hierarchy will beare with Church Papists, and whoremongers, with non-residents, idle, ignorant, superstitious, and adulterous Clergy men; admitt freely a Doctor Lamb, or any like monstrous monster, to live peace-ablie amidst all his known abo∣minations, and let goe scott-free, and unpunished knowne Atheists, Charmers, Blasphemers, Drunkards, Fornicators, Heretikes, Prophaners of the Sab∣bath, &c. Notwithstanding those, called Puritans, which will not observe their Traditions & beggarly Ce∣remonies, shall be hurryed up & downe to their spiritualSyon pl. pag. 125. courts, upon every occasion, and there be scorned, deri∣ded, taunted and reviled with odious and contume∣lious speaches, eyed with big, and sterne lookes, have proctors procured, to make personal invectives against them; made to daunce attendance from court to court,Eng. puri. 26. and from terme to terme, frowing at them in pre∣sence, and laughing at them behind their backs; never leaving molesting of them, till they have emptied their purses, or caused them to make shipwrack of their consciences, or driven them out of the Land, or lastlyDial. str. Ch. 114. Dem. Dis. pre. supp. Gover. D. str. Ch. 128. 114. 119. Necess. Discip. 15 Lear. Dis. Ec. Go. p. 92. by imprisonment starved, stifled, and pined them to death. Thus they cherish vice, & correct vertue, give men leave to be any thing saving good Christians; Besides, in these vncleane stewes, all is done for mony, nothing is regarded else, for mony any sinne may be bought out with them: but those which will not fee them, shall be cursed and cast into hel; for every triffle, although they have done no evill at all, but contrarie∣wise for doeing that which is right and good; And
this is so manifest a truth, as the Prelates Creatures have openlie confessed: The Church Censures now a dayes doe onely touch the purse, evill doers when they have payd theirD. Andr. ser. to the Convoc. see, returne scott free. If no monie, then have at the off en∣ders with the Episcopal Sword, presently at one blow they are cutt off from the Church, delivered over vnto Satan, pro∣claimed Publicans, Heathens, Anathema; For the most ridi∣culousLear. Dis. Ec. Go. 99 1 Adm. 6. Fresh suit l. 2. 421. things, and against every good man, these brutish thunderbolts doe fly vp and downe, and onely to be feared of the purse. And yet this is not the greatest wickednesse which is committed by these peslilent fellowes: for it is fur∣ther affirmed that their learned preachers are excommu∣nicated many times by foolish boyes. No marvaile there∣fore their censures, are not regarded, and that the Non∣conformists, give counsell that no man should make any conscience of them, for surely they are of no more effect, weight or consequence, then if a villaine or rogue, should give sentence of death against a lawfull Prince. I forbeare to mention the bawdy pleading, of their Doctors, and proctors, in those courts▪ and the sum∣ners, yea and Registers themselves, it is so scurilous, vn∣cleane and beastly, as the Nonconformists, say it would greive a chast care to heare it; For the Archdeacons and Chauncellours, are fain to laugh it out many times, when they cannot hold their countenance any longer. Here were a fit place for him, who pu∣blished the lying libels, vn∣der the name of Lawne, Fowler, Saunders, and Bul∣lard, for in those courts his vncleane tongue might have matter enough to talk of. 2. Adm. 6. In the writing of these things there comes to my minde a speach, which a B. spake once to me in private. I relating to him certaine base, and inhu∣mane cariages which they did me in his courts, out
of great compassion he vttered these words: I pray God (saith he) to keepe all good men out of their hands, his speach was good, but in what a case is he himselfe all the while, which vpholds with both hands, these soule murderers, their court and courses, and yet in his conscience is perswaded that they are all starke naught. It is not needefull that I proceed farther in this point, seeing the Nonconformists, doe generally affirme, that their Church is still vnder the Bondage of Antichrists Go∣vernment,M. Davis. pag. 2. Syon pl. 11. Neces. Di. 2. 3. 8. Brigh. Rev. 3. p. 202. Pref. Dio. Tri. Epi. to Read. Dem. disc. Prot. fr. scott. pag. 49. the very same false & tyrannous discipline, that is pourtrayed out in the Popes Canons, for which cause we refuse say they to have Christ an immediate King in the immediate government of the Church, so as great indignitie is offered vnto him, as if some base vnderlings vnto a King, should commit his beloved spouse, vnto the direction of the mistresse of the stewes, and enforce hir, to live after the order of a brothel house. I will here conclude with this argument: Whatsoever is contrary to the institution of Christ, and his writen word, is Antichristian▪ and is to be banished out of Church of the God. But the Government by Lord Bishops, with Episcopall do∣mination, is contrary to the institution of Christ and his wri∣ten word. Therefore it is Antichristian, and is to be banished out of the Church of God.
SECT. III: WE have heard, what the Nonconformists say, of their Church Government: in this Section we will lay downe our conclusions from it: and these are cheiflie. 3. First, No obedience must be yeelded to these Ecclesiast. officers I say, we may neither acknow∣ledge their authority, nor in any thing, kind, or degree partake with them in their administration: but strict∣ly avoyd the same, as we would avoyd wrath, and vengeance to come. There is no need that I alleadge Scriptures, reasons &c. (As before) for confirmationM. Bates 87. 88. 154 Syon pl. 38. 107. 108. Protest. from Sco. 94. Mart. Iun. 83. 84. Mart. sen. of this, seeing the Nonconformists, goe with vs fully in the thing, and doe affirme, that men ought not to appeare, in their courts, neither to obey or regard their citations ex∣communications, warrants &c. Nor to receive any absolu∣tion from them, in a word, not to yeeld obedience to them: in any one thing, which comes from them, as they are Bishops, Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commiss. offi∣cials, &c. For this were an acknowledging of them, and a way, to maintaine them, in their vsurpation, pride,Col. 2. idolatrie, covetuousnes, &c. Beside, we should suffer men, to rule then over vs at their pleasure, and so notGal. 6. 1. stand fast in that Christian liberty, which the Lord com∣maunds vs to doe. Moreover it is certaine, a man cannot obey the Bi∣shops Government, but he must necessarily, transgresse, against the Lawes of the Realme, and to prove this, an argument may be framed thus.
Whosoever shall allow or countenance in word or deed, any forraigne power, authority, or jurisdiction (and more particularily of the Pope of Rome) makes himselfe a trans∣gressour to the King and to the Lawes. But such as obey the B. Fool. Government, doe allow and countenance, in word and died a forraine power, authority, and jurisdiction, and particularly of the Pope of Rome. Therefore such as obey the B. Eccles. Government, make themselves transgressors to the King and the Lawes. 1 Eliz. 1. 1 Iaco. R. Both parts of the reason are evident and cleare as the light. The former, are of the words of the oath of Allegeance: Touching the later to weet, that the Prelates exercise a forraigne power, authority, and jurisdic∣tion, derived from the Pope: We have before sufficiently proved. And therefore it behoveth all the Kings subjects, to looke well to this thing, least they be not onely forsworne, but incurre also the penaltie of the Law: which is after conviction, forfeitures, judgements, and executions, due to high treason. Our second inference is, that the publick assemblies of England are false and Antichristian: and therefore to beleft: this necessarily followes vpon the former pre∣mises: for if they have not the power of the censures, and of excommunication: but stand vnder a govern∣ment, which came wholy and every part from the devil, and Antichrist, then is their condition naught: the reason is, because this power is of absolute ne∣cessity, for the Churches of Christ, an essentiall property therof, and serves not onely for their well beeing but the beeing it selfe, for without this there can be no
De consc. 1, 4, cap. 24 214. coupling of the parts and members together. And so much D. Ames, testifyeth. Now the assemblies of England were not gathered by any such power, but in their first constitution wanted the same, and had thisDef. Pet. for Ref. p. 7. false power, which is exercised at this day, as the Noncon∣formists doe aknowledge. Our Arguments which we have used in this point, have been to this effect. Every true visible Church hath a power immediately vn∣der Christ to execute Church Government. But the publike congregations of England have not any such power vnder Christ, to execute Church Government. Therefore they are not true visible churches. What they will say to this, I know not: but hither∣to they have, either beene silent, or answered to no purpose in the world: For it is usually their manner, to tell us how the Churches in Corinth, Pergamus, Thya∣tira, &c. neglected to execute discipline, as though there were no difference betweene omitting, to ad∣minister the ordinance, and the want wholy of it; yea and to have an Antichristian & Divelish in the roome of it. Indeed herein they well resemble children, which being not able to read the lesson given them, doe skip over, and take another easie one: So these, leave altogether the point in hand, which is to prove by Gods word, that a true Church may want in it selfe immediate power under Christ, to execute Ecclesia∣sticall Government, and may be subject to that which was brought-in by the Romish Beast: and talke of a mat∣ter, which I thinke no man ever denyed. It is true, some have assayed to prove it, but after many thoughts,
spent about it, we have had nothing but wind from them: namely of a city wiihout a wall: of a vinyard, gar∣den, Orchard &c. Wanting a hedge, fence, bounds &c. And such broken stuffe, not worthy of any answere: For where doe they read in Scripture, that this power, which Christ hath given to his Church, is compared to a wall, hedge, &c. But rather may be better like∣ned, to the power of the body, which receives food, and1 Cor. 5. whereby excrements are purged and avoyded, the want whereof were prodigious in nature, neither could the body possiblie subsist and live. And here by the way, I thinke it convenient, to answere breifly, vnto some reprochfull passages, wri∣ten by D. Laien, against the Separatists, he accuseth them,l. 1. cap. 14 pag. 38. of strange and vnsound conclusions: but names nothing: onely from M. Park. Polit. Eccles. he Englisheth a sillogisme in this manner. If Discipline be so necessary and also vnchangable, it is lawfull to separate from such Churches as doe not vse it, (say the Prelats) but Disci∣pline is vnchangablie necessary, (say the Separatist) Ergo it is lawfull to separate from such Churches as doe not vse it. The minor he grants to be true but denies the Ma∣jor, and to prove it false he gives this reason. For want of an integrall part of the whole; or of some essentiall part in it selfe (though not of the whole) is no sufficient ground for separation. He might with more credit and good conscience, have granted the Major also, then sought to refute it by frothy, empty, and impertinent words: for first he speakes as a man most ignorant of the nature of
Church power, for were he able truely to define it: he should see that it is of such necessity, as a people cannot constitute themselves in the right order of the Gospell without it, as we have before expressed. 2. If the Bishops Major as he termes it be wel vnderstood it, ca∣ries this meaning: discipline is so necessary, that where it is not, there can be no Church ordinances rightly admi∣nistred: no true ministery worship▪ Sacraments, Censures, &c. And it is certainly so, and if M. D. have any thing to object against it, let him speake out, he knowes his liberty. 3. If M. D. will but hold vp his words against the light, he shall see they have not the face of an answere: for let his words be graunted: what is this to the necessity of discipline, vnlesse he could prove, that the same is not so essentiall but a true Church may wholy want it, The which thing, neither he nor any man is able to prove, and therefore he only beggs baselie the matter, but proves nothing; and ther∣fore for the warme cloathes, whereof he speaketh, he may even keepe them himself, to cover the nakednesse of his Argument. I will not here speake of his irreligious phrase, comparing the holie way of God, to hatching, neither of his untruth, to say that separatisme was not before B. Whitgift wrote for Ceremonies. I think the man knowes better, to wit, that from false ministers, worship, &c. the Saints have separated before Whit. either wrote, or was borne. If our practise be otherwise even by the testimonies of the Nonconf. let it be manifested. If this will not serve the turne, let him then take knowledge
of what D. Ames saith: In the beginning of Queene E∣lizabethsFresh suit, l. 1. p. 10. Reigne, there was a Company of honest men, that for the Ceremonies, refused to joyne with the Parish assemblies at London, as appeareth in the examination of Iohn Smith, W. Nixson, extant in a booke called part of a Register. We could prove (if there were need) in King Edwards Reigne, that there were some good Christians, which would not communicate with the Parish Assemblies, but there is no use hereof, seeing we have the word of God, to justifie our practise. There is one thing more, which Mr. Dr. much talkes of, and makes it even the burden of his song, i. e. that the Bb. are the authors of the Separatists Scisme, their practise butteth full vpon the others vnreasonable and vnsound reasoning. But what if it appeare that Mr. Dr. Arguments doe lead rather to separation, and that he speakes one thing, and practiseth another; Would not this be a strange sight, especially to himselfe? Now whether this be so, we will here trie by some reasons, in his owne mood and figure. If the booke of Common-prayer, vsed in the assemblies of England, be an insectious Leiturgie, Romish stuffe, a devised service, and raked out of 3 Romish Channells, it is lawfull to separate from such chur∣ches as doe vse it, (say the Learned) but the Booke of Com∣mon-prayer,See before pag. 9. vsed in the Assemblies of England, is an in sections Leiturgie, Romish stuffe, a devised service, and rakedSvons pl. 42 318, 314, . out of 3 Romish Channells▪ saith Mr. Dr.) Ergo it is aw¦full to separate from such chuh s doe vse it, specially when they continue obstinate and incorrigible in the practise thereof, after due dealing and conviction, as I
suppose Mr. Dr. will freely confesse, they have done even after due meanes used, both by manie godly Learned from time to time, & now at last by himself. If the ministerie of the church of England be vnlawfull andSee before pag. 27, 28 Antichristian, it is lawfull to separate from it (say the Lear∣ned) but the ministerie of the church of England is vnlaw∣fullSyons pl. 3 and Antichristian (sayth Mr. Dr.) Ergo it is lawfull to separate from it. Syons pl. 111. If the church of England hath not Christs Key, she is not his house; (saith Mr. Dr.) But the church of England hath notVpon Rev. 3. pag. 202 Edit. 3. See before pag. 136 Syons pl. 85, and p. 3. 314. 181. Christs Key, (saith Mr. Brightman and others) Ergo she is not his house, and so consequentlie to be separated from. To separate from corruptions is lawfull (saith Mr. Dr.) the ministerie, worship, and Church government of England are corruptions, (saith Mr. Dr.) Ergo it is lawfull to separate from the ministerie, worship, and Church government of England. I doe not gather up these his arguments for any need we have of them, but to put him in minde of his owne take heed: For if he say one thing, and doe an∣other, he may perhaps at last fall worse then vpon the quick sands of separation, even into the bottomlesse pitt of condemnation. And whereas I perceive he is not wil∣ling to be compared to Barrow; for my part I am not willing that he should, for Reverend Barrow was true to his grounds, and walked conscionable in the holte order of the Gospell: to which order Mr. Dr. hath beene hi∣therto an utter enimie, but for what reason, let himself looke to it. I have spoken the more, because of this
mans insolent boasting against us, and the untrue re∣ports, which he giveth forth of refuting the cheifest se∣paratists: I hope now the world shall see what abilitie he hath in this thing, or otherwise all will have just cause to conclude, that Mr. Dr. will speake more to his good freinds in private against us, then he is willing to have publicklie knowne, to receive an answer to it. Our third inference is, If church government be a matter of Faith, necessarie to salvation, as is any outward or∣dinance of God, and wholie wanting in the Assemblies of of England, then it is the dutie of all the faithfull there, (shaking off the Prelates yoake) to erect this power, and exercise the same among them. I doe not mean that any private person should meddle with the affaires of the Realme, but that every one, in his owne person, doe place himself, about the throne of God, leaving the abu∣ses of the publike state, to be reformed, by such as have a lawfull calling thereto. It is certaine, this ordinance must be sett up, retained, and practised, though Princes are utterlie against it: We must not tarie one houre, to exspect a new grant from men, to doe our duties in the true worship of God, when as we have a sufficient grant allreadie from heaven; for if we doe, we shall surely dye in our sinnes, and our blood shall be upon our owne head. The primitive Christians had not the Magistrates leave to serve God, yet they did, whatsoever he commaunded them: Their practise is an example for us; and all beleevers are bound to doe the like, as often, as there is the like just, and necessary occasion: For as the approbation of men and Angels, makes the wayes
of God, and workes of religion, never a whit the more lawfull, but onely the more free from bodily daunger, so neither can their disalowance make unlawfull such duties of religion, as the word of God approveth, nor can they give dispensation to any person, to forbeare the practise thereof. But because my purpose cheifly is, to shew the judge∣ment of the Nonconformists, touching religious ordinan∣ces, and the use and practise thereof, I will therefore lay downe their words, that so the reader may see, howMr Bate p. 41, 42. well they, and we, in these thinges doe accord, except in Obedience. The Magistrate (say they) is but the ser∣vant of the Lord, and therefore hath no power to bind the the conscience, neither can he exempt any man from obe∣dience to God. Another saith, if the Law of man be wanting, yet the Church must not cease from doeing her duety and exercise her power which is granted her by Christ, who hath also pro∣misedAlt. Dam. p. 15. his presence, when two or three are gathered together in his name, therefore she may entreat, determine, and strengthen her decrees, and constitutions with Ecclesiasti∣call censures, and punishments, notwithstanding the Prince will not assent, approve and ratifie the Canons of the Church, nor confirme them by his lawes and fortifie them with tem∣porall punishments. M. Wing an eminent Reformist, hath 9. reasons in print, to prove that all persons, are necessarily bound, to practice perpetually the ordi∣nances and commaundements of the Gospell, although the civill Magistrate allow not thereof, and because they are effectuall and weighty. I will here lay them downe.
A Collec∣tion of sundry matters, to prove the use and practise of Gods or∣dinance. 1. If the onely sure way for comfort of our soules be the practice of Gods ordinances for his visible Church vnder the Gospell, then we are bound to practice the said ordinan∣ces, notwithstanding the Magistrate doe forbid the said practice. But the only sure way for the comfort of our soules is the practice of Gods ordinances for his visible Church vn∣der the Gosp ll. Therefore we are bound to practice the said ordinances notwithstanding the Magistrate doe forbid the said practice. 2. All the Magistrates power wherein he is actually to be obeyed, is onely where he commaunds or forbids, from God, or for God. But the Magistrate forbidding the practice of this way, doth not forbid from God nor for God. There∣fore the Magistrate forbidding the practice of this way, is not actually to be obeyed. 3. Where the Magistrate may not commaund, and be lawfully obeyed in the Negative part of any commaunde∣ment of the first Table, there he may not forbid, and be Law∣fullie obeyed in the affirmative. But the Magistrate may not commaund and be lawfullie obeyed in the Negative of the 2 commaundement; Therefore he may not forbidd and be lawfully obeyed in the affirmative. 4. We cannot justifie, specially the continued omission of any dutie, and cheifly of the first table, vnlesse we be by vio∣lence restrained from the practise thereof. But to omitt the practise of these ordinances of God for his visible church vn∣der the Gospell, because it is not tollerated or allowed by the Magistrate, is a continued omission of a dutie of the first table, and this not omitted by reason of a violent restraint. Therefore we cannot justifie the omission of this dutie.
5. It is not lawfull to omitt the dutie of charitie, to releive any poore saint of God, though the Magistrate forbidd it: Therefore we may not omitt this dutie of piety, though the Magistrate forbid it. 6. If the Lord foresaw the aversnesse of Magistrates to the practise of this church Government, and yet did never exempt nor dispense with the peoples omission therefore, then we may not omitt or forbeare this dutie, though the Magi∣strate doe not tollerate it. But the Lord foresaw the avers∣nesse of Magistrats to the practise of this church Government, and yet did never exempt nor dispense with the peoples omis∣sion of this dutie. Therefore we may not omit or forbeare this dutie, though the Magistrate forbid. 7. Whatsoever was commaunded to the 7 Churches, to be practised vnder persecuting Magistrates opposing, that we must not omitt, though the Magistrate doth not tollerate it. The practise of Church Government was commaunded to the 7 Churches, Revelation 2 and 3. Therefore we must not omitt the practise of Church Government, though the Magistrate doth not tollerate it. 8. If the Church Government may be omitted, whereso∣ever, and whensoever the Magistrate doth not allow it, then it doth depend wholy for the practise of it on the will of man. But it doth not depend, neither ought it to depend wholy vpon the will of man. Therefore the Church Government may not be omitted, when and wheresoever the Magistrate doth not allow it. 9. If the Magistrate may forbid mee the practise of the ordinances of God, then he may forbid me to be so good a sub∣ject, as I can be or may be: But the Magistrate may not for∣bid
me to be so good a subject to Christ as I can be or may be. Therefore the Magistrate may not forbid me the practise of the ordinances of God. The Nonconformists are not alone in this thing, for all the reformed Churches affirme the same (viz.) that it is the part and dutie of all the faithfull to submitt to theHarmony of confes. Sect. 10. Belgick artic. 28, & French artic. 26. See the Historie of Scotlād p. 256. and 283. Doctrine, and discipline, appointed by Christ, yea though the contrarie edicts of Princes and Magistrates doe forbid them vpon paine of death; And so have their practises beene many ages together, and there is good reason for it: For the Regiment and Government of the Church dependeth not (as the Nonconformists well teach) upon the authoritie of Princes, but upon the ordi∣nance of God, who hath most mercifullie and wise∣lie so established the same, that as with the comfor∣table ayde of Christian Magistrates, it may singularlyDiscourse of Eccles-Govern. p. 9. 10. flourish and prosper: so without it, it may continue, and against the adversaries thereof prevail; For the Church eraveth helpe, and defence of Christian Prin∣ces,T. C. l. 1. p 51. to continue and goe foreward more peaceably and profitably to the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ, but all authoritie she receiveth, is immediately of God. Before we proceed to another point, we may here frame this argument: If the professours of the Gospell in England, have not among them a true church Government, but are vnder that which came from the great Antichrist, then are they bound to set vp that ordinance of God, and to to practise it, not withstanding the Magistrate doe forbid the said practise. But the professours of the Gospell in England
have not among them a true church Government, but are vnder, &c. Therfore are they bound to set vp that ordinance of God, and to practise it, notwithstanding the Magistrate doth forbid the said practise. These are both their owne positions, and so soundlie proved, that no man liveing is able to confute them. But some will say, this is hard to doe▪ I answer, difficulties must not hinder duties: where we have an expresse commaundement laid upon us, there al disputation must cease, of hardnesse, daungers, losses, &c. Excellently for his purpose speaketh Cal∣vine: There is no travell or labour so great, which we must not endure, to the end we may enjoy the face of God, how pe∣rilous soever the passage be, be it (as they say) betwixt fyreSermon upon Psal. 27. ver. 8. and water, yet let men goe foreward to have libertie, to serve and worship God purlie: Is a man in going, pinched with famin or thrist, yet let him not faint, but scrape the earth rather with his nailes, for food and maintenance, then be turned, or driven back from comming to the Temple of God. Many use to say: they wish all were well, and pray for reformation. To this I answer, it is not enough that we desire to have all things well, except we en∣deavour to make them so. He that wants and hun∣gers for bodilie food, deserves to starve, except with all he use diligence, and sore labour also, as he is able to get it. Againe, prayers I confesse are good, but with∣out practise they profitt not: The heart which setts the hand at worke, and is full of zeale, obedience, sinceri∣ty,Exo. 14. 15 &c. shall doe well, and prosper. When Moyses stood crying at the red sea, what saith God unto him? speake
unto the children of Israel, that they goe forward. I am perswaded the Nonconformists pray dayly for their de∣liverance from the Bb. government: but here is their fault, they goe not forward, but are like him in the Prov: which lyes in the ditch, and cries God help, but doth not seeke to help himselfe, though he can, and is able. Others think because mens laws are against Christ, that they shall therfore be excused, in omitting their service unto him, but they will finde it otherwise, and as for this shift, it denotes a most unsound▪ heart, for as we would repute that servant verie naught, who being commanded by his maister to do divers things; doth onely that which serves for his own credit, pro∣fit, pleasure &c. but the rest not being so, (though more weighty and necessarie) he purposly omitteth: so certainly they carry the broad Characters of notable hipochrites even in their foreheads, which walk onely in such waies of Christ as ly open for them, by the au∣thority of man, where they may go with good leave safely, and free from all bodily daunger▪ but where the commandements of God, are hedged up with thornes, by mens prohibitions, there they fowllye step aside, and walke corruptly▪ when the Apostles were sent forth to plant Churches, if they should have left the Lords worke, because they were forbid∣den to preach in the name of Iesus, they had surely sinned, and would have beene greatly punished for it; are not the ordinances of the Gospell, as strictly to be keptVpon psa. 51, ver. 7. p. 200, 203 now, as heretofore? yes surely, Mr. Hierom saith, that such outward observances in matters of religion, as are of di∣vine
institution, not the least of them are to be neglected, dis∣pised or difused, vntill he that ordained them shallbe pleased in expresse termes, to disanul them. If not the least must be omitted, then not Church government, because it is a cheife ordinance, and without the which (as I said be∣fore) no publick worshipp can be rightlie admini∣stred. There are some, which out of tendernesse of con∣science refuse to kneel in the act of receaving, and doe take the Sacrament sitting. Moreover doe meet in private families, to Fast and Pray together; and are per∣suaded that herein they doe well, though their practise be forbidden by the Magistrate. Now I desire these seriouslie to consider, if they may lawfullie performe some religious duties against Human Lawes, why not others? and specially if they be such duties, as serve more for Gods glory, the furtherance of the Gospell, the edification of the Church, and salvation of their owne soules. I doe not finde any thing written by Dr. Ames a∣bout this point, although he well knew that one maine ground of our separation from their Parish Assemblies, is because (as the Nonconformists affirme) they want the power of Christ, and stand under that which was taken wholy from the Pope; yet it may be, he thought that he had said enough hereof, in the Addition of his first booke, pag. 26. where he repeates certaine words, which had beene before printed in his reply to D. Morton: IfPag. 31. Gaius (saith he) had made a separation from the Church, wherein Diotrephes lived, whether the Apostle Iohn had been
the cause of that scandall, because he condemned his abuse of excommunication. This speach (saith D. Burgesse) is the weakest pretence that could be devised; and truly so it is, and therefore I marvaile, seeing he was tould so much that he had not either said somethinge for his owne defence, or blotted it out, that so the weakenesse and impertinēcy of it, might never have been seen. Could not D. Ames perceive any difference, betweene the abuses there noted by Iohn in Diotrephes, and those which are mentioned by the Nonconformists, against the Church of England; we doe not read, that Diotrephes is said to be an vnlawfull and Antichristian minister, that he had brought into the Church a devised worship, had sett up a false Government, yet such are the faults which the Nonconformists have found out, in the Church of England; I wonder therefore, that the Doctor should so much overshoot himself; For though we doe not thinke, that it was lawfull, either for Gaius, or any other member of that Church, to separate, because Diotrephes playd the Diocesan (but they were to stay, and seeke his reformation) notwithstanding we thinke, yea, and doe know of a certainty, that from a church, where the ministerie, worship, and government is vnlawfull and Antichristian, we may warrantablie depart; and such is our Separation by the Nonconformists Principles. Thus Reader thou hast heard the most, and all which Dr. Ames hath said, to maintaine the reputation of their grounds, charged with Separatisme; now if thou considerest how effectually he hath refuted the Rejoin∣der, in the matter of Ceremonies, but contrary wise about
this point of Separation, how he speaks either nothing, or nothing to any purpose, thou mayst well perceive that in the former, he had the truth with him, but not in the other, although (it seemes) he was unwilling in plaine termes, to give the case away. CHAP. IV. THat the ministerie, worship, and church government of England, is not lawfullie to be joyned with, we have evidentlie allreadie proved by their owne Prin∣ciples: In this Chapter we will speake of their Church, observing still the former order, that is: 1. I will shewe their Tenets, touching a true visible Church. 2. How farre their English Church by their owne testimo∣nie differs from, and is contrary to it. 3. I will lay downe our inferences and conclusions. 4. Answer to such Objections, as may seeme to carie most weight a∣gainst them. To let passe the strict significatiō of the word (church) and also the sundry acceptations of it; concerning true visible churches, the Nonconformists say, that there are none, but particular ordinarie congregations,Offer for Confer. pag. 2. Dioces. Tri. p. 12. Neces. of Ref. p. 64, 65. First part of repl. in answ. to D. Down. Defen. l. 1. par. 2. p. 44, &c. & second repl. l. 3. chap. 1, p. 177, &c. such Chur∣ches, and such onlie, they affirme God erected, but as for Nationall, Provinciall, Diocesan, they are now of hu∣man institution, & altogether unjustifiable by the scrip∣tures. The author, institutor, and framer of every true visible Church,M. Clev. upon pro. ch. 9, ver. 1. p. 3. is only Christ: for he alone hath the disposing of the word, vouchsafing it to some, and
denying it to others; and it is his spirit, which con∣verteth mens soules, and begetteth them to ever∣lasting life, and so they become stones for this building. For the persons whereof the same are constituted, they ought to be a Faithfull People, calledM. Iaco. institut. of true vis. chur. pa. 7. M. Bradsh unreason. of separ. p. 107. Fall of B. p. 50. 1 T. 3, 15. Esa. 2, 2. Zach. 8, 3. Esa. 5, 1. Song. 4, 12 Ephe. 4, 16 Son. 4, 10, 7 1 Pet. 2. 9. Psa. 48, 3. Protest. frō Scotl. p. 22. T. C. l. 1. p. 50. Neces. disc. p. 7. M. Bradsh unreas. of sep. p. 107. Mr. H. upon Psa. 110, ver. 3. fol. 396. T. C. l. 1. p. 51. M. Iacob institut. of true vis. ch. p. 2. and separated from the world, and the false worship, and the wayes thereof. Such I say as keepe the Commaundements of God, and the faith of Iesus; for how else should the Church be, the House, Mountaine, and Temple of the eternal God, his Vinyard, Kingdom, Heritage, and enclosed Garden, the body of Christ, his spcuse, love, sister, Queene; a chosen generation, a holy nation, a peculiar people, and the joy of the whole Earth. Howsoever therefore there may be Hypocrites, which beare the face of god∣lie men in the church, whose wickednesse is onelie knowne to God, and so cannot be discovered by men, yet in the churches of Christ, there ought to be admit∣ted no drunkard, no whoremonger, &c. at least, which are knowne, because the temple of God must be kept as neere as it is possible, free, and clean from all pollu∣tions, and prophanations whatsoever. The meanes whereby men are made fitte for this Church of God, is by the word, when they have well proffited by hearing the same, they are then freely, and of their owne accord, to present themselves to the Lord, that is, either to joyne themselves to some true Church already constituted, or by voluntary pro∣fession of faith, and obedience of Christ, to knit themselues together in a spirituall outward societie or
Mr. Bate p. 26. Offer for confer. p. 2 Ephe. 2, 12 R. 9, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 5, 4 Luk. 1. 71. Zach. 2. 10 11. Mat. 28, ult. Protest. from Scot. p. 22. Dr. Ames de consc. l. 4, c. 24. p. 211 212 Rev. 1, 13 body politick; Now everie true particular congre∣gation assembled lawfully in the name of Christ, is an independent body, and hath by Christs ordinaunce pow∣er to performe all publick worship, for unto it apper∣taineth the covenant, the worship, the sacraments, and all ecclesiasticall discipline, having also the promises of peace, love, glory, and salvation, and of the presence of God, and his continuall protection, and for this cause, it is the dutie of everie faithfull christian, to make himselfe actually a member thereof. 1, In re∣spect of Gods institution, Matth. 18. 17. in which not onely the precept is contained: but a certaine ne∣cessitie of the meanes. 2. In respect of the presence of God, & of Christ. For if we wil com to God, we ought then to com to that place where his presence is in a spe∣ciall manner, & where he is to be found, of all such as secke him with the whole heart. 3. In respect of Gods glorie, the which by this meanes is publikely propaga∣ted,Psal. 65, 5, and 133, 3 and advanced; For as the name of God in the old Testament was placed in Ierusalem, so now it is in the Churches of the Saints, although not in this or that1 Cor. 5. 12. place. 4. In respect of Gods covenant and promise, for those which are in the Church, are directlie (as it were) joyned to his blessings, the which are there powred forth abundantlie upon them. 5. In respect of our profession, for otherwise it cannot be, but those evi∣dencesHeb. 10, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 11. 17, and 12, 25, 27. Rom. 1, 12 will be darkened, whereby the faithfull are dis∣cerned from unbeleevers. 6. In respect of mutuall edification, which necessarily followes, upon our joy∣ning together in the fellowship of the Gospell.
Touching the manner and order of this joyning unto true visible Churches, the Nonconformists doeFall of B. pa. 30. Curr. Chu. pow. p. 54 describe it thus: He which is to be received, first is to goe to the Elders of the Church, to be well informed and instructed by them, and to have his cause by them propounded to the congregation, afterwards he is to come himselfe into the publike assemblie, all men looking upon him with love and joy, as upon one that commeth to be maryed, and there he is to make a pro∣fession of Faith, and to be asked sundrie needfull questions, to which he having well answered, and beeing found worthie, by the consent of the whole Church, is joy∣fullie to be taken into their communion; and this they say, was the practise of the primitive Churches: ForLib. 6. Eusebius reporteth in his Ecclesisticall Historie, that a Romane Emperour, named Philip (who first became aNeces. dis. p. 172. printed at Geneva. Christian of all the Emperours, and first submitted the Romane Empire unto Christ desireing to communi∣cate with the rest of the Church, was not admitted, before he had openlie made profession of true religion. When a people are thus established, in the faith and order of the Gospell, their care then must be to walk unreproovablie. and as in the naturall body, everie several member is (as it were) the member of every o∣ther, in serving to their good, as the eie doth see, theCartwr. Cate. of Christ. Rel. p. 303 304. hand doth take, the tongue doth speak, for the good of anie other member: so must it be in the church of God, everie person according to his place and calling ought to be as profitable unto the rest as he can, andNeces. dis. p. 171. 172 specially their godly watchfulnesse must bee, to keepe
their communion clean and pure; and therefore no un∣holy person may partake with them in the holie sacra∣ments, but such onelie (as farre as men can judge by their outward profession) that doe belong truely unto Christ; When any one among them falls into sinne,T. C. l 1. p. 50. he must be lovinglie admonished thereof, and brought to repentance, or else to be cutt of by excommunica∣tion, if he continue obstinate in his sinnes. How thisSee p. 130 138. dutie of brotherly admonition is to be performed, we have already shewed, this onely is to be added, viz. that it ought necessarily to be practised, & may not be omitted, for certainly the tolleration of known iniqui∣tie, is a greivous sin of the church, & in its own natureRev. 2, 20. 1 Cor. 5, 6 Curr. chu. pow. p. 20. D. Ames de consc. l. 4, p. 212. 213. tendeth to the corruption thereof, yea it defiles the communion Hag. 2. 13. and everie one makes himself guilty of the pollution, which doth not indeavour as much as in him lyeth, to remoove such offences: In a word, this mixture which ariseth by tolleration, much hinders the comforte and edification of the godly. As in all the rest, so in this point the Nonconformists and we, are of judgments alike, and it is our greate greife, that they will not joyne with us in practise also, and make themselves members of such true visible churches, as here they have well described, for so should Gods name be glorifyed, the Gospell propagated, Sa∣tans, and Antichrists Kingdome much weakened, and themselves obtaine mercie in the great day of the Lord. They pray, let thy Kingdome come, but how doe they thinke, that ever they shall behold the beauty and
glorie therof, seeing they resolve not to set their hands unto the raysing of it up, but doe leave the work who∣ly to the Magistrate: so that if the arme of flesh will not build a spirituall temple for the Lord, he is likelie for their part, to have none at all: but whether such cour∣ses will not prove ill at last, I leave it to themselves to thinke of. SECT. II. WE heard before what a true visible Church is, now it followes, that we shew how everie way contrarie to the former patterne, the English assemblies are said to be by the Nonconformists. First, they acknow∣ledge, that their reformation at first after Poperie, wasFall of B. p. 30, 31 not rightly founded, because neither then, nor ever since, was there any profession of Faith publickly made by the persons, which entred into Church estate, but in∣deed it was then held, and so it is at this present, a suf∣ficientCurt. chu. pow. p. 54 thing to be members of their churches, if men come to their service and Sacraments, take the oath of al∣legeance, and be conformable to their wicked Ceremonies, whosoever doth this, passeth for a Protestant; howso∣ever in practise he be a Papist, Arminian, &c. yet is he more regarded then the most sincere Christians, whome they call Puritants. And by this meanes it is, that in the bosom of their church are swarmes of Atheists, Idolaters, Papists, erronious, and hereticall Sectaries, wit∣ches, Charmers, Sorcerers, murderers, theeves, adulterers,
D. Chater. Serm. on Rom. 12, pag. 65, 66 Neces. dis. p. 33. Mr. Perk. on Mat. 6. ver. 9. p. 126, vol. 3. lyars, blasphemers, oppressors, voluptuous persons, whose God is their bellie. Moreover, such is the great ignorance of God, and his truth among them, that the greatest multitude by many parts, doe not understand the Lords prayer, or the articles of Faith, or the doctrine and vse of the Sacraments, there are not five, among five skore, which doe un∣derstand the necessarie grounds and principles of Re∣ligion,Dialog. concern. strif. of the Chur. pa. 99, 100 but many thousands, which are men & women growne, if a man aske them how they shallbe saved, they cannot tell. Mr. Nichols esteemed a forward preacher amongstMr. Giffar. count. div pa. 48. them saith. We finde by great experience (and I have now five and twenty yeeares observed it) that in those places where there is not preaching, and private conferring of thePlea of the inno∣cent. p. 218 minister and the people; the most part have as litle know∣ledge of God and of Christ as Turks and Pagans, and to prove this, he gives an example in his own flock, for I have beene in a parish (saith he) of foure hundreth com∣municants, and marvelling that my preaching was so litle regarded, I tooke upon me to conferre with every man and woman, before they receaved the communion; and I asked them of Christ, what he was in his person? his office? how sinne came into the world? what punishment for sinne? what becomes of our bodies, beeing rotten in the graves? and lastly whether it were possible for a man to live so vp∣rightlie, that by well doeing he might win heaven? In all the former questions, I scarse found ten in the hundred to have any knowledge, but in the last question scarse one, but did affirme, that a mau migh be saved by his owne wel doing,
that he trusteth he did so live, that by Gods grace, he should obtaine everlasting life, by serving of God and good prayers. And it is no wonder, that the condition of the people is generallie thus, seeing they thinke that all the service of God, to lie in churching, crossing, kneeling,Quest. cō∣cer. chur. of wom. pag. 63. and beeing houseled, (as they call it) at Easter; and as for preaching, they hould it a superfluous and needlesse ce∣remonie; and therefore when their service is done, they take it, they may Lawfullie goe out of the Church, though the minister be ready to goe into the pulpitt. Mr. Hern. on Psa. 51, pag. 309. Cathol. confer. pag. 164. M. Giffard Dialog. between a Pap. and Prot. p. 38 Preface to his Coun∣terp. Moreover, they say, that the greatest number of their people, are so wicked and vile, that were it not to save their purses, and for the Lawes of the Kingdome, which doe constraine and compel them, to make some out∣ward profession, they would make none all. For as Mr. Fenner saith: Every man followeth the pride, cove∣tuousnesse, whordme, drunkennesse of his own heart, and no man remembreth Ioseph; the barres are filled with pleadings, and the streets are full of the cryes of the poore, fullnesse of meat, and contempt is among us, and who considereth? yet if this our sinne were onely against men, and not against God, there might be some hope. But when the mouth of the blas∣phemous swearer is not tyed vp, and the hands of the idola∣trous generation of Atheists and prophane persons, be not chained, when the most holie and precious word of God, is manifestly contemned, the joyfull and heavenly tydings of salvation, so negligently and vngratefully troden vnder foot, the true and faithfull messengers pursued, arraigned,
and divers wayes afflicted: then if the old world for mali∣tious imaginations; Sodom and Gomorra for pride, fullnesse of meat, and vnmercifullnesse; If Ierusalem for abusing Gods Prophets, & wilsunes were dstroyd, what may we poor care∣lesse people loke for, if we doe not repent, but (as it is allmost vniversallie feared) speedy ruine, and vtter desolation. Another saith: What Christian heart is so stony, that doth not mourne? what eye so dry, that doth not shed teares? yea rather gush out with teares, to consider and behold, the miserie of our supposed glorus Church, by the spirituall na∣kednesse, blindnesse, and povertie thereof? I meane the great ignorance, the superficiall worship of God, the fearefull blas∣phemies, and swearings in houses, and streets, so also the dire∣full cursings, the open contempt of the word and Sacraments, the wicked prophanations of the Lords dayes, the dishonour of superiours, the pride, the crueltie, the fornications, the cove∣tuousnesse,Defen. of certain ar∣gum. ag. G. Powel pag. 61. the vsries, and other the like abominations, all∣most as greivous, as either heretofore in the time, or now in the places of poperie, when and where there was no preaching at all of the Gospell. Neces. dis. p. 9. It is also further testifyed, that the holy thinges a∣mong them, are prostituted, and sett open to adulterers, fornicators, drunkards, and all kind of vicious and sinful livers; They sett no porters at their church dores, to keepe out the polluted, but every uncleane person isPlaine de∣clar. of Eccl. disc. p. 172. Curt. chu. pow. p. 40. permitted to enter freely. I say, all may come boldlie to the Lords supper; they looke after nothing but this, that they kneele, which if they doe but observe, be their life and religion then, what it will, it matters not. Thus are the misteries of God prophaned, in that, they
communicate with Papists, & other unclean people. To draw unto a conclusion, not onlie are their con∣gregatiōs, said to be vnrightly constituted, & to be impure & vnholy lumps, but (which is the depth of misery) theyNeces. dis. p. 174. have no meanes (as they stand) of reformation; for the wholesome remedies, appointed by the Lord, to keep out unworthie persons, to preserve pure and cleane Gods ordinances, and to take away offences, is not a∣mong them; and here the reader may see what the rea∣son is, that they say, the walls of Syon ly even with theSupplicat. pag. 67. 1 Admon. ground, and they have not scarse the face of a Church. For if it be as these men report, it is Babel, no Bethel, which they have erected. I could name others of them, which write the same things, but we have enough, to rayse our conclusion; the which I will lay downe thus: All true visible churches, gathered, and planted, accor∣ding to Gods word, consisted in their constitution of Saints onelie: But the Churches of England, after Poperie, were not so constituted, but on the conirarie for the greatest number, of prophane people, even mockers and contemners of reli∣gion, as Atheists, Idolaters, Sorcerers, Blasphemers, and all sorts of miscreants, and wicked livers. Therefore the Chur∣ches of England are not true visible churches, gathered, and planted, according to Gods Word. There is never a part of this argument, that they can denye, unlesse they will let fall their owne Principles. For the assumtion, I make no question, but it will passe without exception, and none of them will have the face to oppose it, considering how generally the thing hath been affirmd, & stil is upon all occasiōs,
both in word and writing. Now that the Proposition may appeare as true also. I will prove the same, 1. by Scriptures, 2. by reasons, 3. by the testimonie of the Learned: Of all which in the next Section. SECT. III. IF we take a strict view, of all the Churches which the Lord hath constituted since the beginning of the world, it will appeare that at the orderly gathering and planting, the members of them were all holie and good. I here intend of visible & external holinesse, and so farre as men may judge, and not of that which is within, and and hid from us: For I doubt not, but in Gods sight the purest congregation on earth might consist at first of good and bad, and yet of men, every person to be judged truely faithfull, and sanctified, untill any one byD. Feild of the ch. p. 3, 4, &c. 2 Pet. 2, 4. Iude 6. Eccl. 7, 29. his iniquitie, outwardly committed, appeared other∣wise. Not to speake of the Church of Angells, which God created in heaven, and which were all holy and good, till some by transgression fell away. Neither of it in Paradise, consisting of two persons, & both true be∣leevers. After the fall, the constitutiō of the church, in the covenant of grace, was of good matter, & such was the Lords care, to have the practise of it still preserved,Gen. 12, 1, and 17. Rom. 4, 11 Ioh. 15, 19 2 Pet. 1▪ 4. that he thrusted out Kain from the same, for the great wickednesse, which he fell into. The Lord sealed not up with Abraham, the seale of the righteousnesse of faith, untill he left his Fathers house.
and that idolatrous place, wherein he had lived; whichPsa. 45, 11 Rev. 18. 4, 2 Cor. 6. signifieth to us, that all men must necessarily come out of the world, and from worldlie corruptions, or else they are uncapable to have a Church covenant in Christ, confirmed unto them of God. Rom. 1. 7. 1 cor. 1, 2, Gal. 3, 3, Ephes. 1, 13 Phil. 1, 1, Colos. 1, 2, 1 Thes. 1, 5, 9, As for the visible Churches, planted by the Apostles, it is evidēt, that in their collectiō, they consisted of, such & none other, as were called by the Gospell, confessed their sinnes, beleeved, walked in the spirit, and separated them∣selves from the false state, in which they stood members before. Such a beginning had the congregations in Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Phillipp. Colosse, Thessalo∣nica, &c. & who dares affirm, that there was one man or woman admitted a member at the constitution of any of these Churches, which had beene known to be an il liver, and did not first manifest sound repentance thereof. The matereall Temple was a tipe of the visible churches under the gospel, now we read that it was built from the verie foundation of costly stones, of Ce∣dars,1 King, 6, 17, 18, Algum, Fie, and the like choice and speciall trees, and those all prepared aforehand, hewed and per∣fect2 chro. 1, 8, 9. for the building, so that neither hammer nor axe, nor anie toole was to be heard in the house, in the building of it, no common or vile thing, was used towards it, nei∣ther might anie polluted person enter into it, and offer, untill he had repented, and embraced the faith, and been clensed from his filthinesse: by the gates of2 chro. 23 19. Lev. 22, 19 and 27, 11. the house were Porters sett, to keep the unworthy out. Vpon the Altar there might be offered no uncleane
beast, no nor that which was cleane, having a blemish upon it. What in all this was signifyed? Surely this: Such as will build a spirituall house for the Lord to dwell in, must be a holy people: for he is of that infi∣nitePsa. 5, 4, 5, Hab. 1, 13. puritie, that he will not vouchsafe his speciall pre∣sence, unto profane companies, which joyne them∣selves together; and therefore let it be farr from all men to prepare a place for him, with such trash, or to de∣file his holy things with such uncleane persons, or to offende his nostrels with the stench of such sa∣crifices. The reasons upon which our proposition is groun∣ded, are these, 1. All wicked men are forbidden ex∣presslie by the word of God, from meddling with his covenant or ordinances: Now if men to escape tempo∣rall punishment, are affraid to transgresse against the Lawes of worldly Princes. Much more fearefull shouldPsa. 50. 16. Esa. 35, 8. Zach. 14, 21. Rev. 21, Vlt. they be to breake his▪ who is the King of Kings, and will inflict for it, upon their soules and bodies torments e∣ternallie. 2. That which destroyeth a Church, and makes it, either to become a false Church, or no church at all, cannot be a true Church, or be true matter wher∣of it is made: but men visiblie wicked, and prophane make the Church, a Synagoge of Satan, Babylon, Sodom, Aegypt; and so to be spued out, and removed. 3. It is a∣gainst sence and common reason, that a Church should be constituted of vnholie People; For as in a materiallSee Mat. 3, 2. Act. 2, 37. 41. house, the wood and stones must be first prepared, and then lad orderlie in the building; So in the spiritual▪ men and women must by the word of God necessa∣rily
be first reformed, before they are any way fitt, to have any place therin. 4. They which have no right to the holy things of God in the church, are not to be ad∣mitted into it, neither is that Church, which is gathe∣thered of such persons, rightly constituted; But men of wicked conversation, have no right to the holy things of God in the Church, and therefore that Church,Mat. 7, 6. which is gathered of such, is not rightly constituted.Ephes. 2, 1 5. They cannot performe the services and duties of members, for they are spirituallie dead. If a masterRom. 12, 1 1 Pet. 2, 5. will not covenant with one to be his servant, which hath in him no natural life: much lesse, &c. 6. They have not Christ for their head, and therefore cannot be of his bodie; For as in the natural bodie, there must be first a natural union of the parts with the head, be∣fore there can be any action of natural communion, between the head and the members, or one member and another; So in this spiritual bodie, the membersIoh. 15, 2, 4 5. Rom. 8. must be first united with Christ the head, and become one with him, before they can any way partake in his benefits, or have communion one with another, as members of the same body under him the head. 7. They are altogether uncapable of this covenant; ForRom. 7, 2 as a woman, which hath been once a wife, cannot mary againe with another man, untill her first husband be deceased, or she from him lawfullie divorsed. so nei∣therHos. 2, 19, 20. can these be maried to the Lord, till they have mor∣tifyed their corruptions, and put the world and Satan away, unto which before they were (as it were) ma∣ried 8. The Godlie and wicked are contraries, guided Gal 5, 18.
and led by different causes: Now two contraries are not capable of one, and the same forme. Thirdly, for this we have the judgment of the learned also. There must be (saith Molierus a profession of trueIn Psal. 15 religton, and obedience yealded thereto, at least outward∣ly, to become a member of the visible Church. Beza saith,Annot. in Act. 2, 40 He is rightly joyned to the church, which separates himselfe from the wicked. Paul calls the Romans Saincts (saith Are∣tius) to put a difference between their former estate where∣inIn Rō. 1, 7 they lived, which was unholy and impure, and the con∣dition to which they were now called. Piscator affirmes, The matter of a particular church, to be a companie of beleevers. Mr. Iacob in his definition of Christs trueVolumen. Thes. Theolog. p. 356 visible Church, saith, that those which joyne in a spiritual outward society, or body Politick together, must be a faithfull people. Mr. Bradshaw saith, they must be a people, called and separated from the world, and the false worship, andExposi. on Numb. 23 v. 9, p. 158 wayes thereof, by the word. The same speaketh Mr. Attersoll, and alleageth these Scriptures for it, Gen. 4. 26, and 12. 1. Iosh. 24. 2. 3, & 23. 7. 8. Num. 6. 2. Lev. 20. 24. 26. Ioh. 15. 19. Act. 2 40. 41. I could name many others,See Mr. Fenner Sacra. Theolog. l. 6, 0. 3, p. 90 which write the same thing, but there is no use thereof. Onelie it cannot be amisse to shew, how the Church of England makes this, an Article of her Faith, as the Prelates have publi∣shed it in her behalfe. Articl. of Relig. 19 The visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of Faith∣full men, in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments dulie be ministred, according to Christs Or∣dinance, in all those things, that of necessitie are requisite to the same.
Thus the Proposition beeing proved, and the assump∣tion acknowledged to be true, the conclusion must needs stand firme (viz.) that the Churches of England are not true visible churches, rightly gathered, and planted, ac∣cording to the Scripture; and therefore by necessarie con∣sequence lawfully to be separated from. Before I end this point, I will here lay downe some few Syllogismes, intyrelie made up, betweene the Incon∣formists, and Conformists, all concluding the forenamed position. That Church which hath not a Lawfull ministery, is not a true visible Church: But the Church of England hath not a Lawfull ministerie; Ergo the church of England is not a trueBabel, not Beth. pag. 108, Challeng. chap. 1, p. 33, 34, visible church. The proposition is affirmed of the Conformists, as Burton, Sutcliffe, &c. The assumption is granted by the Nonconformists, as we have in the first chapter largelie shewed. The true visible church of Christ, is a society of beleeving and Faithfull people, and a communion of Saints (so say the Conformists) but the church of England is not a society ofSntcl. cha∣leng. p. 40, & answ. to the excep. p. 65 beleeving and Faithfull people, a communion of Saints (thus write the Nonconform. see p. 169. &c.) Ergo, the church of Engl. is not a true visible church. The true church is the Kings daughter, described in Psal. 45. But the church of England is not the Kings daughter, so described: Therefore the church of England is not the trueBurton in answ. to H. cholm. p. 100 church of Christ. The Proposition is laid downe by the Conformists, wherby they prove Rome a false Church. The assump∣tion
is the Nonconformists: For if they say the truth, their members have not those qualities, belonging to the Kings daughter; neither their Preists nor people. See pag. 15. 16. 39. 137. 169. 170. The true church of Christ is the Flock of Christ, but the church of England is not the true Flock of Christ▪ Therefore the church of England is not the true church of Christ. Burton in the same booke pag 99. The proposition say the Conformists is undeniable, Son. 1. 6. 7. Act. 20. 28. Ioh. 10. 16. The assumption is proved by the Nonconformists Principles, compared with Ioh. 10. 3. 4. 27. Christs flock heare his voyce, and know it, & follow it, but the Church of England, sub∣mitting to an vnlawfull ministerie, worship, and discipline, heare not Christs voyce, nor know, nor acknowledge, nor follow it, but the voyce of Antichrist. Sutcliffe chaleng. ch. 1, pag. 6, Arg. 9. The church of God doth keep the doctrine of the Apostles & Prophets, without addition, alteration, or corruption (thus the Conformists) But the Church of England keepes not the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, without addition, alteration▪ and corruption (say the Nonconformists, see pa. 108.) Ergo she is not the church of God. The same booke, p. 13, Arg. 19 No society can be termed Gods church, which retayneth not Gods true worship; (thus say the Conformists) But the church of England doth not retayn Gods true worship; (say the Nonconformists, see pag. 78. to 113.) Ergo she can∣not be termed Gods church. Id. p. 27, Arg. 52. The true church consisteth not of feirce Lyons, Wolves, Ty∣gers, and such like wild and feirce beasts, but of sheepe and Lambes, which learne of Christ, and are meeke, humble, gentle, &c. (so say the Conformists) But the English
church doth consist of Lyons, Wolves, Tygers, and such like wild, and feirce beasts, and not of sheepe and Lambes, which learne of Christ, and are meke, humble, gentle, &c. (thus affirme the Nonconformists, see pag. 31. &c. 145. 169. 170.) therefore it is not a true Church. Here the reader seeth clearly, how the Conform: ma∣jors, and the Nonconform: minors, make up intyre Syllo∣gismes of Separatisme. And how they willbe able to unlose these knots, I know not, except by revoking ut∣terly their owne grounds; which if either of them doe, yet I doubt not, but we shall well enough be able to maintaine them against men. SECT. IV. NOw we come to take a view, of such exceptions, as may seeme to cary most weight, against our for∣mer conclusion; And these are laid down cheifly by Mr. Dayrell, in his treatise of the Church: this man made a shift, to fill up there, with words, above thirty sheets of paper; The which subject, if some men had tooke in hand, they would easily have comprised all the matter of it, in 12. or 14. leaves. My purpose is not to follow him, in his idle repetitions, neither to speake much of his contradictions, & absurdities, but in short to give a full answer to his tedious & tyresome discourses. Tou∣ching the description, which he makes of a visible church, he saith thus: All that be, and remaine vnder thepa. 29. & 41 voyce, and call of God, that is, the ministerie of the word, &c. be of the visible church.
Answ. This is a false and prophane errour; for first, then the vilest Hereticks that ever have beene in the world, may be members thereof, as the Appellites, Cer∣donians, Macedonians, Paternians, Patricians, &c. such as held two contrarie beginnings, or Gods, the one good, the other evill; such as held, that Christ is not rysen from the dead; denyed the Holy Ghost to be God; af∣firmed the bodie to be created of the devill, &c. 2. Then may excommunicate persons be of the church, before they acknowledge their sinnes; yea Tues, Iews, and Infidles. 3. Whereto leadeth this Position, but in∣deed to make the Church a very stincking ditch, to re∣ceaveEze. 16, 28 all filthinesse, and to be like the whorish woman, which openeth her knees to every passenger, contrarie to the patterne, given us of God, Rev. 21. ult. 4. If this were true, then should no man for any offence be censured, so long as he remaines vnder the voyce and call of God; For that which is enough to state one in the Church, is enough to keepe him there still, if he retaine it. 5. He speakes contrary to the judgement of all Reformists and Conformists, that ever I have heard or read of, and contrarie to his owne writing in other places: for in pag. 22. 35, &c. he defines a Church to be a company called out from the rest of the world, and such as doe submit them∣selves to the true worship of God. Now there is a great difference betweene this calling from the world, submit∣ting to the true worship of God, &c. and onely to be un∣der the ministerie of the word. 6. I cannot tell from whom Mr. Dayr▪ receaved this strange doctrine unlesse it were the Heretick Eunomius, which taught, that so
men were of his religion, it was no matter what theirAugust. de Haeret. conversation was, nor how many sinnes they commit∣ted. He doth often affirme in his booke, that it is not. 54, Faith and repentance, but the Profession thereof, which isPag. 244, necessarie to the making of a member of the visible Church. Marke how blasphemously he speakes; in∣timating, if men with their mouth speake some few good wordes, they may be taken lawfullv into the Communion of the Saints, and partake with the rest in the Sacraments and Prayer; All be it knowne to be notorious murderers, theeves, traitors, sorcerers, witches, whore∣moungers, &c. and so resolved to live, and continue. It is very likely this Mr. Dayr. had a great Church, see∣ing he made the doore unto it, broad and wide, justMat. 7, 13, like the way to hell. I could here lay down many grosse absurdities, which might be truly concluded from his words, viz. that a Church cannot cast out some obstinate sinners, neither is she▪ and the world, to be distinguished, &c. but be∣cause the vanitie, and evill of this speach, is enough all∣ready shewed, I purposely passe them over. We have seene one of Mr. Dayr. definitions; nowPag. 35, followes another. Let there be an assembly, joyned to∣gether in prayer, hearing the word, and receaving the Sacra∣ments, according to Christs institution, and it is a true vi∣sible Church. Answ. It is so indeed, and hence this argument a∣gainst them may be framed: If in the Ecclesiastical As∣semblies of England, there is neither prayer, preaching, nor sacraments administred, according to Christs institution, then
are they all false Churches: But the first is true, therefore the second. The proposition hath sufficient confirmation, from their Principles, before named; the assumption is cer∣taine, and manifest, by the doctrine and description, which he here makes of a true visible church; and there lyeth against it no exception. Pag. 36. In the next page he delivers a Paradox (viz.) that men outwardly may submitt to true worship, and yet be irre∣ligious and prophane. Now this is either falsely or foo∣lishly spoken. If he meane of visible prophanesse, and irreligion, then it is a contradiction, and indeed plaine Nonsence; for to say, that a person, may outwardlie sub∣mitt to God, and yet outwardlie be prophane and un∣godly. If he intended of secret and inward irreligion of the heart; In this sence it is true, but answereth nothing at all to the matter, for which he brings it. Here also he layeth downe Mr. insw. wordes, as he saith; unto which he makes no direct reply, but runnes to another matter, whereof he had now no cause at all to speake: He denyeth that either the Papists, or Ana∣baptists doe professe true Religion, although they professe, some true and sound doctrine. What moved him thus to thinke, I know not, unlesse it were because these have many errours in their religion; Now if this reason will stand firme, and good against them, then it must needs follow, that the Church of England professeth not true religion, though she profsse some true and sound doctrins, in regard she maintaineth many lyes, and vile errours. Mr. Gilbe,In the table after Sold▪ of Barw. a forward minister, reckoneth up, above se∣ven
score grosse points of poperie, remaining in their Church, and many others of them have don the like, as I have in this treatise manifested. And I think it would aske a better witt, and head, then ever Mr. Dayr. had, to proove, that there are halfe so many corruptions, in the religion professed by the Eng. Anabaptists. From pag 41. to 51. there are certaine reasons (as he calls them) to prove the Church of Eng. and their Parish assemblies true visible churches. As for the first of them, I deny both the Proposition and Assumption; He saith: Whatsoever people or nation is within the dayly voice and call of God, &c. the same is a true visible Church. This is un∣truelie affirmed, as I have proved before; and for his speaking of it againe, it sheweth the more his igno∣rance in the way of God; For will any wise man take Lyons, Wolves, Foxes, &c. into his sheepsould? sow tares, or darnel, in his garden, plant thistles, or thornes, in his Or∣chard? The Church is the Lords speepcfowld, his garden, orchard, &c. and therefore if Mr. Dayr. had been so wise as he should, he would not have spoken so corruptly, but have given rather counsell to keepe out vncleane persons, considering what the Prophet saith: Holynes be∣commeth thy house o Iehovah, to length of dayes. Againe, we may perceive by his wordes, that he understood not the nature of a visible Church; For as to the constitution of it, there belongs a holie people, as the matter, so also a uniting and coupling of them together, which is the forme, whereof it consisteth: As the constitution of a common wealth, or of a cittie, is a gathering and knit∣ting of people together in a civill Policie; so the Con∣stitution
Eph. 2, 12 of the common wealth of Israel, (as the Church is called) and of the cittie of God the new Ierusalem, is a. Aristot 3, Polit. c. 1. gathering and uniting of people into a spiritual Poli∣cie; The forme of which Policie is order, as the Philoso∣sophers acknowledged, calling Policie an order of a cit∣ty; which Order is requisite in every administration of1 Cor. 14, 40 the Church, as the Apostle teacheth; and cheifly in the collection thereof; And therefore next unto Faith in God, it is to be esteemed most necessarie, for all holie societies. This was one thing, for which Paul rejoycedCol. 2, 5. in the Church at Collosse, as for their steadfast Faith in Christ, so their Order also. But Mr. Dayr. will have his Church without Order▪ or Forme; and what is it then, but a meere, atxie, or confuse Chaos, a state onlie fitt for the devills Goates to be in, which desire liberty, and notHeb 12, 13. for Christ sheepe, which are to make streight pathes to their feet. He saith, there lyeth no exception against the As∣sumption. And why so? because their Pastors and Tea∣chers are true ministers. Me thinkes the man should have beene ashamed, to have begd so much at one time; But to let his folishnesse passe, we do deny them to be law∣full Officer, and have brought their owne hands against them for it. Secondly, he writes here, against his brethren, yea (and I thinke) against his owne con∣science: For the greatest number of their Bb. Preists & Deacons, are dumb dogs, ignorant asses, &c. such as eitherEze. 16 49 cannot, or through pride, sullnesse bread, and abundance ofSee before pag. 43. idlenesse (Sodomes sinnes) will not preach; and therefore it is untruely said, that the people generally of England are
within the dayly voyce and call of God. 3. The later part of his reason, is wholie against himselfe; sor whereas his wordes import, that the people generally of England are impenitent sinners, and unbeleevers, it must follow necessarily, that they are alltogether uncapable of any Church estate, and so much we have formerly proved.Pag, 176▪ 177. Were it not a ridiculous thing, to set up a house with wood and stones, and afterward to take Axes, Sawes, Hammers, and other tooles, to cutt, saw, and fitt them for the building: yet such an unskilfull builder Mr. Dayr. sheweth himselfe in his whole booke. For hee will have idolaters, adulterers, theeves, conjurers, murderers, and any villain in the Land, to be placed in the Lords spirituall house, and afterward will have meanes used to prepare them for the same. Not to contend about the proposition of his second ar∣gument, howbeit it is verie faulty. I denie the assump. viz. that the people of England doe injoy, and outwardly submit themselves to the true worship of God: for the worship which they have, is affirmed of the Noncon∣formistsSee pag. 78. &c. to be antichristian and unlawfull: but let us heare his reason. If such as both in their life, and at theire death served God with the verie same worship we doe, have in that worship beene saved, then i the worship wee now have, true divine worship. But the first is true, therefore the second. If Mr. Bradshaw had found such a reason in Mr. Iohnsons writing, he would surely have called him idle head, crackt braind, foole &c. but I leave such terms to men of his intemperate spirit, and doe thus answer.
2. A Papist, Arminian, or Anabaptist may say as much and upon as good ground, and who dares denie but manie of their religion, have found mercie with the Lord, must it therefore follow that their worship is good? indeed Mr. Dayr, logick so concludeth it. 2, MenRom. 9, 33. may serve God with an outward worship, not agree∣able to his word, and yet be saved: for who knoweth how infinitely good hee is to his poore creature. 3. It is apparent this man had a very ill case in hand, that could not tell how to maintaine it, but by revea∣ling the secret and hid consell of the Lord: for I won∣der how he came to know who in their worship have beene saved: if he should say in the judgement of cha∣ritie he thinkes thus, then his argument must be of an another fashion, namely, that he thinkes their worship is true: for otherwise it will want shape and proportion. 4. It hath beene the constant practice of the godly, to proove their positions by the scriptures, but it is likely he saw that there was no helpe for him there, and therefore onely makes use of this reasonlesse reason. His third argument is foolish and carnall; and both parts of it false. For first it is incident to the best and purest Churches upon earth to erre and to bee decei∣ved, and therefore their sentences and approbations must be examined by Gods word. 2. If the reformed Churches doe justifie the English, therein they condemne greately their owne practice: for in theire constitution, ministery, worship, and governement they are as opposite1. Admo∣nition. as light and darkenesse one to the other: and so much the Nonconformists confesse. 3. Seeing the Prophets
Christ and his Apostles condemne their Church, their case is never a whit the better, though all men in the world speake well of it. 4. The strictest professors, do hold the Church of England as it is Nationall, Provin∣ciall, and Diocessan, false: howbeit they thinke some particular congregations in the Land to bee true. 5. With such weapons as these doe the Papists fight: and where they can bring one, the others ten, to wit∣nesse for them, and their Romish superstitions. I meaneBellarm. de notis Eccles. antiquity, universality and such like popular reasons, whereby they seeke to uphold their cursed Kingdome. Lastly, it is untruely affirmed, that all the Churches of God in the world doe acknowledge the people of England to be a true Church. For there are many which have both professed and prooved the contrary. Now for his last argument, I deny also both parts of it: and affirme that neither the mother nor daughters are true Churches▪ the reason which he layeth downe is, as the rest, sillie, and most impertinent to proove the thing for which he brings it. The summe and effect of that which hee hath written in five or sixe pages is this, that their worship and religion is true, because in Q. Maries dayes, divers Martyrs professed the same, and died in it. Answ. 1. Here the thing in question is brought for confirmation: the Martyrs allowed of their worship, be it so, what then, should hee not yet have prooved the same to be lawfull? Yes doubtlesse, if hee would have written either according to rule, reason, or religi∣on. 2. If a Papist should suffer death under Heathen or
Turkes, because he would not denie Christ esus, wee think he may in some respect be judged a martyr, and yet the Romish worship which he professeth, remaine still false, and idolatrous. 3. I desire the Reader to marke how absurdly he speaketh: the thing which he under∣takes to proove, is, that their assemblies are true, for this he alleageth the Martyrs, now to what purpose I can not tell in the world: unlesse he meant that there was such vertue and efficacy in their sufferings, as the whole Nation thereby was sanctified, and made Churches. Lastly, this reason is one and the same, with that which he brought to confirme the second Syllogisme, save that for the more authority of it, hee addeth the name of the Mrtyrs, the insufficiency whereof I have there shewed and thither doe referre the Reader. In the conclusion he saith, Answer me this one argu∣ment and so I end. If Mr. Hooper Mr. Bradford with others knowing the corruptions then in the worship and ministery, being the same also with ours now, notwithstanding this knowledge, and not separating, were saved: then men at this day notwithstanding their knowledge of the corruptions and not separating because of them, may likewise be saved. But the first is true: therefore the second. Ans. His former reasons were not more false and foolish, than this is wicked and profane, for first, wherefore serves it, but in truth to teach men to cast off all care in seeking Gods glorie, by an even walking, and to doe so much of his will as is sufficient to bring them to heaven, and no more▪ thus he counselleth people to be lovers of themselves more than lovers of
God: yea to love God for themselves, and to serve him for a reward onely; but let all persons, in all places take heede, that they follow not this mans ad∣vice, for if they resolve to doe no more, but what they think will serve their turne to be saved, they will sure∣ly misse of that, and for their self love suffer wrath and vengeance eternally. 2 Howsoever Iwill not judge another mans servant, yet it is more then he or anie mortall man that can infalliblie tell, whether Mr. Bradford, Mr. Hooper and others were absolutely saved, and therefore hee reasoneth still most childishly, to prove his matter by things secret, and known to God onely. 3 When Luther, Calvin, and others left the Church of Rome, might not anie popish priest have said as much to them. If Mr. W. Mr. C. with others knowing the corruptions then in worship &c. Now I perceive if Mr. Dayr. had been in their place, he would not have separated from that Synagogue of Satan, and to speake the verie truth, he could not do it lawfully upon his own groundes. 4. That these men knew some corruptions to be in their worship & ministrie, I grant it, but not in that kinde and degree, which the Nonconformists since have manifested, for if they had certainly known that these things were un∣lawfull and antichristian, and their Church government taken wholly from the Pope: I beleeve they would not have joyned in spirituall communion therewith, & therfore Mr. Dair. shamfully abuseth the reader, to say the martyrs saw their corruptions, and they are the same which they have now: whereas he should have proved,
that they saw them according to the nature of them, and as his fellow brethren have since seene them, & affirmed them to be, for unlesse this can be shewed, they differ herein asmuch from the martyrs, as if one sinned ignorantly, aud another against his knowledge and conscience. 5. The saintes are taught of God, not to be servants of men, but to live by their owne faith, &Phil. 3. to presse forward toward the mark. and therefore hee sheweth litle skill in the course of religion, to sette downe this, or that mans practise for a rule to walke by, unlesse he had professed himselfe to be a Familist or perfectist, and so would make the world beleeve, that none could erre which took such for example whom he prescribed to them. 6. I cannot tell for what end be propounded this argument, for imagin it should be granted him, that the Martyrs knew the corruptions of their Church, &c. and yet were saved: and so are many now in England, which understand the same: what would hee from hence conclude? I thinke there is no man on earth that knowes; if there be, they might doe well, at the next impression of his booke, to set it in the margin, for to cover what they can, the mans empty, naked, and absurd writing. Mr. Dayr. having shewed his best skill, wit and lear∣ning, to proove their parish assemblies, true Churches: in his second booke (according to his division) hee at∣tempteth to confute the description which Mr. Barrow, and the Brownists (as he maliciously names Gods peo∣ple) have laid downe of a true visible Church: and a∣bout this point, hee writes more then an hundred and
fifty pages, all the matter whereof (leaving out his Bat∣talogies and impertinenr speeches) might well have beene written in sixe leaves of papier. But it seemes the man wanted no money, and therefore would make it up to his reader in Taile, what he could not doe in weight; forgetting in the meane time the proverbe, a little and good; and also what the learned use to say, The worth of a writing doth not consist in bulke and belly: but in the sinewes, veines, and arteries, which with good blood, and spirit, may be comprehended in a little body. But let us see how he confutes us. First he layeth downe our definition of a true visible Church, which is, a company of people, called, and separa∣tedApol. p. 44 from the world, by the word of God, and joyned together by voluntary profession of the faith of Christ, in the fellow. ship of the Gospel. Before we ome to examin the reasons (if they may be so termed) which he alleageth against this definition, I desire the reader to minde it well, that we herein do say no more, then what in effect is fully acknowled∣ged, by the Nonconformists,Fall of Bab. p. 50. Cart. hist. Christ. l. 2. page 359. Dudl. Fenner. Sacra Theolog. lib, 6▪ eap▪ 3. Pag, 90. Neces. disc. pag. 7, Mr Iacob. defin. Chur. pag, 2. Conformists,Mr Butt. agan. H. Col. p. 100. Sutcl. chal. pag. 6, 5. Mr. Atters. on Numb. 23, 9, pag 158▪ and 357. the Church of England,Articl. of Relig. pag. 13, Art 19. the learned generally,Pet. Mart. in in loc. commun. pag. 741. Vrsin. catech. explicat, pars 2, pag. 343. Alstedius Theolog. Polemic. pars 2, pag. 140, Piscat. volum. Thes. Theolog. pag. 356. and all the re∣formed ChurchesHarmony of confes Section 10, Belg ik, Articl. 28, and Fren. Art. 26. upon earth, as is to be seene in their books here named. Yea Mr. Brad.Vnreason of sepation pag. 107. although no
friend of the Separatists, yet confesseth the whole, as it is here laid downe to be true and good. Notwithstan∣ding, this man commeth boldly forth against us, as if he had been either asleepe all his life time, or lived in some unknowne parts of the world, and so could not tell what any body had said about this thing. And now for his reasons, in which he is as confu∣sed as is the subject for which he pleadeth: notwith∣standing such as I finde here and there, disorderly written of him, I will reduce into some particular heads. The maine and chiefe argument, wherewith he fighteth against us, for saying, a true visible Church is a company of people called and separated from the world. is, because hypocrites and reprobates may beein the Church. And to proove this, he is very large and tedious: for I dare say, more then halfe of his booke is spent about it; in alleaging for it, Scriptures, Examples and Reasons: But a few words will serve for answer to it; in regard he talkes of a thing, which neither helpes him, nor disadvantageth us, for the question betweene them and us, hath ever beene, about the true and naturall members, whereof Gods Church is orderly gathered, and planted: and not about the decayed and degene∣rate estate thereof. But of this he saith nothing: one∣ly reasoneth much to this purpose. If a mans body may have sores, boyles, broken limmes, &c. then is not the body whole and sound in the definition. If in a garden, vineyard, or orchard, after the constitution, there grow weeds, thornes, and thistles: then cannot the same in the description, be said to bee planted at first of all good herbes, vines and trees. But
the first is true: therefore the second. Now if such Philoso∣phie be to be laughed at, then truely much more is Mr. Dayr. Divinitie here to be pittyed: for he denieth our definition, to wit, that a true visible Church in the first collection consisteth of a people called and separated from the world: and why? because forsooth afterwards some of them may fall into unlawfull and sinfull courses. If all our writings should bee read over, yet will it not be found, that ever we have denied; but many hy∣pocrites may be in the true Church, yea open and vile transgressours: but here lyeth the poynt, if any shall af∣firme, that the same may be first gathered, of knowne lewd, and unconverted men, that indeed wee deny utterly, and can proove the contrary: or if they shall say, that obstinate and incorrigible sinners, may lawful∣lySee page 176. 177. be suffered therein, this also we affirme to be untrue, But if they say, that in a true visible Church, there may be great evils committed, yea and a long time tolera∣ted, wee assent unto it. Howbeit it is certaine (as Dr. Ames saith) this forbearance is a grieveus sinne before God. If Mr. Dayr. therefore had well understood, what our negative and affirmative positions are, hee might have spared most of his writing. For throughout his booke, he hath most falsely reported of us, by insinuating as if we held all of the visible Church to be saved, and that no wickednesse therein can be committed: now our words tend onely to shew, what a Church is, and how every member ought to walke: but if in some respects they bee not so, yet may the Congregation notwith∣standing be true and good.
Mr. Dayr tells us verie often of the sinnes commit∣ted in the Iewish Church, so in Corinth, Pergamus, &c. If he were alive, I would aske him whether they did well herein; If he should say yea, then were he a blas∣phemer; if nay, then he gave us the whole cause, and so might cast his booke into the fyre. For the thinge which we affirm, is, that every member of the church ought to be holy, not that they are allwayes so, but should be so, and it is their great fault, they are other∣wise. And here the reader may observe how greatly he hath mistaken the matter: For whereas Mr. Barrow, Mr. Ainsw. and others, doe shew from the scriptures, what a true Church is, whereof gathered, how every mem∣ber should walke, & how abuses are to be reformed, &c. He (either through ignorance, or mallice, or both) still inferreth from their writings: that they held perfection of Churches, that there can be no Hypocrite or reprobate in the Church, &c. Things groundlesly collected of him. Of the same nature are the reports, which many of them publish dayly in their Sermons and Bookes; namely that the main cause of our Separation is, because wicked men are suffered in their church. But this is untrue, for howsoever (as I said before) such a tolleration can not be justified; yet this is not properly the reason, but because their Parishes were at first constituted, as now they stand, of the members of Antichrist, to wit, the ido∣latrous Papists, and of all other kind of most notorious sinners, as whorems. witches, atheists, swearers, usurers, cursers, scoffers at religion, &c. This prophane multitude,
without any profession of faith and repentance, were forced and compelled by human authority in the be∣ginning of QElizabeths raigne, to be members of their Church, and so have continued, they and their seed e∣ver since: contrary to the expresse word of GodActs 2. 30. & 19. 9. Rom. 16. 7 & 20. 14. 15. 17. Io. 17. 14. 10, Ez▪ k. 36. 38. Phil. 1. 5. Act. . 41. 42. 47. & 11. 21. 24. & 17. 4. 34. Rom. 12. 5. 2. Cor. 9. 13. Psal. 110. 3. Esa. 14. 1. & 44. 5. & 6. 8. Zach. 4 6. & 8. 21. 22. 23. 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15 16. Iosh. 23. 7. 8. Psal. 94. 20. Mar. 18. 15. 17. 1. Cor. 5. chap. & 6. 9. 10. 1. Eph. 1, 1. 22. 23. & 2. 11. 12. 19. 20. 21, 22. and this is so evident and certaine, as the Nonconformists ac∣knowledge it most true, beside, we leave them in re∣spect of their ministery, worship, and Church government, which is also prooved unlawfull, and Antichristian by their owne testimony. Another exception which he taketh against our de∣scription is, because we say, a people called by the word of God, this he denies to be true, and affirmes that men may come to be members of the visible Church, and not be called by the word, and therefore verie unfitly is it placed in the description of a visible Church▪ pag. 62. 63. Ans. We need not wonder when a man undertakes to justifie a bad cause that he useth ordinarily vile, and profane arguments for it. First this which he affirmeth is directly against the Holy Scriptures of God.Mat. 28. 19. 20. Psal. 19. 7. . Cor. 1. 21. Ier. 23. 29. 1. Pet. 23. 25. Iames . 18. Iob. 33. 23. 24. Act. 16. 10. Rom. 10. 17. 2. Con∣trarie to all example in the old and new Testament.1. Cor. 3. 9. Gen. 12. 1. Acts 2. 40. and 10. 44. Col▪ 1. 5. 27. Ephes. 1. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 15. 1. Thes. 1. 3. 5 9. 3. Wholy against the doctrine of his brethren and fel∣low Preists, and the learned everie where. c 4. The
c Atters. on Phil. 10 pag. 205. T. C. I. 1. p. 51. Clev. on Prov. 9. 3. pag. 11. Barn. Sep. schism. pag. 118. By field on Col. 1. 6. pag. 49. Scriptures which he names, are both untruly and unad∣visedly applyed of him, for first touching that in Exod. 12. 38. Howsoever many Egyptians and other nations were mooved by Gods workes shewed in Egypt, to go out with the Israelites, notwithstanding that they should bee all taken into actuall communion with the Church, it is onely his dreame: and no such thing can be truely gathered from the place: but the contrary is most probable, as I could (if there were any use) give many reasons for it: see Numb. 11. 4. And the liked Willet. on Rom. 10. obs. 7. pag. 485. Elton on Col. 1. 7. pag. 41. Scharp. Cursus Theo. p. 6. Cent. Magdeb, I. 1. c. 4. pag. 171. Pisc. Aph. loc. 18. pag. 101. may be said unto the place in Est. . 17. and this also fur∣ther added how he knew (if any were received into the fellowship of the Saints) that the word of God, was not preached unto them by some meanes, in one measure or other, before their admission. As for the other texts, namely, Iohn 2. 23. and 4. 39. and 6. 26. His alleaging of them, plainely notes, that his knowledge was not much in these Scrip. Fort. Christ did not there cōstitute any visible Church. 2. The persons there spoken of, were most of them members by birth of a true Church. 3. Howsoever the things which hee mentioneth, as miracles, reports, &c. were great meanes to confirme the Gospel, and to draw people unto the hearing of the word, notwithstanding the word alone was the instru∣ment (Gods blessing going with it) whereby the peo∣ple were brought unto faith and repentance, Ioh. 4. 42: 4. But wherefore doth he instance these examples, see∣ing they are extraordinary, and therefore if it should be granted, as hee ignorantly understands the places: yet it will not follow, that there is any other outward
ordinary meanes to call men out of the world, beside the word: now of this ordinary meanes speakes the de∣finition onely. 5. Observe how the exception which he makes here against us, serves nothing to helpe his case; for if all the persons which he names, were recei∣ved into the visible Church, and say it was by some o∣ther meanes, beside the word, that mooved their hearts to obey the Lord therein; yet how can he proove, that these were outwardly wicked, and irreligious, knowne to be Idolaters, drunkards, sorcerers, mockers, lyers, blas∣phemers, &c. For unlesse he can manifest this, if all the rest were granted, yet will it not stead him a whit, to justifie the state of the English Church, which was ere∣cted after popery (as hee could not deny) of such vile varlets and uncleane creatures. It is therefore worth the noting, what ill speede Mr. Dayr. hath still in all his testimonies, and witnesses: for after he hath puld them in at the window, or backdoore by the haire of the head, yet this is his crosse, either they stand up against him, or are quite dumb▪ and speake not a word, touching the point for which he brings them▪ We heard what the reasons are, why Mr. Dayrell disliked our definition. Now before we come to the last part of his booke, there is somthing to be said touch∣ing the manner which he layes downe, of making ofPage 63. 64. Churches by the sword, about this he begins with a tedious comparison of one that hath children and ser∣vants which be papists, and by threats will have them wor∣ship God aright, thereupon they frequent the Church assem∣blies and seeme outwardly to be religious, and are to be ac∣counted
of the visible church, and yet these came not to be of the Church by the call of the word &c. now may the mas∣ter and father doe this, and may not the magistrate? &c. Ans. 1. Howsoever parents and masters, are to use all good means, that those which are under their govern∣ment may be religious & holy, yet have they not anie more power to make them members of Gods Church (if they be not under the visible covenant) then they have power to give them saving grace, & sanctification. 2. Whereas he saith, these come not to be of the vi∣sible Church, by the call of the word, that is untrue; For howsoever a person may come, to the place where a Church is; yet his comming simplie there, doth not immediately make him an actuall member of it, as he still ignorantly intimates; For those of his brethren, which were farre more judicious then himselfe, doeT. c. l. 1, Pag. 51. teach otherwise: when men doe profitt in hearing, then are they to be joyned to the Church. But it seemes if Hea∣then & Turkes, would have but come to his service and preaching, he would have acknowledged them to be part of his flock, albeit they manifested no repētance at all; If he should say, no, then were he contrarie to his owne saying here. 3. This Similitude is against him∣selfe; For first, the Magistrate did not commaund the Subjects, to goe unto Churches, formerly gathered, and there to be prepared by hearing. but forded them to be members; they beeing altogether and every way most unfitt. 2. The worship which they did, was not according to Gods word, but after the traditions and devises of men. 3. They neither outwardly seemed
religious, nor renounced Poperie, nor professed true re∣ligion, but in all this plainely shewed the contrarie, as we have before proved by their owne writings. See Mr. Robinsōns Iustisica∣cation of separation 205. Mr. Ains. Counterp. 224, &c. After this he makes a long narration, to justify this compulsion by the practise of the ings of Idah: now this point by others hath beene so fullie answered, as one would thinke, that Mr. Dayr: should never have had the forehead once, to have named it, except he had been more able to refute their arguments. For answere to it: I deny that there is any true proportion between this Example; and the thing unto which they doe apply it. 1. The Iewish Church was nationall, but such are none now under the Gospell▪ neither Provinciall, nor Dioce∣san, as the Nonconformists doe say and prove. 2. How∣soever Iud..h fell fearfully into sinne, yet by vertue of the Lords covenant with her forefathers, faithfully on his part, remembred and kept, remained still the true Church of God, and was not (as Israel) quite broken-off, and therfore the Magistrate compelled not the people, to be members, but to perform the duties thereof, they beeing members truly before. Indeed if either Heze∣chiah, Iosiah, Asa, or Nehemiah, had forced the Fdomites, Aegyptians, Babylonians, &c. into the holy Temple, and there to have sacrificed to the Lord, it had been some∣thing like unto their practise; For the English nation, cō∣sisting of many sheires, citties, townes, and villages, wasRom. 11, 16, 21, never within the Lords covenant, & holy in the roote▪ as Iudah was; Howbeit, it may be, many hundred yeares past, there were some true churches planted in the Land, by the preaching of the Gospell, and obedience
of faith. 3. The ministerie, worship, and church govern∣ment, unto which Iudah submitted, was the Lords, and the contrarie abolished by her good Governours, as the reader may see by these scriptures.2 King 18, 3. 4, 5, 6 2 Chro. 29 2. 3, 5 19, 20, 21, &c. and 30, 1, 2, &c. & 31, 1, &c. 2 King 22, 12, and 23, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 24, 25. 2 chro. 34 2, 3, 4, 5, 9▪ 33. But neither in the beginning of King Edwards, or Q. Elizabeths raigne, was there such a course taken, but the selfe same false ministerie, worship, and church government, left to stand, which the Romish beast, had before devised, and is at this day used in his cursed Kingdome, onely some few faults put out: and this themselves, when they write a∣gainst the Hierarchie, doe avouch boldly. 4. If we consider the Preists and people of the Iewes, it will appeare evidently, that there is no agreemēt or liknesse in the cōparison: For these separated themselvs frō the filthines of the heathen of the land,Ezra 6, 21,  and 8, 1, 2, 3, 4. confessed their sinns, humbled their soules by fasting and prayer before the Lord,chap. 9. 1, 2, sanctifyed themselves,2 chro. 29, 5, 12, 21 2 chro. 14, 2, 3, 4, 2 chro. 29, 18, 19, prepared their whole heart to seeke God,2 Chro. 15 8, 9, 12, made a covenant with him, frejoyced at the oath,2 chro. 15, 13, kept the passo∣ver with joy:2 chro. 29, 25, 27, But the English at first in every par∣ticular were much unlike these people, as appeares by the great rebellions, which they made in many places, because they thought that their idolatrous service should be put downe. Yea so unwilling were they to leave their idolatrie, as the Magistrate was saine to informe them by a proclamation how they did mistake his reformation. It seemes to you (saith he, speaking of their Mattens and Evening song) that you have a new Service, now in∣deed it is no other but the olde, the selfesame words in Eng∣lish, which were in Latin,This serves to proove what the Noncon∣formists have be∣fore said, touching their wor∣ship in chap. 2, Sect. 2, and 4. Acts and Monum. 2, Volum. pag. 1497. & 1498. edition 5. saving a few things taken out,
so fond, that it had been a shame to have heard them in Eng∣lish &c. If therefore the Service in the Church was good in Latin, it remaineth good in English, for nothing is altered, but to speake with knowledge, that which was ignorantly be∣fore uttered. To be short, I would have them once to tell us, where they have learned to inforce and constraine men to be members of their Churches; I thinke they will not finde a president for it in the world, unlesse they take it from Mahomets doctrine:Alcoran∣cap. 19. and 19. who taught that men should be compelled to the faith by warre and sword. For all refor∣med Churches practice otherwise. There are no swine and dogs driven in among the Godly, but whosoever joynes; comes freely and voluntarily to them; some∣times Mr. Dayr. and his brethren, are all for these Chur∣ches, but when they see that their owne standing must needes be naught and foule, if the others be justifyed, then they will call back their words againe, and plead corruptly for themselves. Mr. Dayr. hath one string yet left to his bow, the which if it should be broken too, then all the shooting would be mard. Be it granted (saith he) that all our parish assem∣bliespage 81. were at first no true Churches, &c. yet notwithstanding now they may be, and indeed are true, seeing that ever since, above fifty yeares, we have beene partakers of the true word and Sacraments, and many of us effectually called thereby: and to drive this nayle into the readers head, he layes downe a similitude thus. There are many men in a house, but gotten into it, not through the doore whereby is the ordi∣nary passage into it, but by some back doore, or through the
window, or haply at some breach violently made into the same house, were it not extreame folly, or rather madnesse, because of this manner of entrance, to deny the inbeing of the afore∣said men in the house. Answ. A man fallen into the water, will rather catch at a mote, thē willingly sinke: it is just so with this Mr. Dayr. being loth to fall under the controversie, which inconsiderately he took up; he talks of this thing and that: the which if they should be judiciously weighed, would be all foū as light as vanity. To reply breifly, for it is not worth a long answer. First, if their Churches were false in the Constitution, then are they so still, because they stand in the very same state, and have not repented of the evill thereof, neither since have entered into any visible covenant with God, by publick, and voluntarie profession of faith. If two persons should make an adulterous covenant, who would deeme them, to be Lawfully man and wife, so long as they stood by vertue of that false agreement, which they made at first toge∣ther? 2. Their having of the word and Sacraments, proves no more their Churches to be true, then doth a true mans purse, in the hand of a theife, prove him to be an2 chro. 36, 18 honest man. As the Lords Vessels were of old in tempo∣rall Babilon, so are there sundry of his Ordinances now in spirituall Babin; and therefore the Papists can say the like, and all other Hereticks; if any should reply, but these have the word preached, in an vnlawfull ministery, and the Sacraments vnrightly administred: I answere,
the same may be said of the English assemblies, as the Nonconform. have soundly proved. 3. What their obedience is, the reader may partly guesse by comparing their profession and practise toge∣ther: The former is shewed in this treatise, and whatIer. 3, 2. the later is, all may see it at home, by their doings in England. As the Prophet said of Isral, let them lift up their eyes to the high places, and behold where they have not plaid the harlot. I could give many instances to shew what small cause they have to boast of their order and manner of walking. For first, they are not a people separated and called from the world; a dutie much urged in the scriptures,Esa. 52▪ 11, Rev. 18 4, Psa. 45, 10, 11 and practised allwayes by the saints.1 King. 18, 3. 4, Act 2, 40, 41, Ezr. 6, 21, Lev. 26, 20 2. They are not free, but stand most slavishly under strange Lords, expresly against Gods commaundement.Lev. 25 42, 1 Co. 7, 23, Gal. 5, 1. 3. They worship the Lord not in the sincere order of the Gospell, but after an Idola∣trous and Popish manner, which is a fearfull and crying iniquity.Ioh. 4, 23 Rev. 14, 9 2 Chro. 11 15, Lev. 10 1, 2. 4. Add hereunto the knowledge, which many of them have, that these things are evill. It is the saying of King Iames, that the Puritans are the foundersMeditatiō upon the Lords prayer, p. 15. and fathers▪ of the Brownists, the later (saith he) only boldy putting in practise, what the former doc teach, but dare not prforme. For what end he wrote this, I let it passe, but the words in part are true: Our separation from the Church of England, is by their grounds certainly good and lawfull, and therefore they say, and doe not.See Mat▪ 2, 3, Now what the reason of it is, I know not; unlesse to enjoy libertie, pleasure, profit, freinds, credit, and such wordly respects.
I doe omitt the fearefull apostasies, which sundry of them have made, from that obedience, unto which they were come, some for wives, others for riches, and many to avoyd persecution for the crosse of Christ. Besides, whome doe they take for greater enemies, then the Separatists? And why? because (as the King said) these boldly put in practise, what they doe teach, but dare not performe. And for this verie thinge, many of us have receaved most greevous injuries both from their tongues and hands, but the Lord forgive them for it. 4. Be it granted, that som of them are effectually called; what then. doe these make all the rest holie? not in the least: for as a handfull or bundle of corne, shuffled into a feild of weeds, though in it selfe, it may retaine the same nature, yet cannot make the feild a corne∣feild, so neither can a few good Christians, sanctifie the whole lump of the idolatrous & vile multitude in the Land, and make them to be the true Churches and people of God. 5. Touching his comparison, it is a begging foolish∣ly of the question; for first, let them prove themselves, to be in the house, and then they shall heare what we we will say of the window and backdoore. From Pag. 212. to 237. he attempteth to prove, that men may Lawfully joyne in divine worship with the wicked. Touching this thinge, although it concernes not much our matter in hand, yet I will write a few wordes, in answere to his long talke in this Chapter.
First he sayth, that the Apostles had religious commu∣nion with infidels. But this is a false doctrine, for a man may preach the word and yet not have spirituall com∣munion with all which are present and heare the same, and this must necessarisy be so, because otherwise it would follow, that every one when he teacheth, com∣municates with the devill, for in likelihood he is con∣stantly there with the rest: indeed Mr. Dayrels words import no lesse, but I hope he hath not left any behind him, of so corrupt and vile a judgement. 2. He sets downe a manifest untruth: for we doe not affirme that there can be no religious communion▪ but with Members of a visible Church. our profession and practice daily is otherwise; yet so, that they be such persons, howbeit not in a Church state, yet to be judged to bee in the faith by their gracious and holy walking. 3. Whereas he affirmes, that we separate from them, because wicked and prophane people are suffered to come unto their worship: this also is untrue, for we leave them rather, because the worship it selse is wicked and prophane, as we have from their owne writings al∣ready shewed. 4. In page 220. he speakes enough to justifie our practice. for thus he writes. We may not have religious communion, or partake in divine worship, with Idolaters, in their false and idolatrous worship, Heathen or Antichristian, but must separate and come out from among them. And a little after he gives a reason. Idolaters and false worship∣pers, in their worship, doe not worship God, but indeed the
devill. not Christ, but Belial, &c. If this be true, in what a fearefull case then, are the people of the Land? who serve Christ by that idoll booke, considering the same is affirmed by the precisest of them, to be an idolatrous and false worship: yea and I am perswaded that this Mr. Dayr. would have said as much too, if he had written of it, against the Prelates. 5. By his owne confession, they are all levened, through the iniquity one of another. For thus he saith,Page 230. The open sinne of a man, and impunity thereof, defileth them that have authority and power, to punish the delinquent, and doe it not, that is, maketh them also guilty of sinne, or to par∣take in that sinne. Now compare with this, their posi∣tions in page 134, &c. where it is acknowledged, that the authority and power to punish the delinquent, be∣longs wholly to the whole Church, and not to the Bh. Chancellours, Officials: Seeing therefore most horrible sinnes are openly committed among them, and no meanes of reformation is used by those which are there∣to onely called: It must needs follow, if Mr. Dayr. and his brethren speak the truth, that all their parishes are defiled, and they are guilty of each others sinnes, and doe constantly partake in the knowne transgressions one of another. 6. Whereas he would have us to proove that the place in Hag. 2. 13. 14. doth signifie spirituall pollution and that the Apostle in 1. Cor. 5. 6. by a little leven, &c. mea∣neth that the whole assembly may become guilty and defiled by open sinne. I answer, These Scriptures are not onely by us thus
interpreted: but also by D. Ames and other learnedDe consci. lib. 4. pag. 212. 213. Pare. in 1. Cor. 5. Hemin. in Eph. 5. 16, 17. Eras. pa∣raph. in 1 Cor. 56. Beza ann. in 1 Cor. 56. men: and therefore herein, he hath them as much as us against him. The like might be said of other Scrip∣tures which he accuseth us of perverting; if it were needfull, I could shew how expositors do apply them as we do, and so do the Nonconformists in all their wri∣tings against the Church of England, notwithstan∣ding this man casteth out of his mouth stoods of re∣proaches after us. But this will appeare to be no new thing, if we take a view of their writings, which have stood for error and falshood; for when the truth hath brought for her defence, the evident Scriptures, PapistsGreg. Martin. Campian. Kellison, &c. have beene wont to carpe at the allegations, and in∣terpretations of them, and challenge their adversaries for corrupting them; the formall ProtestantsWhitg. defence of answer to Admonit. in the gen. Tab. s. in Eng∣land have done the like against the Reformists, and they now use the like colour against us: but how truely, let him judge, whose heart desires to know the truth in sinceritie. Onely I would have it observed, how prettily he prooves the Separatists to pervert the Scrip∣tures, to wit, because he understandeth them otherwise then they doe. Concerning other passages in his booke, I judge them not worth an answer. If there be any, I am wil∣ling that he should take them for his advantage, which undertakes to make a reply unto the things which I have here written.
CHAP. V. Pag. 54. WE heard in the first Chapt. of the reference, which Dr. Ames had unto Mr. Bradshawes book, intituled, the vnreasonablenesse of separation; now as my promise there was, so I will (according to the measure of knowledge, and grace, given me) in this Chapter make answer unto it, that so the godly min∣ded, may judge, whether the Separatists, or he, are most vnreasonable. That the reader might not exspect to see any thing in the booke, proved by the word of God, the publisher therefore of it (after some scoffing at Mr. Iohnson and others) tells us, that it was not the authors meaning to ga∣ther proofes, &c. and much quotation may prove som thing, but answereth not directly to any thing. Answ. 1. Whosoever meanes to settle well the conscience, especially in a main point of faith and reli∣gion, ought necessarily to bring good proofes from the scriptures, for the things whereof he speaketh: For otherwise, either men will give no trust unto hisAugust. contro. maxim. l. 3, c. 14 words, or if they doe, it must be unadvisedly. And how∣soever, he putts Gods word here sleightly by, notwith∣standing others have otherwise esteemed of it. Augu∣stine was of mind, that Councells, Bishops, &c. ought not to be objected for triall of controversies, but the holy scriptures onely, Another saith, I yeeld the scripture a witnesse of my
sence; and my exposition without the Scripture, let it be of noOrig. Ho∣mil. 9. in Ier. Panormit. de elect. & ele. potest. c. signif. Fresh suit, l. 2, p. 351 credit: Yea hereto accord the very Papists, We are ra∣ther to beleeve one private faithfull man, than a whole Councell, and the Pope himselfe, if he have the Word and reason on his side. As D. Ames therefore said, so doe we say, we esteeme not any thing like of a thousand objections, fetched from testimonies, subject to errour, as we would have done of one plaine testimonie divine, if it could have been produced. 2. That quotation of scriptures should not answer directly to any thing, it sounds in my apprehension very harshe, to say no worse▪ for I have hitherto allwayes thought, that there could be no better answering then by scrip∣ture, I mean rightly all eaged & applyed. 3. As many wordes simply will not serve to vntye the knot of a syllogisme, so neither will a few firmely knitt it, except they be spoken to good purpose. 4. For his upbraiding of us with ignorance about Logical formes, I let it passe, we are, that we are, and doe blesse God for that small knowledge of humane lear∣ning, which we have received, & do think it a practise most unbeseeming any of the Saints, to boast of their own ability, much more to deride others, for their lacks But this is to be observed generally, that those which stād for bad causes, doe after this sort still reproch their adversaries; thus do the Papists,Defence of the A∣polog. of the chu. of Eng. p. 619 the Protestants, so the Protestants,Mr. Hutton against the minist. of Devon, & Cornwal, p. 9, & p. 151 the 7. confideration. Stones Serm. on Psa. 120. the Puritans, and so they us, as here, & in their other writingsSprint usually. Now to the booke.
I thought once to have sett downe his answer, be∣fore my reply, as he hath done Mr. Iohnsons reasons, be∣fore his answer: but I perceived then, that this treatise would be very large; besides, both their bookes are all∣ready in many mens hands, & therefore I changed my mind▪ only I doe desire the reader to peruse both their writings, for so shall he profitt the more, by that which I have here penned. Answ. to pag. 1. I find nothing here, but some insinuating florishes, of his owne skill in Logick, and great contempt putt upon Mr. Iohnson, for his vnablenesse therein. Now, my purpose is, both here and in other places, in a manner alltogether to passe-by his vntemperate speaches, know∣ing that before this time, he hath made his reckoning for them with God. 1 Pet. 3. 9. Rō. 13, 21, Besides, it is a Christian part not to render rebuke for rebuke, and a thousand times better were it to sustaine even a legion of reproaches, then for a man by tur∣ning (though but one) to give cause of suspition, that evill hath gott som part of conquest over him. But I marvell, why he saith, that Mr. Iohnson in disdaine sti∣leth them forward preachers; For 1. He knew not the others heart. 2. To my knowledge, this is a terme commonly given, and taken of them, acceptably, and1 Cor. 7. in good part. 3. The Apostle saith, Love hopeth all things; But it is evident Mr. Bradsh. followed not his rule, which is, when things are doubtfull in themselvs, to embrace the best. Answ. to pag. 2, 3. He speaks often of their law, but what law he means, I know not, whether the cōmon, provincial, civil, or statut;
neither what by the true intent of it, and therefore until some freind of his, doe set forth an exposition of it, we cannot give to it any direct answ. 2. Seing he grants, to be a true minist. there must be a qualificatiō, according to the intent of the law, we desire them, in their next writing, to tell us plainly, whether all their Bb. Preists, & Deacons, are so qualified: if not, then certainly Mr. Dayr. Mr. Bradsh. &c. have much deceived the people: For under the colour of some few among them, qualified (as they say) they have cunningly sought, to justifie all the rest; and yet knew, (as it is cleare by this mans wri∣ting) that their ministerie is false and unlawfull. 3. Let the vanity of his speach be here observed; their mi∣nisters are true, if they bee, &c. which is, as if a knowne harlot, should say, I am honest, if I am qualified, accor∣ding to the word of God. 4. He mistakes Mr. Iohn∣sons words, for he doth not say, that the Prelates are ministers of the Church Assemblies, but of the Church of England; Notwithstanding, if there were need, we could prove both by their profession, and practise, thatReply to D. Morton pa. 85. the Bb. are the proper Pastors of all the Parishes in their Diocesses, and the rest are curats only to them. 5. If the ministerie of the Prelates, belong not to any ordinarie assemblies, then is the same Antichristian, and so consequently is that which is derived from it; And so much from their owne Principles, we have formerlyP. 9, 11, 39. proved. 6. He should have proved, that that authority & power, which the Law gives to the Prelates, is lawfull, and good; for if the same be otherwise (as he knew in his owne conscience it is) I doe not see for what
reason he mentioneth it, it having no weight of mat∣ter against us, nor for themselves. Vnto p. 4. Answ. 1. To let passe the name Priest, and that like∣nesse which is betweene their ministery and the popishSee Treat. of the mi∣nist. of the Church of Eng. page 98, 99, &c. priesthood, because others already have sufficiently hand∣led the thing: I doe deny that they are such Pastors and teachers as are spoken of in Ephes. 4. 11, 12. and have shewed the contrary from their owne principles. 2. Note this mans lightnesse and inconstancy. Some∣time he stands for the justification of all their Ministers, as here, and in pag. 10. &c. but otherwhile he will only defend those which are qualified according to the law, and execute their office, as page 2. 5. 94, &c. Thus a man knowes not how to follow, nor where to finde him:Prov. 30. 18, 19. As the way of an Eagle in the ayre, such is the way of an a∣dulterous woman: It is hid and cannot be knowne. 3. It is untruely affirmed, that their priests and Dea∣cons doe exercise the proper and essentiall ministerie of Pa∣stors and Teachers. For first, most of them, by their con∣fession,Pag. 15, 16, 43. are idle bellied Epicures, sencelesse asses, and not one of twenty that can preach. 2. By their law, their Deacons are not to administer the Sacraments, neither any of those which are full Priests, but according to a Popish Leiturgy. 3. None of them, neither may, nor doe exercise Church-governement, though they acknowledge it an assenti and proper part of their ministerie. To the 5, 6, 7. pages. Answ. 1. Our question is not of what should, or may be in a Land, but of that which we know is by law established and practised accordingly. 2. I cannot thinke that the Prelates have permitted the ministery
of some, which never received ordination from the papists or themselves: for though it may be possible, that one or two, may secretly passe without being made Priests by them, yet that they should permit this thing, I am perswaded he could never proove it. 3. He often taxeth Mr. Iohns. with absurdenesse, but no man I thinke could passe him here. For if it should be granted, that there was a Prelate which for love or money permitted the ministery, &c. doth it therefore fol∣low, that the ministery of that Church, is any other, but of their Prelacie, Priesthood and Deaconry, as Mr. Iohnson sayth. For what if some have as much per∣mission under the Papacie, is not their ministery then of Prelacy, Priesthood and Deaconry? Indeed so Mr. Bradsh. doth inferre, but with what wit or truth, let the Reader Iudge. 4. A man may be an unlawfull Minister, though he never received the Bb. ordination, viz. when he runs of his owne head, and is not elected, called and ordained by the free and common consent of a true Church, and such were those of whom Mr. Bradsh. speaketh, if there be any truth in his relation. 5. If some do swerve from some observances, which the Law requires, yet is not their calling hereby the more true and lawfull: for if Monkes and Friars do not keepe sometimes all their rules and orders, yet are they notwithstanding the divels and Popes officers, even so, &c. 6. Though their Law intend not, such a proper priesthood, as was in the Iewish Church, nor (as in all re∣spects)
is now under the Romish beast, yet this helpes nothing their cause, seeing it both tendeth and establi∣sheth such a ministerie, as by their owne confession is directly against the word of God: Pag. 44. 45, 46. 7. Touching their Parsons, Vicars, Stipe ndaries, Chap∣lins, &c. wee have prooved from their writings that these names and offices come wholly from the di∣vell and Antichrist: and therefore his pleading for Baal is altogether here unusefull as to say, All is one kinde of ministery and in this respect they are Parsons, and in that respect, Vicars, &c. for, as much may a Papist say of their Parsons, Vicars, &c. and as true too. If therefore he would have justified these men, he should first have manifested, that his brethren have notoriously slandred their ministery, & so have taken quite away their rea∣sons, by shewing better, and not needlessely to bring in a tale, which neither helpes him, nor hurts us. 8. His conclusion is pitifull: for instead of satisfa∣ction, he leaves his Reader more doubtfull then before: in regard of an exception which he makes thus, If they duely execute the same, meaning, the office of true Pastors, now what, if they doe not this, as indeed they doe not, what be they then? To this he saith nothing: nei∣ther will I inferre any thinge, but leave it as a Quaere, to be answered by him, which shall next write in the behalfe of Mr. Bradsh. To pag 7, 8, 9. Before I make answer unto the particular things in these pages, I will lay downe some generall observa∣tions, touching the manner of this mans writing, both here, and in the rest of his booke. 1. Haveing no∣thing
with any shew to object, like a bold sophister, he makes a flat denialls of expressed truths, as thus: I say it is false, I deny it, &c. as if the weight of an argument were sufficiently removed by empty denials, 2. His proofs are allwayes beggarly I sayes, or ifs, and may be soes; and doth not in all his writing, either directly, or by sound consequence from the scripture, confirme any one thing, whereof he speaketh. 3. Although in the course of his life, he made shew to be a great eni∣my of the Bb. and their traditions; yet now against us, he standeth to maintaine the vilest abominations in their Churches. 4. Such corruptions as the Noncon∣formists generally have condemned, he basely here ju∣stifieth; and by the same carnall and corrupt reasons, which the Prelates use to doe, so that his writing is not more against us, then against themselves, and therefore it concerneth them as much as us, to set forth an answer unto it. 5. As Mr. Dayr. in his booke, hath shewed much ignorance, and contradiction; no lesse hath he great hypocrisie, in pleading for such evills; as some, which knew him, doe well know, that his judgement of them (at least of many of them) was wholy other∣wise. It is true, the report goes, that he was not the pro∣per author of it, but another did it, and gott him to father it▪ This may be so, and it is probable enough, notwithstanding Mr. Brandsh. evill is not the lesse, if he should suffer any one, as the Asse did Balaam, to ride upon him, for to curse the Israel of God. Now to answer the things particularly.
Answ. 1. When we know what those accessarie parts bee, which true Pastors, and teachers may have of their offices, callings, and administrations, not ordained by Christ, we will speak more of that point, in the meane time, they may doe well, to consider, that they want not the accessarie only, but indeed the substanciall and essenciall parts of true offices, &c. & this they thēselvs doe not barely say, but soundly prove: & to cōfute this, Mr. Bradsh. hath nothing in all his writing, and therefore their owne arguments must needs stand in force, un∣till they doe revoke them, and bring better to the con∣trary. 2. Whether the Prelates be ordinarie, or extraordi∣narie ministers, it is not material, and therefore the di∣stinction is idle, and impertinent; For if their office andSee p. 34, 35 calling be false, devilish, Antichristian, &c. as the Non∣conformists say, we will give Mr. Bradsh. leave, to place them in what order or degree he will, and yet his cause shall be never the better by it: but observe, how∣soever some time he undertakes to justifie their stan∣ding; yet here by a wile, which he useth, they are left, to shift for themselves. 3. He could not prove, when he was alive, that ei∣ther the prastise of all the Preists in the Church of Rome, in all things was according to that constitution, or their constitution, according to their practise, or either of them answereable to the strict termes of the Law. What then, might not he therefore conclude any thing generally against the unlawfullnesse of their ministry? his wordes import positively no, but we are sure yes; &
so will every wise man I think (beside himselfe) affirm too. Notwithstanding his Tenets usually doe lead un∣to such absurdities. 4. He either, through ignorance, or deceit speakes, besides the present question. For Mr. Iohns. to proove them false ministers, mentioneth their calling and en∣trance, according to their Pontisicall, now to this he saith nothing, but talkes of their practise: the which, if it should be granted, to be otherwise then the Law requires, yet it is nothing to the purpose, for which he brin∣geth it. Would it not make some men laugh, if they should heare one, that is accused to be a bastard: To maintaine the contrarie, by this reason, viz. because he doth such duties, as those children doe, which are borne under wedlock. The thing which Mr. Iohnson affirmeth from their owne writing, is, that their ministerie begotten by the Prelates, is illegitimate and false; I say those, which take their offices, and callings from them, are bastardly ministers. Now, marke (good reader) how handsomly Mr. Bradsh. makes an answere to it. He cannot prove (saith he) that the practise of all our ministers, is in all things according to the constitution, &c. What then, yet seeing he proves your ministerie by your owne con∣fession to be a Child of the Whore,So is the Pope called by the Holy Ghost, in Rev. 17, 5 it must needs be still a bastard, whether the practise of it be good or evill. 5. I doe deny that those administrations, which are performed by their Popish Canons, and booke of common prayer, are the maine, principall, and essentiall admini∣strations,
which Christ hath ordained. For first, these allow of no true Pastors and Teachers. 2. Require the Sacraments to be unlawsully administred. Lastly, com∣mand an idolatrous worship, and divellish discipline to be performed and executed in all their congregations. In page 46. he sayth, that the Prelates may well laugh at Mr. Iohnsons simplicity and sillinesse of wit, that thinkes to fright them with such a bugbeare as this, &c. But may they not much more laugh at the writings, which his brethren have published against their Canons & service∣booke,P. 139, 140 calling the former slavish Ordinances, lawlesse, peri∣lous, Popish, wicked, & damnable Canons, shamefull idolls, &c.P. 78. the later, a devised service, the Masse in English, &c. But what of all this, if they will beleeve Mr. Bradsh. they need not be frighted with such bugbeares, as these: For if it should be granted (as it is only for reasoning sake, that he will doe this) that some thinges are in the Canons and booke aforesaid, which were never ordained by Christ, yet the main, principal, and essencial administra∣tions, which he commaundeth, are contayned in them. Now, how much better had it beene, if this mishap∣pen thing, had had its mothers womb, for the grave, or beeing brought out, had been ever kept in some hole or darke place, where it should never have seen any light, nor any mans eyes should ever have looked upon it, then to serve in this sort, which it doth; namelie, to strengthen the handes of the wicked, greive the hearts of the righteous, & to discover their owne vile halting, & double dealing.
To pa. 10. Ans. 1. Are the Princes of the earth bound by Gods Lawes to mainetaine the ordinary ministery of your assem∣blies? then have you from time to time, shamefully mocked and abused them, in craving so earnestly for their aide, to have this same quite rooted out, and abo∣lished,1. Adm. and a right established in the roome and place thereof. 2. The Dumb dogs, Caterpillers, and idle bellies never had a better Proctor then this man to plead for their unlawfull standing. For he saith the Magistrate is bound to protect their ministery. But how can we beleeve him, seeing the Nonconformists teach otherwise, and lay downe unanswerable arguments for the same: but as for him he gives none at all. If any should say, He meanes not the bare Readers. I answer, He makes no distinction, nor exception, but speakes generally, and indefinitely of the ordinary ministery of their Church as∣semblies. Beside, the office and calling of these, is for nature and kinde the very same which the rest of them have received. 3. I doe not so much admire, that he makes here some question, whether there be any cor∣ruption, in and about their ministery. And that pag. 13. he thinkes needlesse to spend any time, in justifying their Canons, as I wonder he had not downe right affirmed, that there are no faults at all in either of them. For any one may see by his worke, that he meant not now to tie his conscience short, but would make a little bould with it for the present, and so he might fetch over a sure blow upon us, he cared not though with every stroke he made wounds through the sides of his brethren. 4. Seeing he confesseth, the idolatrous
ministerie of Antichrist is to be abolished. It must needs follow then, that these scriptures,Rev. 17, 16. 1 Tim. 2, 2 Rom. 13, 4 Deut. 12, 2 Pa. 72, 1 alleaged by Mr. Iohns. are neither abused nor prophaned: For such is theirs. 1. Because their enterance into the ministery, is by a Popish, and vnlawfull vocation. 2. The service, which they are enjoyned to doe, is idolatrous and Anti∣christian. 3. The manner of performing it, is also unlawfull. For they are to weare surplusses, signe chil∣dren in Baptisme, with the signe of the Crosse, kneel in the act of receaving the bread and wine in the Lords supper, &c. the which things are very idols. 4. Touching preaching, it is no essencial part of their mi∣nisterie: For those which neither doe it, nor can, are yet by their Law as true and Lawfull Ministers, as any other among them. And all this, many Nonconfor∣mists of greater note, and zeale, then ever Mr. Bradsh. was, have by reason soundly manifested, and therefore he hath here shewed the more pride, and ignorance, thus still to oppose them, haveing nothing wherewith to refute their effectual arguments; But to use his ownPag. 87. phrase, a vomit of his coleworts, not twise, but twise twenty times sodden, that is, bold I sayes. To pa. 13. Doth he speake in earnest, that the Prelacie, in and of it self, may stand well enough with the Offices of the A∣postles, Evangelists, Pastors, &c. Truely I cannot think so, and therefore if I should have seene such a passage, in their writing against the bb. I would have admired at it; but seeing it is put forth onelie against the Separatists tush, why may it not passe, though it be as contrarie to their saying otherwhere, as light to darkenesse.
The author of the Preface, before the Fresh suit, against humaine Ceremonies, saith, he cannot abide dawbing. Now, I professe in all good conscience, I never saw to my re∣membrance, such dawbing in any Conformist; and to say truth, it is a great deale worse: And for proofe hereof, observe what they write in their writings against the Prelacie: Syons plea p. 4. The Hierarchicall government cannot consist in a nation with soundnesse of doctrine, sincerity of Gods worship, holi∣nesse of life, the glorious power of Christs government, nor with the prosperity and safety of the commonwealth. Remove. imputati∣ons from the minist. of D. and Cor. p. 36 Another saith: Not Paul himselfe, if he were liveing, should be permitted, to continue his function, if he would not conforme, as we are verily perswaded he would not. Mr. Vdal, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Banes, Mr. Bates, and many others of them, have spoken to the same effect, and suffered for this banishment, spoyling of their goods, yea some of them losse of life. See also before in pag. 34, 35. 138. It is reported of a certain Thratian, by name Leicur∣gus, how imagining that he was, hewing downe a vine with his hatchet, slew his owne sonne, and maymedApoll. de Orig. Deorum l. 3. himselfe. Much to this purpose is Mr: Bradsh. worke: for thinking to refute us, he quite overthrowes his bre∣threns cause, and his owne too. And whether this be not unreasonable, let the judicious judge. If Dr. Ames had not boasted of this mans booke, I would not have touched it, because I knew the bowels of it could possible not be opened, but it would cause an ill savour to some, in regard it containeth most
vile and uncleane matter; but seeing they are neither affraid to publish such stuffe to the world, nor ashamed afterward to glory of it, they must give us leave to re∣turne it home to them againe, howbeit to their losse & discredit too. This is the book, which Mr. Pag. up∣braides us, with, Ar. ag. Separ. p. 38. To 14, 15 pag. Answ. 1: Touching the corrupt shifts, which he useth, to justifie civil offices, in Ecclefiastical persons, I will not speak much of it, but doe desire the reader to take knowledge, that the Nonconform.T. C. the rest of the second re∣plie, p. 1, to 31. Mr. Bates 73, 74, &c. Course of Confor∣mitie, p. 20 affirme the thing to be utterly unlawfull, and give sundry good reasons for it. 2. Whereas he saith, the same authoritie that permits their ministers to be civill Magistrats, doth permit them to be drunkards, &c. And by the same Law, that their ministers may take vpon them civill Magistracy; any true Pastors may take vpon them the same authoritie. To this I say in his owne words, what a shamelesse man is this toP. 11. affirme such vntruths: for concerning the first, he slaun∣dereth the state, and in the other he puts the lie on the writings of his brethren, which testifie otherwise. 3. Whether they be made civil Magistrats, by the favour or grace of Princes, as he speakes, or any other way, it is no∣thing to the purpose, seeing the thing in it selfe is eve∣ry way, and alltogether unlawfull. 4. When they have proved themselves to be true Pastors & Teachers, then there willbe a fitt place, to shew, whether the ad∣mitting of a civil office, doe change the nature of a Church ministery or no. To 16, 17 pag. Here Mr. Bradsh▪ in plaine termes, casteth his brethren off, and good reason too, for he sees, that either he must wholy renounce their Principles, or conclude
with them, that their ministery is unlawfull. But he tels us, that he is not bound to their opinions. Well, neither I thinke are they to his. And now, seeing he, and they, are thus parted, let us a little consider, whose of their opinions, in likelyhood, are the truest, and best, to be embraced. Touching the former, I mean the Non∣conformists (to say nothing of their number, zeale, learning, knowledge, sufferings for the truth, &c. In all which they farre exceeded him,) not onely doe they affirme their ministery to be false; but as I have often said, and also shewed out of their bookes, they prove by good arguments, the thing to be so. But as for Mr. Bradsh. he delivers his opinion upon his owne word, and if we will not take that, we must have nothing: nay truely many times we cannot have his word, sor he turnes his tale so often forward and backward, as no man can tell where, when, or how to beleeve him: For instance, somtime all their ministers are true with him, otherwhile they which be qualifyed only, & such as duly execute their office. Thus he is like to one that hath a mad dog by the eare, and knowes not whether it be best to hold him, or let him goe. For Mr. Barrow, & Mr. Greenwood, as we will not bind our consciences to their opinions, so neither will we rashly reject the grounds, which they have taught, and given reasons of, unlesse we be able to shew bet∣ter, although Mr. Bradsh. hath dealt thus ilfavouredly with his brethren.
To Page 18, 19, 20, 21. There are fishes name Sepiae (as writers report) who least they should be taken of their pursuers, do cast be∣hinde them abundance of blacke matter, and so escape out of sight. By such a wile Mr. Bradsh. thinkes here to get away from us▪ for with his shifts; and trickes, he puts quite by the matter in hand. But to answer briefe∣ly. 1. There are many hundred Priests in the Land, which have no particular places to serve in: Is their ministery therefore unlawfull? Indeed he seemes here to grant it, as the rest of his brethren doe. 2. Seeing not all (as he confesseth) but some of those that have offices are bound to bee members of true visible Churches. I will leave it in this place as a Quaere, Whether such as nei∣ther are, nor by law are bound to be such, are true Pastors or no? for Mr. Bradsh. had so much forecast, as to say nothing about this thing; howbeit, it was the maine point in question. 3. He takes it for granted, that their Churches are true, but brings no proofe for it: and ex∣cept we will give him all this at once, there is nothing which he speakes to any purpose in the world. But this we cannot give him, though he beg it shamefully,See before page 169. &c. because the thing is otherwise, as their owne writings manifest. 4. What if their Priests be not in all points answerable to their lawes, are they then members of a false Church? indeed either his words cary such a mea∣ning, or to me they seeme non sence. 5. Have not some in the Church of Rome dispensations to have more cures then one? Yes surely; now doe these speciall dispensations make the action lawfull? such an inference Mr. Bradsh. words have, or else the man talkes he knowes not
what. 6. Howsoever the matter be not much, whether the Governement which the Bb. excercise in civil andRe moove imputat. from mi∣nist. of C. D. pag. 46 Syons plea pag. 4. Page 34, 35 147▪ Protestat▪ from Scot. pag. 88, 89, &c. Altare Damas. 57, 58, &c. ecclesiasticall cases, doe impaire the dignity, authority, or supremacy of the civill Magistrate, seeing the same is unlawfull and Antichristian as we have before proo∣ved. Notwithstanding this thing is confidently affir∣med of the Nonconformists, and they give sundry instan∣ces thereof; and therefore the boldnesse of this man is notorious, that he should dare in this manner still to dawbe up the vile things, which his brethren pull downe with both hands. Some men in matters of controversie, care not (as one saith)Intus in animo perdant, modo vi∣ctores ab∣scedant. Ambro. To page 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. though they loose the peace of conscience, so they may gaine their supposed victory. If Mr▪ Bradsh. in judge∣ment came the nearest (as it is reported) of all the Non∣conformists to the separation; surely his soule could have small comfort in this writing, it conteining nothing for the most part, but what is quite contrary to all their sayings otherwhere. To let passe his idle scoffing, as imputing it to a  necessarily attending that pen which under∣takes the defence of such a cause. In these pages he sheweth himselfe a miserable informer and setler of the consience: for his counsell is much to this effect; so a man hold some thing, it is no matter what it be, nor how ungroundedly taken up, to answer his ifs and thoughs, and whats particularly. First, What if some (saith he) shall say that our Archbb. and Bb. have the Pastors Office? Answere.
Then they shall speake untruely, or else you your selves doe beare false witnesse against them; in affirming, that they are notDefen. Eccle. dis. ag. Bridg. pag. 88, 89 Pref. Dio. Strif. of the Ch. Repr. Mart. Iun. pag. 12. Mr. Bates, pag. 55. Pastors and Teachers, neither any true ministers at all in the Church of God. 2. What, if one hold, they are not Pastors, but named only so, metaphorically, as Princes are so called? &c. Answ, This were to hold a thing, which is contrarie to their Law, and directly against their profession and prac∣tise. 3. What, if one hold, that the ministers of our particular congregations, are Pastors? Answere. He hath no reason for it, because they have no true calling unto that office, neither doe performe the substanciall dutiesIn title page of his Rej. thereof. When Dr. Burges stiled himselfe Pastor of Sutton Coldfeild. Marke what Dr. Ames writes, in an∣swere to it: It is (saith he) such a name or title as by theFresh suit l. 1▪ p. 5. Prelates rules, is not admitted, and our booke of ordination acknowledgeth no such Pastors, from whence also it is, that in our convocation church language, we never heare of a Pa∣stor of one Parish alone. None of our divines in the Synod of Dort would take to themselves that title, though most othersResp. ad Epist. 1. Ma. did in their subscription. D. Andrewes, an Archbishop in esteeme, censureth this title for a Noveltie. 4. What though one hold, that our Archbb. and Bb. are Commissioners and visitors, in causes Ecclesiasticall, vnder the King. Answ. The Magistrate hath no authority from God, to set up such Officers, which shall take into their hands the rights and priviledges, belonging to the whole Church, and therefore whereas he attemp∣teth, both here, and in pag. 35. 36. to justifie the Hierar∣chicall
Government; and by this reason, viz. because they take it from the King. I desire the reader to compare with this base stuffe their former principles, and con∣siderSee before p. 34, 35, 147. whether there be not probable reasons, to think, that he sinned herein fearefully against his knowledg and conscience. But to the point in hand, is not here witt, to dispute by ifs & thoughs? Now, I am not of Mr. Bradsh▪ merry dispositiō, to laugh at anothers fault: But truly, if a man were so disposed, his sillie, and childish wordes would give him often occasion enough. For suppose, a Papist should argue, as he doth, What if one should hold, that our Archbb. and Bb. be Pastors, or what &c. would not every one, that seeth it, say, there is in it, neither ryme, nor good reason. If therefore he had not meant a meere gulling and mocking of the world, he would not have taught men to hold this thing, and that, or what they would, without any reason and ground, but have shewed first by the word of God, that the opi∣nions were lawfull and good, which he counselled them to embrace. After this, he tells us, that some of their Preists and Deacons, are Pastors, & som Teachers; but I have proved the contrarie, and therfore both now, & hereafter doe purpose, to let his idle repetitions passe; onely if I may without offence aske a question of them, seeing Mr. Bradsh. makes here this distinction, and doth often∣times justifie the whole Clergy, by what names or titles soever they be called, I would willingly therefore
know, of what kind their dumb ministery is, whether these Sr. Iohns be Pastors, or Teachers; for if they be true ministers, one of these, they must be necessarily. See before p. 48. Mr. Bradsh. haveing a great desire to justifie their Deaconrie (howbeit, he knew that his brethren had condemned it for a false office, as they have it in their assemblies) demaundeth of us, whether Magistrates may not require some things of Teachers, not required by the A∣postles? Answ. Yes forsooth, but if they require, be∣fore a man shallbe a Teacher, that he enter into the ministery by an unsawfull and Popish vocation, and shall execute afterwards the same in an idolatrous manner, If he in all this doe obey them, he must needs ther∣upon become no true minister; and such is their cause, by their owne confession; And therefore the que∣stion, as he propoundeth it, is deceitfull and imperti∣nent. Lastly, he excuseth their Preists, which obey the Bb. what obedience (saith he) doe they promise to Prelates, but onely in things, that they shall judge honest, and Lawfull, and not repugnant to the word of God. If this manner of arguing be good, what corruptions so abo∣minable but may get contenance? Vnder such pre∣tences, any Heretick may maintaine the grossest er∣rours, which he holds, and practiseth. But to let passe any further answer, I desire the readerSee Mr. Bradsh. 12 general Argumēts against Ce∣remonies. to take knowledge, that none of the Nonconformists have more effectually condemned their Popish Ceremo∣nies than this man, for he hath by many arguments proved, that the use of them is very sinfull: notwith∣standing
behold his forehead, how in his writing here against us, he seeks by flattering speaches, to justifie the very practise, which he professeth in his writing against the Hierarchie, to be unlawful, idolatrous, antichristian.Remove. imput. frō the minist. of D. and C. p. 22. Fresh suit l. 2, p. 184. I may well use the words, which they speake against the Conformists: We abhorre this hypocrisie, and leave such temporising vnto those, which are content, to make themselves the servants of men. But its true, as one saith: Extremitie drives men vnto hard shifts. To p. 27, 28, 29. Here Mr. Bradsh. bestirreth himself, to prove their ministery good, by the Scribes and Pharisees, but this example will not helpe him in the least. For first, howsoever they had new names, and in many things were very corrupt, yet they sate in Moyses Chaire,See Pa∣reus in Mat. 23, v. 2, p. 578. that is, came rightly, and Lawfully, to the Leviticall and Preistly Offices, which they executed in the church of God. But their ministers (as we have shewed it un∣der their owne hands) doe want this true calling, and therefore the comparison holds not. It is possible, that two persons, liveing in adultery, may in sundry respects be no worse, then some, which are truely mar∣ried: Is their state therefore one? not so; and why? because the former wanted a right comming together: So in this cause, in somethings I am perswaded, their ministers are not worse thā the Pharisees,Yet the Nonconf. say, they are worse, see page 15, 16. as in pride, covetuousnes, hypocrysie, persecution of the saints, &c. yet neverthelesse, their standing (in respect of the mi∣nistery) is not as good, as the Pharisees; because (as I said before) they have not a true calling thereto, which the others had.
2. I cannot thinke, that Mr. Bradsh. should be so ig∣norant, as in this place he makes shew of. For his words import, that the abilitie, which the Pharisees had, to ex∣pound the Law, argued them true ministers: But this is false, for that; and indeed that only, which argued their office to be true, was the Lords institution, in setting the Tribe of Levi apart for the holy administratiōs;Exo, 28,  Mal, 2, 4▪ 5 Heb. 5, 4. of which Family were these,Ioh. 1. 19 with 24. so many as were imployed, in, and about the service of the sanctuary. 3. If the preaching of the word and administration of the Sacraments be sufficient, to argue a true mini∣stery; then are not onely many Papists Preists, but other, vile, Heretickes, and excommunicates, Lawfull Pastors and Teachers, for so much they can doe. The truth is, his arguing is no better, then if Ieroboams Preists should thus have pleaded: Those Preists, that teach IacobDeu. 33, 10 Gods judgements, and Israel his Law, that put incense before the face of God, and burne incense upon his Altar, are true Preists; But these things doe we, therfore we are true Preists. If they shall say, the assumption is untrue, the like say we of their cause. 4. Howsoever, he often undertakes, the defence of all their ministers, yet here he leaves the blinde Preists in the ditch: And indeed this is the manner usually of them, they are so shifting up & downe, as a man knows not where there home is, nor when to find them there, for some time the whole Clergie is pleaded for: when they are beaten thence, then they fly to their best mini∣sters; when they cannot defend them any longer, then we have an howers talke of their gifts and services.
Thus as a man that sitteth uneasie, is ever stirring to & fro, till he be out of his place, so doe they shift, and shift, till they be cleane out of their arguments & matter: If they thinke, I speake beyond my compasse, let them once pitch and insist upon any one of these grounds, without starting, joyne issue with us, and come to the particular, that so a directly named position, may re∣ceive a direct and speciall reply. To p. 30. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Answ. 1. There is little hope to finde any good here, seeing so manifest an untruth, is uttered in the be∣ginning. He tels us (if we will beleeve him) that to communicate spiritually with the ministers of Antichrist, in holy things, is not to communicate in his Apostacie. If this be true, then unlawfull ministers, may be lawfully communicated with; but this cannot be, for as it was unlawful to communicate with Corah, or with Vzziah, though they burnt true incense, or with Ieroboams Preists, though they offered true sacrifices, so it is un∣lawfull to communicate, with a devised, or usurped ministery, what things soever, (though good in them∣selves,) are administred in, and by it. And this we for∣merlyPag▪ 27, 28 have proved fully. 2. It is certaine, that the ministery of Preists and Deacons, ordained by Antichrist, is the ministery of his Apostacie, and not Christs, as he prophanely affirmeth: for he makes them not according to the institution, prescribed of God, but wholy after a wicked and dive∣lish device of his owne braine; so that the same is a meere fruite of the Beast and false Prophet, and no acci∣dental effect, but a most cursed thing, which doth as
properly flow from his defection, as figgs from the figg-tree, or a child from the seed of the Parents. As for Luther, Husse, Wickliffe, and others, whereof he speaketh, it is but an absurd and childish begging of the question, seeing it cannot be proved, that they re∣ceived a lawfull ordinary ministery from the Church of Rome. 3. He saith, that the ministerie of such Priests and Dea∣cons, which the Prelates ordaine, are the true ministers of Iesus Christ. What every dumb dog, and all those 60. 80. and a 100. which are made at a clap, and sent forth as rouges and masterlesse servants, to get benefices, where then can, having no particular congregation? &c. Yea now all againe are justified: for he speakes without exception or limitation. If I were not unwilling to give occa∣sion unto the Bb. to insult over these mē, I could hence manifest much bad dealing in them, but I will forbeare for the present, and doe referre the reader to their ow Principles,1 Admo. p. 3. Offer for Confer. p. 2. Nces▪ dis. p 2. T. C. . 1, p. 193, Eccle. dis. p. 40. Mr. Bates, p. 66. Demon. dis. p. 24, 25. Def. Adm▪ p. 2. which is, that all Ecclesiasticall officers ough necessarily to be made by the free choise of the congregation wherein they are to administer. This manner of ordina∣tion, they professe, is only Lawfull, and none else. T this ascenteth Dr. Ames, and denies utterly, that the calling of their ministers doth essencially depend upon the Bb▪ calling. Now, what the reason is, that they are thus mu table, it may easily be conceived, namely, the differen condition of the persons▪ against whome they write for if a man should read over their bookes, publisher to the world, against the Hierarchie, he should not (warrant you) heare them once there to say (as heer
they doe) that it is lawfull for their Prelates, to ordaine ministers; but then they will speake out boldly, that this practise is wicked, and unwarrantable, yea and they can upon such occasions give good reasons for it also. Mr. Bradsh, in page 5. justifieth the ministery of such among them, as are not ordained by the Bb. here he saith that these are the Ministers of Iesus Christ, which receive their ministery from the Bb. yea and from An∣tichrist too, so that it seemes, if men will be Priests of their churches, they may come in any way, and it is no matter how they be ordained, nor who ordaines them, nor whether they be ordained or no: indeed his words imply no lesse, and therefore he must needs be reasonable. But if the Nonconformists should have seene but halfe such rotten stuffe in any. Conformists writings, they would have cried out, and that justly, Dawbing, daw∣bing. 4. He hath little cause to scoffe so idely as he doth, at Mr. Iohns. for the manner whereby he prooves his propositions, considering how he himselfe never brings either Scriptures, Examples, Reasons, or human Testimonies to confirme any one thing whereof he writeth. Hierom speaketh of some who have their Syl∣logismes and argumentations notNon in modo & figura, sed in calci∣bus. in mood and figure but in their heeles. Mr. Bradsh. is not much unlike these; for wanting all proofe to make good the points which he boldly affirmeth, he layth about him with his heeles, by kicking the person whom he opposeth, with bitter and unchristian floutings. Notwithstanding, the wise∣dome
of God is marvellously here to be seene, which suffered not this man to countenance his corrupt spee∣ches with any weight or shew of arguments, that so it might appeare, to be penned by him, rather for disgrace of others, then defence of themselves, & also that none by it might be deceived, but such as are willing to pluck out their eyes, and to take one that is blinde for their guide and leader. 5. To let passe the unlawfull speach, which they use in ordayning ministers (i. e.) receive the holy Ghost,T. C. . 1, pag. 6, &c. Altar. Da. pa. 165. and certaine frothy demaunds, which he moveth, to uphold (if he could) the Bb. Kingdom. The things not beeing worthy of answer. In pag. 38. he bewray∣eth great ignorance, in not putting a difference be∣tweene a minislerie, and the execution of it, for these are two distinct things, and therefore it is possible, that one may be a true Ecclesiastical Officer, and yet never doe the services thereof; as for example, a woman is really a wife, immediately upon her marriage, I say, before she performes any dutie; yea though it should come to passe, that she never performeth any. And therefore Mr. Bradsh. was deceived, to thinke, if one bee a false minister by ordination, that the administration of law∣full things, makes him true; for it is not so. If the Church of Israel should have chosen some, not of Aarons house, but of other Tribes, to be Preists, and they had administred without exception, had these there∣fore been Lawfull Officers? in truth, according to his understanding they had; but herein he grossely erred. Mr. PerkinsExposi¦tion upon Mat. 7. ver. 16, pag. 239. Last volu. layes it downe, as one infallible note of a
false Prophet, to come without a calling from God, and from the Church. I pray observe, although a man should execute the ministerie of a Pastor, notwithstanding if he want a lawfull calling, he is still a false minister in the judgement of this author, and I thinke of all wise men, beside Mr. Bradsh. Againe, if one be ordained a Pastor, accor∣ding to Christs institution, he hath certainly a lawfull ministerie; howsoever, things afterward shall fall out; yea though he should sing Masse and Mattens, as he speaketh; but he asketh, if any, that is in his witts, will say so? yes, and prove it also, and if he himself had not wanted some witt in this point, he would not thus have confounded one thing so absurdly with another▪ for as a person may be a servant or subject truely, & fully, and yet doe afterwards the actions of theeves, re∣bels, Traitors; so a man may take a true ministerie, by ordination, and yet both in life and doctrine doe wic∣kedly, and deserve justly to be deposed. But I gesse, wherefore he hales-in these foolish posi∣tions; it is probable, he knew wel enough (what gloses so ever he made sometime to the contrarie) that their ordination of Preists & Deacons, by the Prelates, is (as his brethren say) unlawfull and Antichristian; and there∣fore he hoped now to justifie themselves, in regard of their good services: but this will not helpe him neither; for if their administrations were right (which are not) yet would their ministerie be still false, so long as they doe retayne that false calling, which they tooke first of the Bb. they of the Pope, and he from the devill. This is no other∣wise, then according to their owne Te∣nets; for they say: Whatso∣ever com∣meth frō the Pope, which is antichrist, commeth first from the devill.
To pag. 39 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. Ans. 1. As a man, when in his answers, he purpo∣seth to deceive others, his manner is, to conceale that which should give special light unto the matter: It is even so with Mr. Bradsh. that he might meerely gull the reader, he hides from him, whatsoever should most serve for his true information, about the point in dis∣pute. In pag. 7. he tould us, that Pastors and Teachers may have divers accessarie parts of their offices &c. not or∣dayned by Christ. Here he sayth, that they may in divers, and sundry particulars, disobey Christ in his ordinances of worship and Government. Now he doth not expresse in either place, what these divers & particulars are, nei∣ther durst he, I am perswaded, for had he, we should soone have joyned issue with him. But to leave him in the midst of his idle words: this I say, when we un∣derstand once their meaning, they shall have our direct answer unto it. In the meane while, I doe entreat them, to consider advisedly of their owne Principles, about their Worship & Government. Touching the first,See before pag. 72, 78 it is (as they say) contained, in the booke of common prayer, the which was taken out of the vile Massebooke, fullP. 138, 147 of all blasphemies▪ lyes, and abominations; and the other is taken wholy, and every part from the Pope. 2. To let passe many thinges, which he often af∣firmeth, without any proofe, I doe desire, that they wil shew us, in their next reply, some good reason for that which he writeth in pag. 40. 41. viz. That ministers may execute the ministerie and Government of other Archb. & Lordbishops besides Christ, be Archdeacons, parsons, vicars, read stinted prayers out of a booke, and observe other humane
inventions, and have their Church Government, according to Canons, Courts, &c. which were never appointed by Christ, and yet obey Christ in all the main, esseniall, and substanciall points of his ministery, worship, and Government. If they can prove all this, I doe not see, but the controversie may be easily taken up, between them and the Bb. on∣ly then, they have just cause to beg pardon of them, for their pleas against the Prelacie, and the many heavie ac∣cusations, which they have put up, both to Princes & Parliaments, against them. But if they cannot (as I know they cannot) make good the thinge here avou∣ched, then let it ly as a blot for ever upon their cause, for thrusting abroad such deceivable trash, especially upon those, which either were Authors of it, or have since justifyed so hypocriticall and shamelesse a writing. 3. He once more here rejecteth, the Principles of the Nonconform▪ and bidds them, answere for themselves, touching the Suits, which they have putt vp to the Parlia∣ments, for the abolishing of their ministery. Now, the reason why I doe againe note it, is, because the reader may see how impossible it is for any of them, to justi∣fy their standing and writings too; the same beeing as unlike each to other, as good is to evill. For the Pre∣lates laughing, whereof he speakes in this place, I have mentioned it before; this only I add, that never did Mr. Iohns. by his simplicitie and sillinesse of witt, give that occasion unto the Bb. of Mirth, as he hath justly of sorrow to all his brethren, by his dawbing and rotten speaches; for truely in the wordes of Iacob, they may
Gen. 34, 30 say, he hath troubled us, to make us, to stinke among the in∣habitants of the Land; yea to increase their greife, asPsa. 41. 9. David said of Ahitophel, & Christ of Iudas, so may they speake of him, our familiar freind, in whome we trusted, which did eat of our bread, hath lift vp his heele against vs. From pag. 48. to 67. Answ. 1. Mr. Bradsh. sayth, that there is no ordinary ministeriall office, which Christ hath given to his Church, but their ministers either have, or by their Lawes ought to have the same. I have proved before, that this is un∣true, and therefore it is not needfull that I should make answere any more to his bold thredbare, I sayes. But ob∣serve here (to use his owne wordes) what a juglingPag. 52. method of reasoning he hath gotten. Their ministers have such ordinary ministeriall offices, &c. Why? because by their Lawes they ought to have them. Now, may not a man, by the same manner of arguing, prove that there are no Theeves, Traitors, Whoremoungers, &c. with∣in the Kings Dominion, in regard by the Lawes, every one should be true, loyall, chast, &c. But this later, I thinke, would be laughed at of all, notwithstanding to the very same effect, is only the other, or else it serves for no use at all, but to shew, that the man had more will to doe mischefe, then he had, either witt or skill to accomplish the same. 2. I passe over againe his idle scoffing at Mr. Iohnson, for quotation of many Scriptures. Indeed Mr. Bradsh. was careful to shunne this fault; for he hath not from the beginning, to the end of his book, brought one proofe from the word of God, to make good any one thinge
whereof he speaketh, but as if he were one of the illumated Fathers of the Familists, delivereth his yea & no alwayes upon his owne bare word. 3. Many greivous errours are bound up in this in∣vective of M. Bradsh. but for lying here is one that sur∣mounts them all,; namely, that the Prelates doe not thrust them into a ministery, but leave them to be called and chosen by the people; or those Patrons, vnto whose fidelity the people,P. 56, 57, 58. have committed this charge. This (as I have shewed) is very false. And truely it is strange to me, that they should dare affirme, so knowne and apparent an un∣truth; for according to their law, profession, and prac∣tise, whosoever is ordained by the Bb. hath immediate∣ly upon his ordination all the essenciall and substan∣cial parts of a minister, is (I say) as true in their under∣standing, as these, which have a people, or have bought benefices of their Patrons; yea although he should ne∣ver have any particular congregation, to administer un∣to. Therefore welfare the Conform. for howsoever, their courses are starke naught, yet they will owne their errours, and not shift them off (as these doe) by groundlesse devises, the which they can no more prove, then that there is a man in the moone. They have la∣boured these many yeares, to get away this power of making ministers from the Bb. But seeing they are now out of all hope to gaine it, they perswade the people, that it is only but a leave & libertie, which the Prelates grant; And touching the ministery itselfe, they have it else where. Oh, horrible mocking and abusing of the world! a meere invention of their owne, haveing
no shew or coulour of truth in it. 4. If the Prelates doe not put them into a ministery, but leave them to be called or chosen by the Patrons, then it must follow necessarily, that either they are made mi∣nisters by those Patrons, or else they are none at all. But this I will leave as another Qure. Moreover, because my desire is, to come speedily unto some par∣ticulars with them. I doe therefore demaund some good proofe, for the thinges which this bold man here affirmeth. First, that the people have committed this charge, vnto the fidelity of Patrons. 2. If they have, whe∣ther the thing be lawfull or no? And to give the rea∣der in the mean time some information about the point, this I would have him to know, that howsoeverAntomy of Cere. made by Mr. Sprint before de∣fore def. of Pet. to the K. Learn. dis∣cours. of▪ Eccl. Gov. p. 125. M. Bright. on Rev. 3, p. 194, Edit. 3. Alt. Dam. p. 170. here against us, they plead for these Patrons, yet in their writings against the Prelats, they tell quite another tale, for there they call them all Latrons, and professe their places to be unlawfull and wicked; and give many worthy reasons thereof. And no doubt, this is true, which they say; for indeed, the bondage is intollerable, which the poore enslaved people suffer at these mens hands. If some one in a Parish, had entayled to him and to his heires for ever, the power of appointing husbands and wives to all the people therein, the slave∣ry were unsufferable, although in a matter of a civill nature: but how much more then unspeakably great is their sin, which loose this spiritual freedome! And greater those Patrons, which keepe it: and greatest Mr. Bradsh. and such fellowes, who labour what they can, to maintaine so vile & wicked a thing.
5. Seeing he asketh what errours we can prove in their Church, and is so audatious, as to affirm, that those set downe by Mr: Iohs.An answ. to Mr. H. Iacob. his defen. of the Chur. and minist. of Eng. page 63, 64. A treatise of the mi∣nist. of the church of Eng. p. 10, 11, 12, &c. are pretended. I will therefore give in som particulars (for it were impossible to name them all) published under their owne handes, and professed of them to be the poysonsome Leaven of Anti∣christ. M. Gilby in the table, Luk. 22, 2 1. The Popish names, and offices of Archbishops. 2. Lord bishops. 3. Their titles of Primacy, Lords grace, &c. contrarie to the commaundement of Christ. 4. Their visi∣tations▪ and power, which they exercise over their brethren. 5. Their Lordly Dominion, revenues, and retinew. 6. Their black Chymre, or sleevelesse coat, put vpon the fine white rochet, with other Popish apparel. 7. Chauncellours. 8. Deanes. 9. Subdeanes. 10. Archdeacons. 11. Officials. 12. Chaunters. 13. Commissaries. 14. Pre∣bendaries. 15. Apparitors. 16. Parsons. 17. Vicars. 18. Parish Preists. 19. Idle readers. 20. Vagabound ministers of no place. 21. Chapleynes. 21. Canons. 22. Petty Canons. 23. Virgerers. 24. Rector Chori. 25. Epistlers. 26. Gospellars. 27. Queristers men and boyes. 28. Singing Clarkes. 29. Organists. 30. Organ blowers. 31. Beadmen. 32. Sextins. 33. Impropia∣tions. 34. Ministers, not made, neither by election, voca∣tion, nor aprobation, agreable to Gods word. 35. Deacons, made to other purposes than the scriptures appointe. 36. The horned cap. 37. The tippet. 38. Surplsses. 39. Copes in great churches. 40. The tmporall offices of Ec∣clesiasticall persous. 41. A dumb ministery. 42. The Popes accursed Canon Law. 43. The Prelates articles &
injunctions from time to time newly devised. 44. The Church wardens eath, to present to their courts, all the offen∣ces, faults, and defaults, committed in their Parishes against the aforesaid articles. &c. 45. The court of faculties, from whence are had dispensations, licences, tolerations, &c. 46. Dispensations, to eat flesh, at their times forbidden. 47. And licences, to marie in any time of the year, and in priviledged places, by means wherof, many are maried without their parēts knowledg, or consent, yea and many stolen oftimes from their Freinds, and so maried. 48. Dispensations for boyes and dolts, to have benefices. 49. Dispensations for nonresidents. 50. & for plurality of benefices, as they haveing of 2. 3. 4. or more Toquot, as many as a man will have, or can get. 51. Their institutions, inductions, proxes, &c. 52. Absolving the dead dying excommunicate, before they can have (as they call it) Christian burial. 51. Houseling the sicke. 52. Private Bap∣tisme. 53. Godfathers, and Godmothers. 54. The ring in marriage. 55. Bishopping of children. 55. Churching of we∣men. 56. Prayer over the dead. 57. Lords supper to be re∣ceived kneeling. 58. Lent. fast. 59. Crosse in Baptisme. 60. Hallow eves. 61. Imbring dayes. 62. Frydayes and Sater∣dayes fast. 63. The hallowed font. 63. Marriage forbidden at certaine seasons of the yeare. 64. The oath ex officio. 65. Apccripha bookes, which have in them errours, lies, blas∣phemies, magick, contradiction to the Canonical scriptures. 66. an Antichristian discipline. 67. Private communion. 68. Their administring of it, not with the words of Christs institution, but with other, taken out of the Popes Portuis. 69. Reading homilies. 70. Corrupting the scriptures, in mistranslating many places, adding to the text, and leaveing
quite out many parts thereof. Many score of vile errours, besides these, I could name, from their writings, but this is enough for the time. Only I request the reader, to observe the bad dealing, which is here shewed. The corruptions, which Mr. Iohnson mentioneth in his treaises, to be in the church of England, are only such, which he tooke out of their owne bookes.Namely, the Ad∣monition to the Par∣liament, sold, sold. Bar. Tabl. T. C. his first and second re∣ply. Neces. dis. Yet see, how they will beare now the world in hand, that these are but pretended matters, when indeed (as I said) they are only their owne Prin∣ciples, set forth by their owne hands, and justifyed still upon all occasions, when they deal against the Hierar∣chie. It seemes therefore they are not willing, that any, saving themselves, should say, that their Bb. their Courts, Canons, Officers, Ceremonies, Service, &c. is Antichristian and unlawfull; for if we say but word for word the same, which they say before us: They cry out pretended er∣rours, and yet the things are true when they speake them. Now, if this be not vnreasonable dawbing, I know not what is. But he asketh, how we can prove, that these things are taught in their Churches? If a Papist should have thus replyed, unto one, which had written against their transubstantiation, images, holy water, &c. it would have been counted an idle and foolish put off; for what if they be not allwayes taught, yet these are their sinnes, in regard they both professe and doe them, and have them established by Law, in their congre∣gations.
The like may be said of the errours, fore named, as authority commaunds them, so they are constantly practised, and upon all occasions defended publikely & privately. Besides, if any one shall open his mouth, to shew the evill of them, he is subject to be immediately silneed, suspended, excommunicated by the Lords, the Prelates. And to prove this, let their terrible Canons beare witnesse; for thus it is enacted: Canon. 4. Whosoever shall hereafter affirme, that the form of Gods worship in the Church of England, established by law, and conteyned in the book of Common prayer, &c. is a corrupt, superstitious, or vnlawfull worship of God, or conteyneth any thing in it, that is repugnant to the scriptures; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but by the Bishop of the place, or Archbishop, after his repentance and publick revoca∣tion of such his wicked errours. Canon. 6. Whosoever shall hereafter affirme, that the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, by law establi∣shed, are wicked, Antichristian, or superstitious, or such as being commaunded by lawfull authority, men who are zealously and godly affected, may not with any good conscience approve them, vse them, or as occa∣sion requireth, subscribe vnto them; let him be ex∣communicated ipso facto, and not restored vntill be
repent; and publickly revoke such his wicked er∣rours. Canon. 7. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the govern∣ment of the Church of England, vnder his Majestie, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that doe beare office in the same, is Antichristi∣an, or repugnant to the word of God; let him be ex∣communicated ipso facto, and so continue, vntill be repent and publickly revoke such his wicked er∣rours. Canon, 8. Whosoever shall here after affirm, or teach, that the form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, conteyneth any thing in it, that is repugnant to the word of God, &c. let him be excom∣municated ipso facto not to be restored, vntill he re∣pent and publickly revoke such his wicked errours. 6. Where he demaundeth, what one truth of religion we can name, that is not, or hath not beene (when just occa∣sion hath been offered) taught by some of their ministers? Although this be not much materiall, touching the point in controversie, seeing none of them teach true doctrine, but in a false and Antichristian calling, which is utterly unlawfull to be done; notwithstanding if we will beleeve the Nonconform he had small cause to bragg thus of their preaching. For first, their ministers
2 Admon. p. 47. Asser. Christian. Ch. pol. 236. for the most part are ignorant asses, and loytering idle bel∣lyed Epicures, which either cannot, or doe not teach at all. 2. A number of those, which doe, are prophane, and heathenish Oratours, that thinke, all the grace of prea∣ching lyeth in affected eloquence, in fond Fables, to make their hearers laugh, or in ostentation of learning of the latin, their Greek, and Hebrew tongue, and of their great reading2 Admon. p. 52. of antiquities: when God knoweth most of them, have little further matter, then is in the in the infinite volumes of com∣mon places, and apothegmes called to their hands. 3. How∣soever some of them deliver many sound truths,Out of their own mouth, they con∣demne many times their sinfull practises. 1 Sam. 12, 5 yet they doe not lay the axe to the root of the tree, I mean, seeke to suppresse such evills, as raigne most among them. We would repute that Phisitian unwise, which hath a patient under cure sicke of a great fever, and he gives him a medicine, which serves only to heale the gout or dropsie. Now, in truth, such vnwise Phisitians are the best of them: for the main disease, which cleaves to the foule of the people, is false worship. But what course take they about it? Thus they doe: they administer good things, to purge out pride, drunken∣nesse, &c. But leave all the while this Capitall disease alone, by which meanes many persons perish, and are utterly cast away. Now, these have not the Prophets for an exāple: for it is marvelous observable, when the ten Tribes fell away from the true worship of God, that all those Pro∣phets, whome the Lord then sent early, and late after them, applyed their doctrines even alltoge∣ther (as it were) against the sinnes of Dan and
Bethell:Read the Prophe∣sies of Ho∣sea, Ioel, Amos, and Michea, who were Prophets, especially ray sed up, to reco∣ver that people. as the spiritual sicknesse of Israel was idolatry, so they gave them constantly such souveraigne medecines, as served best to cure the same; And indeed this course of teaching is onely profitable: for as a small stroake downe-right upon the naile, is better then a thousand besides it: Even so, a little home matter, against the present evils of the people; as namely, their devi∣sed service, false ministery, Antichristian Government, &c, would profit them much more, then all their lowd & long crying out, of judgement, judgement; only against swearers, drunkards, usurers, whoremoungers, &c. be∣cause the former faults are more generally committed, and have taken deeper roote in the hearts of old and young. 7. Concerning the defence, which he makes for reading their booke of Articles and Canons in the church, a few words will serve in answer to it. 1. If it were true, which he saith, that they doe not this thing mi∣nistrially, yet their fault is not the lesse. But he speaketh falsely herein, for this is laid upon them as a proper part of their Office; and none else but they, by their Law, either doe, or may doe the same. 2. If they doe not teach them for truths, then it must be for lies, and er∣rours; if so, their evill is the greater, and proportionable thereunto, without repentance, will Gods vengeance be upon them for it. 3. His answere here, is quite beside the point▪ and he seekes meerly to cozen the reader; that which Mr. Iohnson mentioneth, is their Articles & Canons, very vile and wicked things by their owne confession; To this he replyeth: may not a man in
the weakenesse of his judgement and in infirmity, at his first entrance, into a calling, conforme, and subscribe to some things, not so warrantable and true, &c. Note how punc∣tually he speakes, and comes up, as neere to the matter, as Yorke is to the Lands end, a man in the weakenesse of his judgement, &c. may doe some thing, &c. Ergo, he may conforme to the damnable Canons, and articles, read them to the people, &c. By the same manner of arguing▪ he may be a ew, a Turke, a Heathen▪ any thing. And not only in this place, but such sencelesse shifts are common with him, throughout the booke; for whereas it is proved in Mr. Iohnsons writing, that their ministery is nlaw∣full & Antichristian, because neither their Offices, cal∣ling, nor administration, is according to Gods Word, but (as they say themselves) all taken from Antichrist. He childishly tells us, that true Pastors & Teachers may want some accessarie parts of their Offices, &c. which answereth nothing to the point; nor is more to any purpose, then if a convicted traitor would seek to prove his cause, to be otherwise, for that he wants som accessarie parts of a true subject. 4. Touching the distinction which he puts betweene reading the Canons to the people, and not teaching the rrours contained in them. I shall leave it, as another Demaund: how they can proove, that these falshoods and lies may be read in the manner that they are, and yet be neither taught nor justi∣fyed? From pa. 68, to 83. Answ. 1. If it be vnlawfull (as he sayth) outwardly, and but in appearance to joyne with Idolaters in their Idola∣try, then hath he shewed himseIfe all this while an
vnreasonable man, to peswade us to returne againe unto their service, considering if we should, it were upon their owne grounds, to joyne with Idolaters in Ida∣latry; but this we dare not doe, neither I thinke would they, if they did feare the Lord and his righteons judg∣ments, as they should, and mind advisedly their owne writings. They have a long time beene named Pro∣fessours, and fitly so: for truely, their profession is good,When they write against the Prelates. and therefore in this, they and we doe well ac∣cord, as I have before shewed: But those, which willbe Christians indeed, must be more than Professours, to weet, practisers, and doers of all the Lords com∣maundements, so farre as they know, according to their power & abilitie. 2. I would know, what scriptures there are, which doe witnesse, that there was false worship in the Iewish Synagogues, and of what kind it was, and proofe also that Christ was present, where, and when the same was practised. These Doctrines we finde often in their bookes against us, but to this day never saw their rea∣sons for them; and therefore we are perswaded, they are meerely their owne dreames, purposely taken up, to countenance by them, if they could, their insincere walking. 3. I cannot see what profit any reader can have by Mr. Bradsh. writing; for whofoever desires to know what ministers are true among them: First, he must (if he will follow his direction) search their Lawes, to know what is their presribd about this thing; after∣ward, make diligent inquirie of the true meaning ther∣of,
then goe among the Clergy, to examin, whose office, calling, and administration, is according to the Law and the intent of it.Quaere. To whom must men goe, to know the true mea∣ding of the Law. Now, is not he vnreasonable, to put poore people upon such hard taskes; notwithstanding unlesse they doe all this, they are as farre to seeke in the thing, as ever they were; for any satisfaction he gives them; But no doubt, if Mr. Bradsh. had had a good cause in hand, he would have referred his reader to the Prophets, Christ, & his Apostles, and not used such carnal & idle talke. 4. He saith, it is lawfull to communicate in that Worship Where the Ceremonies are vsed; but we cannot beleeve him, for his brethren both affirm, and prove the con∣trary. And here now is a fist place, to write downe the wordes, whereof mention was made in page 99. partly, because the author is a principal Nonconfor∣mist, and partly to discover the rashnesse and folly of this inconsiderate man, which durst without any rea∣son, (more then boldnesse) still justifie the very things, which his brethren, by many sound Arguments, have manifested to be evil and unlawfull. Thus he writes: A dispute upō com∣munica∣ting, at cō∣fuled cō∣munions, pag. 68, 69, &c. The sitter is accessorie to the sinne of the kneeler. First, he endureth the kneeler by his presence, and maketh him thinke, that his kneeling is neither scandalous nor idolatrous. You say, your sitting condemneth his kneeling. No such matter. But in communicating with him, you approve it as indifferent, as when ye sit in time of prayer af∣ter Sermon, When another is kneeling, or standing▪ For shall you communicate With an idolater in the very
act of his Idolatrie? and not be accessarie in counte∣nancing it With your presence. If you doe damne it as scandalous, or idolatrous, Why communicate you with bim? If you build vp that, which you destroyed, you make your selfe a irespasser. The Apostle forbiddeth the Corinthians to converse, or eate With a brother ido∣later, 1. Corinth. 5. and yet you will eate and drinke With him, When he is committing the very act. The Apostle forbiddeth not societie With him in publick As∣semblies, but onely in private, and Where he commit∣teth the act, till he be reclaimed. Next, the commu∣nicant with the kneeler casteth himselfe into tentation, by setting before him an evill example, Which may in∣duce him to doe the like, especially, if the kneeler be a person of any credit and countenance. Many are dis∣quieted With the sight of a monster, or carcasse many moneths after. It is an evill token, When you can be so Well content to see such a monster in our Kirk, and your heart not rise Within you. If you should present your solfe to the Masse in the same manner, and With the same liberty, custome would so harden the heart, that in the end you would halt With the lame, and conforme in every point. It will creepe like a Ring-Worme: seemeth it now tollerable, the next day it Will seeme holy, and the third day necessaie. So bewitching sinnes are idolatry and superstition. Third∣ly, you are partaker of an Idoll feast. Start not at this I say: for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper may be turned into an idoll feast, and hath been a more ab∣hominable feast then ever Was any among the Heathens.
And howbeit, there may be some difference betwixt the Formalists, and the Papists, arising upon the diversitie of in∣ward opinions and conceits of Christs reall presence in the Elements, yet if both their gestures be idolatrous in theirAugust. hom. de Pastor. owne kindes, the Lords Supper is made an idoll feast. Non ad diabolum pertinet quis isto, vel illo modo erret, om∣nes errantes vult quibuslibet erroribus. It is nothing to the Devill, whether a man erre this way, or that way what∣soever way they erre, all that be in errour, he seeketh to be his. Fourthly, the communicant advanceth this innova∣tion, and setteth forward this grosse corruption by his pre∣sence and communicating with the kneeler. For if the knee∣ler were left to themselves, they would be ashamed of them∣selves▪ whereas now they are comforted, and hardened in their sinne, and some follow their example. Fides puraHieron. ad Ioannē Hierosol. moram non patitur ut apparueri scorpius, illico conte∣rendus est. Pure faith suffereth no delayes. As soon as the the scorpion appeares, it is to be bruised saith Hierom. Fourthly, a confusion of gestures lawfull, and vnlawfull, is brought into the Lords table, some sitting like ghuests at a Feast, as Christ and his Apostles sate; others like supplicants kneeling and adoring vpon the knees. This confusion is not like that varietie of gesture, in time of prayer, when some sitte, some stande, some kneele. For all the three gestures are there indifferent. But not so heere. If men are polluted, by receiving the Sacrament with those which kneel, then much more, when with∣all they take it where the same is administred, by an unlawfull person, and according to a prescript form,
culled out of the blasphemous Massebooke. And this is their present cause, by their owne confession; I wish therefore, they would take due consideration of it, and speedily reforme themselves herein. They professe to be espoused unto Christ: Now, marke the similitude, if a betrothed virgin, before the day appointed for marriage, should prostrate her body to a stranger, she disables herselfe for ever hereby from being his wise: Their marriag day, they make account, shalbe celebra∣ted in Heaven; But now, if in the mean while, they defile their soules and bodies with the uncleane acts of Idolatry, what reason have they to think, that they shal enjoy the sweet comfort, and pleasure of so heavenly & blessed a husband. From pag. 84, to 92. Answ: 1. Though it should be granted, that in a true constituted Church some matters incerely Ecclesiastical may be imposed through humane srailty; yet this helpethSee chap. 2. Sect. 2, 4 and ch. 3. Sect. 2, ch. 1, Sect. 2 4. their cause nothing at all; in regard, that a false wor∣ship, an Antichristian Hierarchy, or Church Govern∣ment, and unlawfull ministery therefrom derived, is imposed upon, and by the people slavishly submitted unto. 2. Though every humane Ordinance be not of that na∣ture, as to make that Church and Ministery false, where it is vsed; yet some are, or else there are no false Churches and Ministers in the world; and such humane Ordi∣nances, there be many in their Parish Assemblies, as from their owne Principles, we have shewed. 3. Though it were generally granted of all, that thoses Churches and Ministeries are to be communicated
with all that have some thing in, or appertaining to the constitution thereof not instituted by Christ; yet it will not thence follow, that we may with such, as in their constitution were wholy false; but such are theirs. 4. Grant this, that all are not false Churches, which doe not, or by the Laws of man are not suffered to vse their power. Notwithstanding such congregations, as doe al∣togetherP. 149, &c. want this power, and stand under that, which was taken every part from the Devill & Antichrist, are certainly false, and so not to be communicated with all; And this is their present state, if they speake truely themselves. 5. Admitt, that those may be true Pastors, who are out∣wardly by mans Lawes subjected to a superiour Ecclesiastical Officer.But for this thing I shall exspect, to see some proofe. Yet can it not hence be concluded, that their ministers are true, seeing neither their Offices, cal∣ling, administrations, &c. are agreable to the word of God. 6. If the Offices of Provincial and Diocesan Bishops be contrarie to the Scripture, then necessarily that ministe∣ry, which is derived from it, must be so also. And this conclusion the Papists have drawne from the writingsA detec∣tion of divers no∣table un∣truths, &c. p. 188, &c. of the Conformists. If our English Prelates be no true Bishops, then surely neither be the Preists, or Ministers, or Deacons, that be ordained by them; and so consequently the congregation of England, is not the true Church of Christ. Here we have againe much rude scoffing, and such crowing (to use his owne termes) as if he were some
cock of the game, that hath picked out the eyes, and broken the neckes of all that have beene set against him. The proposition (sayth he) is false, the Assumption is false, the consequence is false. But for proofe, a man may finde assoon a needle in a bottle of hay, as any for the things which he boldly denyeth. Moreover, the points in controversy, which are of greatest weight, & moment, he either puts quite off, by a fine trick, theyP. 83, 88. need no answer, or else answereth to them, besides the matter. For an instance to this purpose, writeth Mr. Iohnson: Every true visible Church of Christ, or ordinary Assemblie of the faithfull▪ hath by Christs ordinance power in it selfe immediately vnder Christ, to elect and ordaine, de∣prive, and depose their ministers, and to execute all other Ec∣clesiastical Censures. But none of the Parish Assemblies of England have such power: Therefore they are not true vi∣sible Churches of Christ. Both parts of this reason he proves from their owne writings; now marke his reply to it: All are not false Churches, which doe not vse this power, &c. And is not this (thinke ye) wittily answered? We say from their Principles, that a true Church cannot be without power; But their Churches are wholy without it. For answere, he tels us, a true Church my want the vse of it. We say so too. But doth it follow, because a man in a sound, hath not the use for the time, of that life, which is in him; therfore one may be quite without life & yet not dead. To this effect he reasoneth, or else (as Paul sayth of1 Tim. 1, 7 som) he understood not what he said, nor wherof he af∣firmed, but spake evil of the things which he knew not. Iud. 10.
Answ.  p. 92. 100. Mr. Bradsh▪ having used all the witt and skill he had to refute the former Reasons: in these pag. in a moc∣king contradiction of Mr. Iohnson, he undertakes to prove that the publick ministery of the Church Assemblies of England, is true and lawfull. I have neither time nor mind, to follow him in his vagaries, & idle repeti∣tions, but will set downe, in few wordes, the summe of his long talke, and give answer to it breifly. First, thus he sayth: To have such gifts, as Christ ascended to heaven, for the worke of his ministery, to be outwardly called to that worke, by such a Church as professeth the fundamentall points of the Gospell; to instruct the people committed to their charge, in the Doctrine of the Law and Gospell: to administer vnto them the holy Sacraments of Christ, and to be their moth in prayer vnto God are all the things essencial, appertaining to the office of true Pastors and Teachers. Such is the ministe∣ry of our assemblies. Howsoever. I will not contend much with him a∣bout the Proposition, which is lame to the ground; and a farre better might have beene framed breifly thus: To have such an office, as Christ in his Testament hath given to his Church; a lawfull calling and enterance therevnto, and a lawfull administration thereof, according to the said Testament, are all the essencial, &c. The Assumption is false. 1. Their ministers have not the gifts, whereof he speaketh, and so we have ma∣nifested from their owne writings. 2. I doe denie, that their Bb. of whome they take their ministery, arePsa. 26, 5. a Church in any sence, saving the malignant, and there∣fore
if all the rest were granted, yet hence would his whole argument (like the unwise mans house) fall toMat. 7. the ground. 3. Though they instruct the people in some Doctrines of the Law and Gospell, as doe Papists & all other Hereticks; notwithstanding the reading of the Servicebooke, in forme and manner, the celebra∣ting of marriage, Churching of women, burying of the dead, conformity, and subscription, are more essencial to their ministery, & more necessarily required by the Lawes of their Church, then preaching either of the Law and Gospell is. And so much Mr. Bradsh. else∣where affirmeth: Those that yeeld to Ceremonies, need not preach at all in their Churches, except they will, no nor doe any other part of divine service, if they will maintaine a Curate, that will keepe the Ceremonial Law, and fairely read or singe the Kinges Service, as they call it.you must observe, he wrote this a∣gainst the Bb. 11. Ar∣gum. ag. Cerem. 4. For the Sacraments, they are (as they say) wickedly mingled, and prophaned, and wickedly administred. Be∣sides, if we will beleeve Mr. Bradsh. when he speakes out against the Hierarchy, they have divers Sacraments, which are not of divine institution, administred in their9. Argum. Churches, viz. the Crosse, Ring in marriage, Surplesse, &c. 5. The prayers, which they are to make unto God, must of absolute necessitie (without partiall, dispen∣sation, or manifest violation of their oath to the Bi∣shops) be foolish, false, and superstitious. I mean, whē they read their service∣booke. 2 Admon. pag. 57 But I desire the reader to observe how wittily he confirmeth the Assumption. It shall be sufficient (sayth he) that we can set forth vnto him such a ministery in sun∣drie of our Church Assemblies, of which all those points may
be truely verified. Who would have thought that Mr. Bradsh. having blotted many leaves of his booke, with meere scoffing at Mr. Iohnson, about his Logick, should so grossely overshoot himselfe in termes of reasoning. For what wise man, but he, would have laid downe a Position, that comprehended indefinitely, & generally all the ministers of their Assemblies; and to prove it, saith, we can shew some such. It seemeth then, that those (some such) must make all the rest true. Intruth, so he inferres, or else his argument (as he saith often of Mr. Iohnson) is crackt braind, and lacks not truth only, but sence also. There are some merchants, who to put off the false wares, which lie upon their hands, will shew the buyer a little that is good, and by this meanes cunningly shift all the rest upon him, and so deceive him: The like subtilty useth Mr. Bradsh. here, and often in his booke, that he might perswade the reader to beleeve that all their Ministers and Churches are true, he shew∣eth him some of the best; in hope that under these, he shall craftily put all the rest upon him. I mention these his deceiveable shifts the oftner, that we may have here∣after more honest dealing. If they will justifie all their Ministers and Churches, let them say so directly; If but som few, as in their writings they still intimate, I desire them to speake it out plainely, and not to cary the thing so covertly, as if they would have the poore people to beleeve, that they meant all, when them∣selves are perswaded the greatest number are false and Antichristian.
Another reason, which he brings, to prove their mi∣nistery Lawfull, is, because they professe the Pope to be An∣tichrist; renounce all Ecclesiastical homage to him, and main∣taine all the members of the Church of Rome to be Hereticks and Idolaters. &c. To this I say, quid verba audiam cum facta videam. It is true, I know, many great er∣rours of that Church, they opppose and have left, not∣withstanding, they retaine the selfe same Ministery, Church Government, Service, Courts, Canons, &c. which they brought out from thence, uphold them still (I say) to the uttermost of their strength and power; and hate, revile, imprison, banish kill, &c. those which will not conforme thereto. And hence it isPap. supp. an. 1604. Reas. of religiō. 13 the Papists say, that from their treasure house, the religion now established in England, hath learned the forme of Chri∣ning, marying, Churching of women, visiting of the sicke, burying of the dead, and sundry other like, as the book (trans∣latedPanegyr. Missae, cap. 11, 12. and De∣monst. dogm. cap. 7. out of theirs) declared. So Iacobus Gretzerus al∣leadgeth against the Reformed Churches their Service∣booke, for their Popish holydayes, Dr. Tucker, and their Late booke of Canons, both for the signe of the Crosse, for kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament. For the whole Hierarchy, from the Archbishop downewards, & divers other their superstitions. So Cornelius Scul∣tingiusIn his Hierarchi∣ca Anacri∣sis. citeth Whitgift, and taketh whole leaves out of him, for defence of their Hierarchie.Relect. against Whitak. cont. 2. q. 3 art. 3. Stapleton also useth the foresaid Doctors arguments, to uphold thereby their discipline, and professeth, that they are built upon one foundation. I could multiply authors
of this nature,Rhemist. in 10. 21, 17. but it needs not, only let it be here minded, that all these testimonies are acknowledged to be true of the Nonconformists. Is not therefore their profession great against the Pope: they clal him (they say) Antichrist and the Beast, &c. Yet not∣withstanding in respect of many maine and founda∣mental Orders, and Ordinances of his Church, they wallke along hand in hand with him. So that, they are much like to one, which cals a woman, &c. Whoore, Whoore, and lyeth with her all the while in the bed, and commits folly with her. Answ. to p. 100. 110 Nothing is here said, but the former thinges againe repeated. Indeed, he undertooke to answer certaine demaunds, but he kept himselfe off, so covertly from the points, that he hath left them farre more obscure & darke then they were before. For this cause I have thought it necessarie to propound unto them 13. que∣stions, all gathered from Mr. Bradsh. shifting answeres, & idle putt offs, with request, that they would answere them directly and sincerely, and from the scriptures; and so doubtlesse the controversie betweene them & us will be brought the sooner to an end. 1. Whether the office of Lecturers in the Ecclesia∣stical Assemblies of England, be not new, and strange from the scriptures? If not, whether they be Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Elders? &c. 2. Whether the civill Magistrate hath power to set over the Churches of Christ, in his Dominions,
such Commissioners and overseers, as the present Hierarchie is, or no? 3. What be those Ecclesiastical Officers, which some true Churches in England, have these many yeares beene without, either all, o cheifest of them? 4. Whether the calling, enterance, administration, and maintenance of any of the publicke Ministers of the Church of England, be unlawful, and Antichri∣stian, or no? 5. Who are those Ecclesiasticall Officers, in the Church of England, which neither in name, nor in deed, are true, as he himself confesseth? 6. Whether it be lawfull for the Ministers of the Gospell, to be maintained by tithes and offerings, &c. in the manner and forme, as it is practifed now in Eng∣land, or no? 7. Whether all the Parish Assemblies of England be true visible Churches or no? 8. Where are those Churches in our Kingdom, from whence we have separated, which doe consist, as now they stand, of a companie of people, called, and separa∣ted from the world, and the false worship, and wayes thereof, by the word of God, and are joyned together in the fellowship of the Gospel, by voluntarie profes∣sion of faith, and obedience of Christ? 9. What are those parts and parcells, in the booke of Common prayer, which is not the true worship of God, whereof he speaketh? 10. Whether it be Lawfull, to have communion
with the English Leiturgie, as it is ordinarily now used in their Churches? 11. If the true worship of God be prescribed, in the booke aforesaid, we demaund then in what part there∣of the same is contained? 12. Whether those, which joyne to the Ecclesiasti∣cal Ministerie, Worship, and Orders of their Cathedral or Parishional Assemblies in those things, which are not performed therein, according to the true meaning & intent of their Lawes, doe sin, or no? 13. What is the true intent and meaning of these Lawes, and to whom doth it properly belong, to give the interpretation of them? Thus having finished, what I purpose to write for this time, I commend now the same to the best accep∣tance of every wel disposed reader. Beseeching God to make us more and more of one mind in the truth, and to give us all hearts, to walke sincerily in it, untill our changing come. ISA. 48. 18, 19, 20. O that thou haddest hearkened to my commaundements, then had thy peace been as a River, and thy righteousnesse as the waves of the Sea. Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the off-spring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof: his name should not have been cut off, nor destroyed from before me. Goe ye forth of Babilon, flee ye from the Cldeans▪ &c. FINIS.
A TABLE Of the principall things, contained in this Treatise. A. ADministrations per∣formed, according to the booke of Common prayer and Canons un∣lawfull. pag. 219. Administrations, in themselves good, may be done by false ministers. pag. 236. Apocripha unlawfull to be read in the Church, and reasons thereof. pag. 108, 109. Dr. Ames writing, for their ministery answered. pag. 55. 56, &c. and for their worship. p. 113, 114, 115. and about their Church Government. p. 162. 163. Archbishops, see Bi∣shops. B. Baptisme in the church of England, unlawfully administred. p. 104. Benefices, how they are obtained by the ministers of the Church of Eng∣land. p. 17, 18, 19, 20, &c. Bels, as they are used in their Assemblies, unlaw∣full. p. 112. The English Service∣booke, taken out of the vile Massebooke. p. 78, 79.
The wickednesse of the Bishops described. p. 31, 32 33. Their offices false and Antichristian, and reasons for the same. p. 33. 34. 35. They cannot give a true ministery: p. 37. Their booke of ordination, ta∣ken out of the Popes Pon∣tifical. p. 12 The manner of burialls in Englād unlawful. p. 102 Mr. Bradsh. his scoffing. p. 212. 227. 235. 240. Vnchari∣tablenesse. p. 212. Absurd∣nesse. p. 215. 216. 240. 250. Ignorance. p. 236. Contra∣dictions. p. 221. 232. 234 Dr. Burgesse Protestation, to become a Separatist, if he did beleeve the Noncon∣formists Principles. p. 2. 113 C. No man may admini∣ster in the Church, with∣out a lawfull calling. p. 8. 9 The calling of their Mi∣nisters doth essencially de∣pend upon the Bb. calling. p. 55. 56 Ceremonies condemned; and why. p. 92. 93. 94 They are the least evills of many in their Churches. p. 116. 117 Canon Law unlawfull, and reasons for it. p. 139. No person by their Ca∣nons may speake against the abuses of their church p. 246. 247 No true visible church, but a particular ordinary congregation p. 164 To the right constitu∣tion of a true visible Church, it is of necessitie, that all the members be holy and good. p. 165. 174. 176 177. 178. 185. 193. 242 Churches of England false, and reasons thereof. p. 149. 169. 179. 180. Civil offices in Ecclesiastical per∣sons unlawful. p. 242 All their spiritual Courts in Eng. unlawfull. p. 141 No man ought to appeare at them; reasons for it. p. 148. The manner of their
proceedings in these Courts. p. 145. 146 The Commissaries Court described. p. 141. 142 The high Commission like the Spanish Inqui∣sition. The Convocation∣house described. p. 143. 144 Church wardens Office unlawfull; reasons for it. p. 138 Conversion no signe of a true ministery. p. 66 Their Collectes in their Assemblies Idolatrous. p. 107 Confirmation of Chil∣dren unlawfull, and rea∣sons for it. p. 100. 101 Crosse in Baptisme un∣lawfull, and reasons for it. p. 95. 96 Excommunication, and the absolution of the per∣son, are actions common to the whole Church. p. 134 Churching of women, see women. D. There ought to be Dea∣cons in every true church; reasons thereof. p. 4. 5. Their Office consisteth only in receiving and di∣stributing the benevo∣lence of the Church; and arguments for it. Idem The Deaconrie of their Church Assemblies is an unlawfull office. p. 48 The office of a Doctor is distinct from that of a Pastor; and reasons for it. p. 4 Mr. Dayrels description of a visible church refu∣ted. p. 182. 183. The reasons which he layes downe, to prove their Parish As∣semblies true Churches; answered. p. 185. 186. 187. 188. 189▪ &c.
Discipline, see Go∣vernment. E. The Election of every Ec∣clesiast. Officer must be by the free choyse of the whole Church where he is to administer. p. 7. 8 The Ministers of the Church of England are not Elected, according to Gods word. p. 12 Obstinate sinners must be excommunicated. p. 131. Reasons for it. p. 132. How the Church is to walke towards such. p. 133. And when, and how to receive them a∣gaine. p. 134 70. Grosse Errours, practised in the Church of England. p. 243. 244 Examples, proveing the unlawfulnesse of commu∣nicating in a false worship p. 84. 85, &c. F. The Court of Faculties described. p. 141 Their Fasts are Popish. p. 106 So is the Font. p. 104 G. A certaine forme of Church Government is prescribed by Christ; rea∣sons for it. p. 128. 129. The same is unchange∣able, ordinary, and com∣mon to all Churches. p. 135. A matter of fayth, and necessary to salvation. p. 136 It cannot be a true Church, which wants it. p. 149
This Government must be set up, and practised, though the civil Magi∣strate allow not thereof. pag. 15. and reasons for it. p. 156. 157. 158, &c. The Church Govern∣ment in England, taken wholy and every part from the Pope, page 138. 147 Men cannot submitt to it, without breaking the Law of the Land. pag. 148. 149 Governours or Ruling Elders ought to be in every true Church. page 4 Godfathers in Baptisme Popish. p. 104 The manner of rea∣ding the Gospells and Epistles condemned. pag. 107 Gifts make not mini∣sters. pag. 65 H. Homilies unlawfull to be read in the Church; Reasons for it. p. 109. 110. The observation of holy dayes superstitious. p. 106 107 The Hierarchie im∣paires the authority of the civil Magistrate. pag. 227 I. What Ieroboams Preists could have said for their Religion. page. 85. 86, &c. Such as maintaine ill causes, upbraid others with ignorance. page 211
K. The example of the Kings of Iudah; vainely alleaged to justify King Edwards, & Queen Elizabeths; com∣pelling of their subjects, to be members of the Church p. 201. 202 Kneeling in the act of receiving of the Lords Supper, an idolatrous ge∣sture; reasons why unlaw∣full. p. 97 The sitter is accessary to the sinne of the kneeler. p. 252. 253 King Iames his saying of the Puritans. p. 205 L. The ministery of Lec∣turers, in the Assemblies of England, new and strang from the scriptures; and reasons thereof. p. 49. 50, &c. Dr. Laiton answered, and his principles proved, tolead unto separation. p. 151. 153. 154 Such as take any Eccle∣siastical Office from the Bb. transgresse against the Law of Realme. p. 71. 72 Letanie no better then blasphemie and conjura∣tion. p. 107 The Learned against communicating in a false ministery. p. 27. 28. 29. and false worship. p. 90. 91 M. The manner of mar∣rying in England unlaw∣full. p. 101 Members are to be taken into the church, by ma∣king publick profession of faith and repentance. p. 135. 167 Every man that is a member ought to have his voice in the Ecclesiastical causes of the Church p. 134
Reasons, why men should make themselves members of true visible Churches. p. 166 What makes members of the Church of Eng∣land. p. 169. The great wickednesse of them. p. 170. 171. 172. The ministery of Eng∣land taken wholy from Antichrist. p. 11. Proved to be false. p. 219. 222. Their manner of making ministers. p. 12. 13. 14 What they are for quali∣fication. p. 15. 16. and prac∣tises p. 21 Men may be unlawfull ministers, though never ordained by the Bb. p. 68. 215 Vnlawful ministers not to be communicated with in any thing they doe. p 26. Reasons for it. p. 27 Conversion of men to God, no note of a true mi∣nisterie. p. 64 The Ministers of Eng∣land of one constitution. p. 56 True ordinary ministery, tyed to a particular Assem∣bly. p. 10. A roving & unsetled, false p. 9 Musick in the Church unlawfull. p. 111 N. The profession & prac∣tise of Nonconformists, how they differ. p. 205. 206 Their Minors and the Conformists Majors, lead to separation. p. 179. 180 Not so true to their grounds as the Confor∣mists. p. 38. 241 O. Oath ex officio, why unlawful. pag. 140 No Obedience must be
yeelded to the Bb. Go∣vernment. p. 148 Five kinds of ordinary Ec∣clesiastical Offices, only belonging to every true Church. p. 3. 4 Officers not simply ne∣cessary for the publicke administrations in the Church. p. 135 The Church may de∣pose her officers. p. 130 Offences how to be sup∣pressed in the Church. p. 130. 131. and why. p. 168 The Officers of the spiritual Courts in Eng∣land described. p. 137. Their places Antichristian p. 18 Brethren out of Office may teach publickly in the Church. p. 54 Order and forme re∣quired in the collection of all true Churches. p. 186 P. Pastors are all equal by Gods institution. p. 3 These are wanting in the English Assemblies. p. 11 Parsons, Vicars, &c. un∣lawfull officers. p. 44. 45 Parents ought not to bring their children to be Crossed in Baptisme; and reasons for it. p. 96 Patrons places unlawful. p. 242. To be present at Idolatrous worship, un∣lawfull. p. 119. 120. And namely where the Cere∣monies are used. p. 98. 99 Power given to every particular Church. p. 257 An essencial property there of. p. 149 Preaching of the Gos∣pell, no part or property of the ministery in Fng∣land, but a thing casual. p. 259 The manner of prea∣ching there. p. 248. 249 Neither preaching nor administring the Sacra∣ments argue a true mini∣nistery. p. 232
Not enough to be Pro∣fessours. p. 251 Their Preists and Dea∣cons take their ministery from the Prelates, and no where else. p. 241 They have not the es∣sencial ministery of Pa∣stors and Teachers. pag. 214 Prelates, why worse then the Papists p. 82 Of Pollution by other mens sinns. p. 208. 209 Q. None must be chosen into any office, but such as are wel qualifyed for it; and reasons thereof. pag. 9. 10 13. Questions, propoun∣ded with request to be answered. p. 262. 263, &c. R. Reading Preists descri∣bed: p. 38. Their mini∣stery unlawfull, and rea∣sons for it. p. 40. 41. A sinne, to communicate in their ministery. p. 42. What service they doe, p. 44. The greatest num∣ber of the English mini∣sters are such. p. 43 Every Officer must be Resident in his place, and why? p. 10 Rome and England how like in Church Ordinan∣ces. p. 261 The judgement of the Reformed Churches no good argument to prove the Church of England true by. p. 188. 189 S. Sacraments prophanely administered in the church of England. p. 105. 172 More Sacraments then Christ ordained admini∣stered in their Churches. p. 259
Sacraments, admini∣stred in private houses, un∣lawfull. p. 105 Service booke, a devised worship, and reasons for it: p. 80. 81. 82 The Scribes and Phari∣sees misapplyed, to justi∣fie the ministery of Eng∣land. p. 231 Sidemens office unlaw∣full. p. 138 Our separation, why. p. 196. 207 Lords Supper, how a∣bused. p. 103. 104 Surplices unlawfull, & reasons for it. p. 94. 95 Scriptures, how abused in the Church of England p. 108 T. Toleraticir of sinne in the Church hurtfull▪ and why. p. 168 V. Visitation of the sick, as used in England Popish. p. 112 Bb. Visitation descri∣bed. p. 142▪ 143 W. Widdowes, an office in the Church, and reasons for it. p. 6 God hath prescribed a perfect platform, how he wilbe worshipped. p. 72 Reasons, why he should be worshipped, according to the same. p. 74. 75 The worship of the church of England is con∣tained in the booke of common prayer. p. 78 Churching of Women unlawfull, and reasons for it. p. 99 The word of God, the only meanes, to fitt men for Church-estate. Z. True Zeal will not en∣dure any thing of Anti∣christs. p. 107 FINIS.
ERRATA. For Eder read Elder. p. 9. lin. 13. For honestly read honesty. p. 14. lin. 25. For as read at. p. 28. lin. 20. For thelr read their. p. 103. l. 23. For nor read not. p. 131. l. 2. For Hierom read Hieron. p. 161. l. 29. For number 38. in marg. read 61. after Ar∣row. ag. Br. p. 224.
