A587 12655005 65329
May the Seventeenth, 1642. Admirable, Good, True, and Joyfull Newes from IRELAND. Being an Exact Relation of the last weekes passages in IRELAND, dated from Dublin May the 8. 1642. Wherein is shewed how by the un∣daunted Valour and wisedom of Sir Charles Coot, the Town and Castle of Trim was taken from the Enemy, wherein 4000. of the Rebels were, besides 4. Lords of the Pale; who were glad to fly with as many more as could, the rest were taken prisoners, & about 200. or more killed. By which happy victory 40 Protestants obtai∣ned their freedome, who were before kept Pri∣soners by the Rebels in that Castle. Likewise a Relation of another great over∣throw given to the Lord Misery, by the Lord President of MUNSTER. With the names of some other Forts and Townes taken from the Rebels by the Protestant Army. Printed at London for Iohn Wright, 1642.
An exact Relation of The last weekes passages in IRELAND. Dated from Dublin May 8. 1262. ON Tuesday Aprill 26 some foot and horse of the Protestant Army, with two large brasse pee∣ces were sent against the Castle of Leslep, and after some small opposition, the enemy departed out at a backe way unknowne, and left the Castle to us; some English men were found dead, killed by the Rebels, being before prisoners unto them: When they were forced out of the Castle they burnt Leslep Towne and many Protestant houses. That day our men put a Garrison into the Castle, and returned home to Du∣blin. Wednesday the 27, the Lord Foyle, and the Lord Digby, with some horse marcht from the Naas, and Sir Charles Coot met them with some foot and peeces, who joyning Forces made about 400 horse and 200 foot, and then marcht toward a place called Clancury, hanging some straglers by the way; but about the foresaid Towne were some 400 Rebels gathered to∣gether. Sir Charles Coot thought of fighting, and drew out his men to that purpose, but these stood not, some few our men killed, with onely the losse of a boy stragling behind: So we marcht on toward Sir Luke Fitz Garret his Castle, and sent for him, but he refu∣sed to come, we then comming not so neere him as
was intended, marcht on to Castle  to the no∣ble Sir Iohn Geffard, where we found much good hee had done to the whole Country, and in good time we relieved him, and that night the Commanders staid with him: but billetted their men on Sir Lukes lands, who was well provided for conveniency; wee rested all night quietly upon his land, though hee wisht us further off. Also that day many Priests about 17 were seized and clapt up in prison. Thursday the 28 the Lord More came to us; ac∣companied with a Troope of horse, having some few dayes before gone out of Tredath, and dared the ene∣my to the Navan, killed and hanged some straggling Rogues, nere 250. the maine body of them would not stand. That day we had some foot and horse went to∣ward a place called Bray, where they heard the Rebels to be busie, some few they hanged, and brought 11 prisoners tooke in a boat at Sea to Dublin. That day also we set forward to Philips Towne, and tooke in the way a Fort of the Rebels called Ba∣liboging with little trouble, they being given to run∣ning, wee hanged some stragglers still as wee went, as we did every day, towards 9 a clocke in the morning we entred Philips Towne with some opposition, but much in the Castle wherein were placed 70 Musket∣tiers who withstood us valiantly, but in vaine, for we got it after two houres fight, 30 of them killed and the rest taken by us and hanged, and their Constable of the Castle, among the rest one Conyars: Wee hanged many of the Towne, also in the Towne is a passage made by Art over a Bog, able to keepe many men out with few, and no other way of passage towards
the Queenes County, but much about; having taken it, we left some there to garde it, and passed present∣ly toward Castle Gasell without opposition, for all their brags, onely hagning stragglers, with much joy were wee in that Castle received, which hath beene drawne to many straights, but having relieved it wee returned backe to Philips Towne, as being the safest place where wee staid all night, and in the morning burnt the Towne and departed to the noble Sir Iohn to Castle Iordan againe; going within musket shot of Sir Lukes Castle, but he would not be seene, nei∣ther did oppose us, that night we stayed with Sir John, and did to Sir Luke as before, which he tooke patiently because he could not helpe it. Friday the 29 having relieved Sir John, wee bent our course toward Trim, Sir John with his men ac∣companying of us 5 miles, and returned to his charge, leaving Trim to us: after we had parted with him, we met with a man which Sir Charles prest to know how Trim was in strength, which for feare of hanging hee confest to have no lesse then 4000 in it, and 4 Lords of the Pale also, and that Navan had 7000, some were thinking these too many to incounter, but Sir Charles words were 30000 should not keepe him from attempting to take the Towne, and so marched on, and when those in the Towne perceived Sir Charles resolution by their Scouts, when Sir Charles was within a mile of Trim, all these foresaid mentio∣ned betooke themselvs to their heeles, leaving onely a few women and children, and the Towne to us. Sir Charles entred the place and went on to pursue them, killed some of the Reare of them, and there a bullet past vvithin three inches of his throat, but mist him,
but the greater part of the Rebels vvith their nim∣ble heeles vvhich is their advantage, out-vvent us, and got to the Navan and set fire of the Suburbs of it themselves, Sir Charles returned tovvard night to the Tovvne vvhere hee novv is, and the second of May sent newes of it to Dublin, desiring more strength to pursue the victory, with these merry words, that seeing he must at last dye in the field, hee might kill as many as he could before that time of them, who arrived in Dublin to doe his arrant. In this exepdition at Philips Towne and Trim were redeemed forty and more English prisoners and fired each day many places. Saterday the 30. some of our men scattered out without leave, to plunder some of the Enemies horse, who fell foule on them being few, slew foure of our horse-men, not above five being there, and killed some Carmen, in all Souldiers and others some twenty. Among the rest one Marham a Vintner, Clavells wives father, and this way have we lost more in strag∣ling, then in Battell. This day we heard out of Munster, that the Lord Pre∣sident was indifferent well recovered, and had with Sir Thomas Vavasor chased the Lord Musery, and gave him an overthrow and burnt a part of his Country. On Monday the second of May, we had newes, the English under the Lord Conway, marcht towards the Newry, and the Scots to the reliefe of Coulerand. Tuesday the third we had newes brought, that the Lord Conway on the one side, and Sir Henry Tichbourne on the other had taken the Newry, but as yet it is ve∣ry doubtfull how, either by fiight or the Enemies flying that it was taken, which make some doubt of
the truth of it, but little hope can the Enemy have in holding of it: more of this next weeke: but it is from a friend who sent such word from Tredoth, but it was not taken so soone as you could heare it in London, as many Letters say from thence. This day at ten clock of came a Trooper & Messen∣ger from Sir Charles Coot, and the Lord Digby, and Lord Foyle, that they had fired a great part of the Country, had relieved Castle Gassell, had destroyed Philips Towne, a strong Towne and a bad passage, and had in their returne home tooke the Castle and Towne of Trim, one of the places of most strength the Enemy had in those parts, have delivered many prisoners out of Trim and Philips Towne, brought by the Enemy out of the North to be kept prisoners: this was an exceeding peece of service beyond our thought till we heard of it; in Trim were foure Lords of the Pale that delivered themselves by their legs by running away; there is Sir Charles now placing a gar∣rision, it makes the old Sir Charles young againe to see God so blesse him in his enterprises, but indeed most sincerely hath he gon on without by-respects, which is too much in some, and which daily doth us great harme. They hanged and killed some 200. or more, but the rest fled toward the Navan, and for feare our men should follow them, burnt that Towne them∣selves and fled, as having no heart to stand. On the fourth day some Troops went to Sir Charles cut to Trim, to strengthen him there; where hee is fortifying it, intending to prosecute his Victory forward while they are flying, and to take the Castle of Navan, which they as yet keepe. Also this day had we two Church-yards new made
without the City, for such dying there is amongst sol∣diers, nay I dare say, twenty for one kill'd, most for want; this day in the morning were they Consecra∣ted, our Church-yards in the City are able to hold more. On the fifth day the Lord Moore departed to Tre∣dath, with two Troopes of Horse. I am now call'd away in such haste, that I cannot stay to write the rest, till the next weeke I rest, Dublin the eight of May, 1642. In my last I acquainted your Lordship with a design then undertaken by my Lord Lisse, for the reliefe of the Lady Ofaly, which his Lordship hath prosecuted with so much judgment and good successe, that not onely her Ladyship is put into a condition of sub∣sistance, in despight of what the Rebels were or are like to be able to doe, but upon intelligence given him, he hath approved his first intentions, and taken in a Towne called Trim, from whence his Lordship sent hither a partie of Horse, desiring to be enabled to follow his good fortune, by the sending to him one troope of Horse more, and 1200. foot, which is condesended unto, and the troopes will be sent home on Saturday next, no man can observe his gal∣lant inclinations, attended with his suitable events, with greater delight than I doe, Nor shall be more ready to serve him to ward accomplishment of all his undertakings. May 14. 1642. Ordered that this be forthwith printed. H. Elsing. Cler. Part. de Com. FINIS.
