B406 99825423 29805
The CASE and USAGE of Mr. Edward Bagshaw. ON January 3. 1662. I living then peaceably in Northamptonshire, by a Servant of Sir John Bernard, one of the Justices of Peace of our Country, was served with a Warrant, subscribed by Sir Henry Bennet, wherein my Person was commanded to be seized, with my Books and Papers: This was brought to me about seven a clock at night, and though I might well have pleaded the un∣seasonableness of travelling at that hour, yet to shew how willing I was to clear my self, that very night I rode seven Miles to Sir John Bernard's House, where I lodged, and spent the Lord's Day following. On Monday, Jan. 5. though the Weather was so tempestu∣ous, that Sir John did very civilly intimate his willingness to let me stay; yet, lest any Delay might seem to argue Guilt, I refused his courteous offer, and that day rode to Dun∣stable; which was about 25 Miles, in so much Wet, that no∣thing but a Zeal to clear my Innocence, could have made me so willingly venture through it. On Tuesday, Jan. 6. from Dunstable I rode to London, where I arrived about one a clock: and though I was desired, after so long a Journey, to stay and refresh my self; yet, so impatient was I to know my Crime, that, without either eating or drink∣ing, and in my Riding Habit, I went immediately to the Se∣cretary Sir Henry Bennet, by whom I was examined about three in the afternoon, but so slightly, that I plainly saw he was not himself satisfied, that I deserved any of that kind of Rigour; yet, whether because he was bound by his Place to comply with the Information of my Accusers, o not able to bear down the Importunity and Address, by Sir Joies, he
sent me forthwith to the Gate-house, and committed me Close-Prisoner, for Dangerous and Seditious Words and Practices. In that place I abode ten dayes, after which time, the Chan∣cellour (who now appeared as the sole Author of my Imprison∣ment) sent for me to Worcester-house, and in his Chamber (the Secretary being present) asked me several captious and ensnaring Questions; As, Whether I had never said that the Long-Parliament was in Being? And, Whether I did not affirm, That by the Spring there would be a Change? And, Whether I had never spoken Derogatory words of the King, by saying that he kept Wenches, and the like? To all which, when I had, as I thought, given satisfactory Answers, I desired I might be brought to a Tryal: but was answered, That should be when the King pleased: Upon which I was remanded to the Gate-house; but that afternoon, viz. upon Jan. 16. I was fetched from thence, and sent to the Tower, whither I was committed Close-Prisoner by a New Warrant, the words of my former being changed, into, Treasonable Designs and Practices: But for what Reason that Alteration was made, I as yet know not, having often desired a Tryal, but could not obtain it. With what unhandsom Circumstances of Rigorous Restraint I was used there, I shall now forbear to mention, because a few words cannot express that matter: but in short, notwith∣standing I was forced to give ten pieces in Gold to Sir John Robinson, to purchase the Liberty of Tower Air, and besides paid thirty shillings a week for my Diet and Lodging, yet I was given to the Arbitrary Disposal of an Absurd and Drunken Keeper, who being himself a slave to his Lusts, was thought the fittest person to oppress the spirit of one, who never was guilty of any State-crime, but the desiring of a sober Li∣berty. In this condition I continued above a year, so hopeless of Redress, that I never did attempt to seek it; when on Jan. 30. 1663. one Mr. L'Estrange (whom I had heard much, and written something of, but never saw before) came to search my cha in my Window found a Paper, which con∣tained  Mr. Davis, who was then newly sent to
Fangier in a very Extraordinary manner; In which Paper, there were, it seems, some Marginal Notes likely to give Of∣fence; and therefore it was in all hast conveyed to White∣hall, as a Discovery worthy the Diligence of such a Needy and Officious Informer. On Feb. 2. following, I was sent for to Whitehall, and by the King himself examined about that Paper; not whether I con∣trived or writ it (for that, as Sir John Robinson afterwards told me, the King was satisfied I had no hand in) but how, and by whom it was conveyed to me? To whose Questions, though I answered in words of Truth and Sobriety, yet because I durst not do a thing so unworthy of the Gospel, as to betray another; and because I could not humble my Language to the false and flattering stile of Court (for though I was called Rogue, and used like one, yet I could not forget that I was a Minister of the Gospel, and therefore was enabled to speak with that Con∣stancy which became one.) For this I was returned back by the King, in a Passion, much greater than his Title; and that very night, about eleven a clock at night, I was by Sir John Robinson committed to the Tower-Dungeon; where I continued four dayes and four nights, without either Bed, Fire, Candle, or any thing else, that, as to humane conveniencies, could make my Life desirable: Besides the Dismal Horrour of that place, be∣ing all the time afflicted with the Piles, in so great extremity, that the very vehemence of pain did often put me into a sweat, and so by accident prevented my feeling the cold, which at that time of the year, and in that place, was more than ordina∣rily piercing. On Saturday, Feb. 6. about three in the afternoon I was released from thence, without any seeking of my own, but by the unwearied Importunity of my Eldest Brother, and (that I may be just in commemorating, as I think, an Effect of Real Worth) by the generous and compassionate resentment of Sir Henry Bennet the Secretary, by whose Warrant I was returned to my former Lodgings, and by his Intercession, preserved from being remanded into the Dungeon, which, by Sir John Robinson the very next day after, was most maliciously and in∣humanely sollicited.
Though I came out of the Dungeon with so much Health, as made it evidently appear that God himself did own and preserve me there, yet within three dayes after, I fell into a violent Feaver, which brought me very low; And though God did then likewise deliver me from the Fury of it, yet Sir John Robinson was not wanting to do his part that it might prove mortal; forbidding not onely my Brothers, but likewise my Physician access to me, notwithstanding both He and They had an express Order for their free Admittance. I am scarcely yet well recovered, when this News comes, that I am to be sent away I know not whither;—And since I understand that every part of this Proceeding against me, is contrary, not only to God's, but likewise to our English Laws, I thought fit to leave this Narrative behind me, that it may be presented to the scanning of all sober and virtuous Men in the approaching Parliament: And if they find that one Innocent Person cannot suffer unjustly, but all are threatned; and be∣sides, the Honour of the Nation suffers, which consists in ha∣ving Right done to all its Members; I shall then expect a Re∣dress, equal to my Injuries; At least▪ that I may be restored unto my Birth-right, and that is, my Liberty. March 10. 1663/4. 11. at night. Edw. Bagshaw. Postscript to the Reader. I Have carefully perused this Narative; and if any Dispassionate and Impartial Reader judge, that any expression here is too Sharp and Vehement, let him put himself in my case, and then write more mildly if he can: For, to oppress an INNOCENT Per∣son in his just Rights; and to break those very Laws,
which are not only Righteous in themselves, but made Sacred by being sworn to; even moderate men, thus provoked, would not have scrupled to call by their True Names; which I, in civility, have for∣born to mention. And though since the writing of this, it hath pleased God to over-rule the Intentions, that were once taken up, and resolved upon, of send∣ing me away, yet I would not alter any part of my Case, that so it might make the deeper impression: Since the words of departing, as well as of dying men, may easily be supposed to be most weighty and serious. March 16. 1663/4 Edward Bagshaw. On the 2d. of February, by a Warrant from Sir Henry Bennet, I was sent for to White-Hall, and being conveyed to his Lodgings, he told me, The King within, expected me; who imme∣diately examined me as followeth. K. Do you know any thing of this Paper? (shewing the Paper that L'Estrange took.) B. I know, that I neither had, hand, or head in it. K. Do not you know who brought it into your Chamber? B. It's very possible, Mr. L'Estrange might, for he hath malice enough to do such a thing. K. I perceive my Clemency doth no good, I will take a course with such Rogues as you are. B. Sir, this is not Language becoming a Christian Ma∣gistrate.
K. You are a Rogue indeed, to teach me what I am to do; I will make your bones stretch for it, how great soever you think your Party is. Sir Henry Bennet. Pray Mr. Bagshaw, tell the King in∣geniously who writ that Paper. B. I have said already, that I had not the least hand in it, and this I speak as in the Presence of God, nor can I positively say, who is the Author. K. But will you say, you know not, who put it into your hand? B. I do not say so; but we close-Prisoners, are in that condition, that many things may be done to us, that we can give no certain accompt of. K. Well, I shall teach you the duty of a Christian Subject, you shall stretch for it. B. You say, I must answer for that Paper with my life, so that it is to no purpose for me to say any thing. K. No, Sirra, that shall not serve your turn, I'le see how well this Pertness mill abide with you. B. Sir, you can do no more than God gives you leave to do, you have no Power but what comes from Him; that truth I have learn'd of the Scriptures; and I bless God I have peace in my Conscience, that I have neither spoken or done any thing seditiously, and that I have had a care, to keep a Conscience void of offence both towards God and men. K. I'le see what peace you will have, your flesh shall pay for it; Mr. Lieutenant, take him away. B. In the mean time, I wish you true peace, inward peace. Upon the speaking of which words he de∣parted. FINIS.
