B916 11902230 50592
Directions to place the Sculptures. 1. The Frontispiece before the Title. 2. The Map of Italy before the Table. 3. Michael Angelo. Pag. 17. 4. Titian. p. 50. 5. Paulo Veronese. p. 112. 6. Pietro de Cortona. p. 117. 7. Raphael Urbin. p. 159.
Licensed, Roger L'Estrange. Decemb. 6. 1678.
PICTVRA The Painters Ʋoyage of ITALY Roma W: Lodge  et fecit.
THE PAINTERS VOYAGE OF ITALY. IN WHICH All the famous Paintings of the most emi∣nent Masters are particularised, as they are preserved in the several Cities of ITALY. Chiefly relating to Their Altar-pieces, and such other Paint∣ings as are Ornamental in their Churches. And Also Many choice Pictures, kept as Jewels, in the Palaces of particular persons. Whereunto is added That excellent Collection of Signior SEPTALE, in his Closet at MILAN. Illustrated with The Heads of some of the most renowned Painters. Written Originally in Italian by Giacomo Barri a Venetian Painter. Englished by W. L. of Lincolus-Inme, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Flesher, at the Angel and Crown in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1679.
TO The Right Honourable THOMAS, Lord BELLASIS, Viscount FAƲLCONBERG. My Lord, WHen I had the ho∣nour to attend your Lordship in your Embassy to the States of Venice, it was my fortune
there to meet with a small Piece, entituled Viaggio Pittoresco d'Italia, the Task being of no very great difficulty, and alto∣gether agreeable to my own in∣clination, I have gratified my self; and I hope not disobliged ingenious Artists in a faithful rendition of it into English; which I have done the rather because the Book is rarely to be found in Italy, and I can∣not remember I have seen any Original in England but that which is in my own hands. I
have taken courage to prefix your Lordships honourable name to this Translation to render it acceptable to the world, under the Patronage of an acurate Judge, and a zealous lover and encourager of the noble Art of Painting. If it may serve to put your Lordship in mind of the pleasure you received by a personal view and admiration of those great Masters elaborate Pieces when your Lordship was abroad; and in any mea∣sure testifie my desires to serve
your Lordship, 'tis the greatest Honour and satisfaction can be wished for, or is attainable by, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obliged and most obedient Servant W. L.
To the ingenious READERS. HAving, not many years since, given my self the satisfaction of personally viewing the most prin∣cipal Places and Rarities of Rome, and other the beautiful Cities of Ita∣ly; I thought my self obliged to make my Countreymen some accompt of my Observations, those especi∣ally who are lovers of the Noble Art of Painting; if not to assure our young Nobility and Gentry that 'tis worth their while, and curiosity to Travel; yet at least to inflame their minds, and excite their industry, to
imitate those great Masters whose Employment made their Lives easie, their Persons Venerable, and their Names Immortal: On these conside∣rations I had attempted, my self, a Collection of what I had seen, but for want of opportunities, and ad∣mission into several Places of re∣mark, I was about to have desisted from that Design, which I foresaw was like to be but very imperfect: At last, lighting upon the ensuing Treatise, I found the work criti∣cally done to my hand; wherein there is a faithful accompt of the Names and Performances of most of the greatest Masters, as well An∣tient as Modern, whose curious and elaborate Pieces are at this day the fairest Ornament, and Pride, o all the places of Devotion, Pleasure▪ and Magnificence throughout all Italy. The Author Giacomo Barr
was a Venetian Painter of good e∣steem, and had the good hap to please his Countreymen by letting them know in this Book what Treasures they were Masters of: and I dare hope this my Translation (mean as it is) has not rendred it altogether unacceptable at home, to those at least who have any passion for an Art so worthily esteemed by the most In∣genious Spirits of all Ages. I have added onely two things of my own to this work, One is a view of Sig∣nior Septale's Closet in Milan, not inferiour to any of the Italian Princes Collections (inaccessible it seems to our Author;) The other a few Heads of some of the most renowned Masters. I shall compass the ends of all my Travels and pains, if my Countrey∣men, by these my endeavours, may take encouragement to emulate what they see there so highly valued and
admired; and undoubtedly the English Genius is as capable of arriving at the highest pitch of Per∣fection and Glory in This and all o∣ther Liberal Sciences, as that of old Athens, or of modern Rome. W. L.
ITALIA by Robert Morden at the Atlas in Cornhil London map of Italy
THE TABLE. A. ANcona. Pag. 27 Asolo. 105 B. Bolognia. 33 Burano. 91 Bassano. 106 Brscia. 113 C. Citta di Castello. 24 Cividall. Conegliano. 100 Coneda. 103 Castello di S. Salvatore, 101 Castell Franco. 106 Cittadella. 107 Cremona. 114, 154 Corte Maggiore nel Pia∣centina. 135 Carpi. 140 F. Fuori di Roma. 23 Fuligno. 24 Fano. 29 Furli. 29 Faenza. 32 Ferrara. 33 Fiorenza. 115 Finale di Modena. 139 G. Genoa. 114, 154
I. Imola. 30 Isola dì S. Elena. 92 Isola della Gudiecha. 94 Isola di S. Giorgio. 93 L. Loretto. 26 Lucca. 155 M. Macerata. 26 Murano 88 Mazorbo. 90 Montanagna. 109 Modena. 136 Mantua. 141 Milano. 143 N. Napoli. 159 P. Perugia. 25 Pesaro. 28 Pordenon. 98 Padua. 108 Parma. 118 Piacenza. 132 Pescia. 157 Piere di Lamari. 158 R. Roma. 1 Rimini. 30 Ravenna. 31 Reggio. 138 S. Senegaglia. 31 Seravall. 104 Sirinalta. 113 Sassvoli. 140 T. Torcello. 91 Treviso. 96 V. Ʋrbino. 32 Venetia. 45 Ʋdine. 99 Villa di Marens. 101 Villa di Fontanelle. 101 Villa di Castello. 104 Villa di Mazen. 105 Vicenza. 110 Verona. 112
The State or Territory OF THE CHURCH, Within the City of Rome. The Church of S. Peter. AS you enter at the great Door, the first Chappel on the right hand of the Cru∣cifix is all painted by the hand of Lanfranco. Then follows in the same part of the Church the great Altar-piece of the Martyrdom of S. Se∣bastian, a singular work of Dominichino. The Cuppola over this Altar is Mosaick work, and the Design of Pietro da Cortona. In like manner follows the Chappel of the Sacrament, where is a Piece of the same Pietro da Cortona representing the Coronation of our B. Lady. The Cuppola of this Chappel is also Mosaick, and the Design of the same Authour. Walking under this Chappel, on the front there is a Square of Mutiano.
Following on, in the cross Isle on the right hand there is a Side of one of the Altars, which is the work of Monsieur Possine, representing the Miracle of S. Erasomus, a very beautifull piece. Being gone a little farther, you see the fa∣mous little Bark of S. Peter, a singular good work of Lanfranco. The Square right over against this is the hand of Camassei, and denotes the Miracle done by the Apostle S. Peter, when he caused the wa∣ter to spring up in the Prison for baptizing withall. Then follows directly in view the speciall Picture which demonstrates when S. Petronilla was laid in the Sepulchre: it is the work of Guercin da Cento. Turning towards the Chair at the head of the Church, and having passed the said Chair, you see on your left hand a stately Picture which re∣presents S. Peter going to the Temple with S. John, and doing the Miracle of curing the lame: a most superb work of Chivoli. Advancing a little forward along the cross Isle, and being past the Sacristie, there is a Picture which denotes the Miracle of S. Gregory holding a bloudy Handkerchief in his hand: a most beautiful work of Andrea Sacchi. Those Pictures of the four Altars under the Pilasters of the great Cuppola are by the hand of the same Sacchi.
The Church of S. Martha behind S. Peter's. Entring this Church at the great Door you see the Picture of S. Ʋrsilla, and on the left hand is a Picture of twoOr Hermits. Eremits, the work of Lanfranco. The Church of S. Peter in Montorio. Here you will admire the most famous great Altar-piece, and, as I may say, the unparallel'd Picture of great Raphael. It signifies the Trans∣figuration of our Saviour. The Church of S. Onofrio. Before you enter this Church, there is a little Lodgment wherein are painted three Half-moons, by the hand of Dominichino. Within this Church on the right hand there is a Picture which represents the Holy House as it was transported into Italy by the Angels, the work of Hannibal Carache. The Church of S. Mary in Transtevere. Upon the Roof of this Church is a Square, wherein you find represented the Assumption of our B. Lady; a beautifull work of Dominichino.
The Church of S. Francis on the Bank. Entring at the great Gate, there stands a Pic∣ture within a Chappel on the left hand, which signifies the Lady of Pietie, the work of Han∣nibal Carache. The Church of S. Bartholomew in the Island. In this Church there are four Chappels pain∣ted by Anthony Carache, one on the right hand as you enter the great Door, the other three on the left, all very fair works. The Church of S. Trinity de ponte Sisto. That Piece of the Trinity of the great Al∣tar done by Guido Reno is a work worth great admiration. The Church of S. Charles de Catenari. The four Angles of the Cuppola do demon∣strate the four Cardinal Vertues, by the hand of Dominichino. The Tribunal of this Church is the hand of Lanfranco.
The great Picture is of Pietro da Cortona. Another Picture of the Pilgrimage of S. Joseph is by Andrea Sacci. The Church of S. Bridget in Piazza furnete. You will find in this Church an Altar-piece of our Lady with the Child Jesus and S. John, by Hannibal Carache. The Church of S. Petronio Bolognesi near unto the Farnese. The Piece of the great Altar with our Lady and other Saints is the work of Dominichino. The Church of Girolamo della Carità. At the great Altar you see most rare Pictures by Dominichino, representing the Communion of the above-named Saint. The Church of S. Catharina de Funari. Entring at the great Door, the Piece of the first Altar on the right hand, with a S. Margaret and a Christ over the said Altar, is the work of Hannibal Carache.
The two Histories on the sides of the great Altar are the works of Frederico Zucchari. The Church of S. Paul without the Walls. In a Chappel near to the great Altar there are two Squares with the Histories of Moses, and in the Sacristie there are divers other Squares; all the works of Lanfranco. The Church called the Baptism of Constan∣tine near to S. John in the Laterane. Here you see two great Histories: one repre∣sents the Battel of the Emperour Constantine the Great; the other is the Triumph of the second Battel: both by the hand of Camassei. All those Squares around the little Cuppola, as also divers Boys, are the work of Andrea Sacchi. The Church of S. Paul at the Three Fountains. There is a Table which demonstrates the Cru∣cifixion of S. Peter, a most fair work, by Guido Reno.
The Church of S. Luke in Campo Vaccino. The great Altar-piece denotes S. Luke as he is painting the Picture of our Blessed Lady; the work of So termed amongst the Italians. divine Raphael. The Church of S. Lorenzo de Spetiali in Campo Vaccino. The high Altar with the forenamed Saint is the hand of Pietro da Cortona: and entring the same Church, the first Picture on your left hand is the work of Dominichino. The Church of S. Sebastian above the Pulveriere. Here is the Piece of the great Altar with the Martyrdome of the said Saint, done by the hand of Camassei. The Church of S. Gregory. In the Chappel of this Saint is a singular good Piece by Hannibal Carache.
The Chappel of S. Andrew adjoyning to the foresaid Church of S. Gregory. As you enter this Church, on your right hand you see a History painted in A particular man∣ner different from painting in Oyle. fresco, which represents this Saint when he was buffeted; a stupendious work of Domini∣chino: on the left hand is, when the said Saint was conducted to his Martyrdome; a singular work of Guido Reno. In another little Chappel adjoyning to this, you see the little Tribunal, where are divers Boys playing upon variety of Instruments. The Round Church of S. Stephano. The Picture of the first Chappel as you enter on your left hand with a Madonna and the Child Jesus, S. Elizabeth, a S. John and a Joseph, is the work of divine Raphael. The Church of S. Bibbiana. Where you may see divers Pictures concer∣ning the life of this Saint, by Pietro de Cortona.
The Church of S. Maria Maggiore. In the Chappel of our B. Lady are divers Saints, beautifull Pieces, of Guido Reno: the Cuppola of this Chappel is by the hand of Civoli. The Picture aloft and near to this Chappel sig∣nifies a Madonna, by Guido Reno. That Square near to the Crucifix represents when Christ rais'd Lazarus from the dead; 'tis the work of Mutiano. The Church of Madonna della Victoria. Entring the great Door, the second Chap∣pel on the right hand is all painted with the History of S. Francis, by the hand of Domini∣chino. There is another Table of the Trinity, by Guer∣cin da Cento. The Church of S. Bernard, having passed the Four Fountains. The great Altar-piece is the hand of Andrea Sacchi. In the same Church there is a Picture of S. Ber∣nard, by Camassei.
The Church of the Fathers Capuchines. As you enter at the great Door, the first Altar on the right hand, representing S. Michael the Arch-angel, is a rare work of Guido Reno: and on the left hand is demonstrated the Conver∣sion of S. Paul; a very fair Piece of Pietro da Cortona. A little onward you see the Picture of the Lady of Piety, by the hand of Camassei. Then follows a Picture on which is painted the Nativity of our Saviour, by the hand of Lanfranco. After that is another Picture of the B. Virgin, and an holy Bishop, by Andrea Sacchi. Afterwards is the high Altar-piece with the Conception of the B. Virgin, the work of Lan∣franco. Let us turn off to the other part of the Church, and we shall see the Picture which de∣monstrates St. Anthony of Padua raising a man from the dead. An excellent work of Andrea Sacchi. The Church of S. Isodoro. The great Altar-piece with this Saint praying, is the work of Andrea Sacchi.
The Church of S. Joseph. The great Altar-piece represents a Dream of this Saint, by the hand of Andrea Sacchi. And at your entrance, you distinctly see a piece done by the hand of Lanfranco. The Church of St. Trinity on the Mount. Here are seen two Chapells, one demonstrates when our Saviour was taken from the Cross; and the other the Assumption of the B. Virgin, both marvellous works of Daniel da Voltera. The Church of Madonna del Popolo. In the Chapell of the Chigi are several figures of divine Raphaell. And in the Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar is seen a Piece of the Assumption of the B. Virgin, and above this are several histories, to be reckoned amongst the best works of Han∣niball Carache. The Church of S. Lorenzo in Lucciná. Here is seen a very fair Piece of our Saviour upon the Cross, by the hand of Guido Reno.
The Church of S. Maria Inviolata. The Tribunall demonstrates the Assumption of the B. Virgin, an excellent piece, by Camassei. The Church of S. Romualdo. The Piece of the High-Altar with this Saint, is a most stately work of Andrea Sacchi. The Church of S. Sylvester upon Monte Cavallo. Being entred the great Door, you may ob∣serve in the second Chapell on your left hand, two Freezes of Boyes inBlack and white. Chiaro Scuro, by Polidoro. Then follows the Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar, and there are on the four Angles of the little Cuppola, four Histories of the Old Testament. The First is Queen Esther falling before the King her Husband. The Second, as they are discoursing together. The Third is King David, playing on the Harp, before the Ark. The Fourth is Judith, when she shews the Head of Holofernes, all by the hand of Domini∣chino.
The Palace on Monte Cavallo. That Chapell where the Pope sayes Mass is all excellently painted, by Guido Reno. The Church of Jesus. Entering the great door, on your left hand, you may see many Saints, done by Guiacome Bas∣sano. The high Altar-piece demonstrates the Presen∣tation of the B. Virgin at the Temple, by the hand of Mutiano. The Church of S. Andrew in the Valley. The Tribunall, with the four Angles are mar∣vellously well done, by Dominichino. The Cuppola also is a stately work of Lan∣franco. The Picture of the Blessed Caëtano, is by the hand of Camassei. And that of the Blessed Andrea Avelino, is the hand of Lanfranco. The Church of S. Lorenzo in Dmaso. Here is seen the high Altar-piece, being the work of Frederico Zurthari.
The Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar is the work of Pietro da Cartona. The Spanish Church of S. Giacomo. The Chapell of S. Diego is all painted by Al∣bano. The design of Carache. The French Church of S. Lewis. Entering at the great door, the second Cha∣pell an the right hand is all excellently painted, by Dominichino, with the History of the life of S. Cecilia. Onely excepting the Altar-piece which is a copy after Raphael, copied by Guido Reno from the Original, which they preserve at Bolognia. The great Altar-piece is the work of Gia∣como Bassano, representing the Assumption of the B. Virgin. The Church of the Madonna del Anima. The Altar-piece of one of the Chapells, on the right hand as you enter, is a Madonna, and the work of Julio Romano.
The Church of the Madonna della Pace. Entering at the great door, there are over the first Chapell on your right hand, diverse Pro∣phets and Sibylls, and are some of the choicest things that ever Raphael painted. The great Tribunall is all painted by Albano. The Church of S. Augustino. As you enter at the great door, you may see on your left hand, over a Pilaster, a Prophet and two Boyes, an admirable work of Raphael. In the Front of the Chapel of S. Tomaso da Villa nova, is to be seen a Picture of Guercin da Cento. The Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar in the corner of the Church, is all singular∣ly well painted by Lanfranco. The Church of Salvatore in Lauro. The Picture of the Nativity of our Saviour is a fair work of Pietro da Cortona. There is another Picture of the B. Virgin, with another Saint below; by Albano.
The Florentine Church of S. John. Here you will admire a most beautiful Cha∣pell, with the History of the Passion of our Sa∣viour, by Lanfranco. The new Church of the Fathers of S. Philippo Neri. The Roof of the Church, and the Cuppola, the four Angles, as also the Tribunall, are state∣ly works of Pietro da Cortona. You may also plainly see two Pieces of Ba∣rocci, one represents the Presentation of our B. Lady, the other the Visitation of S. Elizabeth. The Altar-piece on the Chapell of S. Philip is by the hand of Guido Reno. And behind the same Altar is another pain∣ting, by the hand of Guercin da Centa. S. Lorenzo alla Sobara, being the Church of the Curtezans. The great Altar-piece is done by Camassei.
MICHAEL ANGILO Nat. Ao 147 portrait of Michaelangelo
S. Lucia in celsis near to S. Maria Maggiore. There is a Square by Lanfranco, and another by Camassei of S. John Communicating the B. Lady. The Nunns Church near to S. Mary in Trastevere. The great Altar-piece here is the work o Camassei. The Palace of the Vatican. In the great Hall here, called the Sala Reggia, you see a Battle, with other large Histories, most beautiful works of Frederico and Tadeo Zuccharo. After you have seen the aforesaid Hall, you enter into S. Paul's Chapell, which is all painted by Michael Angelo Bonarota; and here you will admire that famous painting of the Ʋniversall Judgement. Let us walk above in the second Gallery, which is all painted by Raphael, with the Hi∣stories of the Old, and several of the New Te∣stament; The Rabeschi or the Ornaments are painted by John of Ʋdine, Raphael's Scholar; but the design of Raphael. Being afterwards come within the Chambers, the first Chamber, all beneath the Cornice, is painted with theDiffering from other manners of Painting▪ Cortoni of Raphael.
The first History as you enter on your left hand signifies when Constantine the great saw the Holy Cross in the Sky, when he was making an Oration to his Souldiers: Painted by Giulio Ro∣mano, a famous Scholar to the abovesaid Raphael. Then follows the great Battle of Constantine; rarely Painted by the said Giulio. Then continues the third Picture, which re∣presents how Pope S. Silvester Baptized the afore∣said Emperour. The fourth being a Chimney-piece, demon∣strates the Baptisme of Fattor Bono, by the hand of Raphael Bergo, a Scholar also of the above na∣med Raphael. Now follows the second Chamber, the which is all Painted by Raphael's own hand, excepting those Histories in Chiaro Scuro,A terme of art for Black amd White. which are Painted by his Scho∣lars. The first History over the door where you enter, represents the Pope hearing of Mass, and a Miracle succeeds. The third History is when Attila coming with his Army to besiege Rome, against the Pope, there appeared in the Sky S. Peter, and S. Paul. The fourth demonstrates S. Peter in Prison. After this there are severall Histories of the Old Testament painted on the Roof. Then follows the third Chamber, and over the door where you enter, you see represented the Antient School of Athens. Over against this is an History denoting a disputation concerning the Holy Sacrament. Over a Window is represented Mount Parnassus.
A little below, on the sides of the Windows, is a representation of the Pope and the Emperour giving out the Laws. There are also divers significations painted on the Roof. The fourth and last great Chamber is all rare∣ly painted by the same Raphael, onely excepting the Roof, which is painted by Pietro Perugino, Raphael's Master. The four Histories about this Room are these; First, That over the door where you enter represents the Pope in a Ship. The Second signifies the Burning of the City of Rome. The Third is when the Pope Crowned the Emperour Charles the Great. And in the Fourth are many Bishops. The Palace of the Chigi in the street of Lungara. In a Ground-room of this Palace you see the Study of Painting, and in a little Garden-room is the famous Galatea; the works of great Ra∣phael. The Garden of the Duke Atlanti, as you go to Lungara. Here you will find many Pieces, both by Ra∣phael and Giulio Romano.
The Palace of Farnese. Here you see a Gallery all painted in Fresco, by the most excellent hand of Hanniball Ca∣rache. In the Wardrobe of the said Palace, there are preserved a great many rare Pictures, by diverse Masters, which I forbear to nominate one by one, for brevity sake. Within the Garden of the Palace of Chiavica dal Buffolo, you see very fair works of Polidoro and Frederico Zuccharo. At the Common Store-house over against S. Eustachio, you see a House painted by Frederico Zuccharo. Ʋpon the Mount Cittorio. Here is a Front of a House, by the hand of Poli∣doro. The Palace of the Verospi. Here is a Chamber painted by Lanfranco, and a Gallery by Albano.
The Palace of the Mancini on Monte Cavallo. The Gallery of this Palace is the work of Camassei. You also see on this Palace that beautifull Au∣rora; by Guido Reno. The Garden of the Mattei in Campo Vaccino. Here is a little Chamber with several naked Women and other ornaments; by the hand of Raphael. The Palace of Pamphylio in Piazzo Navona. Here you see a Gallery all painted by the hand of Pietro da Cortona. And in the Hall is a Freeze, by Camassei. The Front of the middle part of the Palace of the Duke d'Acqua Sparta. This being called La Marchesa d'Oro, is all painted with various resemblances, by the hand of Polidoro.
Coming from the Bridge of S. Angelo, and entering the Street De Coronari. Here is a Front of a House in Being the usual manner of Poli∣doro's painting. Chiaro Scuro, the work of Polidoro. Near to the Chiavica of S. Lucia. You see here upon a House divers Histories in Chiaro Scuro, by Polidoro. The Palace of Barbarini at the Four Fountains. Here you see the great and famous Hall, pain∣ted by Pietro da Cortona, being some of the choicest of his works. Within one of the Chambers there is painted on the Roof, the Divine Wisdom. A choice work of Andrea Sacchi. On the side of another Chamber is plainly re∣presented the Creation of Angels, by Camassei. Then follows another of Camassei, with the History of the Nine Muses on Mount Parnassus. Just without the Porto di Castello there is a little House painted by Polidoro.
The State or Territory OF THE CHURCH, Without the City of Rome. Grotta Ferrata, being a Monastery of Be∣nedictines, two miles distant from Frescati. THe famous works that you will find in the above mentioned Monastery, are worth any ones coming a long journey to see, for they are the choicest things that ever were painted. By the studious hand of Dominichino.
The City of Fuligno. In the Nuns Church, called Le Countesse. HEre you will admire an extraordinary fair Picture of our Blessed Lady upon the Clouds, and diverse Saints below, by the hand of divine Raphael. No Curious person (without a dissa∣tisfaction to himself) passes through this City without a sight of this Picture. The City of Castello. In the Church of S. Dominico. THere is to be admired a Picture of the E∣spousal of the Blessed Virgin with S. Jo∣seph; there needs no other commendation, than that it is the hand of Divine Raphael.
The City of Perugia. The Domo, or Great Church. ON the right hand of the great Altar there is a Picture of the taking our Saviour from the Cross. The work of Frederico Barocci. The new Church of S. Philippo Neri. There is seen a most noble square, of Guido Reno. The Church of S. Francis. Here you will find the Assumption of the Bles∣sed Virgin with the Apostles, by the hand of in∣comparable Raphael. S. Severo being the Church of the Fathers Camaldolesi. Here is an admirable Piece of Christ on high, above the Clouds, and below there are diverse Monks kneeling on the Ground; the work of Raphael.
The Church of the Nunns of Monte Lucce. Where there are diverse fair Pieces of the a∣foresaid Raphael, and of Giulio Romano. The City of Macerata. The Church of the Fathers Capuchines. THe great Altar-piece represents Paradise, a truly divine work of Barocci; and deserves to be seen by every one. The holy House at Loretto. The Church of the B. Virgin. IN this Church you meet with a Picture of the Nativity of the B. Virgin, an admirable work of Hanniball Carache.
And another in the far end of the Church, which demonstrates an Annunciation; a singu∣lar work of Barocci. After this is the Apothecaries Shop belonging to the holy House, where the Pots and Vessels are all painted by the most excellent hand of Raphael. The City of Ancona. The Church of S. Dominico. IN this Church you will find an admirable Picture, by the hand of great Titian. The Church of the Fathers Franciscans Zoccolanti. Here is seen another Picture of the above na∣med Titian. None that are Curious should deceive themselves so much, as to pass by this City and neglect a sight of this Piece.
The City of Pesaro. The Domo. THere is a great Piece towards the middle of the Church, on the right hand as you enter, which is a most beautiful work of Guido Reno. The Church of the Fathers Franciscans. Here is a little S. Michael, by the hand of Barocci. The Confraternity of S. Andrew. Here you will see a Picture with the History of that Saint when he came (being called by our Redeemer) to the Apostleship; the work of the aforesaid Barocci. The Church of the Fraternity of S. Anthony. Here you will admire a most beautiful Piece, by Paulo Veronese.
The City of Fano. The New Church. HEre are seen several small Pictures, done by Guido Reno. The City of Furli. S. Girolamo, the Church of the Fathers Zoccolanti. IN the Chapell of the Conception of the B. Virgin, you may observe a representation of this My∣stery, with Angels round about, by Guido Reno. The Church of Madonna del Popolo. There is a Picture, done by Guercin da Cento. The New Church of S. Philippo Neri. Where is seen a Picture of the Annunciation of the B. Virgin, by the hand of Guercin da Cento.
The Church of the Fathers Capuchins. The Piece at the great Altar is the work of Gúercin da Cento. The City of Imola. The Church of S. Dominico. AT the farther end of the Quire you will see a Picture with the History of S. Ʋrsula, by the hand of Ludovico Caracci. The City of Rimini. The Church of S. Vitale. HEre is seen a Picture with the Martyrdom of this Saint, by Paulo Veronese.
The Church of the Oratory of S. Girolamo. Here is the Picture of this Saint, the work of Guercin da Cento. The City of Senegalia. IN this City is a little Church joyning to the Piazza, where you may see a Picture which represents Christ as he was carried to his Burial, by the hand of Barocci. The City of Ravenna. The Domo. IN the Chapell of Cardinal Aldrobandini is an admirable Picture, which demonstrates when it rained Manna. And at the same time you ee an half Figure of our Redeemer compas∣sed
about with Angels; 'tis the work of Guido Reno. The Church of S. Vitale. There is a Picture of the Martyrdom of this Saint, by Barocci. The City of Faenza. The Church of the Fathers Capuchines. HEre is a large Piece of our B. Virgin, with the Child Jesus, St. Francis, and S. Chri∣stina; by the hand of Guido Reno. The City of Ʋrbino. The Domo. HEre are diverse Singular good works of Barocci.
The City of Ferrara. The Church of S. Francesca Romana. AT the high Altar is a most beautiful Piece, by Ludovico Caracci. And in a Friery joining to this Church is a History, by the same Ludovico. The City of Bolognia. The Church of S. John on the Mount. I Should do wrong if I did not instruct you where to find that divine Picture of S. Ce∣cilia, by the hand of eminent Raphael: it is pre∣served in this Church as a precious Treasure of so great a Master: all the Virtuosi which travel by the way of Bolognia cannot depart this City without a sight of such a marvellous Piece.
There is likewise another Picture with the History of the most holy S. Rosario, a rare work of Dominichino. The Church of S. Petronio. In which is seen a famous Picture of S. Rocco, by the hand of Parmegianino. The Church of the Nunns of S. Margaret. Here is seen a Picture of the B. Virgin, and Christ a Child, as also S. Margaret, with other figures: by the hand of Parmegianino. The Church of the Monks of S. Michael in Bosco. In the Cloyster of this Church you will ad∣mire divers great Histories, which represent the works of S. Benedetto; they are divided into partitions, in Chiaro Scuro, with other pretty conceited ornaments by the hand of the mostFrequently so called amongst the Italians. excellent Carache. There is also another large and beautiful Hi∣story by the hand of Guido Reno.
The Church of Certosa. In this Church is seen a Picture which de∣monstrates S. John Baptist preaching, with two other Histories of the Passion of Christ, by Ludo∣vico Caracci. There is also another famous Picture of the Communion of S. Girolamo, one of the best pieces that ever was painted, by the Excellent Carache. Without the Gate of the great Street in the Church of the Scalsi, you may see a Picture, by Ludovico Caracci. The Church of S. Dominico. Here you will admire a Picture of S. Giacinto, and over against it is another of S. Raimondo, and in the Chapell of the Martyrdom of S. Andrew there is the figure of Charity, S. Francis, and S. Dominico, with other things, by the hand of Ca∣rache. You also see on the front over the Tombe in the Chapell of this Saint, a Piece which de∣monstrates the said Saint as he Ascends with Christ into Heaven. There is also the B. Virgin and a glory of Angels; by the hand of Guido Reno. Behind the Pulpit you may see a Picture of the Innocents, by Guido Reno.
The Church of S. Francis. Here is an admirable Piece of the Assumption of the B. Virgin and the Apostles, rarely done, by Hannibal Carache. There is also another Picture with the Con∣version of S. Paul, by the hand of Lodovico Ca∣racci. S. George, being the Church of the Fathers Serviti. Where is seen a Picture of the B. Virgin and Christ a Child, and other two Saints besides them, painted by Hannibal Carache. There is also another rare Piece of the Bap∣tisme of Christ, by the hand of Albano. The Church of S. Gregory. In this Church is seen a Picture of S. John Baptist Baptizing of Christ, by the hand of Lu∣dovico Caracci. And as you enter on your left hand you see a Picture, by Guercin da Cento.
The Church of S. Nicolo in the Street of S. Felice. In which is a Picture to be reckoned amongst the Choicest works of Hannibal Carache. The little Church of S. Bartolomeo di Reno. Where is a Chapel with a Picture, wholly painted by Augustino Caracci. The Church of S. Salvatore. In this Church you meet with a Picture of the Assumption of the B. Virgin and the Apostles, by the hand of Augustin Caracci. And that Square of our Saviour in the farther end of the Quire, is by the hand of Guido Reno. The Church of S. Bernard near the Street of Castiglione. As you enter, on your left hand, in the first Chapell there is a Picture by Ludovico Caracci. On the left hand of the great Altar is a Square above upon the Wall, by the hand of Guido Reno.
The Church of the Augustine Friars, called S. Giacomo. Here is the Picture of S. Rocco, by Ludovico Caracci. The little Church of S. Rocco, called the Pratello. Where is seen a Picture of this Saint, by Lo∣dovico Caracci. S. Paul, being the Church of the Fathers Teatini. The Picture at the second Chapel as you en∣ter on the right hand, is by Lodovico. The Sagrestie of the Domo. Where is also a Square of the aforesaid Lo∣dovico. The Church of the Nunns of S. John Baptist. On Your left hand as you enter, the Picture at the second Chapell, as also the great Al∣tar-piece
are the works of the same Lodo∣vico. The Church of the Nuns of Corpo di Christo. On each side of the great Door you will see a Picture, of the aforesaid Lodovico. The Church of S. Ursula. The Piece at the great Altar represents the Martyrdome of this Saint; there is another on the right hand of this Altar, both by the hand of Lodovico. The Church of the Nunns of S. Christina. The great Altar-piece of this Church, is by the same Lodovico. The Church of the Nunns Convertite. Here is an admirable Piece on the right hand of the great Altar, rarely done by Lodovico. The Church of the Mendicanti. Here they preserve a Picture of S. Matthew as
he was called by Christ to the Apostleship, by the hand of Hannibal Carache. After this is the great Altar-piece, and a sin∣gular good work of Noble Guido Reno. The Church of S. Bartholomew in Piazza Ravegnana. Here is a Picture of S. Charles, by Lodovico Carache. And another of the Annunciation, by the hand of Albano. S. Martin, being the Church of the Fathers Carmelites. On the left side of the great Chapell you may observe the Picture of S. Girolamo, by the hand of Albano. The Parochial Church of S. Tomaso, in the great street. In this Church you see a Christ aloft, and on the Ground below is S. Andrew, and S. Francis, by the hand of Guido Reno. The Church of the Fathers Capuchines. In this you see a Divine Picture with Christ
upon the Cross, with the B. Virgin, S. John, and a Magdalen, all embracing the Cross, a singular work of Guido Reno. The Church of the Nunns of S. Agnes. The great Altar piece is the work of Domi∣nichino. The Church of S. Sebastian behind the Gabella. In This Church you find a Piece done by Albano. S. Columbano. Here is to be seen a Picture of S. Peter, in Fresco, by the hand of Albano. Madonna di Giera, being the Church of the Fathers of the Order of S. Philippo Neri. Here are to be admired several beautiful works of Albano.
The Church of Madonna di Reggio. Over against our most holy Lady, there is seen a Picture, done by Guercin da Cento. S. Antonio of the College of Mont-Alto. Here is a Picture on the right hand of the great Chapel, done by Guercin da Cento. The Piece at the great Altar is the work of Lodovico Carache. The Houses of Particular Persons. The House of the Favi. IN this House is seen divers Freezes with the History of Aeneas out of Virgil, by the a∣bove-named Lodovico. There are also divers works of Albano.
The House of the Magnani, near to S. Giacomo Maggiore. Here is to be seen a large Freeze, the which represents the Acts of Romulus and Remus, the Frames which contain them are painted with diversity of Garlands and wreaths of Flowers in Chiaro Scuro; the work is of Excellent Carache. And in a Room below there is a Chimney∣piece of an Apollo, in Fresco, with other Figures, by Lodovico Carache. The House of S. Pieri, in the great Street. In this House we see divers works of Au∣gustino, and Lodovico Carache, and of Guercino, all in Fresco. Ʋpon the Front of the publick Palace of the Piazza. Here are three beautiful Figures of naked Women, by the hand of Guido Reno, in Fre∣sco.
Ʋnderneath that Portico which is over against S. Maria Maggiore. Here you see a History which represents when Pilat washed his hands at the presence of Christ, by Lodovico Carache, in Fresco.
The State or Territory OF VENICE. The City of Venice. The Palace of S. Mark. AS you walk above to the College Cham∣ber, you see four Squares in the four cor∣ners. In one of these is represented Vulcan and Cy∣clops as they are working at the Anvil. In another is Mercury with the three Graces. In the third is Pallas compelling Mars to keep the Peace, with the Picture of Plenty. In the fourth is Ariana Crowned by Venus, with a Crown of Stars. As also a Bacchus with other Figures.
Upon the Roof is a Square of S. Luke the Evangelist, and a Represented by a Crowned Virgin holding a Scepter in one hand, and a pair of Scales in the other. Venetia confer∣ring together, as al∣so a Picture of Ju∣stice, and aOr Duke of Venice. Doge. There are likewise divers little Histories in Chiaro Scuro, with little Boys, painted by the hand of Tintoret, very fair works. Let us enter another Chamber, and we shall find on our right hand, a great Square of Titian, which represents the Picture of Faith upon the Clouds, with three little Ange's, and below is S. Mark, and an armed Doge kneeling. All the Roof is to be reckoned amongst the master-pieces of Tintoret. After this Chamber you go into that of the College, and in the Anti-Chamber you see upon the Roof a most beautiful Square of Paulo Vero∣nese, in some compartements it is Azured in Chiaro Scuro; where are other Figures of the same Author. Then follows the Royal Chamber of the Col∣lege, where you will admire upon the Roof the Represented by flinging Thunderbolts from Heaven. Thundering of Jupiter, by the most noble hand of Paulo Veronese. The Square which is in Front, is of the same Paulo, and all the other about are of Tinto∣ret. We go out of the College and enter into the Chamber of the Pregadi, where will be admired the great Square which is above the Tribunall,
with the Dead Redeemer upheld by Angels, with many Saints, and other Figures And two Fi∣gures in Chiaro Scuro, about the entrance at the great Door. On the left hand is found a Figure in Chiaro Scuro, which represents Peace. And there is near to that a Square of the Blessed Virgin in the Sky. S. Mark, S. Peter, and S. Lewis, and a Doge kneeling. And that great Square on the middle of the Roof with a Venetia upon the Clouds, com∣passed about with a multitude of Gods, and o∣ther Figures, is the work of furious Tintoret. After this we go into the Chapell behind the College-Chamber, and before your entrance you see over the Door, Christ risen from the dead, by the aforesaid Tintoret. And within this Chapell you see a Christ in Emaus at Table with the two Disciples; this is the work of great Titian. Let us enter into the Chambers of the Coun∣cil of Ten, and we shall see in the first of them, on the middle of the Roof, a great Oval of na∣ked Figures; some of the fairest works, done by Paulo Veronese. Upon the same Roof you see several Vani (or Compartments) in one of which you see a Juno pouring from Heaven great quantities of Jew∣els and Crowns, and below stands a Venetia, in a posture receiving those gifts. In another Square is to be admired a beauti∣ful Juno, holding her hands on her breast, toge∣ther with an old Man holding his right arm un∣der his chin, both which are the works of Paulo.
There are also four Figures around the middle Ovall, in Chiaro Scuro, three of these are done by Paulo. After this first great Chamber, you enter into a lesser, where in the middle compartment is a most beautiful Square, with six Histories, every one painted in Chiaro Scuro, by Paulo Veronese. Rare things. In the uppermost Chamber of the said Coun∣cil you see upon the Roof, several fair works, by Paulo. Afterwards you go into another Chamber, the Roof of which is all painted by Tinto∣ret. And in this same Chamber, over the Tribunal is a Madonna with Christ, and an Angel, by the hand of Raphael. In this Chamber over a Door, you see a Ma∣donna with the Child, S. Magdalen, S. John Bap∣tist, S. Catherine, and another Figure kneeling, the work of old Palma. The Chamber of the Grand Council. Here every one is amazed to see the great Square which represents Paradise; a large Square, and by the hand of Tintoret. Over against this great work, on the other side of the Chamber, is an History of the Ve∣netians warring against the Genoese, by Paulo Ve∣ronese. The Roof is divided into three Orders. In the Order of S. Giorgio Maggiore, the first
Square towards the Throne is the work of Paulo Veronese, the third and the fourth are by Tin∣toret. In the second Order, on the right side of the Throne, are in like manner works of Paulo, and Tintoret. In the third Order there is a large Square, a mighty work of furious Tintoret. The great ovall towards the Throne, is a noble work of Paulo Veronese. That Chamber called the Sala del Scrutinio near to that of the Grand Council. In this Chamber is to be seen a great Square of a Battle, by Tintoret. It is the first Picture on the right hand of the Tribunall, near unto the Door, as you go to the Chamber of the Grand Council. The Magistrato delle Biade. All the Roof here is painted by Paulo Vero∣nése. In this Magistracy there are Three Chambers, in one of which you see a Square of the Resur∣rection of Christ, by Tintoret.
The little Church of S. Nicholas in the Palace of S. Mark. In this little Church there are the Four E∣vangelists, on each side the Altar two. And at a distance in a Half-moon is the Madonna with the Child Jesus, S. Nicholas, and a Doge, the works of Titian. Over the Door there is another Half-moon, with a S. Mark sitting upon a Lion; rarely well done by Titian. Over a Door of the Stair-case, by which the Doge goes into the College, you may observe a S. Christopher with the Child Jesus on his shoul∣ders, a fair work of Titian. Here you may observe upon the Roof, a Lady with a little Boy in her hand; by Titian. Let us enter the Library, and on the left hand we shall see seven Philosophers; the two first, as also the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth are done by Tintoret. The seventh with a Globe in his hand, is by Sciavone. On that side towards S. Mark's Steeple, there are four other Philosophers, by Tintoret. On that side towards the Piazza, there are seven Philosophers. The second is by Sciavone, and the third laying his hand upon his breast, is by Paulo Veronese. Afterwards upon the Roof there are three Rounds by Paulo Veronese, and other three by Sciavone.
TITIANO Nat Ano 1480 portrait of Titian
After these, in a Chamber called the Procu∣ratie, there are great quantities of Or Pictures by the life.Ritrati, by Tintoret. The Magistrato delle Legne. Upon the Roof you see a Square by Paulo Veronese. And over the Tribunal you see five Retratti of Senators, by Tintoret. The Church of S. Giminiano Preti. That Picture on your left hand as you enter this Church at the great Door, with a S. Ca∣therine, and the Angel which Annunciates her Martyrdome, is by Tintoret. The Portalls of the Organ are by Paulo Ve∣ronese. On the outside of which are two holy Bishops, and within is a S. John Baptist, and S. Menna Cavaliere. S. Gallo Abbazia. There is a Square of our Saviour in the mid∣dle, and two Saints, by the hand of Tintoret.
The Church of S. Moise Preti. In the Chapell of the Most Holy, there is on the right hand, a Christ washing the Feet of the Apostles, by Tintoret. In the Chapell on the left hand near the Sa∣cristie, the Piece at the Altar is a Madonna with her Son; by the hand of Tintoret. The Church of Santa Maria Gi∣benigo. Here you see a Picture of our Saviour in the Sky, accompanied with Angels, and below is a S. Justina, and a S. Francisco di Paula; by Tin∣toret. There is afterwards the Organ painted by the same Tintoret. On the outside of the Portall you see the Con∣version of S. Paul; and within there are the four Evangelists; and under the Roof, going out of the great Door, there is a Madonna with her Son; by the same Author. And upon a front of a House near to the house of the Pisani, and the Palace of the Flan∣gini, in S. Maria Gibenigo, there are painted by the hand of Giorgone, many Freezes in Chiaro Scuro, in Yellow, Red, and Green, with rare fancies of Boys, in the middle of which are four Half-figures, viz. A Bacchus, a Venus, a
Mars, and a Mercury, coloured after theWhich was not to paint in above two or three colours. usual manner of the Author. S. Mauritio. Here is a Palace of the Family of the Soranfa all painted by Paulo Veronese, with four Histo∣ries of the Romans, adorned with many Boys with Garlands, all in Chiaro Scuro, and below are two Figures finished in Bronzo. The Church of S. Samuel. Here you will admire a great Picture of our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, and a St. John Bap∣tist, by the hand of Tintoret. The first Cloyster of the Convent of S. Stephano. Augustin Friers. In this Cloyster there are twelve Histories which represent part of the Old, and part of the New Testament: all singular work of Por∣denon. The first is, Christ discoursing with the Sama∣ritan Woman. The second is, The Judgement of Solomon, concerning the dead Child. The third is, The Adultress brought before our Saviour.
The fourth is, David cutting off Goliah's head. The fifth is, Our Saviour put into the Tomb. The sixth is, The Sacrifice of Abraham. The seventh is, S. Paul Converted at the voice of Christ. The eighth is, Noah being Drunk, is found naked by his Sons. The ninth is, The Martyrdom of S. Ste∣phen. The tenth is, The Murthering of Abel. The eleventh is, Our Saviour as he appeared to Magdalen after his Resurrection. The twelfth is, Adam and Eve scourged by the Angel out of the Terrestial Paradise. Above the aforesaid Histories there is the An∣gel Annunciating Mary; and on every side there are divers Saints, with their corresponding signi∣fications. The Church of S. Benedette Preti. The Portals of the Organ are painted by Tintoret, on the outside of them you may see Christ at the Well with the Samaritan Woman; and within is the Annunciation.
The School of S. Girolamo, near to the Church of S. Fantino. Look down upon a Bench, and you will see a Square of Tintoret's, with the Miracle of S. Girolamo. You also see four Squares of Paulo Veronese. One is the coming of the Wise men. Another is the Disputation with the Doctors. The third is the Assumption of the B. Virgin. And a fourth follows. There is above, a most beautiful Picture of the B. Virgin, and S. Girolamo, by the hand of Tintoret. The Church of S. Luke Preti. The high Altar-piece represents the B. Virgin in the Sky with our Saviour, and Angels, and be∣low on the Ground S. Luke sitting upon the Bull; they are precious works of Paulo Veronese. The Church of S. Salvatore. There the High Altar-piece, of the Trans∣figuration of Christ, by the hand of great Titian, is a singular work. And in the Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar, you see Christ in Emaus, with the two Disciples, by old Palma.
The Picture of the Annunciation by Titian, a most fair work. Fontico de Todeschi. On the Front over the Canalle there are ma∣ny Figures painted by Giorgone. That Front towards the Land is by Titian. Stately Pieces. Afterwards in the German Merchants Dining∣room there are many beautiful Histories, by Paulo Veronese. There is also a little work of Tintoret: where you see a Cynthia in the Sky, followed by the Hours. The Church of S. Guliano Preti. In this Church you see a Supper of Christ with the Apostles, by Paulo Veronese. As also a Dead Christ in the Sky upheld by Angels, and below on the Ground is S. Mark, S. James, and S. Girolamo, the work of the above∣said Paulo. The Church of S. Paul. Entring at the great Door, that Square which is in the corner of the Church, with the Supper of our Saviour with his Disciples, is a singular good work of Tintoret. In the field, or place before S. Pauls, you
plainly see upon the Front of the House of So∣ranzo several Figures of Giorgone, most beauti∣ful things. In this same Parish of S. Paul you see the Pa∣lace of the Zane, all painted by Andrea Schia∣vone, with many Fables and Histories, the which look very gloriously over the Grand Canalle. The Church of S. Apollinare. Here you see the Picture with the five Coronati, by Schiavone. The Church of S. Silvestre. As you enter at the great Door, you see on your left hand the famous Visit of the Wise men, by Paulo Veronese. You also plainly see a Square with our Savi∣our in the Garden, by Tintoret. There is another rare Picture of S. John Bap∣tizing Christ, by Tintoret. The Church of S. John di Rialto. The great Altar-piece is the work of great Titian, signifying this same Saint giving Almes to the Poor. And in the Chapell on the left hand of the said Altar, is a work of Pordenon, with the Saints
Catherine, Sebastian, and S. Rocco, with a little Angel. The Cuppola is all painted by the same Por∣denon, in Fresco, and in the Angles of the Cup∣pola there are the Four Evangelists, by the same hand. Behind the great Altar, on the outside of the Church, upon the Wall, you see this Saint giving Almes to the Poor; Rarely well done by Por∣denon. The Church of S. Augustino Preti. Here is placed a Square over a side door of the Church, of our Lord shewn unto the People by Pilate; by Paris Bordone. The Church of S. Stin Preti. That Picture with the Assumption of the Bles∣sed Mary, is the hand of Tintoret. The School of S. John the Evangelist. The Roof of the Albergo is to be admired; by the hand of great Titian. In the middle part you see the holy Evan∣gelist contemplating upon Heaven, with other little Angels, and in four compartiments there are the four Symbols of the Evangelists, with se∣veral little Angels heads in divers other com∣partiments.
The Church called the Frari de padri Conventuali. That Picture of the Conception of the B. Virgin, is a marvellous fair work of Titian. In the great Chapell there is the great and fa∣mous Picture of Titian, where is represented Mary ascending into Heaven with the Eternal Father above, and below are the Apostles in ad∣miration. The School of S. Francisco purè à Frari. The Roof is all painted by Pordenon, where are divers Saints; singular works. The Church of S. Rocco. Entring this Church, on the left hand, there is a great Square, with S. Martin on Horseback, dividing his Cloak, with many other Figures; the work of Pordenon. An the other side of the Church, right over against this, there is another great Square re∣presenting Christ curing one sick of the Palsie; a work worthy of Tintoret. Afterwards is the great Chapell, all painted by Tintoret, excepting the Cuppola, and the
four Evangelists, which are of Pordenon; both one and the other are marvellous works. In a Chapell on the left hand above the Al∣tar, there is a Square with our Saviour carrying the Cross, by the hand of Titian. The Organ is painted both within and without by Tintoret. The School of S. Rocco. Now here it is that I know not where to begin, because of the quantity of Squares, where are seen infinite works of Tintoret. In the first Ground Room, there are six great Squares. The first on the left hand, there is an Angel which Annunciates Mary. The second is the Visitation of the Three wise men. The third is Mary going into Egypt. The fourth is the Slaughter of the Inno∣cents. In the fifth is the Conception of our Lord. In the sixth is Mary ascending into Hea∣ven. Over the first Stairs, you see an Annunciation, by Titian. There is another in front of this Annunciation, where there is a Visitation of Mary, with S. Eli∣zabeth, by Tintoret. Then above that, the first Square is the Nati∣vity of our Lord. And after, is S. John Baptizing Christ.
After that is the Resurrection of Christ. Behind that, is the Supper with the Apostles. And after, is the Altar-piece with S. Rocco in the Sky, with many Figures. Then follows on the other side, Christ multi∣plying the Loaves and the Fishes. After that, is the Messias raising Lazarus from the Dead. In another, is Christ Ascending into Heaven, with the Apostles below. Then follows the Miracle done at the Pool in the Sheep-market in Jerusalem. In a corner behind the door of the Albergo, there is a Devil speaking to Christ, that he would convert the Stones into Bread. In the head end of the Hall there is between the Windows S. Rocco, and S. Sebastian. Let us turn our eyes towards the Roof, and we shall see Adam and Eve, as they stand eating the Apple. Afterwards, is the Pillar of fire which guided the Hebrews through the Desert. Jacobs Dream when he saw the Angels Ascen∣ding, and descending from Heaven. Jonas cast ashore, out of the Whales bel∣ly. Elias flying from the wrath of Jezebel. In the middle Square there is the Rod of Ser∣pents. The Sacrifice of Abraham. The Manna in the Desert. The Hebrews eating the Paschal Lamb, and many other Histories of the Old Testament.
There is afterwards in the Albergo, Christ be∣fore Pilate. Christ, with the Reed in his hand. Christ, going to Mount Calvary. And again, that famous Crucifixion, one of the fairest works that ever was done, bySo called from his bold manner of painting. furious Tin∣toret. On the Roof you see St. Rocco in the Sky, with all the other compartiments. All the above named works in this School, are by Tintoret. The Church of S. Nichola de Frari. The high Altar-piece with the B. Virgin in the Sky, and many Saints below, viz. S. Nicho∣las, S. Katherine, S. Francis, S. Anthony of Pa∣duae, and S. Sebastian, is a most singular work of divine Titian. On the right hand of the said Altar, you see a S. John Baptizing Christ, the work of Paulo Veronese. We also see two Prophets and two Sibyls in Chiaro Scuro, by the same Paulo. There is a Square with Christ upon the Cross, by Paulo. The Roof likewise is all painted by the afore∣said Paulo: and they are stately works, parti∣cularly that of the Adoration of the Wise men, which is in the middle.
Quartier de Castello. The Nuns Church of S. Joseph. ON the Piece of the first Altar on your right hand (entring by the great door) there is S. Michael the Archangel, and a Senator, by the hand of Tintoret. On the same side, at the third Altar, you see the Transfiguration of our Lord on Mount Tabor, painted by Paulo Veronese. The great Altar-piece represents the Nativi∣ty of our Saviour, by Paulo, a most admirable thing. The Nuns Church of S. Daniel. As you enter this Church at the great Door, the first Picture is a S. Katherine disputing with the Doctors, by Tintoret. Then follows the Piece at the great Altar, which demonstrates Daniel in the Lions denn, the work of Pietro da Cortona.
The Church of S. John in Bragora. Entring this Church at the great Door, there is the Supper of our Lord with the Apostles; by Paris Bordone. The Church of S. Severo Preti. Where you see a Square with the Crucifixion of our Lord, joining to the Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar, by the hand of Tin∣toret. The Church of S. Maria Formosa Preti. The great Altar-piece represents the Assum∣ption of the Blessed Virgin, the work of Tinto∣ret. On the left hand beside the great Altar, and near to the Door, there is a little Chapell, where you see a Picture divided into five parts, a mar∣vellous work of old Palma. The Church of S. Leone called S. Lio Preti. The first Picture as you enter at the great Door, on your left hand, with S. James the Apostle, is by the hand of Titian.
The Church of Santa Maria Preti. Entring at the great Door, you see on your left hand a little Picture with S. Daniel in the Lions denn, with an Angel, a Prophet, and a S. Andrew, by the hand of Paris Bordone. The Nunns Church of Celestia. In the Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar▪ there is an admirable Picture of two ho∣ly Bishops, and S. Dominico, the work of Paris Bordone. The Church of S. Francisco della Vigne, Padre Zoccolanti. Entring the Church at the great Door, in the fourth Chapell on your right hand, there is a Picture with the Resurrection of Christ, by Paulo Veronese. On the other side of the said Church, in the fifth Chapel there is a Picture, by Paulo, with a Madonna and her Son, S. John, S. Joseph, S. Ka∣therine, and S. Anthony the Abbot. Let us enter into the Sacristie of the said Church, and the first Altar as you enter on your right hand, is by Paulo.
The Church of S. John è Paulo, Padre Dominicani. At your entrance at the great Door on your left hand there is a large Square of S. Peter Martyr, by divine Titian. After followes, underneath the foot of the Crucifix, in the middle of the Church, a little Oblong, containing three Histories, viz. Cain murthering his Brother Abel. The Serpent exalted by Moses. The third is Abraham offering Isaac. The Chapell of Rosario, in the above said Church. On that Front which is over against the Al∣tar of our Lady, there is to be seen a large Square in the middle between two Windows, which demonstrates the Crucifixion of our Lord, and on the Roof you see an Oval, on each side of the Oval, is an Oblong, by the hand of Tin∣toret. The School of S. Mark. Here are four great Squares, they may truly be called four wonders in painting; but in par∣ticular that which is at the head of the School,
with S. Mark flying through the Sky; all the four represent the Miracles of the abovesaid Saint, the work of furious Tintoret. The Albergo of the said School. As you enter, the first Square on your left hand is by Giorgone. Then follows a second, which represents old Barcarole, as he presents the Ring given by S. Mark to the Screne Prince. A singular work of Paris Bordone. The Church of the Hospitall of the Mendicanti. On your left hand as you enter the great Door, at the second Altar there is a Picture of S. Elena worshipping the found Cross, with other Figures, the work of Guercin da Cento.
Sestier di Canall Reggio. The Church of S. Maria nova Preti. ENtring this Church by the great Door, the first Picture on the left hand with S. Girolamo in the Wilderness, is the work of Ti∣tian. The Church of S. Apostoli Preti. The Square on the right hand of the great Altar, where it rains Manna in the Desert, is by Paulo Veronese. The Church of the Fathers Jesuites. As you enter at the great Door, at the se∣cond Altar on the right hand is a Piece of the Martyrdome of S. Lorens; a rare thing of Ti∣tian. At the farther Altar is a Christopher, by old Palma. Afterwards is the great Altar-piece, with the Assumption of the Madonna, so delicate a piece,
that I doubt not to say, it is absolutely the most superb work that ever Tintoret painted. And on the right hand of the said Altar, there is a Square of S. Mary visited by S. Eli∣zabeth, the work of Andrea Sciavone. And on the other side of the Altar, there is the Crucifixion of our Lord, painted in the wonted manner of Tintoret. In a Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar, there is a most beautifull Picture of the Naetivity of our Lord, by Paulo Veronese. The Nunns Church of S. Catherine. As you enter this Church by the great Door, the first Altar on your right hand does demon∣strate to you the Angel Raphael with Tobias: some say this piece was done by a Scholar of Titian's, others say by Titian's own hand, but most say 'tis the Masters hand, and so I am apt to believe. Afterwards at the high Altar, you see a Piece of the Espousall of this Saint with the Child Jesus, and it is a really divine work of the for ever famous Paulo Veronese. Around this Altar there are six Squares con∣taining the Life of S. Katherine, done by Tinto∣ret when he was a young man.
The Church of Santa Sophia Preti. Over the great Door, there is a little Piece of a Supper of our Saviour with the Apostles, by Paulo Veronese. The Church of S. Felice Preti. Entring this Church at the great Door, you see a Piece at the second Altar on the left hand, by Tintoret. And on the right side of the great Altar there are two Squares one above another; one is our Lord in the Garden. The other, The Supper with the Apostles, both by Tintoret. Going a little below the aforesaid Altar, there is plainly to be seen upon the first Altar on the left hand an armed Saint, with a Or face after the life. Ritratto. The Church of the Madonna del Orto Frati. As you enter at the great Door, you see on your left hand, the first Altar-piece, consisting of five Saints, viz. S. Lorenz, S. Gregory, S. Dominico, the Blessed Lorenzo, Justiniano, and S. Elena; a rare work of old Palma.
Then follows the fourth Chapell, with a most beautiful Picture, where you find S. Agnese, and many other Saints, with Angels in the Sky, by Tintoret. A little forward at the sixth Altar, there is a Piece of the B. Lorenzo, Giustiniano, S. John Baptist, S. Francis, and others, a work greatly worthy of the praise of Pordenon. On each side of the high Altar there is a ve∣ry large Square. That on the right hand represents the Hebrews worshipping the Golden Calf. And that on the left hand is the Ʋniversal Judgement. Above the Altar there are four Figures in Chi∣aro Scuro. Then are the Doors of the Organ painted on the outside with the Purification of the Blessed Vir∣gin. And within on the right hand is S. Peter admiring the Cross in the Sky. On the other hand is the Beheading of S. Christopher, all these are the works of great Tintoret, and infinitely admirable. The School of Merchants, near to Ma∣donna del Orto. In a low Room there is a Picture with S. Christopher and Mary in the Sky, with Angels round about them, by Tintoret. Above upon the Cieling, there is another Pi∣cture of the Nativity of S. Mary, by Tintoret.
Afterwards is seen an Annunciation, with many pieces of Architecture, on each side is a Figure in Chiaro Scuro, rare things, and worthy of Paulo Veronese. The Church of S. Marcelliano Preti. The first Picture on your left hand as you enter at the great Door, with an Angel and To∣bias, as also an holy Hermit, and a Dog, is the work of famous Titian. The great Altar-piece with three Saints, viz. S. Marcelliano in the middle between S. Peter and S. Paul, is by Tintoret. The Church of the Fathers Serviti. You see here the Organ, by the hand of Tin∣toret, on the inside is the Annunciation, on the outside is an holy Bishop and a Prophet. Below these is Cain Murthering his Brother Abel, and the Father Eternal speaking unto Cain. The Church of Magdalena Preti. On the left hand of the great Altar, there is a S. Mary Magdalen accompanied with many other Figures, by Tintoret. Afterwards upon the outside of the Doors of the Organ, there is a Christ as he appears to S.
Mary Magdalen after the Resurrection, and with∣in is an Annunciation. On the top of the said Organ you see the Coming of the Wise men, in small, by Tintoret. The Church of S. Emagora è Fortunato, called S. Marcuola Preti. Entring at the great Door, on the right hand under a little window you see a square with the Child Jesus, and on each side is S. Andrew and S. Katherine, by Titian. Then follows the second Altar with the Pi∣cture of S. Elena, by Tintoret. And on the left hand of the great Altar is a Supper, by Tintoret. The Church of S. Giobbe Frati Zocco∣lanti. As you enter at the great Door, the Piece of the fourth Altar on your right hand, does de∣monstrate three Saints and an Angel, viz. S. An∣drew, S. Peter, and S. Nicholas, it is a most beauti∣ful work of Paris Bordone, though a more infe∣riour hand has the credit of it. The Church of S. Jeremia Preti. All the Organ, excepting the little Doors, is painted in Chiaro Scuro, together with the four
corners; within there are the four Evangelists, a work of great esteem, by the hand of Andrea Sciavone. The Nuns Church of S. Girolamo. The first Picture on your left hand as you enter the great Door, is the work of Tintoret. Quartier della Croce. The Nuns Church of the Cross Franciscans. LEt us enter at the great Door, and we shall find the first Altar on the right hand, with a dead Christ and an Angel which supports him, as also a S Katherine, and a Pope; by the hand of Tintoret.
The Nuns Church of S. Andrew. That Altar-piece on the right hand of the great Altar with S. Augustine clothed in a white Garment, likewise two Boys, one of them hold∣ing his Pastoral Staff, the other his Mytre, is one of the best works of Paris Bordone. At the other Altar on the left hand of the great Altar there is S. Girolamo in the Hermi∣tage, by the hand of Paulo Veronese. The Church of S. Simeon Grande Preti. As you enter at the great Door on the right hand, over a Bench, there is a Supper of our Lord with the Apostles, by Tintoret. The Church of S. Giacomo dall Ovio Preti. The Picture of the Chapel of S. Lorens, is by Paulo Veronese; in it you find this Saint, with S. Girolamo, and S. Nicholas, and a little Boy in the Sky. Below the said Picture there is an oblong Picture with the Martyrdom of the aforesaid Saint, a most graceful work of Paulo. And near to a side Door of the said Church, on the left hand of the great Altar, you see upon the Roof an Ovall with Faith, Hope, and Cha∣rity,
and many Angels. And the four Round with four Doctors, are rarely done after the usu∣all manner of Paulo Veronese. The Church of S. Maria, Mater Domini Preti. Being entred the great Door, and past the se∣cond Altar on the left hand, you see a beautiful small Piece of a Supper, by old Palma. And over a side Door of the Church there is a most famous Square of the Invention of the Cross, by the hand of Tintoret. The Church of S. Cassiano, called S. Cassiano Preti. Let us enter at the great Door, and we shall find on the right hand of the first Altar, a Pi∣cture with the Saints, Girolamo, S. Mark, S. Pe∣ter, and S. Paul, a marvellous work, by the hand of old Palma. The great Chapell is all by Tintoret. One Picture represnts the Redeemer risen from the dead, and S. Cassiano preaching unto many Nations. On the right hand is Christ Crucified, and on the left is our Lord when he delivers the holy Fathers out of Hell, beautiful pieces. There are also three little Histories, upon
the top of the Organ, concerning the life of Cassiano, by Tintoret. Quartier di Dorso Durro. The Church of S. Pantaleon Preti. ON the left hand of the Organ there is a large Square with S. Bernard curing ma∣ny sick of the Plague; a rare work of Paulo Veronese. Another Picture of S. Bernard, is by Paulo Ve∣ronese. The great Altar-piece with S. Pantaleon curing a Sick man, and a Priest, by Paulo Veronese. The Church of the Carmine Frati. On the top of the Organ you see two oblong Pieces, in one is the Annunciation, the other is the Nativity of Christ, by the hand of Andrea Schiavone. In like manner upon the top of the little Quire, right against the aforesaid Organ, you see two other oblong pieces, one is the coming
of the Magi; the other is the Circumcision of our Lord, by the hand of the aforesaid Schia∣vone. There is another Picture of the Circumcision of our Lord, by the hand of Tintoret. The Nuns Church of S. Maria Maggiore. The great Altar-piece represents the Assum∣ption of the B. Virgin, with the Apostles, by the hand of Paulo Veronese: a singular thing. Afterwards on the sides of the aforesaid Al∣tar there are three great Squares. One represents when the Priest scourges Joa∣chin out of the Temple for having no offspring. In another is the Espousal of the B. Virgin with Joseph, In the third is the Visitation of the three Ma∣gi; all three by the hand of bold Tintoret. In a Chapell on the left hand of the great Altar you see the Picture with the famous S. John Baptist, by Titian. Entring this Church at the great Door, and being past the first Altar on the right hand, there is a Square which represents the Ark of Noah, by the hand of Giacomo Bassano: it contains all the several kinds of living Creatures and is rec∣koned to be one of the finest Pictures in the world. After this there are four Squares placed on four Pillars of the Church; they signifie the four Seasons of the Year, by the hand of the same Bassano.
There are also two Squares on the sides of that Door which opens to the Canalle. One represents the Adultress before Christ. In the other is the Centurion prostrated before the Redeemer. And in a lesser Square upon a Pillar, there is Christ in the Garden upheld by an Angel, they are all three by Paulo Veronese. In the Sacristie there is an Ecce Homo, by Paris Bordone. The Nuns Church of Terrese. The Round which is in the middle of the Roof, with the Madonna in the Sky and Angels round about, with three Saints below, and the four compartements adjoyning the abovesaid Round, containing the four Evangelists; all this is a singular good work of Andrea Schiavone. The Church of S. Nicholas Preti. Upon the Roof over the great Altar, there is a Round, where S. Nicholas is carried into Heaven by the Angels, with the Picture of Faith, and a multitude of Angels and Cherubins, by the hand of Paulo Veronese. Entring this Church at the great Door, on the left hand over a side Door of the Church, upon the Roof there is a Round, and a lesser Round on each side of the great one. In the great one is the Eternal Father with many Angels. In
one of the lesser is the B. Virgin, in the other is the Angel Annunciating, with other four Rounds containing the four Evangelists. The Church of S. Sebastian. Joining to the little Door which is not far from the great one, you see the Picture of S. Nicholas, a Bishop, and an Angel, the work of Titian. At the farthest Altar on the same side you see a Picture with Christ upon the Cross, by Paulo Veronese. On the other side of the Church there is a Picture of St. John Baptizing of Christ, by Paulo. Then follows another Picture of Christ when he appeared to the two Disciples going into Emaus, by Andrea Schiavone. The Walls of the Church are all painted in Fresco with Pillars, Statues, and other ornaments of Architecture, by Paulo Veronese. All the great Chapell is by the same Paulo, the Cuppola and the Tribunal are painted in Fresco. The great Altar-piece represents the B. Virgin with her Son, and Angels in the Sky; and below are the Saints Sebastian, S. Katherine, S. John Baptist, S. Francis, and S. Peter. The great Square on the right hand of the great Altar represents S. Mark and S. Marcellin going with S. Sebastian (who is in Armour) and comforting him to his Martydom.
In another Square on the left hand you see the above-named Saint bound to a Machine of wood, coming to be Martyred, and the false Priests per∣swading him to worship their Idols, with many standers by: all the aforesaid works are the fairest that ever were done by the most noble hand of Paulo Veronese. Afterwards are the Doors of the Organ, on the outside is painted the Circumcision of our Lord, and within is Christ curing one sick of the Palsie, works so fair that they stand in no need of commendation. Upon the top of the Organ you may observe a little Square with the Nativity of Christ, one as well as the other are most graceful pieces of great Paulo. Let us cast our eyes upon the Roof, which is all painted by the aforesaid Paulo. The first Square demonstrates Queen Esther going into the presence of King Ahasuerus, ac∣companied with many Waiting-maids. In the middle Square is the King Ahasuerus frowning on Queen Esther. In the third you see Mordecai conducted to Haman, by the order of the King. As you goe into the Sacristie on the left hand over the Door of a little Chapell you may see a little Square with S. Girolamo in the Hermitage. In the Sacristie, the middle partition of the Coronation of the B. Virgin, and the four other partitions of the four Evangelists, one as well as the other are of Paulo. There is also another Square of the Chastising of the Serpents, by Tintoret.
Let us goe into the Quire, and right against the Door we shall see a Square, which represents S. Sebastian before the god Cletiano, confessing himself to be a Christian. In front of this Square there is painted over the Door, the same Saint beaten with Clubs, a work in Fresco. Above these Squares there are the four Evan∣gelists, two on either side in Fresco, all these are of Paulo Veronese. In the Refectory there is the great Feast of Christ in the House of the Pharisee's, 'tis enough, that it is of Paulo Veronese. The Nuns Church of All-Saints. The great Altar-piece represents Paradise; and on a little Door of the Tabernacle of the said Altar there is a Christ rising again. Afterwards are the Doors of the Organ, on the outside of which you see the most noble Vi∣sitation of the Magi; and within are four Doctors of the Church, with Angels playing upon vari∣ety of Instruments. On the Roof is the Father Eternal, and round about the top of it are divers little Figures, and Histories in Chiaro Scuro, all of them by the most noble hand of Paulo Veronese.
The Church of S. Gervaso & Protaso, called S. Trovaso Preti. The Picture of the Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar, contains S. Anthony the Abbot tempted by Devils, with our Sa∣viour in the Sky succouring the Abbot, the work of Tintoret. Then follows the other Chapell, on the right hand of it you see the Supper of our Lord with the Apostles, and on the left our Saviour wa∣shing the feet of the Apostles, both of them by Tintoret. The Church of the Fathers Dominicans, formerly the Jesuites. Entring at the great Door, at the third Altar on your right hand you may observe a Picture of our Lord upon the Cross, and both the Maries, by the hand of Tintoret. And upon the Doors of the Organ there is painted Pope Ʋrban the fifth giving of habits to the Fathers Jesuites, by the hand of Ti∣tian.
The Church of the Hospital of the Incurabili. In which is seen a Picture with S. Ʋrsula accompanied with her Virgins, and an Holy Bishop, with an Angel in the Sky, the work of Tintoret. And over a side Door of the Church you may observe a little Square of our Saviour car∣rying the Cross, and an Executioner drawing him along, by the hand of Giorgone. The Nuns Church of Spirito Santo. As you enter on your left hand there is a Round of the Image of the B. Virgin, and two little Angels holding a Crown, with S. Girolamo and S. Sebastian in the Clouds, and below is S. Evangelist and S. Augustine. There is also a Picture of the Visitation of the Magi, both of them are by Tintoret. The Nuns Church of the Humiltá. Entring the great Door, at the second Altar on your right hand you will admire a Picture o S. Peter, and S. Paul, a most fair work of Gi∣como Bassano. Upon the Arch of this Chapell you may ob∣serve
a Square of Christ taken from the Cross, with the two Marys, a rare work of Tintoret. At the High Altar on the upper part of the Tabernacle there is a Nativity of our Lord, by Giacomo Bassano. A little lower upon the frontispiece is a Fa∣ther Eternal, by Paulo Veronese. And a little lower in the third piece there are two Angels, by Paulo. On the Portall is the Redeemer with the Globe in his hand, and several Cherubins, by Paulo. On each side of the abovesaid Portall there is two little Squares. In one there is S. John preaching in the Desert; in the other is the Centurion before Christ, both by Paulo. Afterwards is the Roof done likewise by Paulo, with three great Histories, and many pieces in Chiaro Scuro. The first Square over the Quire represents the B. Virgin Annunciated by the Angel. And in an Ovall in the middle, there is Mary Ascending into Heaven, with the Apostles below. Then follows the third, which is the Na∣tivity of Christ; all these are marvellous good pieces. The Church of the Salute. There is in this Church two Pictures by the hand of great Titian. In one you will admire the Coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.
In the other is S. Mark sitting on high, and below are the Saints Sebastian, S. Rocco, S. Cos∣mo, and S. Damiano. Upon the Roof over the Quire you see eight Heads by Titian, in a round form. Let us go into the Sacristie and cast our eyes upon the Roof, and we shall see three Squares by Titian. In the first is David cutting off the Head of Goliab. In the second is the Sacrifice of Abraham and Isaae. In the third is Cain slaying his Brother Abel. All singular works of the Author. And below is a great Square of the Marriage in Cana in Galilee, by furious Tintoret. The Church of the Most holy Trinity, near to the Saluté. There are thirteen Squares of Tintores, viz. The Eternall Father creating the World. The Forming of Adam and Eve. The Tempting of Adam. Cane slaying Abel. The four Evangelists, in four Squares. Two Apostles, in two Squares. The Annunciation in two Squres. In the Sacristie there is a little Square of the Most Holy Trinity. All singular works of the same Author.
The School of Charity. Here is a very large Square of the Blessed Vir∣gin ascending the Stairs of the Temple, with many other Figures, a divine work of great Titian.
The ISLANDS Adjacent to VENICE. The Island of Murano. The Church of S. Peter Martyr, Fathers Dominicans. ENtring this Church, on your left hand you see a Square near unto the Picture of Rosa∣rio, where you find A Victory against the Turks, with the Blessed Virgin in the Sky, and other Saints, by the hand of Paulo Veronese.
The Nuns Church of the Madonna de gli Angeli. BElow the Organ there is an Ovall with four Angels singing; a most fair work of Paulo Veronese. There is also a Square with S. Girolamo, by Paulo Veronese. After that is the great Altar-piece, where you find the Annunciation, a superb work of Pordenon. The Church of the Des Messe. In which are to be seen three Squares, by Tintoret. In one is The coming of the Magi. In another is the Presentation at the Temple. The third is the Adultery. The Nuns Church of S. James. Here are seen three Pictures by Paulo Vero∣nese. That of the great Altar represents divers Saints, with a most beautiful Glory of Angels. The second on the right hand of the great Altar represents the Visitation of S. Elizbeth. That on the left hand demonstrates Christs resurrection.
The Organ is rarely painted, by Paulo Ve∣ronese. The Church of S. John. The great Altar-piece represents S. John Bap∣tizing of Christ, the work of Tintoret. Before we part from Murano let us go see the Palace of the Trevisano, and we shall see some of the beautifullest works that ever were painted by the singular pencil of Paulo Veronese. The Island of Mazorbo. The Nuns Church of S. Katherine. THe great Altar-piece is a singular work of Paulo Veronese.
The Island of Burano. The Nuns Church of S. Mauro. THe great Altar-piece of this Church, is the work of Paulo Veronese. The Island of Torcello. The Nuns Church of S. Anthony. THere are such beautiful pieces in this Church, that they are worth coming a long journey to see, and they are of the most noble pencil of Paulo Veronese. The great Altar-piece with the two Prophets on the Angels of the said Altar, are by the a∣foresaid Author. On the left side of the great Altar, and on the
sides of the Organ you see ten Squares, which represent the life of S. Christina, both inside and outside of the said Organ is adorned with precious Histories, by the hand of the same Paulo. Over the Altar of Christ there are two Figures in Chiaro Scuro, by the same hand. The Island of S. Elena. The Church. IN the Church here you will admire that most superb piece at the great Altar, where is painted the coming of the Magi, by the hand of Palma.
The Island of S. Giorgio Maggiore. The Church. ENtring the Church at the great Door, the first Picture on the right hand demonstrates the Nativity of Christ, by Giacomo Bassano. Then follows a Picture of the Martyrs, by the hand of Tintoret. After this is a Picture on the right side of the Church, where you find the Most holy Trinity crowning the Blessed Virgin, and below are se∣veral Saints, by Tintoret. There is in like manner on the left side of the Church, right against to that aforesaid, with the Martyrdom of S. Stephen by Tintoret. Then follows on the same side, the Resur∣rection of Christ, with the Pictures of divers Se∣nators, by Tintoret. Now follow the two great Squares which are on the sides of the great Altar, one of which represents the Supper of our Lord with the Apostles, in the other is Manna falling in the Desert, by the same Tintoret. After this you go into the Chapell of the De∣fonti, where you see a Picture of Christ taken from the Cross, by the aforesaid Author.
Afterwards in the Refectory is that most mar∣vellous and large Square which represents the Marriage of Cana in Galilee; this, if I may so say, is a wonder of the World, and whoso∣ever comes to Venice and departs without a sight of this Picture, may by said to have seen nothing, and it is done by the most excellent and noble hand of Paulo Veronese. The Island of the Giudecha. The Church of the Redentore. IN this Church you see two Pictures of Tin∣toret. One demonstrates the Ascension of our Lord with the Apostles. The other is the Scourging of Christ at a Pil∣lar. Afterwards as you enter the Monastery, you see a Square over the Oratory with Christ sitting, with the Apostles kneeling, and other Saints, by the aforesaid Tintoret.
The Refectory of S. James, Fathers Serviti. The Roof of this is painted by Paulo Vero∣nese divided into three Partitions. One demonstrates the Annunciation. That in the middle, the Assumption of the B. Virgin, with the Father Eternal in the Cry∣stalline Heaven surrounded with Legions of An∣gels. The third is the Visitation of S. Elizabeth, and are works really beautiful. The Nuns Church of S. Cosmo and S. Damiano. As you enter, you see on your left hand the B. Virgin in the Sky, and the two Saints, S. Ce∣cilia, S. Theodoro, and a S. Marina. In a Chapell on the right hand of the great Altar there is another Picture with Christ on the Cross, and the Maries, both one and the other are by Tintoret.
The City of Treviso. The Domo. HEre you see the Histories of the Nativity, and Resurrection of Christ, singular works of Paris Bordone. There is another rare Picture of the Annun∣ciation, by the hand of Titian. The Church of S. Francis. Here you may observe a Picture, by Paris Bordone. The Church of S. Girolamo. Where you admire another Picture, by the aforesaid Paris Bordone. The Church of All-Saints. There are also divers works of the abovesaid Master. As likewise one Piece of Giacomo Bassano.
The Church of S. Paul. Here in like manner are singular works, and worthy of all admiration, by the same Paris Bordone. The Church of S. Magdalen. The great Altar-piece represents Christ as he appeared to Mary Magdalen, the work of Paulo Veronese. The Church of S. Augustine. Here is an admirable Picture of S. Giachino, S. Anne, S. James, and S. George, the work of Paulo Veronese. In the Refertory of the Nunnery there is a a Square which demonstrates the Marriage of Cana in Galilee, by the hand of the aforesaid Paulo Veronese. The Mountaine of Piety in the aforesaid City. Here they preserve a Christ with a little An∣gel, a most singular work, by the hand of Gi∣ergone.
The Villa of Zerman Trevisano. The Domo. HEre you will find a most beautiful Picture of old Palma. Pordenon. The Castle of Friuli. The Domo. HEre you see the Organ painted by its own Countrey-man, Pordenone. You also see works in Fresco upon the Wall, by the same Author, as there is likewise in other places, all singular works.
The City of Ʋdine. The Domo. HEre yon will admire some beautiful Histories upon the ledge of the Organ by the hand of Pordenone. The Church of S. Peter Martyr. In which you way observe a famous Picture of the Annunciation, by Pordenone. The City of Belluno. HEre are preserved two very fair Pieces, by Paris Bordone. Compagnia del Croce. Here you will find two singular Squares, by Tintoret.
THE TERRITORY OF CONEGLIANO. Conegliano. The Church of the Reformati. HEre is a very fair Picture, by old Pal∣ma.
The Villa of Marens. In the same Territory. HEre you will see a faire Picture, by the hand of Titian. The Villa of Fontanelle. HEre is an admirable Picture, by the hand of Pordenone. The Castle of S. Salvatore. The Jurisdiction of the Conti Colalto. HEre is a Church all painted by the hand of Pordenone.
And all the Roofs of the said Conti are painted by Andrea Schiavone. Below the said Castle. The Church of S. John. THere are two Pictures, by Pordenone. One of the Virgin fleeing into Egypt. The other of divers Saints. And under them is the Pi∣cture of Piety. Further below the said Castle. The Villa of Sasigano. HEre is preserved a Picture, by the hand of Pordenone.
Another Castle of the Colalti. IN this Castle you see a great Square, by Por∣denone. The City of Ceneda. The Domo. THere is a Picture, by Titian, of the B. Virgin, S. Rocco, and S. Sebastian. Upon the Organ of this Church is represen∣ted the life of San. Titian, the work of Paris Bordone. In the Piazza. In this same there is a House side painted by Pordenone.
Villa di Castello below Ceneda. The Church. HEre are three Niches at the great Altar, in the middle you will admire the B. Virgin, and a Saint on each side, by the hand of Titian, a singular work. The Castle of Saravall. The Domo. THe great Altar-piece with the B. Virgin, and a Glory of Angels, and below are two Saints, with a Landskip, and within it you find a Ship, it is a most precious thing, but by an un∣certain Author.
The Church of the Capuchines. Here they preserve a Square of a Madonna, a stupendious work of Guido Reno. Villa di Mazer in Trevisano, near to Asolo. IN the said Villa there is a Palace all painted with divers operations of the most excel∣lent hand of Paulo Veronese, singular works of the Author. Asolo in Trevisano. The Church of the Reformati. HEre you see a Square with the Conception of the Blessed Virgin, by Giacomo Bassano.
The Domo. In which you see an Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, with numbers of Angels, and two Saints, by Giacomo Bassano. Castel Franco. HEre is an admirable Picture of the Blessed Virgin with her Son, the work of Giorgone. There are likewise divers Palaces near ad∣jacent, where you will find works of the same Giorgone, as also of Paulo Veronese. The Castle of Bassano. The high Church of the Castle. IN this Church you will admire the marvel∣lous Nativity of the Child Jesus, a work to
be admired by every one, and one of the fairest that ever was painted, by Giacomo Bassano. In the Town-house, as also in the Churches, and upon the Houses of particular persons, there are works of divers sorts, by the said Giacomo Bassano. Being this was the Countrey of this fa∣mous man, I look upon it as superfluous to no∣minate place after place where paintings are, because of the great quantities of them, and very little of other Masters. Cittadella. The Parochial Church. THe great Altar-piece is by Giacomo Bassano, and on the sides of the Chapel there is our Lord upon Mount Tabor, the work of the same Giacomo.
The Street which leads from Venice to Padua, viz. upon the bank of the River Brenta. Upon this Road you see many superb Pala∣ces, painted both within aud without, with va∣rious operatious, viz. Histories, Freezes, Archi∣tecture, Garlands of all sorts, stupendious works, by the most singular and excellent hand of Paulo Veronese. The City of Padua. The Church of S. Justina. THe great Altar-piece is a most singular work of noble Paulo Veronese, the which repre∣sents the Martyrdome of this Saint, and is most excellently imbellished by the hand of Augustino Carache.
The School of the said Saint. In which you will admire the Saint, mar∣vellously beautiful, 'tis enough that they are done by the incomparable pencil of great Ti∣tian. The Church of the Hermits. In the Sacristie of this Church they preserve a S. John Baptist preaching, by the hand of the most noble Guido Reno. The Church of S. Maria in Vanzo. Here stands a Picture of the Dead Redeemer, the work of Giacomo Bassano. Montagnana near to Este. The Domo. HEre you will see the great Altar-piece, which represents the Transfiguration of
Christ upon Mount Tabor, a singular work of Paulo Veronese. The City of Vicenza. The Church of S. Rocco. THe great Altar-piece is a most fair work of Giacomo Bassano. The Church of S. Leuterio. In like manner you see the great Altar-piece, by the same Bassano. The Church of S. Croce. Where there is another Picture by the afore∣said Giacomo. Ʋnder the publick House of the Piazza. There is an History of Noah with his Daugh∣ters, by Paris Bordone.
The Refectory of Madonna di Monte, Frati. In this you see a great Square which repre∣sents a Feast, in which is the Redeemer, a most fair work of the most excellent hand of Paulo Veronese. All that are curious omit not the seeing of this piece. The Church of the Fathers Teatini. Here you may observe in a Chapell a most fair piece, by old Palma. The Church of S. Corona, Fathers Dominicans. The Altar-piece here with the three Magi, is by Paulo Veronese. There are also in this same City several works upon the Walls in Fresco, by Pordenone.
The City of Verona. The Domo. HEre you may observe a Picture of the As∣sumption of the B. Virgin, the work of great Titian. The Church of S. George. In this Church you see two Pictures, of which I may say nothing can exceed them, by the most noble pencil of Paulo Veronese. The Church called La Vittoria. In the Sacristie of this Church you must ob∣serve a Square of no great size, but extraordi∣nary fine, by the aforesaid Paulo.
PAVLO: Veronese Nat. Ao 1490 portrait of Paulo Veronese
The City of Brescia. The Church of S. Afra. HEre is kept a most beautifull Standard, by Paulo Veronese. There is also a Square of the Transfiguration of our Lord, a singular work of great Tintoret. The Church of S. Nazaro. Here are several fair Pictures by Titian. Sitinalta in the Territory of Bergamasco. The Parochial Church. IN this Church you see two singular Pictures, by old Palma, that Country-man.
The City of Cremona. HEre is a Picture of S. Sehastian and two Angels, by the hand of Giorgone. The City of Genoua. The Church of S. Francis. HEre is to be seen a Square with S. John, Bap∣tizing Christ, by the hand of Tintoret.
The STATE OF FLORENCE. The City of Florence. S. Mark, Fathers Dominicans. HEre are three Pictures by the hand of Fra Bartolomeo. The Church of S. Croce. Here is a Picture representing the Lady of Piety, a singular work of Civoli.
In the Church-yard of the Nuntiata. There are divers works in Fresco, by Andrea del Sarto. In the Cloyster, over a Door, you see a fa∣mous Piece, called the Madonna del Saccho, by the abovesaid Andrea. The Confraternity of S. John Baptist. In the Cloyster upon the Wall there are the Histories of the life of this Saint, by the same Andrea. The Gallery of the Great Duke. In which you see a Square with the History of the Fall of Phaëton, by the hand of Leonardo da Vinci. There is drawn a Ritratto of Pope Leo the X. by the hand of great Raphael. There is also a little Square of a Madonna, the work of the abovesaid Raphael. Then follow divers Squares of Andrea del Sarto, particularly in the more private Cham∣bers there are most beautiful works, not omit∣ting a sight of that great Square of the Assumption of the B. Virgin, and the Apostles. Over a Door of the said Chambers there is a
PIETRO d': Cortona Nat Ao 1593 portrait of Pietro d'Cortona
very large Square which expresses a Dispute a∣mongst several Saints; a singular work of the said Andrea. There are likewise two Squares of Naked Women, by great Titian. Then follow several Pieces, of Giacomo Bassano. You also see a Square with little Figures of the B. Virgin, with the Child Jesus in her arms, and a Saint on each side, the work of Corregio. You see another Square of Naked Women, by Hannibal Carache. The Palace of Pitti, being the habitation of the Great Duke. Where are seen four most stately Chambers, excellently painted with variety of Histories, by Pietro da Cortona.
The STATE OF PARMA. The City of Parma. The Church of the Nuntiatata. IN the Quire of the said Church you see a Picture with a Madonna and her Son, and four Saints by her side, by the hand of Parmeg∣giano, his first manner of painting. In the Sacristie of the said Covent, there is a Square of S. John Baptizing Christ, by Parmeggi∣ano, his first manner.
Santa Cecilia. As you enter this Church, on your right hand there is a Picture with a Madonna on high with her Son, on each side a Saint, by the hand of Lanfranco, a rare work. The Church of the Capuchines. Entring this Church, on your left hand you see a Square with the Blessed Felice holding the Child Jesus on his shoulders, with the B. Virgin in a posture of receiving them, and a Glory of Boys, the work of Guercin da Cento. Right against this you see another great Pi∣cture, with Christ on the Cross, by his side is a S. Katherine, and the Ritratto of a Capuchine, with many Angels lamenting, a most beautiful work of Guercin da Cento. In a Chapell you see a S. Anthony of Padua, by Tadeo Zuccharo. At the high Altar is a great Piece, the top whereof is half round, with a dead Christ in the lap of the B. Virgin half dead, upheld by Angels, with S. Francis pointing at our dead Lord, as also a S. Magdalen, and S. Chiara, with a Glory of Angels carrying the Cross, painted by the most excellent hand of Hannibal Carache. On the side of the said Altar there is a S. Lewis King of France, and a S. Chiara, the work of the said Hannibal.
Within the Covent, over a Door there is a Madonna with the Child, and a little S. John, by the same Hannibal. The Church of All Saints. At the High Altar there is a Square which represents our Saviour sitting and giving benedicti∣on, with many Saints on his right hand, and a S. Stephen praying, with other Pictures of holy Vir∣gins, by the hand of Lanfranco. The Church of the Fathers Jesuites. Over a place of Confession you see a Square with our Saviour bound to the Pillar with two Angels lamenting, and many little Angels, by the hand of Tadeo Zucchro. The great Altar-piece is a most singular work of Paulo Veronese. On the two Pedestals of the said Altar there are two Heads, with the B. Virgin, and the An∣gel, the work of Tadeo Zuccharo. The Church of S. Sepulchre. As you enter at the great Door in the first Chapell on your left hand you will admire a Square, the top of it is half round; where is a Madonna and the Child Christ, and S. Joseph, a divine work, after the usual manner of great Correggio.
At the Madonna della Scala, over the Door of S. Michael. There is a Madonna with her Son in her arms, by the hand of the aforesaid Correggio. The Church of the Fathers Serviti. There is a Square upon which is a Madonna with the Child in her lap, and many Angels, by the hand of Parmeggianino. At the Battesimo. There is a Square with S. Ottavio, and a Ma∣donna, the work of Lanfranco. The Nuns Church of S. Paul. Entring at the great Door, at the second Chapell, there is a Square with the B. Virgin and her Son in her lap, with S. Cecilia, S. Mar∣garet, and a little S. John shewing our Lord, a most fair work of Augustine Carache. At the great Altar there is a little Square, upon which is Our Lord on the Judgement seat, and on the right hand of the Square is S. Paul at his feet, and S. Katherine kneeling, the work of divine Raphael.
In the said Covent there is a Chamber pain∣ted in Fresco, with many Figures, by the hand of Correggio, a most fair work. The Church of S. Anthony. As you enter at the great Door in a Chapell on your right hand is seen a Square with a Madonna, and her Son sitting reading, and on the right hand of this Square is a S. Girolamo kissing their feet. On the other side of it is a S. Mary Mag∣dalen kissing our Saviours feet, a singular work of divine Corregio. Then follows at the great Altar a Square with the Madonna and the Child Jesus, giving Benediction to the two Saints, S. Francis, and S. Chiara, by the hand of Guercin da Cento. The Domo. In which you will admire the marvellous Cuppola, with the four Angles, one of the finest works in the world, by the most excellent hand of great Correggio. The Church of Madonna della Steccata. Over the Cross-Isle of the Church there is a Madonna aloft, the rest of the Roof is likewise painted by Parmeggianino. In another Isle of this Church, over against
the Image of the Blessed Virgin is seen a Square with the Adoration of the Magi, the work of Carravagio. On the inside of the Organ you see a David and a Sibyll, with other Figures, by the hand of Parmeggianino: all of them singular works. The Church of S. John, Fathers Benedictines. In this Church you see a Cuppola with its four Angles, and other marvellous works ac∣cording to the usual manner of great Correggio. On the Roof of the Quire are works copied from Correggio, by the hand of Baglioue, but re-toucht by Correggio himself. In the two Cross-Isles there are two Chapels where you will see works of Carravagio in Fresco. Coming out of the Church, at the second Chapell on your left hand, there are two Squraes. On one you will admire a Piety. In the other the Martyrdom of several Benedictine Saints, by the hand of great Correggio. There are the Roofs of some little Chapells painted in Fresco, by Parmeggianino. There is also in this Church over a little Door, as you go into the Covent, a S. John the Evangelist, painted in Fresco, by the hand of Correggio. In the first Cloyster of the Covent of the abovesaid Fathers, there are many paintings in Chiaro Scuro, being Histories of the Old Testa∣ment, by the hand of Carravagio.
The Palace of the Fontana adjoyning the Garden of the Most Serene Duke. In a low Apartement you see a great Square Chamber with the Roof painted in Fresco, by the hand of Augustine Carache, singular works, and the last of the Author. There is a beautifull Inscription in the praise of Picture. In the Apartement of Squares there is in one Chamber a Square with Venus and Adonis, by the hand of Paulo Veronese. There is also a Figure representing a River, by Carrache. Then follow the Heads of the twelve Em∣perours in Chiaro Scuro, by the hand of Titian. There is also another Square of many Animals, by the hand of Bassano. You also see two Figures in two Squares but not finished, by the hand of Augustine Carrache. There is seen likewise a little Square of two Ritrattos fixing a Crab-fish to the ears of a Cat and laughing, the work of Carache. There is another Square, with a Psyche aloft, two little Figures, and the work of Tadeo Zuc∣charo.
Now follows the Famous Chamber of the Ritratti. Over a Door is a Square of a beautiful Boy, by the hand of Hannibal Carache. Then follow two Ritrattos, of a Senator and another composing of Musick, the work of Han∣nibal Carache. Next is a Lady ordering her Locks, or Tres∣ses, by the hand of Titian. Over these is a Ritratto of P. Paul the third when he was Cardinal; the work of excellent Raphael. Next is a Ritratto of Diogenes with a writing pen in his hand; a fine thing. You also see the Ritratto of that Amorous Lady, called L. Antea del Parmeggiano, by his own hand. Beneath these Squares is a Ritratto of Duke Ranuccio the first▪ by the hand of Carache. And beneath this again, there is the Picture of a little Girl with a Turbant on her head, the work of Giulio Romano. Next is the Picture of Cardinal Farnese, by the hand of Carache. Below the said Cardinal is anether Ritratto of Duke Pietro Alovigi, the work of Raphael Ʋrbin. Then follow on the third Front two Ritrattos, by Parmeggianino. In the middle between these two Ritrattos is another Picture of the abovesaid Duke Pietro Alovigi Farnese, by the hand of Titian.
There are two little Ritrattos by the hand of Parmeggianino. Next is the Picture of a Souldier, by the same hand. There is also another Souldier in Armour, by the hand of Giulio Romano. Over the Door you may see the Ritratto of Alexander the Great, the work of Titian. Behind a Window is a Ritratto of a Philoso∣pher, by Andrea del Sarto. Over the Window are two Ritrattos, one of which is the Duke of Ferrara, the works of Titian. In another Piece is the Picture of a Priest, by Parmeggianino. Then follows the Picture of Paul the third, in little, the work of Titian. Next to this follow two Ladies, by the hand of Parmeggianino. On the other side of the Window are three Heads, by Titian. There is also the Picture of Frà Sebastian del Piambo, a Painter, the work of Giorgione. And over this same is a Picture of a Shagged Spaniel, by Parmeggianino. Here follows another Chamber. Where you will admire the marvellous Or Gypsy. Cingarina, by the hand of Correggio. There is also a S. Chiara, with a S. Anthony of Padua, by the hand of Caravagio. You may likewise observe four Squares in
half Figures. In one is S. Mary Magdalen, in the other are S. Peter, S. Girolamo, and Prophet David, by Guercin da Cento. You may observe near unto these, a Madonna with the Child, and a S. Joseph, by Raphael de Ʋrbino. Beneath this is a S. John, by the hand of Le∣onardo da Vinci. Then follows a Magdalen weeping, the work of Hannibal Carache. Here are two Saints by Guercino, viz. S. Peter and S. Girolamo. There is a S. Nicholas de Tolentino, by the hand of Pordenon. Here is also a Head of S. Girolamo by the hand of Carache. Next is a Madonna, with her eyes lifted up towards Heaven, by the hand of Carache. You may observe likewise, a Nativity of our Lord, by Hannibal Carache. Over a Chimney you may observe a Christ carrying the Cross, by the hand of Andrea del Sarto. Then follow two Copies of S. John, Copied from the works of Correggio, by an able Master. Now follows the Chamber of Audience. Where are two Squares hung aloft, of two Figures at length, by the hand of Correggio. There are also two other Squares which re∣present two Elements, viz. The Earth and the Water, by the hand of Bassano.
After these is another Square which represents Lucretia Romano killing her self, by the hand of Parmeggianino. Underneath this Square there is another of the Espousal of S. Katherine, one of the fairest works that ever Correggio painted. On each side of this Piece is a Ritratto, one is the effigies of Martin Luther, done by Ra∣phael, the other by Parmeggianino. Next is a Christ in a half-figure, by the hand of Correggio. On the other front you see a S. Girolamo, a half-figure, by the hand of Leonardo da Vinci. Near unto this is a Madonna with our Savi∣our asleep, and a little S. John, by the hand of Hanniball Carache. Then follow two Ritrattos in little, one is the Picture of Hanniball Carache; the other the Pi∣cture of a Lady; both done by her own hand. Then follows another Chamber, which they call the Chamber of Sivetta. In which you will find a Madonna with her Son at her feet, and a little S. John, by the hand of great Raphael. There is also a Square only in rough draught, by Correggio. You may see the Nativity of our Lord, by the hand of Carrache, a little Square. Here follow three little Madonnas, by Raphael, very fair works.
Then follows a Madonna and her Son, and S. Joseph, by the hand of Augustine Carache, a rare work. There is also a little Square of the head of a Madonna, by the hand of Frederico Zuccharo. Next is a S. Rocco, in little, the work of Par∣meggianino. There is likewise a head of our Saviour, by the hand of Carache. Then follows a half-figure as large as na∣ture, of our Saviour, the work of Andrea del Sarto. There is a head of a Priest after the life, by the hand of Hanniball Carache. Then follows a Madonna with her Son in her armes, with a S. John, S. Joseph, and S. Marga∣ret, the work of Augustine Carache. You may plainly observe a Christ dead carried to his Sepulchre, with many Figures, painted upon Copper, a singular work of Hanniball Ca∣rache. After this follows a little Square with a S. Francis in a Trance, upheld by an Angel, and a Glory of Angels about, a most fair work of Hannibal Carache. Then follows a S. John Baptist, by Hannibal Carache. There is also a Madonna with her Son, by the hand of Parmeggianino. Beneath this Madonna you see a Head of Por∣denon.
Then follows another Chamber, which they call the Chamber of the Amoretti. In which you first observe a Lucretia Roma∣na, and another Square of a Leda with a Swan, both of them by Dossi Ferrarese. Adjoining to these is another Lucretia Roma∣na, by the hand of Parmeggianino. You also see The Passion of our Lord, the work of Hanniball Carache. There follows a little Madonna with her Son in her Armes, and a S. John, by Hanniball Ca∣rache; a very fine piece. Another Square a the Madonna, S. Joseph, and several Angels, is the work of Dossi Fer∣rarese. There is also a S. Paul snatched up into the third Heaven, the work of Lanfranco. As also another little Madonna, by the hand of Guercino da Cento. Then Follows the last Chamber, which they call the Emperour's Chamber. In this Chamber you see three Squares. In the first is represented Judith cutting off the Head of Holofernes. The second does demonstrate Tarquin ravish∣ing Lucretia Romana. The third is Bathsheba discovered by David
out of his Palace window, Painted by a Lady called Artemisia, and very fair works. You may also observe a Venus sleeping, by Hannibal Carache. Over the Chimney there is a Square of St. Augustino, and other Figures, the work of Por∣denon. You likewise observe twelve Emperours finely done, by Hanniball Carache. The great Hall in the middle of the said Apartement. Over the Chimney you will admire an An∣nunciation, the Figure is bigger than the life, a singular work of great Correggio. In this Hall you likewise see the Ritratto of Charles the fifth on Horse-back, a most singular work of Titian. There follows in the same Hall, an Angel flying, with many other Angels which accom∣pany him: the Figures are bigger than the life, by Hannibal Carache. Then follow two other Squares, of S. John Baptist, and S. John the Evangelist, with many Heads of Angels, by the abovesaid Carache. Next are two Squares of S. Benedetto and S. Mauro, with many Angels, by the same Hanniball. All these works are much bigger than the life. On the other side of the Hall there is the Nativity of our Lord, with many Figures, 'tis a Night-piece, and the work of Bassano.
Right over against the Ritratto of Charles the fifth, There is another Ritratto of Duke Alexander Farnese on Horse-back, by the hand of Augustine Carache. In the Dukes Apartement there are Pictures of all sorts, of which I can give no good rela∣tion, because of the great quantity there is of them, it also being difficult to get liberty of seeing them. The City of Piacenza. The Domo. AS you enter at the great Door, on your left hand, you see the Chapell of S. Corrado, by the hand of Lanfranco. Higher up near to the Quire, behind the Al∣tar, and on your right hand as you go into the Sacristie, there is an Altar with S. Alessio, by the same Lanfranco. You also see in this Church a Picture which
represents S. Martin giving part of his Cloake for Alms, the work of Ludovico Carache. The Church of S. Sisto, Fathers Benedictines. The Picture in the Quire which represents the B. Virgin and her Son, in the middle of the Picture, and by her side is S. Barbary, S. Sisto, and two Boys, a marvellous fair work, as it was the usual manner of divine Raphael. S. Nazario, a Parochial Church. Going in at the great Door, you will find on your left hand, at the first Altar near the said Door, a painting which represents S. Mi∣chael the Archangel holding Lucifer in Chains, with these words under-written Johannes Lanfrancus fecit. S. Andrew, a Parochial Church. On your left hand as you enter the great Door, and in the first Chapell near the said Door, you will find an Altar-piece with the Image of the Madonna di Reggio, with S. Fran∣cis de Assisi, and S. Rustico a Martyr; the work of Lanfranco.
The Church of the Fathers Serviti, called Madonna di Piazza. As you enter at the great Door, the third Chapell on your left hand is all painted by Lanfranco. The Altar-piece is S. Luke the Evan∣gelist in a posture of writing, with his head lifted up towards a Troop of Angels. The Chapell about the Altar, where there is a little Cuppola with the B. Virgin in glory, and around the said Virgin are twelve Persons which are believed to be the twelve Patriarchs, from whence she is derived. After this there is another little Cuppola with small windows, and on the Top is the Father Eternal. The Church of Madonna di Campagnia. Where you see several works around the in∣side of the Cuppola, by the hand of Giorgone. In this Church you likewise see two Cha∣pells, one with the History of S. Katherine. In the other is the Picture of Christ: also the Altar of S. Augustine, all the works of Pordenon. Then follows the Tribunal, by the same Au∣thour. In like manner you see a Picture with the Blessed Virgin, S. Peter, and S. Paul, the work of most noble Paulo Veronese.
Corte Maggiore, in the Territory of Piacenza. The Domo. HEre you will see a Picture, and a little Cup∣pola, singlar works of Pordenon. There is also a Picture by Carache.
The STATE OF MODENA. The City of Modena. The Gallery of the most Serene Duke. IN this famous Treasury you see a half-figure, and a Head, by the most ingenious Leonarda da Vinci. In the same you see a Ritratto of Raphael, and two Heads, by Andrea del Sarto. And a great Square of Abraham's Sacrifice, by the same Sarto.
There are ten pieces, or there-abouts, by Giu∣lio Romano. You likewise see a Head, by Giorgone. In this same Gallery there are four Squares by Titian. The first represents the B. Virgin and S. Joseph travelling into Egypt. The second is the Blessed Virgin and her Son, and S. Paul. The third is the Child Jesus in the Manger. Then follows the fourth called the Quadro della Moneta, viz. When the Hebrews shewed money to the Redeemer, singular works of the Author. There are also seen some little pieces of Heads, by Pordenon. Then follows the Picture of our Saviour, with another beautiful Square of old Palma. Next are two great Squares of noble Paulo Veronese. In one you will admire the Marriage of Cana in Galilee. In the other the Coming of the Magi, with two other Squares, some of the fairest works of the Author. The next you see is a famous Night-piece, by Correggio; one of his most admirable works, the Lights of the Picture darting out miraculously. In like manner you will admire two Squares of bold Tintoret. Also two of Giacomo Bassano. One does demonstrate the History of the Sa∣maritan.
The other is a Piece of Animals, both of them singular works, after his usual manner. After these there are great Quantities of Squares, by Correggio, which I do forbear to name particularly for brevity sake. You will see a Picture, and a Ritratto, by Parmeggianino. There are likewise divers works of the three excellent Caraches. There are also works of Guido Reno, and di∣verse other Authors, which would fill a Book alone to write of all such Jewels as are contained in this Gallery. I have onely named the most principal, I leave the rest to the Virtuoso's and most curious, to observe them particularly at their own leisure. The Domo. There are two singular good Pictures by Guido Reno. The City of Reggio. The Church of S. Prospero. WHere you see a Picture with the Blessed Virgin and the Child Jesus, and S. Giro∣lamo,
with S. Crispin and Crispianino, the works of Guido Reno. The Picture in the Quire is by Hanniball Ca∣rache. The little Church of S. Joseph. There is a Picture which does demonstrate a living Christ, by Guido Reno. The Confraternity of S. Rocco. The Picture in the Quire is the work of Han∣niball Carache. Finale di Modena. The Church of S. Nicholas. HEre you will find a Picture of the B. Virgin with her Son, and S. Lorenz, the work of Guercin da Cento.
The House of Count Zuccati. The Front of this House is all painted by the abovesaid Guercin da Cento. The Castle of Carpi. The Domo. HEre is a marvellous Picture of S. Rocco, by the hand of Guido Reno. Sassuoli ten miles distant from Modena. The Church of the Capuchines. IN which you will admire that most beautiful Piece at the great Altar, by the hand of Ludo∣vico Carache.
The City of Mirandola. IN this City (especially in the Duke's Gallery) they preserve variety of singular good works of diverse principal Authors, before-mentioned in this little work. The City of Mantua. The Domo. HEre you see a Picture representing the Re∣deemer when he called James and John to the Apostleship, by Giulio Romano. There is likewise seen another Picture with S. Anthony the Abbot, by Paulo Veronese.
The Church of S. Andrew. There are two Pieces, one demonstrates the Crucifixion of Christ; the other the finding of his Blood, by Giulio Romano. The Church of S. Dominico. Here is seen a Picture of the abovesaid Giulio. The Palace of T. There are the most famous works of Giulio Romano, in diverse Halls, Galleries, Chambers, &c. with Histories, and Freezes of all sorts, the works of this Palace deserve coming from a far Countrey to see. In the Delitie di Marmirolo, there are also va∣rious works of the same Giulio.
The STATE OF MILAN. The City of Milan. The Church of the Madonna della Gratie, Fathers Dominicans. HEre is the famous Picture, by Titian, repre∣senting the Crowning of the Redeemer with a Crown of Thorns, one of the fairest works of the Author.
The Domo. Here you see a most beautiful Picture of a Dead Christ, by the hand of Barocci. The Church of S. Celso Preti. In the second Sacristie you see a Square of Raphael. In the Church you will admire the Altar-piece of S. Girolamo, the work of Paris Bordone. The Church of the Fathers Teatini. As you enter at the great Door, on your right hand you may observe a Square by the side of the furthermost Altar, by the hand of Ludovico Carache. In the most famous Library called the Libraria Ambrosiana. There are four Squares by Titian, singular ones. You see moreover, many works by Leonardo da Vinci. In the same you see upon two Squares the di∣spute concerning the Sacrament, by Raphael; pain∣ted in Rome in the Palace of the Vatican. There are also divers designs of the most sin∣gulars Painters named in this Book.
THE FAMOUS CLOSET OF Signior Manfredo Septale. THis Closet abounds with variety of Rarities, in Nature as well as Art, I shall only take notice of the best Paintings, being only proper to the thing in hand. 1. There is the Effigies of Galeazzo Septale, Captain of the Germans, and Great-unkle to Manfredo Septale. This Picture needs no other commendation than that it was the work of Titian. 2. The Picture of Ludovico Septale, Father to the same Manfredo, this is the work of Fide Gal∣litia, the most celebrated Paintress in the world.
3. The Annunciation of the B. Virgin Mary, the work of a certain Hollander eminent in the Court of Rome. 4. The Picture of Senator Septale, Brother to Manfredo, the work of Daniel Crispi a Painter of great repute. 5. There is a large Picture of the aforesaid, Daniel Crispi, relating to the Temptation of S. An∣thony, a singular invention. 6. Another Picture of the most Illustrious and Reverend Bishop Charles Septale, Brother to Man∣fredo, the work of a Flemming, eminent in the City of Rome. 7. The Picture of Manfredo himself, the work of the above-named Daniel Crispi. 8. A small Picture of the B. Virgin Mary with S. Joseph and Christ an Infant taking of Fruits from S. Joseph, a work of singular beauty, and the work of that famous Woman Gallitia. 9. Another small Effigies of Ludovico Septale when he was a youth. 10. The Picture of the B. Virgin, with Christ, and S. John, being little Boyes, painted in a large Picture by great Raphael, the Prince of Painters. 11. A most Elegant Picture of a grave Ma∣tron, by Leonardo da Vinci.
12. A small, but most noble Picture, by Ber∣nardino Luini, a famous Painter, in which is re∣presented the Picture of the B. Virgin Mary, and Christ giving a Flower to S. John Baptist. 13. The Picture of Nontio Gallitii a famous Limner, and Father of Fide Gallitia, who pain∣ted this piece. 14. The Picture of Fide Gallitia in the flower of her age, done by her own hand. 15. The Picture of a Little Boy, the work of Fide Gallitia. 16. The Picture of the Duke of Ferrara, a singular work of Juliano. 17. Another Picture of Septale, the work of Bronzino, a Florentine. 18. The Picture of Gustavus Adolphus King of the Swedes, by an unknown hand. 19. The Picture of Christina Queen of the Swedes, and Daughter to Gustavus. 20. The Picture of Oliver Cromwell, by an un∣known hand. 21. The Picture of the most Serene John Duke of Austria, the work of Paini. 22. The Picture of Pope Innocent the tenth.
23. The Picture of Pope Julius the second in the middle between two young Cardinals, viz. Cardinal Medici (who was chosen Pope when he was but thirty three years of age, and called Leo the tenth) and Cardinal Sixtus, the work of one of Raphael Ʋrbines Scholars. 24. A Woman of tall Stature with her Face hairy all over, every hair as long as ones hand, an egregious work of Paini. 25. The Picture of a Monster by an unknown hand. 26. The Picture of Two Virgins in Hunting habits. 27. A great Picture of Bassano, representing our Redeemer Crowned with Thorns, a Night-piece. 28. A Picture upon which two Painters of no mean Rank (to wit Grosso and Duchino) did vie with each other, in it there is expressed the B. Vir∣gin with the Child Jesus, and B. Elizabeth, and a little S. John. 29. A Picture expressing the sad Accident which befell Lucretia Romana sheathing a Dagger in her Bowels, as an eternal signification of her inviolated Chastity, the work of Cerani. 30. S. James sitting on his Horse, and bran∣dishing his Sword amongst his dispersed Soul∣diers, this is likewise a Picture of Cerani. 31. A S. Joseph, by Cerani.
32. A Busto, with the head of S. James, the work of Cerani. 33. The Woman believed to be a Whore, the work of that famous Painter Leonardo da Vinci. 34. David carrying in his hands the formi∣dable head of the Giant Goliah, a singular work of Julius Caesar Procani, when he was young. 35. S. Francis with a Parrot, the work of Cerani's Sister. 36. A Lucretia, the work of Leone Aretini. 37. Another Lucretia, the work of Sardini. 38. S. Jerome accompanied with an Angeli∣cal Minstrel, the work of Vermilii. 39. The Picture of S. John, the work of Her∣cules Procacini. 40. An Anatomy naturally expressed by Daniel Crispo that eminent Painter, who painted most part of the great Carthusian Church at Tiacin. 41. The Picture of the most celebrated Ju∣cunda, an Ornament in the King of France's Bed-chamber, a Copy from Leonardo da Vinci. 42. An Egyptian Woman, by Fide Gallitia, from an Original of Leonardo da Vinci.
43. A great Piece in which the Martyrdom of S. Cecilia is expressed, by Salimbono from an Original of Micerini. 44. Three large Pictures, Copied from the Paintings of Andrea del Sarto. 45. Two Pictures more of the same hand, in one is S. Agnes and S. Christina, in the other is S. Peter, and S. John. 46. The Picture of a Woman, a Natural work of Tintoret. 47. Herodias with S. John Baptist's head, the Head is the work of Cerani, Herodias the work of a Daughter of Cerani, and Wife to the Painter Melchiore Gherardino. 48. S. Jerome, and S. Lucia, the works of Metchiore Gherardino. 49. S. Jerome praying, a Night-piece, the work of Bassano. 50. A Picture containing the B. Virgin with hr Son, and two Angels worshipping, the work of Soliano. 51. The B. Virgin with Jesus and S. John, a Copy from Raphael Ʋrbin, the Original of which is reckoned amongst the precious pieces that the King of France preserves.
52. An Emulous work of Luino, after Raphael Ʋrbino, expressing the B. Ʋirgin, with her Son and a Pilgrim. 53. The B. Virgin with her Son and S. Joseph, Copied from Correggio, by Fide Gallitia. 54. The Blessed Virgin Mary habited after the Egyptian mode, likewise Copied from Correggio, by Fide Gallitia. 55. A Heifer, painted by Fide Gallitia. 56. The Virgin, with Jesus, S. Elizabeth, and S. John, the work of Leo Aresini. 57. Another Virgin with Christ an Infant sleep∣ing, the work of Camillo Procacini. 58. Two singular Pictures, one of which is illustrated with S. Katherine, in the other is the B. Virgin Crowned with a Glory of Angels, the works of Bernardino Luini, and his Brother. 59. A great Picture in which is expressed the first Murther, viz. Cain giving the fatal stroke to his Brother Abel, an original of Guido Reno. There are also four other Pictures, Copied from the Originals of the same Guido Reno. 60. A Magdalen, by Hercules Procacino. 61. An Annunciation brought from Rome, a piece of singular beauty.
62. Three Pictures famous for three Heads, that of Homer, another of S. Jerome, the third of Moses, having in his hands the Tables of the Law; the works of Tiroli. 63. Two Birds painted by Fide Gallitia. 64. A Porrot of the most beautiful sort, as also another Egyptian Bird, which were formerly live Ornaments in the House of Septale. 65. Daniel in the Lions Den, the Lions are the works of Daniel Crispi, after Brugora, but Daniel is the work of Melchiore Gherardino. 66. The Pictures of Exotick Animals, for∣merly familiar Ornaments in the House of Sep∣tale, now only beautifie two Squares, the chief of these is a Japan Bird called Micous, not so much famous for its diversity of colours, as for its Docibility, for when the Arch-Duke of In∣spruck and the Arch-Dutchess of Austria were ad∣miring, and praising of it, it answered scornfully, that Septale had given it them as a present to their most Serene Highnesses. 67. An Indian Crow. 68. Two large Landskips by the diligent hand of Pietro Florentino. 69. Two other Landskips of a lesser size, by the same Author. 70. A Tempest at Sea.
71. Another Prospect at Sea. 72. A Battle, by Carolo Battavo. 73. A Calm Sea, with many Sails displayed within the Haven, the work of a Fleming, after Brugora. 74. A great Landskip expressing a large Country, by Carolo a Sole. 75. King Priam's Palace in Flames, by Ru∣dolpho. 76. Another Landskip after the life. 77. Another fair Prospect of a Countrey, the work of Pietro Flandro. 78. A great Picture representing Armed Wo∣men, and other Types of War. 79. The Picture of the Great Colossus, or the Amphitheatre at Rome, together with Constan∣tine's Arch, done at Rome, by one Philipp. 80. Other small Landskips, expressed in six Pictures. 81. A most perfect piece of Brugora. 82. The Picture of K. Philip the fourth, the most potent Monarch of Spain, by Paint.
83. A small Picture in Limning, which repre∣sents Jesus going to Emaus, done at Rome. 84. Another small Picture, by Leonardo da Vinci. 85. Other two Pictures which represent the B. Virgin and Christ Crowned with Flowers. The City of Cremona. The Domo. ON the inside of the Front of this Domo there is a large History representing Christ Cru∣cified between the Thieves, with many other Fi∣gures, a superb work of Pordenon. The City of Genoua. The Church of S. Stephen. HEre is to be admired the History of the Stoning of this Saint, a stately work of Giulio Romano.
In divers places where the Gentlemen of Genoua assemble (but chiefly that called the Im∣perial Assembly) are seen divers Squares of great Titian. The publick Palace. Here is to be seen in a Hall, a Freeze of most beautifull Boyes, by the hand of Pordenon. The City of Lucca. The Domo. AT the third Altar on the right hand as you enter, you will find a Picture of our Re∣deemer's last Supper with the Apostles, the work of Tintoret. Near the Sepulchre of Cardinal Giudiccioni you see another Picture of the B. Virgin aud her Son Christ, Crowned by two Angels, at their Feet is an Angel playing upon the Lute, and on each side is S. John Baptist and S. Stephen, by Frae. Bartolo∣meo.
In the Church of S. Romano, Fathers Dominicans. At the first Altar on your left hand as you enter, is another admirable Picture, wherein is expressed an Ecstasie of S. Katherine of Siena, and S. Magdalen with the Father Eternal in Glory. At the second Chapell on your right hand is a Picture of the abovesaid Fra. Bartolomeo, wherein is expressed the Virgin Mother of Mercy, blessing great numbers of people with her Gar∣ment, and above is the B Virgin with the Re∣deemer with his armes spread abroad, and shewing. Santa Maria, called Corte Landini. Here are two Pictures by Guido Reno, one is on the right hand of the great Altar repre∣senting the Virgin in the Snow, with Christ in her arms, and an Angel shaking off the Snow, with a S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Lucia. The other is on the left hand, with Christ on the Cross, at his Feet is S. Katherine a Virgin Martys, and S. Giulio a Martyr. The Church of S. Piero Samaldi. As you enter at the great Door, the first Al∣tar on the left hand is by old Palma, where you find S. Anthony the Abbot in the middle of four other Saints.
In S. Pietro Civoli. The third Altar on your left hand as you en∣ter, is the work of Lanfranco, signifying the Martyrdom of S. Lorenzo. Near to the side Door, is likewise seen a Pi∣cture with Christ Crowning of S. Teresa, and over them are two Saints. In S. Maria without the Gates. Here are seen two Pictures by Guercin da Cento, both of them near the great Altar; in one is S Lucia, in the other is the Assumption, with S. Sylvester Pope, and S. Francis of Asisi be∣low. Pescia, ten miles distant from Lucca. In the Church called La Piere. ENtring this Church, in the utmost Chapell on your right hand, you see a stately Pi∣cture of the B. Virgin upon a Throne with her Son in her Armes, and two little Angels, with
divers Saints on each side, an admirable work of incomparable Raphael. Alla Piere de Lamari two miles distant from Lucca. The Church. HEre is seen a Picture of the abovesaid Ra∣phael, with the B. Virgin, S. Anthony, S. Bartholomew, and S. Bernardino of Siena, an ad∣mirable work. In this same Church, and in the first Chapell on your right hand as you enter, you see a Bishop and an holy Martyr, with two Ritrattos on their knees, and above the Altar is the Father Eter∣nal, it is the work of an unknown Author, but a piece so beautiful that it does not give place to any Master whatsoever.
RAPHAEL d' Vrbina Nat: Ao 1483. portrait of Raphael
The City of Naples. The Chapell of Tesoro. IN divers parts of this Chapell you see Histories relating to several Saints, singular works of Dominichino. In the same Chapell are likewise seen divers stupendious works by the hand of Giovanni Lan∣franco. The Church of S. Dominico. In this Church you see a most stately Picture of divers Saints, by the hand of great Raphael. FINIS.
