B98 12868910 94779
A Compleat and True NARRATIVE OF THE Manner of the Discovery OF THE POPISH PLOT TO HIS MAJESTY, By Mr. Christopher Kirkby. WITH A Full Answer to a Late Pamphlet Entituled [Reflections upon the Earl of Danby.] Relating to the MURTHER OF Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, In a Letter to a Friend. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Henry Million at the Bible in the Old-Bayley. 1679.
July the 12th. 1679. SIR, BY Yours of the fourth Instant (which came not to my hands till yesterday, though it did to my house three daies before, I being then out of Town) I find that you are much stagger'd in your belief touching the Authors of your late friend Sir Ed∣mundbury Godfrey's Murther, and that after the Tryal, Condemnation and Exe∣cution of three of the Principal Actors therein, and the Confession of a fourth in his Printed Narrative; together with so many Concurring Circumstances as make good the Truth of the Evidence given against them at their Tryal; you begin to be perswaded (as you say many other Gentlemen of Quality, and good Judgment are) either that the Persons who suffered for that Execrable Deed, Died Innocent, or (at least) that their Instigation proceeded not from any of the Popish Plotters, but from a Person whose In∣terest it was (as you are made to believe) to have Sir Edmundbury Godfrey removed out of the way, as the only Witness capable to prove Misprision of Treason against him▪ And this Alteration of your perswasion proceeds (as you your self intimate) from a Printed Paper scattered abroad under the Title of [Some Roflections upon the Earl of Danby in Relation to the Murther, of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey,] I shall not trouble you with the Scribler of that Paper; the thing it self does suffi∣ciently demonstrate what his Principles are; only this, that I am confidently assured (of what I did before but guess) that he is of the Popish Party, and then endeavour to set you right again touching this matter (and with you those other Gentlemen of Qua∣lity and Judgment which you speak of) though I take not upon me the Defence of the said Earl, as to any thing he stands Charged with in Parliament; yet to lay the Saddle upon the right Horse as to this particular, (which is no part of his Charge) I have ta∣ken the pains to reperuse the said Printed Paper, and to Examine the Truth of that particular Matter of Fact, upon which principally the Scribler thereof (for he deserves not the name of an Author) hath built all his weak and foolish Arguments to in∣duce you and others to this misbelief; and I find the whole drift and design thereof to be nothing else but a cunning and knavish device, whereby, if it were possible to translate the Guilt of that Horrid Murther from the Popish Party, and to lay the ill-favoured Bastard at the Doors of the Earl of Danby, and his Instruments, for the saving of the Credit of the Popish Politicks (more dear to them than that of their Honesty or Allegiance.) This Act being (as he himself acknowledgeth in his said Printed Paper) the worst mischief to their Cause that they could have thought of in the world. In the first place, therefore you may please to take notice that he lays the founda∣tion of all his said Arguments upon this notorious Lye of his own Invention (viz.) That the Earl of Danby knew of the Popish Plot; a long time before His Majesty had heard any thing of it; and that he had Correspondence with Dr. Oats, and Dr Tonge, by the means of Mr. Kirkby, a Merchant (Brother to Collonel Kirkby) long before the time he pretended to have heard of it from the King; thereby insinu∣ating (though not in direct Terms) that the Earl must needs be guilty, at least of Mis∣prision of Treason in the Concealment, if not of the Original Treason in the Complotment; and this he backs with several other Lyes of the same stamp, impudently telling you (contrary to all Truth) that this long fore-knowledge of the Earls was confessed by both the Doctors to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, at the time of their Examinations by him taken upon their Oaths. And that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was the person who sent his Royal Highness the first Account of the Plot by Mr. Coleman to Windsor, and adds several other things of like Invention, from all which he would have you con∣clude,
That Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey being the only person who could possibly detect this Misprision of Treason in the Earl, it was consequently the Earls interest above all others to have him taken away And because he had power, and probably had will to accomplish it, and wanted not Instruments to l it in execution, therefore he must needs be the person by whose means or command the said murther was committed. And this in h is the samm and substance of that foolish paper wherein he (cunningly to his own apprehension) forgets in the mean time that it was much more in the power of Dr. Oates and Dr. Tonge (if what he asserts were true) to detect the said Earl of this pretended Misprision of Treason then it was in Sr. Edmundbury Godfreys. And therefore that this single Murther could not sufficiently secure him from the Discovery. To let pass therefore the non Sequitur's of all these his arguments, though both his Major and his Minor in each of them were admitted to be true (which will be too long to trouble you with in a Letter,) we shall sufficiently cause this Scriblers whole super∣structure to fall to the ground, by demonstrating the utter untruth and falseness of his Foundation, viz That the Earl of Danby knew of the Popish Plot a long time before it was made known to His Majesty; wherein to convince you that it was a meer inven∣tion of one of the Eldest Sons of the Father of Lyes, to impose upon the belief of the Credulous, and thereby to acquit the hellish contrivers of the Popish Plot of the guilt of that execrable Murther I must pray you to take notice of the ensuing Narrative, the particu∣lars whereof (I assure you) I long since received from Mr. Kirkbys own Mouth, a per∣son of unquestionable Loyalty to the King, and of known Integrity in all his Words and Actions, and who will be alwaies ready (as I presume) to attest the truth thereof, (if occasion shall require) upon his Corporal Oath which particulars are as followeth, viz.
A Compleat and True Narrative of the Manner of the Discovery of the Popish Plot to His Majesty, by Mr. Christopher Kirkby. MOnday the 12th. of August, 1678. about twelve of the Clock Dr. Tonge acquaint∣ed Mr. Christopher Kirkby with the Conspiracy of the Papists against the King's Sacred Person, and the Protestant Religion, shewing him 43 Articles in writing, upon which Mr. Kirkby declared, that Matters of that concern ought not to be Concealed by him, but that he would acquaint His Majesty therewith, though he foresaw many dangers and difficulties he should meet with in the Discovery; whereupon the Dr. de∣clared his great satisfaction that Mr. Kirkby would make this business known to the King, earnestly requesting him not to acquaint any other person with it, which Mr. Kirkby promi∣sed: And about two of the Clock in the Afternoon went to Whitehall, but could not all that Afternoon meet with an opportunity of seeing the King, except in Company of His Royal Highness; so he returned to the Dr. and advising what to do, and how to proceed, Mr. Kirk∣by writ a few lines to present to His Majesty the next morning as He should walk in the Park, signifying that if His Majesty would be pleased to give him a quarter of an hours Au∣dience, he should make known something, that as it was of the greatest Importance, so it was only proper for His Royal Ear, and not to be delayed without eminent danger. And accordingly upon the 13th. of August he waited His Majesties coming into the Park, and in the outer-Gallery presented it to His Majesty, which he read as he went down the Stairs, and afterward called Mr. Kirkby to Him, and asked him what he had to say, who answered, that His Majesties Enemies had a design against His Life: And therefore humbly pray'd His Majesty to keep himself within His Company, for he did not know but that He might be in danger in that very Walk: And His Majesty asking how that could be, was an∣swered, that it might be by being shot at, but that a privater place was necessary for a more particular Accompt. Thereupon His Majesty commanded him to wait His return out of the Park; and in the mean time to go to Mr. Chiffins, who would conduct him into His Clo∣set; but Mr. Chiffins not knowing his business, refused to conduct him thither; and there∣fore he was necessitated to wait His Majesties Return in the Gallery; and His Majesty re∣turning into His Bed-Chamber, and not finding Mr. Kirkby there, was coming out; when he espied Mr. Kirkby, he called him in, commanding him to tell Him what he knew; whereupon Mr. Kirkby told His Majesty that there were two men, by name Pickering and Grove, that were set to watch an Opportunity to shoot His Majesty, and that Sir George Wakeman, was imployed to poison Him; and being asked how he knew this, he replyed, he had seen it in writing in the hands of his Friends, who the day before had acquainted him therewith: And that he had then waited an Opportunity to declare it to His Ma∣jesty, that his friend was neer at hand, and ready with the Papers to be brought before Him, when His Majesty should command, which he was pleased should be between eight and nine of the Clock in the Evening; at which time Mr. Kirkby, and Dr. Tonge attended on His Majesty, and were commanded into the Red Room, where the 43 Articles copied out by the Dr. (who kept the Original for his own Security) were delivered to His Majesty, both of them humbly requesting that those Papers might be kept secret and safe; other∣wise the full Discovery would be prevented, and their lives in hazard; further proposing, that under the notion of Chymists, they might have Access to His Person to prevent all suspition: To which His Majesty was pleased to answer, that He was going the next morning to Windsor, but that He would safely transmit the Papers into the hands of one with whom he would entrust both his Life and Crown, and with whom he would answer for their lives; ordering them to wait upon the Earl of Danby, then Lord Treasurer, the next
morning, which accordingly they did: But the Lord Dumblaine having been very ill that night; and the Lord Treasurer, having sate up late with him, it was about four of the Clock in the Afternoon before they could be Admitted; when being entred his Closet, they found him with the Papers in his hand, which he said he had received from His Hajesty, sealed up, and found them to be of the greatest Concern imaginable; and then asking the Dr. about them, desired Mr. Kirkby to withdraw, which he accordingly did. Two or three daies after the Dr. received more Informations, which Mr. Kirkby copied out; and the Dr. carried them to the Treasurer, with whom he said he could hardly come to speak, but that my Lord had appointed one of his Gentlemen to receive the sealed Papers from him. About the 20th. of August the Dr. told Mr. Kirkby he had offer'd to bring Pickering and Grove into St. James's Park, to be taken there with their Guns about them, if it were thought convenient, his Informant having assured him he could do it if the King were walking there. The 23th. of August Mr. Kirkby went to Sommerset-House, to see Pickering, as he at∣tended the Priests at Mass, but could not that day see him; but the Sunday following he did; and the Sunday seven night after shewed him to Mr. Lloyd, one of the Lord Treasu∣rers Gentlemen: And that week he had been alone to espy out Keins, and learn to know him; and in Company of the Dr. to enquire after Grove, who was to have gone to Windsor if he had not been sick. The 26th. of August the Dr. told Mr. Kirkby, that he had informed the Treasurer how to intercept Letters that came to Grove; and the Treasurer being some daies after gone out of Town, he was resolv'd to know if any were intercepted: And on Saturday the 31th. he went to a friend of his Mr. Henry Kirkby by name, a Letter-Carrier in the Post-Office, and desired to know if any Letters came to one Grove, living in York-street, in Covent-Garden, who promised to enquire of the Letter Carriers for that part of the Town, whom he should meet on Monday at the Office, and on Tuesday would give him an Account. Monday the second of September, Dr. Oats came to Mr. Kerby's Lodgings at Fox-Hall, where he first saw him, or heard him named, and there he furnished him with money for his necessary Expences, appointing to meet him the day following at the Pheasant in Fullers-Rents, to receive farther Informations, and to give less suspition by his being often seen in Company of Dr. Tonge, and so be all discovered. The third of September he met Mr. Henry Kirkby, who told him that he had spoken to the Inland and Forein Letter-Carriers, who told him that Grove had usually Letters eve∣ry week, amounting to three or four pound; and it being insisted on, what he had received the day before, he promised an Account the day following, which accordingly he did, by a note that the Foreign Letter-Carrier had delivered to Grove the second then instant four shillings in Letters, and that the Inland Letter-Carrier had delivered several Letters, but the value he could not tell. Mr. Oats having given an Accompt in his Depositions of the Con∣tents of the Letters from Scotland, and of the death of Mr, Westby (being killed there for endeavouring to discover the Plot) from thence Mr. Kirkby went to Dr. Oats; and having received from him what he had to communicate, appointed to meet the next morning at Heaven in the Old Pallace-Yard, Westminster. The fourth, Mr. Kirkby met Dr. Oats accordingly, who told him that Whitebread, the Jesuits Provincial, was come to Town, and had beaten him, and charged him with having been with the King, and discovering their Plot, which he denied, as not having been with the King; whereupon Mr. Kirkby resolved to go the next day to Windsor, and in the evening proposed to Dr. Tonge, that seeing Mr. Oats was discovered, and in danger, it was needful for him so to do, and desired Dr. Tonge would be pleased to get Dr. Oats his Information sworn before some Justice of the Peace; and the sooner it was done, the better; and ac∣cordingly the Dr. got it effected the sixth of September, before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; whom nothwithstanding they would not permit to read the particulars of the Information, telling him that His Majesty had already had a true Copy thereof; and that it was not convenient that it should be yet communicated to any body else, only acquainting him in general, that it contained Matter of Treason and Felony, and other high Crimes, de∣siring him to attest Dr. Oats Affidavit of the Truth of the Contents thereof; whereupon
Sir Ed. B. Godfrey rested satisfied without reading them, and under writ Dr. Oats his Affidavit, that the Matter therein contained was True; and at the same time Dr. Tonge made Oath that it had been made known to the King. The fifth, Mr. Kirkby went to Windsor, and presented himself before His Majesty, who was pleased not to speak to him that day, not the next; Mr. Bedingfield having delivered certain Letters (mentioned in Dr. Oats his Depositions) to the Duke, and thereby indea∣voured to take away the belief of a Plot. The seventh, he went to the Treasurers Lodgings, and meeting with Mr. Lloyd, he told him, that the Informant was discovered and beaten, and therefore desired to speak with my Lord Treasurer, to take his further directions in that Affair: Mr: Lloyd went to speak with him, and brought Answer, that my Lord would hear him; but although Mr. Kirkby waited all that day, presenting himself before him, and offering to speak, yet could he not be heard that day, nor the next, notwithstanding all his solicitations for it, and my Lords promise that it should be. Monday the ninth of September, the Lord Treasurer went to Wimbleton, and the King not enquiring of Mr. Kirkby any thing concerning the Plot, although he had an opportu∣nity to speak to His Majesty about other business, he thought it not necessary to stay lon∣ger there, but returned home, and that Evening met Dr. Tonge, and Dr. Oats at the Flying-Horse in Kings-street, Westminster, whither he had retired after his narrow Escape out of the Jesuits hands: Mr. Kirkby advised him to go with him to his Lodgingss at Fox-Hall, as well for his security, as that he might have Company to chear him in his then sad Condition, to which he agreed; and so both he and the Dr. remained there with Mr. Kirkby, till they were provided for at Whitehall. Dr. Oats imploy'd himself to write out Copies of his Information; and Dr. Tonge to en∣quire after the Lord Treasurer, whom he sought for at Wimbleton several times, to give in the needful and occurring Informations, which are now under his hands, before the private Committee, being all three much perplexed both in regard of the danger they were in, and the seeming neglect of the Discovery they had made. The 27th. at night Mr. Lloyd met Mr. Kirkby at Fox-Hall, and told him he was come for Dr. Tonge to go to the Council; upon which Mr. Kirkby, and the Dr. went along with him; but before they got thither, the Council was up, and they ordered to attend the next morning at ten of the Clock. This Evening they Resolved to get the Copies of Dr. Oats his Information sworn the next Morning. The 28th. they all three went to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, carrying the first Deposi∣tions, sworn the sixth of September, and two Copies written by Mr. Oats to have them al∣so sworn, That each might have an Authentick Copy; and having the two Copies sworn▪ Sir Edmundbury Godfrey would needs keep one, which was left in his hands: before which time he had never purused the particulars of the Information, and then Dr. Tonge and Mr. Kirkby went to Whitehall, to attend the Council, and desired Dr. Oats to go to Fox-Hall, and stay there till he heard from them; Dr. Tonge being called before the Council, was Ordered to bring Dr. Oats thither; whereupon Mr. Kirkby and he went to Fox-Hall, and brought him immediately before the Council, who then took care of the business, and ordered both Dr. Tonge, and Dr. Oats Lodgings in Whitehall.
THIS Narrative (as it is the truth) being duly considered and on the other side the Reflections upon the Earl of Danby, in Relation to Sr. Edmundbury Godfreys murther, thereby examined, it will appear to any judicious Reader, that the Scribler of that paper which hath shaken your belief, doth not so much endea∣vour to discover the murtherers, as to hide the Plot and Plotters; if it were possible, he would willingly perswade the world that that Monster had its birth from those that dis∣covered it, and to whom it was first made known: Whereas Dr. Oates never spoke to the Earl of Danby before the 28th. of September 1678. That he was examined before the Councel and Dr. Tonge had no Intercourse with him but what tended to give him that information the occurring exigences required (as his papers now before the Committee of Secrecy do sufficiently prove,) and as for Mr. Kirby he never spoke to him at all but once, and that by the Kings Immediate command: moreover the Scriblers cunning by, confounding of the times when the Plot was discovered, and to whom, with the times of taking the Depositions, whereby he builds the Basis of his discourse) is easily disco∣vered. First, It appears not possible that Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey should know any thing of the matter until the Sixth of September, when he first took Dr. Oates his Depo∣sitions (and not much then the contents thereof not being made known to him) and Dr. Tongs Deposition (being only that the matters therein were made known to the King) could not give him any certain knowledge of it. Secondly. He does acknowledge that His Majesty told the Duke, he had been informed of the Plot before His Royal Highness received an account thereof from Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey, by Mr. Coleman, as this Scribler would suggest (but may well be supposed falsely) for it is not to be believed he should the second time have so willingly taken Dr. Oates his Depo∣sitions, if he had made the first known to Coleman, and had apprehended himself in danger for what he had before done, and had been reprehended for it. Thirdly, The Scribler, as Maliciously, as Ignorantly, asserts a Correspondence betwixt the Earl and the Doctors by Mr. Kirkbys means, Antecedent to the Kings being acquain∣ted with the Plot, which is the greatest peice of impudence and untruth in the World, and could not proceed from any other than such as endeavour to impose upon all the World, when alas they will find themselves caught in their own snares. For I will not hope that  any Protestant remaining so stupid as not to be able to look through their Cobweb-deceits, nothing can more fully display to the World, their being in love with that Lusts though insignificant Cover, to wickedness and deceipt, than this Scribler daring publickly to assert a lye, when it was in his power if he had bene willing to have been informed of the truth, by addressing himself to any of those concerned in the Discovery: hence it appears with what it malitious designes those are pregnant, who wilfully keep themselves (at least pretendedly) ignorant of the Truth, that they may take an occasion to impose upon the weak and if possible make the strong to fall. The Lord in mercy deliver His Majesty His Kingdoms and Dominions, from Papists. Treachery and Deceits, and I doubt not then, but we shall remain in peace and qui∣etness. Which is the earnest Prayer of Sir your Affectionate Friend and humble Servant, J. B.
