C1590 R13780 12389764 60969
THE LIVES OF THE Primitive Fathers.
Imprimatur, Hic Liber (cui Titulus APOSTOLICI, &c.) Maii 10. 1676. G. JANE R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Lond. à Sacris Domesticis.
יהוה Hi sunt, qui venerunt de tribulatione magna. APOSTOLICI or The Lives of the Primitive Fathers for the three first Ages of the Christian Church, By WILLIAM CAVE, D.D. Caplain in ordinary to his Majesty. non Evangeliz Hic est patentia et fidei Sanctorum London Printed for Ric: Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Pauls Churhyard, 1677 engraved title page Micha: Burg: delinet
APOSTOLICI: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Lives, Acts, Death, AND MARTYRDOMS OF THOSE Who were Contemporary with, or immediately Succeeded the APOSTLES. As also the Most Eminent of the Primitive Fathers For the First Three Hundred Years. To which is added, A CHRONOLOGY OF THE Three First Ages of the CHURCH. By WILLIAM CAVE, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37. p. 109. . LONDON, Printed by A.C. for Richard Chisel at the Rose and Crown in S. Pauls Church-yard. MDCLXXVII.
To the Right Honourable, And Right Reverend FATHER in GOD NATHANAEL LORD BISHOP of DURHAM, Clerk of the Closet, And one of His MAJESTIES most Honourable PRIVY-COUNCIL. MY LORD, THAT I once more presume to give your Lordship the trouble of such an Address, is not from any confidence I have in the value of these Papers, but partly because I well know, that your Lord∣ships candor and charity will be ready to pardon the faults, and to cover the weaknesses of the Undertaking partly because I thought it very reasonable and decorous, there to offer the Remaining Portions, where I had con∣secrated the First-Fruits. MY LORD, You will here meet with Persons of your own Quality and Order, Men Great and Venerable, whose excellent Learning and exemplary Lives,
whose Piety and Patience, Zeal and Charity, So∣briety and Contempt of the World, rendred them the honour of their Times, and recommend them as incomparable Examples to Posterity. We may here see in more instances then one, the Episcopal Order immediately deriving it self from Apostolic hands: whereof, were not some men strangely biassed by Passion and Prejudice, there could be no shadow of dispute. For he that can read the Lives of Timothy and Titus, of Igna∣tius, Polycarp, &c. and yet fancy them to have been no more then meer Parish-Priests, that only superintended a little Congregation, must needs betray either prodigious Ignorance, or unreaso∣nable Partiality. Here also we may find what a mighty reverence these First and better Ages had for the Governours of the Church, and the Guides of Souls, no respects being then thought great enough. Wherein they acted agreeably not onely to the Rules of Christianity, but to the common sense of mankind. And indeed with what Honours and Dignities, what Rights and Revenues, what Priviledges and Immunities the Sacred Function has been invested in all Ages and Nations, as well the rude and barbarous, as the more polite and civilized Countries, I could abundantly shew, were it as proper to this place as it is necessary to the Age we live in. For we are fallen into the worst of Times, wherein men have been taught, by bad Principles and worse Practices, to despise the holy Order, and to level it with the meanest of the People. And this done not onely by profest Enemies (for then
we could have born it) but by pretended friends, who seem to have a high zeal for Religion and themselves. By which means the hands of evil men have been strengthened, and the designs of those sufficiently gratified, who 'tis like would rejoice at the ruine of us both. I confess that the Persons and Credit of the Regular Clergy should by some men be treated with Contempt and Scorn, is the less to be wondred at, when Reli∣gion it self is not secure from the rude and bold railleries of some, and the serious attempts of others, who gravely design to banish the awe of Religion, and the impressions of whatever is Di∣vine and Sacred out of the minds of men. But, My Lord, It is not my design to enter∣tain your Lordship with an invective against the Iniquity of the Times. I had rather silently be∣wail them, and heartily pray for their reforma∣tion, that the best of Churches may prosper and flourish under the best of Princes. May Her Peace and Order be preserved inviolable, her Liturgy and Divine Offices universally complied with, Her Solemn Assemblies duly frequented, Her Canons and Constitutions observed and pra∣ctised! May Her Priests be cloathed with Righ∣teousness, and able by sound Doctrin both to Exhort and to Convince Gainsayers! May they be labo∣rious in their Ministeries, and be very highly esteemed in love, at least for their relation to God and their Works sake! May Her Governours diligently superintend the Flock of God, and they that rule well, be accounted worthy of double Ho∣nour! In which number may your Lordship
share a double portion! May you fill up all the measures of a wise and able Counsellour in the State, and of a faithful and vigilant Gover∣nour in the Church! To all which great and holy ends, if the following Papers (wherein these things are represented in lively instances) may be capable of contributing any assistance, and in the least measure serviceable to retrive the Pri∣mitive temper and spirit of Religion, it will be thought an invaluable compensation of the mean endeavours of MY LORD, Your Lordships faithful and affectionate Servant WILLIAM CAVE.
TO THE READER. IT is not the least argument for the spiritual and incorporeal Nature of humane souls, and that they are acted by a higher prin∣ciple then meer Matter and Motion, their boundless and inquisitive re-searches af∣ter knowledge. Our minds naturally grasp at a kind of Omnisciency, and not content with the speculations of this or that particular Science, hunt over the whole course of Nature; nor are they satisfied with the present state of things, but pur∣sue the notices of former Ages, and are desirous to comprehend whatever transactions have been since Time it self had a Being. We endeavour to make up the shortness of our lives by the ex∣tent of our knowledge; and because we cannot see forwards and spy what lies concealed in the Womb of Futurity, we look back, and eagerly trace the Footsteps of those Times that went before us. Indeed to be ignorant of what happened before we our selves came into the World, In Orator pag. 268. is (as Cicero truly ob∣serves) to be always children, and to deprive our selves of what would at once entertain our minds with the highest pleasure, and add the greatest authority and advantage to us. The knowledge of Antiquity, besides that it gratifies one of our noblest curiosities, improves our minds by the wisdom of preceding Ages, acquaints us with the most remarkable oc∣currences of the Divine Providence, and presents us with the most apt and proper rules and instances that may form us to a life of true Philosophy and Vertue; Ap. Dio Hali. . p. 5. Tem. 2. History (says Thu∣cydides) being nothing else but , Philosophy drawn from Examples: the one is a more gross and popular Philosophy, the other a more subtle and refined History. These considerations, together with a desire to perpetuate the memory of brave and great Actions, gave birth to History, and obliged mankind to transmit the more observable passa∣ges both of their own and foregoing Times to the notice of Po∣sterity. The first in this kind was Moses, the great Prince
and Legislator of the Jewish Nation, who from the Creation of the World conveyed down the Records of above MMDL. years; the same course being more or less continued through all the periods of the Jewish State. Among the Babylonians they had their public Archives, which were transcribed by Be∣rosus the Priest of Belus, who composed the Chaldean History. The Egyptians were wont to record their memorable Acts up∣on Pillars in Hieroglyphic notes and sacred Characters, first be∣gun (as they pretend) by Thouth, or the first of their Mercuries; out of which Manethos their Chief Priest collected his three Books of Egyptian Dynasties, which he dedicated to Ptolomy Philadelphus, second of that line. The Phoenician History was first attempted by Sanchoniathon, digested partly out of the An∣nals of Cities, partly out of the Books kept in the Temple, and communicated to him by Jerombaal Priest of the God Jao: this he dedicated to Abibalus King of Berytus, which Philo Byblius about the time of the Emperour Adrian translated into Greek. The Greeks boast of the Antiquity of Cadmus, Archilo∣chus, and many others, though the most ancient of their Histo∣rians now extant, are Herodotus, Thucydides, and Xenophon. Among the Romans the foundations of History were laid in Annals, the public Acts of every year being made up by the Pontifex Maximus, who kept them at his own house, that the people upon any emergency might resort to them for satisfa∣ction. These were the Annales Maximi, and afforded excellent materials to those who afterwards wrote the History of that great and powerful Commonwealth. But that which of all others challenges the greatest regard both as it more immediately concerns the present enquiry, and as it contains accounts of things relating to our biggest interests, is the History of the Church. For herein, as in a Glass, we have the true face of the Church in its several Ages represented to us. Here we find with what infinite care those Divine Records, which are the great instruments of our eter∣nal happiness, have through the several periods of time been conveyed down to us; with what a mighty success Religion has triumphed over the greatest oppositions, and spread its Banners in the remotest corners of the World. With how incomparable a zeal good men have contended earnestly for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints; with what a bitter and implacable fury the Enemies of Religion have set upon it, and how signally the Divine Providence has appeared in
its preservation, and returned the mischief upon their own heads. Here we see the constant succession of Bishops and the Ministers of Religion in their several stations, the glo∣rious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, who with the most chearful and composed minds have gone to Heaven through the acutest torments. In short, we have here the most admirable exam∣ples of a divine and religious Life, of a real and unfeigned Pie∣ty, a sincere and universal Charity, a strict Temperance and So∣briety, an unconquerable Patience and Submission clearly represented to us. And the higher we go, the more illu∣strious are the instances of Piety and Vertue. For however later Ages may have improved in knowledge, Experience daily making new additions to Arts and Sciences, yet former Times were most eminent for the practice and vertues of a holy life. The Divine Laws while newly published, had a stronger influence upon the minds of men, and the spirit of Religion was more active and vigorous, till men by degrees began to be debauched into that impiety and prophaneness, that in these last Times has over-run the World. It were altogether needless and improper for me to consider what Records there are of the state of the Church before our Saviours Incarnation: it is sufficient to my purpose to en∣quire by what hands the first affairs of the Christian Church have been transmitted to us. As for the Life and Death, the Actions and Miracles of our Saviour, and some of the first acts of his Apostles, they are fully represented by the Evan∣gelical Historians. Indeed immediately after them we meet with nothing of this nature, H. Ecl. l. 3. c. 24. p. 94. the Apostles and their immediate Successors (as Eusebius observes) not being at leisure to write many Books, as being imployed in Ministeries greater and more immediately serviceable to the World. The first that engaged in this way, was Hegesippus, an ancient and Apostolic man (as he in Photius stiles him) an Hebrew by descent, Cod. 232. col. 893. and born (as is probable) in Palestin. He flourished principally in the reign of M. Aurelius, and came to Rome in the time of Ancietus, where he resided till the time of Eleutherius. He wrote five Books of Ecclesiastical History, which he stiled, Commentaries of the Acts of the Church, wherein in a plain and familiar stile he described the Apostles Travels and Preachings, the remarka∣ble passages of the Church, the several Schisms, Heresies, and Persecutions that infested it from our Lords death till his own
time. But these, alas, are long since lost. The next that suc∣ceeded in this Province, though the first that reduced it to any exactness and perfection, was Eusebius. He was born in Pale∣stin, about the later times of the Emperour Gallienus, ordained Presbyter by Agapius Bishop of Caesarea, who suffering about the end of the Dioclesian Persecution, Eusebius succeeded in his See. A man of incomparable parts and learning, and of no less industry and diligence in searching out the Records and Antiquities of the Church. After several other Volumes in defence of the Christian Cause against the assaults both of Jews and Gentiles, he set himself to write an Ecclesiastical Hi∣story, Lib. 1. c. 1. p. 3. wherein he designed (as himself tells us) to recount from the birth of our Lord till his time the most memorable Trans∣actions of the Church, the Apostolical successions, the first Preachers and Planters of the Gospel, the Bishops that presi∣ded in the most eminent Sees, the most noted Errours and He∣resies, the calamities that befel the Jewish State, the attempts and Persecutions made against the Christians by the Powers of the World, the torments and sufferings of the Martyrs, and the blessed and happy period that was put to them by the conversion of Constantine the Great. All this accordingly, he digested in Ten Book, which he composed in the declining part of his life, Praefat. de Vit. & Script. Euseb. and (as Valesius conjectures) some years after the Council of Nice, though when not long before he expresly affirms that History to have been written before the Nicene Sy∣nod, how he can herein be excused from a palpable contra∣diction, I cannot imagine. 'Tis true Eusebius takes no notice of that Council, but that might be partly because he designed to end in that joyful and prosperous Scene of things, which Con∣stantine restored to the Church (as he himself plainly intimates in the beginning of his History,) which he was not willing to discompose with the controversies and contentions of that Synod, according to the humour of all Historians, who delight to shut up their Histories with some happy and successful pe∣riod; and partly because he intended to give some account of the affairs of that Council in his Book of the Life of Constantine the Great. The Materials wherewith he was furnished for this great undertaking (which he complains were very small and in∣considerable) were besides Hegesippus his Commentaries then extant, Africanus his Chronology, the Books and Writings of se∣veral Fathers, the Records of particular Cities, Ecclesiastical
Epistles written by the Bishops of those Times, and kept in the Archives of their several Churches, especially that famous Library at Jerusalem, erected by Alexander Bishop of that place, but chiefly the Acts of the Martyrs, which in those Times were taken at large with great care and accuracy. These, at least a great many of them, Eusebius collected into one Vo∣lume, under the Title of , A Colle∣ction of the Ancient Martyrdoms; which he refers to at every turn; besides a particular Narrative which he wrote (still ex∣tant as an Appendage to the Eighth Book of his Ecclesiastical History) concerning the Martyrs that suffered in Palestin. A great part of these Acts by the negligence and unfaithfulness of suc∣ceeding Times, were interpolated and corrupted, especially in the darker and more undiscerning Ages, when Superstition had overspread the Church, and when Ignorance and Interest conspired to fill the World with idle and improbable Stories, and men took what liberty they pleased in venting the issue of their own Brains, insomuch that some of the more wise and moderate even of the Roman Communion have com∣plained not without a just resentment and indignation, that Laertius has written the Lives of Philosophers with more truth and chastness, then many have done the Lives of the Saints. Upon this account a great and general out-cry has been made against Simeon Metaphrastes, as the Father of incredible Legends, and one that has notoriously imposed upon the World by the most fabulous reports. Nay, some to reflect the more dis∣grace upon him, have represented him as a petty Schoolma∣ster. A charge, in my mind, rash and inconsiderate, and in a great measure groundless and uncharitable. He was a per∣son of very considerable birth and fortunes, advanced to the highest Honours and Offices, one of the Primier Ministers of State, and as is probable, Great Chancellor to the Emperour of Constantinople; learned and eloquent above the common stan∣dard, and who by the persuasions not onely of some great ones of that time (he flourished under Leo the Wise about the Year DCCCC. but principally wrote under the reign of his succes∣sor) but of the Emperour himself was prevailed with to re∣duce the Lives of the Saints into order. To which end by his own infinite labour, and the no less expences of the Em∣perour, he ransacked the Libraries of the Empire, till he had amassed a vast heap of Volumes. The more ancient Acts he passed without any considerable alteration, more then the cor∣recting
them by a collation of several Copies, and the enlarging some circumstances to render them more plain and easie, as ap∣pears by comparing some that are extant at this day. Where Lives were confused and immethodical, or written in a stile rude and barbarous, he digested the history into order, and clothed it in more polite and elegant language. Others that were de∣fective in neither, he left as they were, and gave them place amongst his own. So that I see no reason for so severe a cen∣sure, unless it were evident, that he took his accounts of things not from the Writings of those that had gone before him, but forged them of his own head. Not to say that things have been made much worse by Translations, seldom appearing in any but the dress of the Latine Church, and that many Lives are laid at his door, of which he never was the Father, it be∣ing usual with some, when they met with the Life of a Saint, the Author whereof they knew not, presently to fasten it upon Metaphrastes. But to return to Eusebius, from whom we have digressed. His Ecclesiastical History, the almost onely remaining Re∣cords of the ancient Church, deserves a just esteem and vene∣ration, without which those very fragments of Antiquity had been lost, which by this means have escaped the common Shipwrack. And indeed S. Hierom, Nicephorus, and the rest do not onely build upon his foundation, but almost entirely derive their materials from him. As for Socrates, Sozomen, Theodorit, and the later Historians, they relate to Times with∣out the limits of my present business, generally conveying down little more then the History of their own Times, the Church History of those more early Ages being either quite neglected, or very negligently managed. The first that to any purpose broke the ice after the Reformation, were the Centuriators of Magdeburg, a combination of learned and indu∣strious men, the chief of whom were John Wigandus, Matth. Judex, Basilius Faber, Andreas Corvinus, but especially Matth. Flaccius Illyricus, who was the very soul of the undertaking. They set themselves to traverse the Writings of the Fathers, and all the ancient Monuments of the Church, collecting whatever made to their purpose, which with indefatigable pains they digested into an Ecclesiastic History. This they divided into Centuries, and each Century into fifteen Chapters, into each of which, as into its proper Classis and Repository, they reduced whatever concerned the propagation of Reli∣gion,
the Peace or Persecutions of the Christians, the Do∣ctrines of the Church, and the Heresies that arose in it, the Rites and Ceremonies, the Government, Schisms, Councils, Bishops, and persons noted either for Religion or Learning, Heretics, Martyrs, Miracles, the state of the Jews, the Religion of them that were without, and the political revolutions of that Age. A method accurate and useful, and which administers to a very distinct and particular understanding the affairs of the Church. The four first Centuries were finished in the City of Magdeburg, the rest elsewhere. A work of prodigious diligence and singular use. True it is, that it labours under some faults and imperfections, and is chargeable with consi∣derable errours and mistakes. And no wonder: for besides that, the Persons themselves may be supposed to have been sometimes betraid into an  by the heats and contentions of those Times, it was the first attempt in this kind, and which never passed the emendations of a second review; an undertaking vast and diffusive, and engaged in, while Books were yet more scarce and less correct. Accor∣dingly they modestly enough confess, Praefat. in Hist. Eccles. praefix. Cent. I. that they rather attem∣pted a delineation of Church-History, then one that was com∣pleat and absolute, desiring onely to minister opportunity to those, who were able and willing to furnish out one more in∣tire and perfect. And yet take it with all the faults and dis∣advantages that can be charged upon it, and they bear no proportion to the usefulness and excellency of the thing it self. No sooner did this work come abroad, but it made a loud noise and bustle at Rome, as wherein the corruptions and in∣novations of that Church were sufficiently exposed and laid open to the World. Accordingly it was necessary that an An∣tidote should be provided against it. For which purpose Phi∣lip Nereus (who had lately founded the Oratorian Order at Rome) commands Baronius, then a very young man, and newly en∣tered into the Congregation, to undertake it, and in order there∣unto, daily to read nothing but Ecclesiastical Lectures in the Oratory. This course he held for thirty years together, seven several times going over the History of the Church. Thus trained up, and abundantly furnished with fit materials, he sets upon the Work it self, which he disposed by way of Annals, comprising the affairs of whole Christian World in the order∣ly series and succession of every year. A method much more
Natural and Historical then that of the Centuries. A noble design, and which it were injustice to defraud of its due praise and commendation, as wherein besides whatever occurrences that concern the state of the Church, reduced (as far as his skill in Chronology could enable him) under their proper periods, he has brought to light many passages of the Ancients, not known before, peculiarly advantaged herein by the many no∣ble Libraries that are at Rome. A Monument of incredible pains and labour, as which besides the difficulties of the thing it self, was entirely carried on by his single endeavours, and written all with his own hand, and that too in the midst of in∣finite avocations, the distractions of a Parish-Cure, the private affairs of his own Oratory, Preaching, hearing Confessions, wri∣ting other Books, not to mention the many troublesom, though honourable Offices and Imployments, which in the course of the Work were heaped upon him. In short, a Work it was by which he had infinitely more obliged the World, then can be well expressed, had he managed it with as much faithfulness and impartiality as he has done with learning and industry. But alas, too evident it is, that he designed not so much the ad∣vancement of Truth, as the honour and interest of a Cause, and therefore drew the face of the ancient Church, not as An∣tiquity truly represents it, but according to the present form and complexion of the Church of Rome, forcing everything to look that way, to justifie the traditions and practises, and to exalt the super-eminent power and grandeur of that Church, making both the Scepter and the Crosier stoop to the Triple Crown. This is that that runs almost through every page, and indeed both he Epist. Ded. ad Sixt. V. Tom. 1. Annal. praefix. himself, and the Hier. Barnab. de vit. Baron. l. 1. c. 18. p. 40. c. 19. p. 43. Writer of his Life, more then once, expresly affirms, that his design was to defend the Traditions, and to preserve the Dignity of that Church against the late Innovators, and the labours of the Magdeburgen∣sian Centuriators, and that the opposing of them was the occa∣sion of that Work. So fatally does partiality and the interest of a Cause spoil the most brave and generous. Undertakings. What has been hitherto Prefaced, the Reader, I hope, will not censure as an unprofitable digression, nor think it altoge∣ther unsuitable to the present Work, whereof 'tis like he will expect some short account. Being some time since engaged, I know not how, in searching after the Antiquities of the Apo∣stolic Age, I was then strongly importuned to have carried on the design for some of the succeeding Ages. This I then
wholly laid aside, without any further thoughts of re-assuming it. For experience had made me sufficiently sensible of the difficulty of the thing, and I well foresaw how almost impos∣sible it was to be managed to any tolerable satisfaction; so small and inconsiderable, so broken and imperfect are the ac∣counts that are left us of those early times. Notwithstanding which, I have once more suffered my self to be engaged in it, and have endeavoured to hunt out, and gather together those Ruines of Primitive Story that yet remain, that I might do what honour I was able to the memory of those brave and worthy men, who were so instrumental to plant Christianity in the World, to seal it with their blood, and to oblige Poste∣rity by those excellent Monuments of Learning and Piety which they left behind them. I have bounded my account within the first three hundred years, notwithstanding the bar∣renness and obscurity of those Ages of the Church. Had I con∣sulted my own ease or credit, I should have commenced my design from that time which is the period of my present Under∣taking, viz. the following Saeculum, when Christianity became the Religion of the Empire, and the Records of the Church fur∣nish us with large and plentiful materials for such a Work. But I confess my humour and inclination led me to the first and best Ages of Religion, the Memoires whereof I have picked up, and thereby enabled my self to draw the lineaments of as ma∣ny of those Apostolical persons, as concerning whom I could re∣trive any considerable notices and accounts of things. With what success, the Reader must judge: with whom what enter∣tainment it will find, I know not, nor am I much sollicitous. I have done what I could, and am not conscious to my self, that I have been wanting in any point either of Fidelity or Care. If there be fewer persons here described then the space of almost three hundred years may seem to promise, and less said con∣cerning some of them then the Reader does expect, he will I presume be more just and charitable, then to charge it upon me, but rather impute it to the unhappy fate of so many ancient Records as have been lost through the carelessness and unfaith∣fulness of succeeding Times. As far as my mean abilities do reach, and the nature of the thing will admit, I have endea∣voured the Readers satisfaction; and though I pretend not to present him an exact Church-History of those Times, yet I think I may without vanity assure him, that there is scarce any material passage of Church-Antiquity, of which in some of
these Lives he will not find a competent and reasonable ac∣count. Nor is the History of those Ages maimed and lame onely in its main limbs and parts, but (what is greatly to be bewailed) purblind and defective in its eyes, I mean, confused and uncertain in point of Chronology. The greatest part of what we have is from Eusebius, in whose account of Times some things are false, more uncertain, and the whole the worse for passing through other hands after his. Indeed next to the reco∣vering the lost portions of Antiquity, I know nothing would be more acceptable, then the setting right the disjointed Frame of those Times: a Cure, which which we hope for shortly from a very able hand. In the mean time for my own part, and so far as may be useful to the purposes of the following Papers, I have by the best measures I could take in some hast, drawn up a Chronology of these three Ages, which though it pretends not to the utmost exactness and accuracy that is due to a matter of this nature, yet it will serve however to give a quick and present prospect of things, and to shew the connexure and concurrence of Ecclesiastical Affairs with the Times of the Roman Empire. So far as I follow Eusebius, I principally rely upon the accounts given in his History, which being written after his Chronicon, may be supposed the issue of his more exact researches, and to have passed the judgment of his riper and more considering thoughts. And perhaps the Reader will say (and I confess I am somewhat of his mind) had I observed the same rule towards these Papers, he had never been troubled with them. But that is too late now to be recalled; and 'tis folly to bewail what is impossible to be remedied. ERRATA. INTROD. p. 5. l. 41. read Claudius. p. 14. l. 45. r. ornaverint. p. 17. l. 40. r. refers. p. 29. l. 41. after assures add us. BOOK. p. 5. l. 41. marg. r. . p. 101. l. 51. r. Emperour. p. 149. l. 12. for to r. of. p. 156. l. 6. after that r. is. p. 164. l. 34. r. condemnation. p. 228. r.  p. 240. l. 23. r. librum. p. 262. l. 37. for spread r. spilt. p. 273. l. 20. for them r. him.
THE CONTENTS. The Introduction. THE several periods of the three first Ages. Our Lords coming, and the seasonableness of it for the propagation of the Gospel. His entrance upon his Prophetic Office, and the sum of his Ministry. The success of his do∣ctrine, and the several places where he preached. The Story of Agbarus not altogether improbable. Our Lords Death. What attestation given to the passages concerning Christ by Heathen Writers. The testimony of Taci∣tus. Pilats relation sent to Tiberius. The Acts of Pilat what. Pi∣lats Letter now extant, Spurious. The Apostles entering upon their Com∣mission, and first Acts after our Lords Ascension. How long they continued in Judaea. Their dispersion to preach in the Gentile Provinces, and the success of it. The state of the Church after the Apostolic Age. The mighty progress of Christianity. The numbers and quality of its Converts. Its speedy and incredible success in all Countries, noted out of the Writers of those Times. The early conversion of Britain to Christianity. The gene∣ral declension of Paganism. The silence and ceasing of their Oracles. This acknowledged by Porphyry to be the effect of the Christian Religion ap∣pearing in the World. A great argument of its truth and divinity. The means contributing to the success of Christianity. The miraculous Powers then resident in the Church. This proved at large out of the Primitive Writers. The great learning and abilities of many of the Churches Cham∣pions. The most eminent of the Christian Apologists. The principal of them that engaged against the Heresies of those Times. Others renowned for other parts of Learning. The indefatigable zeal and industry used in the propagation of Christianity. Instructing and Catechizing new Con∣verts. Schools erected. Travelling to preach in all parts of the World. The admirable lives of the ancient Christians. The singular efficacy of the Christian doctrin upon the minds of men. A holy life the most acce∣ptable sacrifice. Their incomparable patience and constancy under suffer∣ings. A brief Survey of the Ten Persecutions. The first begun by Nero. His brutish extravagances, and inhumane cruelties. His burning Rome, and the dreadfulness of that conflagration. This charged upon the Chri∣stians, and their several kinds of punishment noted out of Tacitus. The chief of them that suffered. The Persecution under Domitian. The Vices of that Prince. The cruel usage of S. John. The third begun by Tra∣jan. His character. His proceeding against the Christians as illegal So∣cieties. Plinies Letter to Trajan concerning the Christians, with the Em∣perours answer. Adrian, Trajan's successor; a mixture in him of Vice and Vertue. His persecuting the Christians. This the fourth Persecution. The mitigation of it, and its breaking out again under Antoninus Pius. The excellent temper and learning of M. Aurelius. The fifth Persecution
raised by him. Its fierceness in the East, at Rome, especially in France; the most eminent that suffered there. The Emperours Victory in his Ger∣man Wars gained by the Christians Prayers. Severus his temper: his cruelty towards the Christians. The chief of the Martyrs under the sixth Persecution. Maximinus his immoderate ambition and barbarous cruelty. The Author of the seventh Persecution. This not universal. The common evils and calamities charged upon the Christians. Decius the eighth Per∣secutor; otherwise an excellent Prince. The violence of this Persecution, and the most noted sufferers. The foundations of Monachism when laid. The ninth Persecution, and its rage under Valerian. The most eminent Martyrs. The severe punishment of Valerian: his miserable usage by the Persian King. The tenth Persecution begun under Dioclesian, and when. The fierceness and cruelty of that time. The admirable carriage and re∣solution of the Christians under all these sufferings. The proper influence of this argument to convince the World. The whole concluded with La∣ctantius his excellent reasonings to this purpose. Page i. The Life of S. STEPHEN the Protomartyr. The violent opposition that Christianity at its first appearance met with both from Jews and Gentiles. S. Stephens Kindred unknown. One of the Seventy. The great Charity of the Primitive Believers. Dissension between the Hebrews and Grecians. Hellenists who. The Original of Deacons in the Christian Church. The nature of their Office: the number and qua∣lification of the Persons. Stephen's eminent accomplishments for the place. The envy and opposition of the Jews against him. The Synagogue of the Li∣bertines, what. Of the Cyrenians, Alexandrians, &c. Their disputa∣tion with S. Stephen, and the success of it. False Witnesses suborned to depose against him. The several parts of their charge considered. The mighty veneration of the Jews for their Temple and the Mosaic Institu∣tions. Its destruction by Titus; and their attempts to rebuild it under Julian frustrated by a miracle. Stephen's Apology before the Sanhedrin. The Jews rage against him. He is encouraged by a vision. Stoning to death, what kind of punishment; the manner of it among the Jews. S. Ste∣phen's Martyrdom. His Character and excellent Vertues. The time and place of his suffering. The place and manner of his burial. His body first discovered, when and how. The story of its translation to Constan∣tinople. The miracles said to be done by his Reliques, and at his Memoriae. Several reported by S. Augustin. What credit to be given to them. Mi∣racles how long, and why continued in the Church. The vain pretences of the Church of Rome. Pag. 1. The Life of S. PHILIP the Deacon and Evangelist. His Birth-place. The confounding him with S. Philip the Apostle. His election to the Office of a Deacon. The dispersion of the Church at Jeru∣salem. Philip's preaching at Samaria. Inveterate prejudices between the Samaritans and the Jews. The great success of S. Philip's Ministry.
The Impostures of Simon Magus, and his embracing Christianity. The Christians at Samaria confirmed by Peter and John. Philip sent to Gaza. His meeting with the Aethiopian Eunuch. What Aethiopia here meant. Candace who. The Custom of retaining Eunuchs in the Courts of the Eastern Princes. This Eunuch who. His Office. His Religion and great Piety. His Conversion and Baptism by S. Philip. The place where he was baptized. The Eunuchs return, and propagating Chri∣stianity in his own Countrey. Philip's journey to Caesarea, and fixing his abode there. His four daughters Virgin-Prophetesses. His death. Pag. 23. The Life of S. BARNABAS the Apostle. His Sirname Joses. The title of Barnabas whence added to him. His Countrey and Parents. His Education and Conversion to Christianity. His generous Charity. S. Pauls address to him after his Conversion. His Commission to confirm the Church of Antioch. His taking S. Paul into his assistance. Their being sent with contributions to the Church at Jerusalem. Their peculiar separation for the Ministry of the Gentiles. Imposition of hands the usual Rite of Ordination. Their travels through several Countries. Their success in Cyprus. Barnabas at Lystra taken for Jupiter, and why. Their return to Antioch. Their Embassy to Je∣rusalem about the controversie concerning the legal Rites. Barnabas sedu∣ced by Peters dissimulation at Antioch. The dissension between him and S. Paul. Barnabas his journey to Cyprus. His voyage to Rome, and preaching the Christian Faith there. His Martyrdom by the Jews in Cyprus. His Burial. His body when first discovered. S. Matthews Hebrew Gospel found with it. The great priviledges hereupon conferred upon the See of Salamis. A description of his person and temper. The Epistle anciently published under his name. The design of it. The pra∣ctical part of it excellently managed under the two ways of Light and Darkness. Pag. 33. The Life of S. TIMOTHY the Apostle and Evangelist. S. Timothies Countrey and Kindred. His religious education. The great advantages of an early Piety. Converted to Christianity by S. Paul, and made choice of to be his companion. Circumcised by S. Paul, and why. This no contradicting S. Pauls doctrine concerning Circumcision. His Travels with S. Paul for the propagation of the Faith. His return from Thessalonica, and S. Pauls two Epistles to that Church. S. Timo∣thy consecrated Bishop of Ephesus. The consent of Antiquity herein. Or∣dination in those times usually done by Prophetic Designation, and the rea∣son of it. Timothies age enquired into. The importance of  and  (let no man despise thy youth,) the words shewed to be used by the best Writers for a considerable age. S. Pauls first and second Epistle to him, and the importance of them. The manners of the Ephesians noted. Their Festival called . S. Timothies martyrdom. The time of his death, place of his burial, and translation of his body. His weak
and infirm constitution. His great abstinence, and admirable zeal. S. Pauls singular affection for him. Different from Timotheus in S. Denys the Areopagite. Another Timothy S. Pauls Disciple, martyred under An∣toninus. Pag. 45. The Life of S. TITUS Bishop of Crete. His Country enquired into. The report of his noble extract. His education and conversion to Christianity. His acquaintance with, and accompanying S. Paul to the Synod at Jerusalem. S. Pauls refusing to circumcise him, and why. His attending S. Paul in his travels. Their arrival in Crete. Titus constituted by him Bishop of that Island. The testimonies of the Ancients to that purpose. The intimations of it in S. Pauls Epistle to him. S. Pauls censure of the People of Crete, justified by the account which Gentile Writers give of their evil manners. A short view of the Epistle it self. The dire∣ctions concerning Ecclesiastic persons. His charge to exhort and convince Gain-sayers. Crete abounding with Heretical Teachers. Jewish Fables and Genealogies what, and whence derived. The Aeones and  of the ancient Gnostics borrowed from the  of the Heathen Poets. This shewn by particular instances. Titus commanded to attend S. Paul at Ni∣copolis. His coming to him into Macedonia. His following S. Paul to Rome, and departure into Dalmatia. The Story of Pliny the Younger's being converted by him in Crete, censured. His age and death. The Church erected to his memory. Pag. 55. The Life of S. DIONYSIUS the Areopagite. Dionysius born at Athens. The quality of his Parents. His domestic Studies. His foreign Travels. Egypt frequented as the staple place of all recondite Learning. His residence at Heliopolis. The strange and mi∣raculous Eclipse at our Saviours Passion. Dionysius his remarques upon it. His return to Athens, and being made one of the Judges of the Areo∣pagus. The nature of this Court: the number and quality of its Judges. S. Paul arraigned before it: his Discourse, and its success. Dionysius his conversion. His further instruction by Hierotheus. Hierotheus, who. Dionysius constituted Bishop of Athens. A brief account of his Story according to those that confound him with Dionysius Bishop of Paris. These shewn to be distinct. The original and procedure of the Mistake enquired into. A probable account given of it. Dionysius his Martyrdom at Athens, and the time of it. A fabulous miracle reported of his Scull. The description of his person, and the hyperbolical commendations which the Greeks give of him. The Books ascribed to him. These none of his. Apollinaris (probably) shewed to be the Author of them. Several passages of the Ancients noted to that purpose. Books why oft published under other mens names. These Books the Fountain of Enthusiasm and mystical Theology. A passage in them instanced in to that purpose. Pag. 65.
The Life of S. CLEMENS Bishop of Rome. His Birth-place. His Parents, Kindred, Education, and Conversion to Chri∣stianity noted out of the Books extant under his name. His relation to the Imperial Family shewed to be a mistake. His being made Bishop of Rome. The great confusion about the first Bishops of that See. A proba∣ble account endeavoured concerning the order of S. Clemens his succession, and the reconciling it with the times of the other Bishops. What account given of him in the ancient Epistle to S. James. Clemens his appointing Notaries to write the Acts of the Martyrs, and dispatching Messengers to propagate the Gospel. The Schism in the Church of Corinth; and Cle∣mens his Epistle to that Church. An enquiry into the time when that Epistle was written. The Persecution under Trajan. His proceeding against the Heteriae. A short relation of S. Clemens his troubles out of Simeon Metaphrastes. His banishment to Cherson. Damnatio ad Metalla, what. The great success of his Ministry in the place of his exile. S. Clemens his Martyrdom, and the kind of it. The anniversary mi∣racle reported on the day of his solemnity. The time of his Martyrdom. His genuine Writings. His Epistle to the Corinthians: the commen∣dations given of it by the Ancients. Its Stile and Character. The great modesty and humility that appears in it. The fragment of his second Epistle. Supposititious Writings. The Recognitions; their several ti∣tles, and different editions. Their Antiquity, what. A conjecture con∣cerning the Author of them. The censures of the Ancients concerning the corrupting of them, considered. The Epistle to S. James. Pag. 77. The Life of S. SIMEON Bishop of Jerusalem. The heedless confounding him with others of the like name. His Parents and near Relation to our Saviour. The time of his Birth. His strict Education and way of Life. The Order and Institution of the Recha∣bites, what. His conversion to Christianity. The great care about a Successor to S. James Bishop of Jerusalem. Simeon chosen to that place, when and why. The causes of the destruction of the Jewish state. The original and progress of those Wars briefly related. The miserable state of Jerusalem by Siege, Pestilence, and Famine. Jerusalem stormed. The burning of the Temple, and the rage of the Fire. The number of the Slain and Captives. The just accomplishment of our Lords predictions. The many Prodigies portending this destruction. The Christians forewarned to depart before Jerusalem was shut up. Their withdrawment to Pella. The admirable care of the Divine Providence over them. Their return back to Jerusalem, when. The flourishing condition of the Christian Church there. The occasion of S. Simeons Martyrdom. The infinite jealousie of the Roman Emperours concerning the line of David. Simeons appre∣hension and crucifixion. His singular torments and patience. His great age, and the time of his death. Pag. 89.
The Life of S. IGNATIUS Bishop of Antioch. His Originals unknown. Called Theophorus, and why. The Story of his being taken up into our Saviours arms, refuted. His Apostolic education. S. Johns Disciple. His being made Bishop of Antioch. The eminency of that See. The order of his succession stated. His prudent Govern∣ment of that Church. The tradition of his appointing Antiphonal hymns by revelation. Trajans persecuting the Church at Antioch. His discourse with Ignatius. Ignatius his cruel usage. His sentence passed. His be∣ing transmitted to Rome: and why sent so far to his execution. His ar∣rival at Smyrna, and meeting with S. Polycarp. His Epistles to several Churches. His coming to Troas, and Epistles thence. His arrival at Porto Romano. Met on the way by the Christians at Rome. His ear∣nest desire of Martyrdom. His praying for the prosperity of the Church. The time of his Passion. His being thrown to wild Beasts. What kind of punishment that among the Romans. The collection of his Remains, and their transportation to Antioch; and the great honours done to them. The great plenty of them in the Church of Rome. Trajans surceasing the Persecution against the Christians. The dreadful Earthquakes happening at Antioch. Ignatius his admirable Piety. His general solicitude for the preservation and propagation of the Christian Doctrine, as an Apostle. His care, diligence, and fidelity, as a Bishop. His patience and fortitude, as a Martyr. His Epistles. Polycarps commendation of them. Pag. 99. The Life of S. POLYCARP Bishop of Smyrna. The place of his Nativity. The honour and eminency of Smyrna. His edu∣cation under S. John. By him constituted Bishop of Smyrna. Whether the same with the Bishop to whom S. John committed the young man. S. Polycarp the Angel of the Church of Smyrna mentioned in the Apoca∣lyps. Ignatius his arrival at Smyrna. His Letters to that Church, and to S. Polycarp. His Journey to Rome about the Quartodeciman Con∣troversie. The time of it enquired into. Anicetus his succession to the See of Rome. His reception there by Anicetus. Their mutual kindness notwithstanding the difference. His stout opposing Heretics at Rome, His sharp treatment of Marcion, and mighty zeal against those early cor∣rupters of the Christian Doctrine. Irenaeus his particular remarques of S. Polycarps actions. The Persecution under M. Antoninus. The time of Polycarps Martyrdom noted. The acts of it written by the Church of Smyrna: their great esteem and value. S. Polycarp sought for. His Martyrdom foretold by a dream. His apprehension, and being conducted to Smyrna. Irenarchae, who. Polycarps rude treatment by Herodes. His being brought before the Proconsul. Christians refused to swear by the Emperours genius, and why. His pious and resolute answers. His slight∣ing the Proconsuls threatnings. His sentence proclaimed. Asiarchae who. Preparation for his burning. His Prayer before his death. Mi∣raculously preserved in the fire. Dispatched with a Sword. The care of
the Christians about his Remains: this far from a superstitious venera∣tion, Their annual meeting at the place of his Martyrdom. His great Age at his death. The day of his Passion. His Tomb how honoured at this day. The judgments happening to Smyrna after his death. The Faith and Patience of the Primitive Christians noted out of the Preface to the Acts of his Martyrdom. His Epistle to the Philippians. Its usefulness. Highly valued and publicly read in the ancient Church. The Epistle it self. Pag. 111. The Life of S. QUADRATUS Bishop of Athens. His Birth-place enquired into. His Learning. His Education under the Apostles. Publius Bishop of Athens. Quadratus his succession in that See. The degenerate state of that Church at his coming to it. His in∣defatigable zeal and industry in its reformation. Its purity and flourishing condition noted by Origen. Quadratus his being endowed with a spirit of Prophecy, and a power of Miracles. This person proved to be the same with our Athenian Bishop. The troubles raised against the Christians under the reign of Aadrian. Aadrians Character. His disposition to∣wards Religion, and base thoughts of the Christians. His fondness for the Learning and Religion of Greece. His coming to Athens, and kindness to that City. His being initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries. These mysteries what, and the degrees of initiation. Several addresses made to the Emperour in behalf of the Christians. Quadratus his Apologe∣tic. Ser. Granianus his Letter to Aadrian concerning the Christians. The Emperours Rescript. His good opinion afterwards of Christ and his Religion. Quadratus driven from his charge. His Martyrdom and place of Burial. Pag. 131. The Life of S. JUSTIN the Martyr. His vicinity to the Apostolic times. His Birth-place and Kindred. His Studies. His Travels into Egypt. To what Sect of Philosophy he ap∣plied himself. The occasion and manner of his strange conversion to Chri∣stianity related by himself. Christianity the onely safe and satisfactory Philosophy. The great influence which the patience and fortitude of the Christians had upon his conversion. The force of that argument to persuade men. His vindication of himself from the charges of the Gentiles. His continuance in his Philosophic habit. The  what, and by whom worn.  His coming to Rome, and opposing Heretics. Marcion who, and what his Principles. Justin's first Apo∣logy to the Emperours, and the design of it. Antoninus his Letter to the Common-Council of Asia in favour of the Christians. This shewed not to be the Edict of Marcus Antoninus. Justin's journey into the East, and con∣ference with Trypho the Jew. Trypho who. The malice of the Jews against the Christians. Justin's return to Rome. His contests with Crescens the Philosopher. Crescens his temper and principles. Justin's second Apology. To whom presented. The occasion of it. M. Antoninus
his temper. Justin fore-tells his own fate. The Acts of his Martyrdom. His arraignment before Rusticus Praefect of Rome. Rusticus who: the great honours done him by the Emperour. Justin's discourse with the Praefect. His freedom and courage. His sentence and execution. The time of his death. His great Piety, Charity, Impartiality, &c. His natural parts and excellent learning. His unskilfulness in the Hebrew Language noted. A late Author censured. His Writings. The Epistle to Diognetus. Diognetus who. His stile and character. The unwar∣rantable opinions he is charged with. His indulgence to Heathens. , what.  in what sense used by the ancient Fathers. How applied to Christ, how to Reason. His opinion concerning Chiliasm. The concurrence of the Ancients with him herein. This by whom first star∣ted; by whom corrupted. Concerning the state of the Soul after this life. The doctrine of the Ancients in this matter. His assertion concerning Angels, maintained by most of the first Fathers. The original of it. Their opinion concerning Free-will shewed not to be opposed by them to the Grace of God. What influence Justin's Philosophic education had upon his opinions. His Writings enumerated. Pag. 139. The Life of S. IRENAEUS Bishop of Lyons. His Countrey enquired into. His Philosophical Studies. His institution by Papias. Papias who. His education under S. Polycarp. His coming into France, and being made Presbyter of Lyons. Pothinus who; how and by whom sent into France. The grievous Persecution there under M. Aurelius. The Letters of the Martyrs to the Bishop of Rome. Pope Eleutherius guilty of Montanism. Irenaeus sent to Rome. His writing against Florinus and Blastus. The martyrdom of Pothinus Bishop of Lyons, and the cruelty exercised towards him. Irenaeus succeeds. His great diligence in his charge. His oppostion of Heretics. The Synods said to have been held under him to that purpose. The Gnostic Heresies spread in France. Their monstrous Villanies. His confutation of them by word and writing. Variety of Sects and Divisions objected by the Hea∣thens against Christianity. This largely answered by Clemens of Alexan∣dria. Pope Victor's reviving the controversie about Easter. The contests between him and the Asiatics. Several Synods to determine this matter. Irenaeus his moderate interposal. His Synodical Epistle to Victor. The Persecution under Severus. Its rage about Lyons. Irenaeus his Mar∣tyrdom and place of Burial. His Vertues. His industrious and elabo∣rate confutation of the Gnostics. His stile and phrase. Photius his censure of his Works. His errour concerning Christs age. Miraculous gifts and powers common in his time. His Writings. Pag. 161.
The Life of S. THEOPHILUS Bishop of Antioch. The great obscurity of his Originals. His learned and ingenuous Education, and natural parts. An account of his conversion to Christianity, and the reasons inducing him thereunto, collected out of his own Writings. His scrupling the Doctrine of the Resurrection. The great difficulty of enter∣taining that Principle. Synesius his case. Theophilus his conquering this objection. His great satisfaction in the Christian Religion. His ele∣ction to the Bishoprick of Antioch. His desire to convert Autolycus. Autolycus who. His mighty prejudice against Christianity. Theophi∣lus his undertaking him, and his free and impartial debating the case with him. His excellent menage of the controversie. His vigorous op∣posing the Heresies of those times. His Books against Marcion and Her∣mogenes. His death, and the time of it. S. Hierom's Character of his Works. His Writings. Pag. 173. The Life of S. MELITO Bishop of Sardis. His Countrey and Birth-place. His excellent Parts and Learning. His being made Bishop of Sardis. His coelibay. His Prophetic gifts. The Persecution under Marcus Aurelius. Melito his Apology for the Chri∣stians. A fragment of it cited out of Eusebius. The great advantages of Christianity to the Empire. His endeavour to compose the Paschal Con∣troversie. His Book concerning that Subject. His journey to Jerusa∣lem to search what Books of the Old Testament were received by that Church. The Copy of his Letter to his Brother Onesimus concerning the Canon of the Old Testament. What Books admitted by the ancient Church. Solomons Proverbs stiled by the Ancients the Book of Wisdom. His death and burial. The great variety of his Works. Ʋnjustly suspected of dangerous notions. An account given of the titles of two of his Books most liable to suspicion. His Writings enumerated. Pag. 179. The Life of S. PANTAENUS Catechist of Alexandria. The various conjectures concerning his Original. The probabilities of his Jewish descent, what. Whether born in Sicily or at Alexandria. His first institution. The famous Platonic School erected by Ammonius at Alexandria. The renown of that place for other parts of Learning. Pantaenus addicted to the Sect of the Stoics. The Principles of that Sect shewed to agree best with the dictates of Christianity. His great emprove∣ments in the Christian Doctrine. The Catechetic School at Alexandria, with its antiquity. Pantaenus made Regent of it. When he first entered upon this Office. An Embassie from India to the Bishop of Alexandria for some to preach the Christian Faith. Pantaenus sent upon this errand. This Countrey where situate. His arrival in India, and converse with the Brach∣mans.
Their temper, principles, and way of life. Their agreement with the Stoics. Foot-steps of Christianity formerly planted there. S. Matthews Hebrew Gospel found among them and brought by Pantaenus to Alexan∣dria. How far and by whom Christianity was propagated in India after∣wards. Pantaenus his return to Alexandria, and resuming his Cateche∣tic Office. His Death. His great Piety and Learning. Pag. 185. The Life of S. CLEMENS of Alexandria. His Countrey. The progress of his Studies. His instruction in the Chri∣stian doctrin. His several Masters. His impartial enquiry after truth. The elective Sect, what. Its excellent genius. Clemens of this Sect. His succeeding Pantaenus in the Catechetic School. He is made Pres∣byter of Alexandria. His Stromata published, when. Lawfulness of flying in time of Persecution. His journey into the East. What Tracts he wrote there. His going from Jerusalem to Antioch, and return to Ale∣xandria. His death. The Elogia given of him by the Ancients. His admirable learning. His Writings. His Hypotyposes: Photius his account of them; corrupted by the Arrians. His Books yet extant, and the orderly gradation of them. His Stromata, what the design of it. His stile, what in this, what in his other Books. A short Apology for some unwary assertions in his Writings. His Writings enumerated. Pag. 193. The Life of TERTULLIAN Presbyter of Carthage. His names, whence. His Father, who. His education in all kinds of Lear∣ning. His skill in the Roman Laws. Different from Tertylian the Lawyer. His way of life before his conversion, enquired into. His mar∣ried condition. His conversion to Christianity, when. The great cruelty used towards the Christians. Severus his kindness to them. Tertullians excellent Apology in their behalf. His address to Scapula, and the ten∣dency of that discourse. Severus his violent persecuting the Christians. His prohibition of the Heteriae. Tertullians Book to the Martyrs, and concerning Patience. His zeal against Heresies, and Writings that way. His Book De Pallio, when written, and upon what occasion. His be∣coming Presbyter, when. His Book De Corona, and what the occasion of it. His declining from the Catholic Party. Montanus who and whence. His principles and practices. Tertullians owning them, and upon what occasion. His morose and stubborn temper. How far he com∣plied with the Montanists, and acknowledged the Paraclete. How he was imposed upon. His Writings against the Catholics. The severity of the ancient Discipline. Episcopus Episcoporum, in what sense meant by Tertullian concerning the Bishop of Rome. His separate meetings at Carthage. His death. His Character. His singular parts and learning. His Books. His phrase and stile. What contributed to its perplexedness and ob∣scurity. His un-orthodox opinions. A brief plea for him. Pag. 201.
The Life of ORIGEN Presbyter, Catechist of Alexandria. Origen, where and when born. Several conjectures about the original of his name. His Father who. His juvenile education and great towardliness in the knowledge of the Scriptures. His Philosophical Studies under Cle∣mens Alexandrinus. His Institution under Ammonius. Ammonius who. His fame and excellency confessed by the Gentile Philosophers. Another Origen his Contemporary: These two heedlesly confounded. His Fathers Martyrdom, and the confiscation of his Estate. Origen's re∣solute encouragement of his Father. His own passionate desire of Martyr∣dom. His maintenance by an honourable Matron of Alexandria. His zeal against Heretics. His setting up a private School. He succeeds Clemens in the Catechetic School at eighteen years of Age. The frequency of his Auditors. Many of them Martyrs for the Faith. Origen's reso∣lution in attending upon the Martyrs. His danger. His couragious act at the Temple of Serapis. His emasculating himself, and the reasons of it. The eminent chastity of those Primitive Times. Origen's journey to Rome, and return to Alexandria. His taking in a Colleague into the Catechetic Office. He learns the Hebrew Tongue. The prudent method of his Teaching. Ambrosius converted. Who he was. His great intimacy with Origen. Origen sent for by the Governour of Ara∣bia. His journey into Palestin, and teaching at Caesarea. Remanded by the Bishop of Alexandria. Alexander Severus his excellent Vertues, and kindness for the Christian Religion. Origen sent for by the Empress Mammaea to Antioch. He begins to write his Commentaries. How many Notaries, and Transcribers imployed, and by whom maintained. Nota∣ries, their Original and Office: Their use and institution in the Primi∣tive Church. His journey into Greece. His passage through Palestin, and being ordained Presbyter at Caesarea. Demetrius of Alexandria his envy and rage against him. Origen condemned in two Synods at Alexandria, and one at Rome. The resignation of his Catechetic School to Heraclas. Heraclas who. The story of his offering Sacrifice. The credit of this story questioned, and why. His departure from Alexandria, and fixing at Caesarea. The eminency of his School there. Gregorius Thaumaturgus his Scholar. His friendship with Firmilian: Firmilian who. The Persecution under Maximinus. Origen's Book written to the Martyrs. His retirement whither. He compares the Versions of the Bible. His Tetrapla, Hexapla, and Octapla, what, and how managed: A Specimen given of them. His second journey to Athens. His going to Nicomedia, and Letter to Africanus about the History of Susanna. His confutation of Beryllus in Arabia. His answer to Celsus. Celsus who. Origens Letters to Philip the Emperour. The vanity of making him a Christian. Origens journey into Arabia to refute Heresies. The Helce∣saitae who: What their Principles. Alexanders miraculous election to the See of Jerusalem; His Coadjntorship, Government, Sufferings, and Martyrdom. Origens grievous sufferings at Tyre under the Decian Persecution. His deliverance out of Prison; Age, and Death. His Character. His strict life. His mighty zeal, abstinence, contempt of the World, indefatigable diligence and patience noted. His natural
parts: incomparable learning. His Books and their several Classes. His stile, what. His unsound opinions. The great Out-cry against him in all Ages. The Apologies written in his behalf. Several things noted out of the Ancients to extenuate the charge. His assertions not Dogmatical. Not intended for public view. Generally such as were not determined by the Church. His Books corrupted, and by whom. His own complaints to that purpose. The testimonies of Athanasius, and Theo∣timus, and Haymo in his vindication. Great errours and mistakes ac∣knowledged. What things contributed to them. His great kindness for the Platonic Principles. S. Hierom's moderate censure of him. His repenting of his rash Propositions. His Writings enumerated, and what now extant. Pag. 213. The Life of S. BABYLAS Bishop of Antioch. His Originals obscure. His education and accomplishments enquired into. Made Bishop of Antioch, when. Antioch taken by the King of Persia. Recovered by the Roman Emperour. Babylas his fidelity in his charge. The Decian Persecution, and the grounds of it: severely urged by the Emperours Edicts. Decius his coming to Antioch. His attempt to break into the Christian Congregation. Babylas his bold resistance. This applied to Numerianus, and the ground of the mistake. The like reported of Philip the Emperour. Decius his bloudy act related by S. Chrysostom. His rage against Babylas, and his examination of him. The Martyrs resolute answer. His imprisonment and hard usage. The different accounts concerning his death. Three Youths his fellow-sufferers, in vain attempted by the Emperour. Their Martyrdom first, and why. Babylas beheaded. His command that his chains should be buried with him. The translation of his body under Constantius. The great sweetness and pleasantness of the Daphne. Apollo's Temple there. S. Babylas his bones translated thither by Gallus Caesar. The Oracle immediately rendered dumb. In vain con∣sulted by Julian. The confession of the Daemon. Julian's command for removing Babylas his bones. The Martyrs Remains triumphantly carried into the City. The credit of this Story sufficiently attested. The thing owned by Libanius and Julian. Why such honour suffered to be done to the Martyr. Julian afraid of an immediate vengeance. His Persecution against the Christians at Antioch. The sufferings of Theodorus. The Temple of Apollo fired from Heaven. Pag. 241.
The Life of S. CYPRIAN Bishop of Carthage. His Birth-place. The Nobility of his Family exploded. The confounding him with another Cyprian Bishop of Antioch. These two vastly distinct. S. Cyprian's education. His professing Rhetoric. His conversion to Chri∣stianity by the persuasions of Caecilius. Their mutual endearment. His great charity to the Poor. His Baptism. Made Presbyter and Bishop of Carthage. His modest declining the honour. His Proscription, recess, and care of his Church during that retirement. The case of the Lapsed. A brief account of the rise of the Novatian Sect. The fierceness of the Per∣secution at Carthage under Decius. The courage and patience of the Christians. Cyprian's return. A Synod at Carthage about the case of the Lapsed, and the cause of Novatian. Their determination of these matters. Ratified by a Synod at Rome: and another at Antioch. A second Synod about the same affair. Moderation in the Ecclesiastic Disci∣pline used in the time of Persecution. The great Pestilence at Carthage. The miserable state of that City. The mighty charity of S. Cyprian and the Christians at that time. These evils charged upon the Christians. S. Cyprians vindication of them. The time of baptizing Infants deter∣mined in a Synod. Another Synod to decide the case of the Spanish Bishops that had lapsed in the time of Persecution. The Controversie concerning the Rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Heretics. This resolved upon in a Synod of LXXXVII African Bishops. The immoderate heats between Cyprian, Firmilian, and Stephen Bishop of Rome about this matter. Cyprian arraigned before the Proconsul, His resolute carriage. His banishment to Curubis. His Martyrdom foretold him by a Vision. His Letters during his exile. The severe usage of the Christians. His withdrawment and why. His apprehension and examination before the Proconsul. The sentence passed upon him. His Martyrdom, and place of burial. His piety, fidelity, chastity, humility, modesty, charity, &c. His natural parts. His learning wherein it mainly consisted. The polite∣ness and elegancy of his stile. His quick proficiency in Christian studies. His frequent converse with Tertullian's Writings. His Books. The ex∣cellency of those ascribed to him. The great honours done to his me∣mory. Pag. 251. The Life of S. GREGORY Bishop of Neocaesarea. S. Gregory where born. His Kindred and Relations. The rank and quality of his Parents. His youthful studies. His study of the Laws. His travels to Alexandria. The calumny there fixed upon him, and his miraculous vindication. His return through Greece. His studying the Law at Berytus, and upon what occasion. His fixing at Caesarea, and putting himself under the tutorage of Origen. The course of his studies. His Panegyric to Origen at his departure. Origen's Letter to him, and the importance of it. His refusal to stay at Neocaesarea, and retirement into the Wilderness. His stunning to be made Bishop of Neocaesarea.
Consecrated Bishop of that City during his absence. His acceptance of the charge, and the state of that place at his entrance upon it. His miraculous instruction in the great mysteries of Christianity. His Creed. The mira∣cles wrought by him in his return. His expelling Daemons out of a Gen∣tile Temple, and the success of it. His welcom entrance into the City, and kind entertainment. His diligent preaching to the People. His erecting a Church for Divine Worship, and its signal preservation. An horrible Plague stopped by his prayers. The great influence of it upon the minds of the People. His judging in Civil Causes. His drying up a Lake by his prayers, which had been the cause of an implacable quarrel between two Bro∣thers; and his restraining the overflowings of the River Lycus. The signal vengeance inflicted upon two Jews, counterfeit Beggars. The fame and multitude of his miracles, and the authorities to justifie the credibility of them. The rage and cruelty of the Decian Persecution in the Re∣gions of Pontus and Cappadocia. His persuading the Christians to withdraw. His own retirement. The narrow search made for him, and his miraculous escape. His betrayer converted. His return to Neocaesa∣rea, and instituting solemnities to the memories of the Martyrs, and the reasons of it. The inundations of the Northern Nations upon the Roman Empire. His Canonical Epistle to rectifie the disorders committed by oc∣casion of those inroads. His meeting with others in the Synod at Antioch, about the cause of Paulus Samosatenus. His return home, age, and death. His solemn thanks to God for the flourishing state of his Church, and com∣mand concerning his Burial. The excellent Character given of him by S. Basil. His Writings. The charge of Sabellianism. S. Basils Apolo∣gy for him in that behalf. Modesty to be used in censuring the ancient Fathers, and why. Pag. 267. The Life of S. DIONYSIUS Bishop of Alexandria. The place of his nativity. His Family and Relations. His conversion how. His studies under Origen. Whether a professed Rhetorician. His suc∣ceeding Heraclas in the Catechetic School. His being constituted Bishop of Alexandria, and the time of it. Apreparatory Persecution at Ale∣xandria, how begun. The severity of it. The Martyrdom of Apollonia, and the fond honours done her in the Church of Rome. The Persecu∣tion continued and promoted by Decius his Edicts. The miserable condition of the Christians. The sudden Conversion and Martyrdom of a Guard of Souldiers. Dionysius apprehended and carried into banish∣ment, there to be beheaded. A pleasant account of his unexpected deli∣verance by means of a drunken rout. His retirement into the Desarts. His return to Alexandria. The great number and quality of the Lapsed in the late Persecution. The contests about this matter. Dionysius his judgment and practice herein. The case of Serapion. His dealing with Novatian about his Schism, and the copy of his Letter to him. His be∣ing engaged in the Controversie about Rebaptization, and great modera∣tion in it. His Letter to Pope Sixtus about a person baptized by Heretics. Valerianus the Emperours kindness to Christians. How turned to cruelty. Dionysius brought before Aemilian. His discourse with him, and resolute constancy. He is condemned to be banished. His transportation into the
Desarts of Lybia. The success of his Ministry there. Innumerable Bar∣barians converted to the Faith. Gallienus his relaxing the Persecution. His Letter to Dionysius granting liberty to the Christians. Alexandria shut up by the usurpation of Aemilian. The Divisions within, and Siege without. The horrible Pestilence at Alexandria; and the singular kind∣ness and compassion of the Christians there above the Heathens. Diony∣sius his confutation of Sabellius. His unwary expressions, and the charge against him. His vindication, both by himself and by S. Athanasius. His writing against Nepos. Nepos who, and what his Principles and Followers. Dionysius his encounter with the heads of the Party; his convincing and reducing them back to the Orthodox Church. His engaging in the Controversie against Paulus Samosatenus. The loose ex∣travagant, and insolent temper and manners of that man. Dionysius his Letter to the Synod at Antioch concerning him. The success of that affair. Dionysius his death. His Writings and Epistles. The loss of them be∣wailed.
THE INTRODUCTION. The several periods of the three first Ages. Our Lords coming, and the sea∣sonableness of it for the propagation of the Gospel. His entrance upon his Prophetic Office, and the sum of his Ministry. The success of his doctrine, and the several places where he preached. The Story of Agbarus not alto∣gether improbable. Our Lords Death. What attestation given to the passages concerning Christ by Heathen Writers. The testimony of Taci∣tus. Pilats relation sent to Tiberius. The Acts of Pilat what. Pi∣lats Letter now extant, Spurious. The Apostles entering upon their Com∣mission, and first Acts after our Lords Ascension. How long they continued in Judaea. Their dispersion to preach in the Gentile Provinces, and the success of it. The state of the Church after the Apostolic Age. The mighty progress of Christianity. The numbers and quality of its Converts. Its speedy and incredible success in all Countries, noted out of the Writers of those Times. The early conversion of Britain to Christianity. The gene∣ral declension of Paganism. The silence and ceasing of their Oracles. This acknowledged by Porphyry to be the effect of the Christian Religion ap∣pearing in the World. A great argument of its truth and divinity. The means contributing to the success of Christianity. The miraculous Powers then resident in the Church. This proved at large out of the Primitive Writers. The great learning and abilities of many of the Churches Cham∣pions. The most eminent of the Christian Apologists. The principal of them that engaged against the Heresies of those Times. Others renowned for other parts of Learning. The indefatigable zeal and industry used in the propagation of Christianity. Instructing and Catechizing new Con∣verts. Schools erected. Travelling to preach in all parts of the World. The admirable lives of the ancient Christians. The singular efficacy of the Christian doctrin upon the minds of men. A holy life the most acce∣ptable sacrifice. Their incomparable patience and constancy under suffer∣ings. A brief Survey of the Ten Persecutions. The first begun by Nero. His brutish extravagances, and inhumane cruelties. His burning Rome, and the dreadfulness of that conflagration. This charged upon the Chri∣stians, and their several kinds of punishment noted out of Tacitus. The chief of them that suffered. The Persecution under Domitian. The Vices of that Prince. The cruel usage of S. John. The third begun by Tra∣jan. His character. His proceeding against the Christians as illegal So∣cieties. Plinies Letter to Trajan concerning the Christians, with the Em∣perours answer. Adrian, Trajan's successor; a mixture in him of Vice and Vertue. His persecuting the Christians. This the fourth Persecution. The mitigation of it, and its breaking out again under Antoninus Pius. The excellent temper and learning of M. Aurelius. The fifth Persecution raised by him. Its fierceness in the East, at Rome, especially in France; the most eminent that suffered there. The Emperours Victory in his Ger∣man Wars gained by the Christians Prayers. Severus his temper: his cruelty towards the Christians. The chief of the Martyrs under the sixth
Persecution. Maximinus his immoderate ambition and barbarous cruelty. The Author of the seventh Persecution. This not universal. The common evils and calamities charged upon the Christians. Decius the eighth Per∣secutor; otherwise an excellent Prince. The violence of this Persecution, and the most noted sufferers. The foundations of Monachism when laid. The ninth Persecution, and its rage under Valerian. The most eminent Martyrs. The severe punishment of Valerian: his miserable usage by the Persian King. The tenth Persecution begun under Dioclesian, and when. The fierceness and cruelty of that time. The admirable carriage and re∣solution of the Christians under all these sufferings. The proper influence of this argument to convince the World. The whole concluded with La∣ctantius his excellent reasonings to this purpose. I. THE state of the Christian Church in the three first Ages of it may be considered under a three∣fold period: as it was first planted and establi∣shed by our Lord himself during his residence in the World; as it was enlarged and propaga∣ted by the Apostles, and first Missionaries of the Christian Faith; and as it grew up and prospered from the Apostolic Age till the times of Constan∣tine, when the Empire submitted it self to Chri∣stianity. God, who in former times was pleased by various methods of Revelation to convey his will to mankind, hath in these last days spoken to us by his Son. For the great blessing of the promised Seed after a long succession of several Ages being come to its just maturity and perfection, God was resolved to perform the mercy promised to the Fathers, and to re∣member his holy Covenant, the Oath which he sware to our Father Abraham. Accordingly, In the fulness of time God sent his Son. It was in the decli∣ning part of Augustus his reign, when this great Ambassador arrived from Heaven, to publish to the World the glad tidings of salvation. A period of time (as Contr. Cels. lib. 2. p. 79. Origen observes) wisely ordered by the divine Pro∣vidence. For the Roman Empire being now in the highest pitch of its grandeur, all its parts united under a Monarchical Government, and an universal Peace spread over all the Provinces of the Empire, that had opened a way to a free and uninterrupted commerce with all Na∣tions, a smoother and speedier passage was hereby prepared for the pub∣lishing the doctrin of the Gospel, which the Apostles and first Preachers of Religion might with the greater ease and security carry up and down to all quarters of the World. As for the Jews, their minds were awa∣kened about this time with busie expectations of their Messiah's coming: and no sooner was the birth of the holy Jesus proclaimed by the arrival of the Eastern Magi, who came to pay homage to him, but Jerusalem was filled with noise and tumult, the Sanhedrin was convened, and con∣sulted by Herod, who jealous of his late gotten Soveraignty, was resol∣ved to dispatch this new Competitor out of the way. Deluded in his hopes of discovery by the Magi, he betakes himself to acts of open force and cruelty, commanding all Infants under two years old to be put to death, and among them it seems his own Son, which made Macrob. Sa∣turnal. l. 2. c. 4. p. 279. Augustus pleasantly say (alluding to the Jewish custom of abstaining from Swines-flesh) It is better to be Herods Hog then his Son. But the Providence of God secured the holy Infant, by timely admonishing his Parents to re∣tire
into Aegypt, where they remained till the death of Herod, which happening not long after, they returned. II. NEAR thirty years our Lord remained obscure under the retire∣ments of a private life, applying himself (as the Ancients tell us, and the Evangelical History plainly intimates) to Joseph's imployment, the trade of a Carpenter. So little Patronage did he give to an idle unaccountable course of Life. But now he was called out of his Shades and Solitudes, and publicly owned to be that person, whom God had sent to be the great Prophet of his Church. This was done at his Baptism, when the Holy Ghost in a visible shape descended upon him, and God by an audi∣ble voice testified of him, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-plea∣sed. Accordingly he set himself to declare the Counsels of God, Go∣ing about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom. He particularly explained the Moral Law, and resto∣red it to its just authority and dominion over the minds of men, redeem∣ing it from those corrupt and perverse interpretations which the Ma∣sters of the Jewish Church had put upon it. He next insinuated the ab∣rogation of the Mosaic Oeconomy, to which he was sent to put a pe∣riod, to enlarge the bounds of salvation, and admit both Jew and Gen∣tile to terms of mercy: that he came as a Mediator between God and Man, to reconcile the World to the favour of Heaven by his death and sufferings, and to propound pardon of sin and eternal life to all that by an hearty belief, a sincere repentance, and an holy life, were willing to embrace and entertain it. This was the sum of the doctrin which he preached every where, as opportunity and occasion led him, and which he did not impose upon the World meerly upon the account of his own authority and power, or beg a precarious entertainment of it; he did not tell men they must believe him, because he said he came from God, and had his Warrant and Commission to instruct and reform the World, but gave them the most satisfactory and convictive evidence, by doing such miracles as were beyond all powers and contrivances either of Art or Nature, whereby he unanswerably demonstrated, that he was a Teacher come from God, in that no man could do those miracles which he did, except God were with him. And because he himself was in a little time to return back to Heaven, he ordained twelve, whom he called Apostles, as his imme∣diate Delegates and Vicegerents, to whom he deputed his authority and power, furnished them with miraculous gifts, and left them to carry on that excellent Religion which he himself had begun, to whose assistance he joined LXX Disciples, as ordinary coadjutors and companions to them. Their Commission for the present was limited to Palestin, and they sent out onely to seek and to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel. III. HOW great the success of our Saviours Ministry was, may be guessed from that complaint of the Pharisees, John 12.19. Behold the World is gone after him, people from all parts in such vast multitudes flocking after him, that they gave him not time for necessary solitude and retirement. Indeed he went about doing good, preaching the word throughout all Judaea, and healing all that were possessed of the Devil. The seat of his ordinary abode was Galilee, residing for the most part (says one of the Ancients seb. Demon∣strat. Evang. l. 9. p. 439.) in Galilee of the Gentiles, that he might there sow and reap the first fruits of the calling of the Gentiles. We usually find him preaching at Naza∣reth, at Cana, at Corazin and Bethsaida, and the Cities about the Sea of Tiberias, but especially at Capernaum, the Metropolis of the Province, a
place of great commerce and traffique. He often visited Judaea, and the parts about Jerusalem, whither he was wont to go up at the Paschal so∣lemnities, and some of the greater festivals, that so the general con∣course of people at those times might minister the fitter opportunity to spread the net, and to communicate and impart his doctrine to them. Nor did he who was to be a common Saviour, and came to break down the Partition-wall, disdain to converse with the Samaritans, so contem∣ptible and hateful to the Jews. In Sychar not far from Samaria, he freely preached, and gained most of the inhabitants of that City to be Prose∣lytes to his doctrine. He travelled up and down the Towns and Villa∣ges of Caesarea Philippi, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis, and where he could not come, the renown of him spread it self, bringing him Disciples and Fol∣lowers from all quarters. Indeed his fame went throughout all Syria, and there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, Judaea, Decapolis, Idumaea, from beyond Jordan, and from Tyre and Sidon. Nay might we believe the story, so solemnly reported by Eusebius H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 13. p. 31. and the Ancients, (and excepting the silence of the Evangelical Historians, who recorded onely some of the actions and passages concerning our Saviour, I know no wise argument against it) Acbarus Prince of Edessa beyond Euphra∣tes, having heard of the fame of our Saviours miracles, by Letters hum∣bly besought him to come over to him, whose Letter, together with our Lords answer, are extant in Eusebius, there being nothing in the Letters themselves that may justly shake their credit and authority, with much more to this purpose, transcribed (as he tells us) out of the Records of that City, and by him translated out of Syriac into Greek, which may give us some account why none of the Ancients before him make any mention of this affair, being generally strangers to the Lan∣guage, the Customs and Antiquities, of those Eastern Countries. IV. OUR Lord having spent somewhat more then three years in the public exercise of his Ministry, kept his last Passover with his Apo∣stles; which done, he instituted the Sacramental Supper, consigning it to his Church as the standing memorial of his death, and the Seal of the Evangelical Covenant, as he appointed Baptism to be the Foederal Rite of Initiation, and the public Tessera or Badge of those that should profess his Religion. And now the fatal hour was at hand: being betrayed by the treachery of one of his own Apostles, he was apprehended by the Officers and brought before the public Tribunals. Heavy were the crimes charged upon him, but as false as spightful; the two main Ar∣ticles of the Charge were Blasphemy against God, and Treason against the Emperour: and though they were not able to make them good by any tolerable pretence of proof, yet did they condemn and execute him upon the Cross, several of themselves vindicating his innocency, that he was a righteous man, and the Son of God. The third day after his interment he rose again, appeared to and conversed with his Disciples and Fol∣lowers, and having taken care of the affairs of his Church, given a lar∣ger Commission, and fuller instructions to his Apostles, he took his leave of them, and visibly ascended into Heaven, and sate down on the right hand of God, as head over all things to the Church, Angels, Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him. V. THE faith of these passages concerning our Saviour, are not onely secured to us by the report of the Evangelical Historians, and
that justified by eye-witnesses, the evidence of miracles, and the succes∣sive and uncontrolled consent of all Ages of the Church, but (as to the substance of them) by the plain confession of Heathen Writers, and the enemies of Christianity. Annal. l. 15. c. 44. p. 319. Tacitus tells us, That the Author of this Re∣ligion was Christ, who under the reign of Tiberius was put to death by Pontius Pilat, the Procurator of Judaea: whereby though this detesta∣ble Superstition was suppressed for the present, yet did it break out again, spreading it self not onely through Judaea, the fountain of the mischief, but in the very City of Rome it self, where whatever is wicked and shameful meets together, and is greedily advanced into reputation. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2. p. 40. vid. Oros. adv. Pag. l. 7. c. 4. fol. 293. Eusebius assures us, that after our Lords Ascension, Pilat according to custom, sent an account of him to the Emperour: which Tiberius brought before the Senate, but they rejected it under pretence that cognizance had been taken of it before it came to them; it being a fundamental Law of the Roman State, that no new god could be taken in without the Decree of the Senate; but that however Tiberius continued his good thoughts of Christ, and kindness to the Christians. For this he cites the testimony of Tertullian, who in his Apolog. c. 5. p. 6. &c. 21. p. 20. Apology presented to the Roman Powers affirms, that Tiberius, in whose time the Christian Reli∣gion entered into the World, having received an account from Pilat out of Palestin in Syria concerning the truth of that Divinity that was there, brought it to the Senate with the Prerogative of his own vote: but that the Senate, because they had not before approved of it, would not admit it; however the Emperour continued of the same mind, and threatned punishment to them that accused the Christians. And before Tertullian, Justin Martyr Apolog. II. p. 76. speaking concerning the death and sufferings of our Saviour, tells the Emperours, that they might satisfie themselves in the truth of these things from the Acts written under Pontius Pilat. It being customary not only at Rome to keep the Acts of the Senate and the People, but for the Governors of Provinces to keep account of what me∣morable things happened in their Government, the Acts whereof they transmitted to the Emperour. And thus did Pilat during the Procura∣torship of his Province. How long these Acts remained in being, I know not: but in the controversie about Easter, we find the Quartode∣cimans Ap. Epiph. Haeres. L. p. 182. justifying the day on which they observed it from the Acts of Pilat, wherein they gloried that they had found the truth. Whether these were the Acts of Pilat, to which Justin appealed, or rather those Acts of Pilat drawn up and published by the command of Eseb. H. Eccl. l. 9. c. 5. p. 350. Maximinus, Dioclesians successor, in disparagement of our Lord and his Religion, is uncertain, but the latter of the two far more probable. However Pilats Letter to Tiberius (or, as he is there called Claudis) at this day extant in the Anacephalaeosis Ad calcem . de Excid. ub. Hicros. p. 683. of the younger Egesippus, is of no great credit, though that Author challenges greater antiquity then some allow him, being probably contemporary with S. Ambrose, and by many, from the great conformity of stile and phrase, thought to be S. Ambrose himself, who with some few additions compiled it out of Josephus. But then it is to be considered, whe∣ther that Anacephalaeosis be done by the same, or (which is most proba∣ble) by a much later hand. Some other particular passages concerning our Saviour are taken notice of by Gentile Writers, the appearance of the Star by Calcidius, the murder of the Infants by Macrobius, the Eclips at our Saviours Passion by Phlegon Trallianus (not to speak of his mira∣cles frequently acknowledged by Celsus, Julian, and Porphyry) which I shall not insist upon.
VI. IMMEDIATELY after our Lords Ascension (from whence we date the next period of the Church) the Apostles began to execute the Powers intrusted with them. They presently filled up Judas his vacancy by the election of a new Apostle, the lot falling upon Matthias, and he was numbred with the eleven Apostles. Being next endued with power from on high (as our Lord had promised them) furnished with the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, they set themselves to preach in places of the greatest concourse, and to the faces of their greatest ene∣mies. They who but a while before fled at the first approach of dan∣ger, now boldly plead the cause of their crucified Master, with the im∣mediate hazard of their lives. And that nothing might interrupt them in this imployment, they instituted the Office of Deacons, who might attend the inferiour Services of the Church while they devoted them∣selves to what was more immediately necessary to the good of souls. By which prudent course Religion got ground apace, and innumerable Converts were daily added to the Faith: till a Persecution arising upon S. Stephen's Martyrdom, banished the Church out of Jerusalem, though this also proved its advantage in the event and issue, Christianity be∣ing by this means the sooner spread up and down the neighbour Coun∣tries. The Apostles notwithstanding the rage of the Persecution, re∣mained still at Jerusalem, onely now and then dispatching some few of their number to confirm and setle the Plantations, and to propagate the Faith, as the necessities of the Church required. And thus they con∣tinued for near twelve years together, our Lord himself having commanded them not to depart Jerusalem and the parts thereabouts, till twelve years after his Ascension, as the ancient Tradition mentioned both by Ap. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 18. p. 186. Apollonius, and Stromat. l. 6. p. 636. vid. Life of S. Peter, Sect. 11. num. 5. Clemens Alexandrinus informs us. And now they thought it high time to apply themselves to the full execution of that Commission which Christ had given them, to go teach and baptize all Nations. Accordingly having setled the general affairs and concern∣ments of the Church, they betook themselves to the several Provinces of the Gentile World, preaching the Gospel to every Nation under Heaven, so that even in a literal sense, their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the World. Infinite multitudes of peo∣ple in all Cities and Countries (says Lib. 2. c. 3. p. 4. Eusebius) like Corn into a well-filled Granary, being brought in by that grace of God that brings sal∣vation. And they whose minds were heretofore distempered and over-run with the errour and idolatry of their Ancestors, were cured by the Sermons and Miracles of our Lords Disciples, and shaking off those chains of Darkness and Slavery which the merciless Daemons had put upon them, freely embraced and entertained the knowledge and service of the onely true God, the great Creator of the World, whom they worshiped according to the holy Rites and Rules of that di∣vine and wisely contrived Religion which our Saviour had introduced into the World. But concerning the Apostles travels, the success of their Ministry, the Places and Countries to which they went, the Chur∣ches they planted, their Acts and Martyrdoms for the Faith, we have given an account in a Work peculiar to that Subject, so far as the Re∣cords of those times have conveyed any material notices of things to us. It may suffice to observe, that God was pleased to continue S. John to a very great age, beyond any of the rest, that he might superintend and cultivate, confirm and establish what they had planted, and be as a stand∣ing
and lively Oracle, to which they might from all parts have recourse in any considerable doubts and exigences of the Church, and that he might seal and attest the truth of those things, which men of corrupt and perverse minds, even then began to call in question. VII. HENCE then we pass on to survey the state of the Church from the Apostolic Age till the times of Constantine, for the space of at least two hundred years. And under this period we shall principally remarque two things. What progress the Christian Religion made in the World. Secondly, What it was that contributed to so vast a growth and increase of it. That Christianity from the nature of its precepts, the sublimeness of its principles, its contrariety to the established Rites and Religions of the World, was likely to find bad entertainment, and the fiercest opposition, could not but be obvious to every impartial con∣siderer of things; which accordingly came to pass. For it met with all the discouragement, the secret undermining, and open assaults which malice and prejudice, wit and parts, learning and power were able to make upon it. Notwithstanding all which, it lift up its head, and pro∣spered under the greatest oppositions. And the triumph of the Chri∣stian Faith will appear the more considerable, whether we regard the number and quality of its Converts, or the vast circumference to which it did extend and diffuse it self. Though it appeared under all manner of dis∣advantages to recommend it self, yet no sooner did it set up its Standard, but persons from all parts, and of all kind of principles and educations began to flock to it, so admirably affecting very many both of the Greeks and Barbarians (as Origen Contr. Cels. l. 1. p. 21, 22. tells Celsus) and they both wise and unwise, that they contended for the truth of their Religion even to the laying down their lives, a thing not known in any other Profession in the World. And Ibid. l. 3. p. 124. elsewhere he challenges him to shew such an unspeakable multitude of Greeks and Barbarians reposing such a confidence in Aescu∣lapius, as he could of those that had embraced the Faith of the holy Jesus. And when Ib. l. 1. p. 7. Celsus objected that Christianity was a clandestin Religion, that sculked and crept up and down in corners; Origen answers, That the Religion of the Christians was better known throughout the whole World, then the dictates of their best Philosophers. Nor were they onely mean and ignorant persons that thus came over, but (as Adv. Gent. l. 2. p. 21. Arnobius observes) men of the acutest parts and learning; Orators, Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians, Philosophers, despising their formerly∣beloved sentiments, sate down here. Apol. c. 37. p. 30. Tertullian addressing himself to the Roman Governours in behalf of the Christians, assures them, that al∣though they were of no long standing, yet that they had filled all pla∣ces of their Dominions, their Cities, Islands, Castles, Corporations, Coun∣cils, Armies, Tribes, Companies, the Palace, Senate, and Courts of Ju∣dicature: that if they had a mind to revenge themselves, they need not betake themselves to clancular and sculking Arts, their numbers were great enough to appear in open Arms, having a Party not in this or that Province, but in all quarters of the World: nay, that naked as they were, they could be sufficiently revenged upon them; for should they but all agree to retire out of the Roman Empire, the World would stand amazed at that solitude and desolation that would ensue upon it, and they would have more Enemies then Friends or Citizens left among them. And he Ad Sap. c. 4. p. 71. bids the President Scapula consider, that if he went on with the Persecution, what he would do with those many thousands both of men
and women, of all ranks and ages, that would readily offer themselves, what Fires and Swords he must have to dispatch them. Nor is this any more then what Ad Traj. lib. 10. Epist. 97. Pliny himself confesses to the Emperour, that the case of the Christians was a matter worthy of deliberation, especially by rea∣son of the multitudes that were concerned, for that many of each Sex, of every age and quality were and must be called in question, this Su∣perstition having infected and over-run not the City onely, but Towns and Countries, the Temples and Sacrifices being generally desolate and forsaken. VIII. NOR was it thus onely in some Parts and Provinces of the Roman Empire, but in most Nations and Countries. Dial. cum Typh. p. 345. Justin Martyr tells the Jew, that whatever they might boast of the universality of their Re∣ligion, there were many places of the World whither neither they nor it ever came: whereas there was no part of mankind, whether Greeks or Barbarians, or by what name soever they were called, even the most rude and unpolished Nations, where Prayers and Thanksgivings were not made to the great Creator of the World through the name of the crucified Jesus. The same Bardesanes Lib. de Fat. ap. Euseb. praep. Evang. l. 6. c. 10. p. 279. the Syrian, Justins contempo∣rary, affirms, that the followers of the Christian Institution, though li∣ving in different parts of the World, and being very numerous in every Climat and Countrey, were yet all called by the name of Christians. So De Justit. l. 5. c. 13. p. 494. Lactantius, the Christian Law (says he) is entertained from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, where every Sex, and Age, and Nation, and Countrey does with one heart and soul worship God. If from generals we descend to particular Places and Countries, Adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 3. p. 52. Irenaeus, who entered upon the See of Lyons Ann. Chr. CLXXIX. affirms, that though there were different languages in the World, yet that the force of Tradition, (or that Doctrin that had been delivered to the Church) was but one and the same; that there were Churches setled in Germany, Spain, France, in the East, in Egypt and Lybia, as well as in the mid∣dle of the World. Adv. Judaeos c. . . 189. Tertullian, who probably wrote not above twenty years after Irenaeus, gives us in a larger account. Their sound (says he) went through all the Earth, and their words to the ends of the World. For in whom but Christ did all Nations believe? Parthians, Medes, Elamites, the inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Armenia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia, of Pontus, Asia, and Pamphylia, those who dwell in Egypt, Afric, and beyond Cyrene, strangers at Rome, Jews at Jerusalem, and other Nations; as also now the Getuli, and the Mauri, the Spaniards, and the Gauls, yea and those places of Britain, which were unap∣proachable by the Roman Armies, are yet subdued to Christ; the Sar∣matae also and the Daci, the Germans and the Scythians, together with many undiscovered Countries, many Islands and Provinces unknown to us, which he professes himself unable to reckon up. In all which places (says he) the name of Christ reigns, as before whom the Gates of all Cities are set open, and to whom none are shut; before whom Gates of Brass fly open, and bars of iron are snapt asunder. To which Lib. 2. p. 23. Arnobius adds the Indians, the Persians, the Serae, and all the Islands and Provinces, which are visited by the rising or setting Sun, yea, and Rome it self, the Empress of all. IX. FROM Tertullians account we have a most authentic testimony how early Christianity stretched it self over this other World, having before his time conquered the most rough and inaccessible parts of Bri∣tain
to the banner of the Cross, which may probably refer to the con∣version of King Lucius (the first Christian King that ever was) a potent and considerable Prince in this Island, who embraced the Christian Re∣ligion about the year CLXXXVI. and sent a solemn Embassie to Eleuthe∣rius, Bishop of Rome, for some who might further instruct him and his people in the Faith; who accordingly dispatched Faganus and Derwianus hither upon that errand. Not that this was the first time that the Gospel made its way through the  (as Clemens Epist. ad Corinth. p. 28. calls the British Ocean, and so the Ancients constantly stile it) the unpassable Ocean, and those worlds which are beyond it; that is, the Britannic Islands: it had been here many years before, though probably stifled and overgrown with the an∣cient Paganism and Idolatry. St. Clemens Ibid. p. 8. tells us of St. Paul, that he preached both in the East and West; and having instructed the whole world in righteousness, made his way to the utmost bounds of the West: by which he must either mean Spain, or more probably Britain, and it may be both. Accordingly Theodoret Comment. in Psal. 116. speaking of his coming into Spain, says, that besides that, he brought great advantage to the Isles of the Sea; and he reckons De curand. Graecor. affect. Serm. IX. p. 125. the Cimbri and the Britains among the Nati∣ons which the Apostles (and he particularly mentions the Tent-maker) converted to the Christian Faith. If after all this, it were necessary to enter into a more minute and particular disquisition, I might enquire not only in what Countries, but in what Towns and Cities in those Coun∣tries Christianity fixed it self, in what places Episcopal Sees were erect∣ed, and what succession of Bishops are mentioned in the Records of the Church; but that this would not well consist with the designed short∣ness of this Introduction, and would be more perhaps than the Readers patience would allow. X. THE shadows of the night do not more naturally vanish at the rising of the Sun, than the darkness of Pagan Idolatry and Superstition fled before the Light of the Gospel; which the more it prevailed, the clearer it discovered the folly and impiety of their worship: Their so∣lemn Rites appeared more trifling and ridiculous, their Sacrifices more barbarous and inhumane, their Daemons were expelled by the meanest Christian, their Oracles became mute and silent, and their very Priests began to be ashamed of their Magic Charms and Conjurations; and the more prudent and subtle heads among them, who stood up for the Rites and Solemnities of their Religion, were forced to turn them into mysti∣cal and allegorical meanings, far enough either from the apprehension or intention of the vulgar. The truth is, the Devil, who for so many ages had usurped an Empire and tyranny over the souls of men, became more sensible every day, that his Kingdom shaked; and therefore sought, though in vain, by all ways to support and prop it up. Indeed some time before our Saviours Incarnation the most celebrated Oracle at Del∣phos had lost its credit and reputation, as after his appearance in the world they sunk and declined every day; whereof their best Writers universally complain, that their gods had forsaken their Temples, and Oracular Recesses, and had left the world in darkness and obscurity; and that their Votaries did in vain solicit their Counsels and answers. Plutarch, who lived under Trajan, wrote a particular Tract (still extant) concerning the ceasing of Oracles, which he endeavours to resolve partly into natural, partly into moral, partly into political causes, though all his Philosophy was too short to give a just and satisfactory account of it.
One cause he assigns of it is, the death and departure of those Daemons, that heretofore presided over these Oracles. To which purpose he relates a memorable passage, . p. 419. concerning a voice that called three times aloud to one Thamus an Egyptian Ship-master and his company, as they sailed by the Echinadae Islands, commanding him when they came near to Pa∣lodes to make Proclamation, that the great Pan was dead, which he did; and the news was entertained not with the resentment of one or two, but of many, who received it with great mourning and consternation. The circumstances of this story he there reports more at large, and adds, that the thing being published at Rome, Thamus was sent for by Tiberius, to whom he gave an account, and satisfied him in the truth of it. Which circumstance of time Eusebius Praepar. Evang. l. 5. c. 17. p. 207. observes corresponds with our Lords conversing in the world, when he began openly to dispossess Dae∣mons of that power and tyranny which they had gained over mankind. And (if the calculation which some make, hit right) it fell in about the time of our Saviours Passion, who led captivity captive, spoiled principa∣lities and powers, and made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in his Cross, and by his Death destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. XI. HOWEVER that the silence of Oracles, and the enervating the power of Daemons was the effect of the Christian Religion in the world, we need no more then the plain confession of Porphyry himself (truth will sometimes extort a confession out of the mouth of its great∣est enemy) who says, . Euseb. ubi supr. c. 1. p. 179. that now its no wonder if the City for so many years has been overrun with sickness, Aesculapius and the rest of the gods having with∣drawn their converse with men: For that since Jesus began to be worshipped, no man hath received any pub∣lic help or benefit by the gods. A great argument, as Eusebius well urges, of our Saviours Divine authority, and the truth of his Doctrine. For when (says he a little before) such numbers of fi∣ctitious deities fled at our Lords aprearance, who would not with admi∣ration behold it as an uncontroulable demonstration of his truly saving and excellent Religion, whereby so many Churches and Oratories through all the world both in Cities and Villages, and even in the De∣sarts and Solitudes of the most barbarous Nations have been erected and consecrated to the great Creator, and the only Sovereign of the World: when such multitudes of Books have been written, containing the most incomparable rules and institutions to form mankind to a life of the most perfect Virtue and Religion, precepts accommodate not to men only, but to women and children: when he shall see that the Ora∣cles and Divinations of the Daemons are ceased and gone; and that the Divine and Evangelical virtue of our Saviour no sooner visited mankind, but they began to leave off their wild and frantic ways of worship, and to abhor those humane sacrifices (many times of their dearest relations) wherewith they had been wont to propitiate and atone their bloody and merciless Daemons, and into which their wisest and greatest men had been bewitched and seduced. I add no more but S. Chrysostoms Orat. III. adv. Judaeos, p. 420. Tom. 1. challenge, Judge now with me, O thou incredulous Jew, and learn the excellency of the truth; what Impostor ever gathered to himself so many Churches throughout the world, and propagated his worship from one end of
it to the other, and subdued so many Subjects to his Crown, even when thousands of impediments lay in the way to hinder him? cer∣tainly no man: a plain evidence that Christ was no Impostor, but a Saviour and Benefactor, and the Author of our life and happiness. XII. WE have seen with what a mighty success Christianity dis∣played its banners over the world; let us next consider what it was that contributed to so vast an increase and propagation of it. And here not to insist upon the blessing of the Divine Providence, which did immediately superintend its prosperity and welfare, nor upon the in∣trinsic excellency of the Religion it self, which carried essential chara∣cters of Divinity upon it, sufficient to recommend it to every wise and good man, there were five things among others that did especially con∣duce to make way for it; the miraculous powers then resident in the Church, the great learning and abilities of its champions and defenders, the indefatigable industry used in propagating of it, the incomparable lives of its professors, and their patience and constancy under sufferings. It was not the least means that procured the Christian Religion a just ve∣neration from the world, the miraculous attestations that were given to it. I shall not here concern my self to shew, that miracles truly and pub∣licly wrought are the highest external evidence that can be given to the truth of that Religion, which they are brought to confirm; the force of the argument is sufficiently pleaded by the Christian Apologists. That such miraculous powers were then ordinary in the Church, we have the concurrent testimonies of all the first Writers of it. Justin Martyr Apol. I. p. 45. tells the Emperor and the Senate, that our Lord was born for the sub∣version of the Daemons, which they might know from the very things done in their sight; for that very many who had been vexed and posses∣sed by Daemons, throughout the world, and in this very City of theirs, whom all their exorcists and conjurers were not able to relieve, had been cured by several Christians through the name of Jesus that was crucified under Pontius Pilate; and that at this very time they still cur'd them, dis∣arming and expelling the Daemons out of those whom they had possess'd. The same he affirms in his discourse with Trypho Dial. cum Tryph. p. 24. & p. 302. the Jew, more than once, that the Devils trembled and stood in awe of the power of Christ; and to this day being adjured by the name of Jesus Christ crucified under Pontius Pilat the Procurator of Judaea, they were obedient to Christi∣ans. Irenaeus Adv. Haeres. l. 2. c. 56. p. 215. c. 57. p. 218. assures us that in his time, the Christians enabled by the Grace of Christ, raised the dead, ejected Daemons, and unclean spirits; the persons so dispossessed coming over to the Church: others had Visions and the gift of Prophesie; others by Imposition of hands healed the Sick, and restored them to perfect health. But I am not able (says he) to rec∣kon up the number of those gifts, which the Church throughout the world receiving from God, does every day freely exercise in the name of Jesus Christ crucified under Pontius Pilate, to the benefit of the world. Tertullian Apol. c. 23. p. 22. challenges the Roman Governors to let any possessed person be brought before their own Tribunals, and they should see, that the spirit being commanded to speak, by any Christian, should as truly confess himself to be a Devil, as at other times he falsly boasted himself to be a God. And he tells Scapula, Ad Scap. c. 2. p. 6. that they rejected, disgraced, and expel∣led Daemons every day, as most could bear them witness. Origen Contr. Cels. l. 2. p. 80. bids Celsus take notice, that whatever he might think of the reports which the Gospel makes concerning our Saviour; yet that it was the great and mag∣nificent
work of Jesus, by his name to heal even to this day, whom God pleased; that he Ib. l. 3. p. 124. himself had seen many, who by having the name of God and Christ called over them, had been delivered from the greatest evils, frenzy and madness, and infinite other distempers, which neither men nor devils had been able to cure. What influence these miraculous effects had upon the world, he lets us know elsewhere. The Apostles of our Lord (says Lib. 1. p. 34. he) without these miraculous powers would never have been able to have moved their Auditors, nor perswaded them to desert the institutions of their Country, and to embrace their new Doctrine; and having once embraced it, to defend it even to death, in defiance of the greatest dangers. Yea even to this day the foot-steps of that Holy Spirit, which appeared in the shape of a Dove, are pre∣served among the Christians; they exorcize Daemons, perform many cures, and according to the will of God foresee and foretel things to come. At which, though Celsus and his personated Jew may laugh, yet I affirm further, that many even against their inclinations have been brought over to the Christian Religion, their former opposition of it being suddenly changed into a resolute maintaining of it unto death, after they have had Visions communicated to them; several of which nature we our selves have seen. And should we only reckon up those at which we our selves have been present and beheld, it may be it would only make the Infidels merry; supposing that we like themselves did forge and feign them. But God bears witness with my conscience, that I do not endeavour by falsly-contrived stories, but by various power∣ful instances to recommend the Divine Religion of the Holy Jesus. More testimonies of this kind I could easily produce from Minucius Fae∣lix, Cyprian, Arnobius, and Lactantius; but that these are enough to my purpose. XIII. ANOTHER advantage that exceedingly contributed to the triumph of Christianity, was the singular learning of many, who be∣came champions to defend it: For it could not but be a mighty satisfa∣ction, especially to men of ordinary capacities, and mean employments (which are the far greatest part of mankind) to see persons of the most smart and subtil reasonings, of the most acute and refined understand∣ings, and consequently not easily capable of being imposed upon by arts of sophistry and plausible stories, trampling upon their former sentiments and opinions, and not only entertaining the Christian Faith, but defend∣ing it against its most virulent opposers. 'Tis true indeed the Gospel at its first setting out was left to its own naked strength, and men of the most unpolisht breeding made choice of to convey it to the world, that it might not seem to be an humane artifice, or the success of it be ascribed to the parts and powers of man. But after that for an hundred years to∣gether it had approved it self to the world, and a sharper edge was set upon the malice and keenness of its adversaries, it was but proper to take in external helps to assist it. And herein the care of the Divine provi∣dence was very remarkable, that as miracles became less common and fre∣quent in the Church, God was pleased to raise up even from among the Gentiles themselves, men of profound abilities, and excellent learning, who might , (as Julian Theod. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 8. p. 131. said of the Christians of his time) beat them at their own weapons, and wound them with arrows drawn out of their own quiver; and it was high time to do so: for the Gentiles did not only attaque the Christians and their Religion by
methods of cruelty, and by arts of insinuation, not only object what wit and subtilty could invent, to bear any shadow and pretence of rea∣son, but load them with the blackest crimes, which nothing but the utmost malice and prejudice could ever suspect to be true. This gave occasion to the Christian Apologists, and the first Writers against the Gentiles, who by their learned and rational discourses assoil'd the Chri∣stians from the things charged against them, justified the reasonableness, excellency, and divinity of their Religion; and expos'd the folly and falshood, the brutishness and impiety, the absurd and trifling rites of the Pagan Worship; by which means prejudices were removed, and thou∣sands brought over to the Faith. In this way they that rendred them∣selves most renowned, and did greatest service to the Christian cause, were especially these, Quadratus Bishop of Athens, and Aristides, for∣merly a famous Philosopher of that City, a man wise and eloquent, dedi∣cated each an Apologetic to the Emperor Adrian: Justin the Martyr, be∣sides several Tracts against the Gentiles, wrote two Apologies; the first presented to Antoninus Pius, the second to M. Aurelius, and the Senate: about which time also Athenagoras presented his Apology to M. Aurelius, and Aurelius Commodus: not to mention his excellent discourse concerning the Resurrection. To the same M. Aurelius, Melito Bishop of Sardis exhibi∣ted his Apologetic Oration for the Christians: under this Emperor also flourished Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis in Asia, and dedicated to him an incomparable discourse in defence of the Christian Faith; besides five Books which he wrote against the Gentiles, and two concerning the truth. Not long after Theophilus Bishop of Antioch compos'd his three excellent Books for the conviction of Autolycus: and Miltiades presented an Apo∣logy (probably) to the Emperor Commodus. Tarian the Syrian, Scholar to Justin Martyr, a man learned and eloquent, among other things wrote a Book against the Gentiles, which sufficiently evidences his great abili∣ties. Tertullian, a man of admirable learning, and the first of the Latins that appeared in this cause, under the Reign of Severus, published his Apologetic, directed to the Magistrates of the Roman Empire; besides his Books, Ad Nationes, De Idololatria, Ad Scapulam, and many more. After him succeeded Origen, whose eight Books against Celsus did not greater service to the Christian cause, than they did honour to himself. Minu∣cius Faelix, an eminent advocate at Rome, wrote a short, but most ele∣gant Dialogue between Octavius and Caecilius, which (as Lactantius De Instit. l. 5. c. 1. p. 459. long since observed) shews, how fit and able an advocate he would have been to assert the truth, had he wholly applied himself to it. About the time of Gallus and Volusian, Cyprian addressed himself in a discourse to Deme∣trian the Proconsul of Afric, in behalf of the Christians and their Reli∣gion, and published his Tract De Idolorum vanitate, which is nothing but an Epitome of Minucius his Dialogue. Towards the close of that Age under Dioclesian, Arnobius taught Rhetoric with great applause at Sicca in Afric; and being convinc'd of the truth of Christianity, could hardly make the Christians at first believe that he was real. In evidence therefore of his sincerity, he wrote seven Books against the Gentiles, wherein he smartly and rationally pleads the Christian cause: as not long after his Scholar Lactantius, who under Dioclesian professed Rheto∣ric at Nicomedia, set himself to the composing several discourses in de∣fence of the Christian, and subversion of the Gentile Religion. A man witty and eloquent, but more happy in attacquing his Adversaries,
then in establishing the Principles of his own Religion, many whereof he seems not very distinctly to have understood. To all these I may add Apollonius, a man versed in all kind of learning and Philosophy; and (if St. Hierom say right) a Senator of Rome, who in a set Oration with so brave and generous a confidence, eloquently pleaded his own, and the cause of Christianity before the Senate it self; for which he suffered as a Martyr in the Reign of Commodus. XIV. AND as they thus defended Christianity on the one hand from the open assaults and calumnies of the Gentiles, so were they no less careful on the other to clear it from the errors and Heresies, where∣with men of perverse and evil minds sought to corrupt and poyson it. And the chief of those that ingaged in this way were these, Agrippa Ca∣stor, a man of great learning, in the time of Adrian, wrote an accurate Refutation of Basilides and his Principles in xxiv. Books. Theophilus of Antioch against Hermogenes and Marcion; Apollinaris, Philip Bishop of Gortyna in Crete, Musanus, Modestus, Rhodon, Tatian's Scholar, Miltiades, Apollonius, Serapion Bishop of Antioch, and hundreds more, who en∣gag'd against the Marcionites, Montanists, and other Heretics of those times. But the principal of all was Irenaeus, who took to task the most noted Heresies of those Ages, and with incomparable industry and quickness of reasoning unravelled their Principles, exposed their practi∣ces, refuted their errors, whereby (as he frequently intimates) many were reduced and recovered to the Church. I might also mention several others, who though not known to have particularly adventured in ei∣ther of these ways, are yet renowned for their excellent skill in all Arts and Sciences, whereby they became eminently useful to the Church. Such (besides those whereof an account is given in the following work) were Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, Bardesanes the Syrian, whose learning and eloquence were above the common standard, though he also wrote against almost all the Heresies of the Age he lived in. Ammonius the celebrated Philosopher of Alexandria, Julius Africanus, a man peculiarly eminent for History and Chronology; Dorotheus Presbyter of Antioch, famous for his skill in Hebrew, as well as other parts of learning; Ana∣tolius the Alexandrian, whom Eusebius magnifies so much as the most lear∣ned man, and acute Philosopher of his age, exquisitely skill'd in Arith∣metic, Geometry, Astronomy, Logic, Physic, Rhetoric, and indeed what not? Pierius, Presbyter of Alexandria, an eloquent Preacher, and so great a Scholar, that he was commonly styled Origen Junior. But this is a field too large to proceed any further in, and therefore I stop here. By all which it is evident, what St. Hierom Discant ergo Celsus, Por∣phyrius, Julia∣nus, rabidi adversus Chri∣stum canes, dis∣cant corum se∣ctatores, qui putant Ecclesiam, nullos Philosophos & eloquentes, nullos habuisse Doctores, quanti & quales viri eam funda∣verint, extruxerint, & oraverint, & desinant fidem nostram rusticae tantum simplicitatis arguere, suamque potias imperiti∣am agnoscunt. S. Hieron. praef. ad Catalog. de script. Eccles. remarques, how little reason Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian had to clamour against the Christians, as a rude and illiterate generation, who had no Learning, no Eloquence, or Philosophy to recommend them. XV. A third advantage that helpt on the progress of Christianity, was the indefatigable zeal and industry used in the propagation of it. No stone was left unturn'd, no method unattempted, whereby they might reclaim men from error, and bring them over to the acknowledg∣ment of the truth. Hence in an ancient Inscription Ap. Grter. Inscript. p. 238. N. IX. said to be set up in
Spain, to the honour of Nero, they are described under this Character, QƲI NOVAM GENERI HƲM. SƲPERSTITION. INCƲLCAB. Those who inculcated and obtruded a new Superstition upon mankind. In∣deed they were infinitely zealous to gain Proselytes to the best Religion in the world. They preached it boldly, and prayed heartily for the con∣version and reformation of mankind, solicited their neighbours that were yet strangers to the Faith, instructed and informed new converts, and built them up on the most holy Faith. Those that were of greater parts and eminency erected and instituted Schools, where they publicly taught those that resorted to them, grounding them in the rudiments of the Faith, and antidoting them both against Heathens on the one side, and Heretics on the other. Among us (says Tatian Orat. contr. Graec. p. 167.) not only the rich and the wealthy learn our Philosophy, but the poor are freely disciplined and instructed: we admit all that are willing to learn, whether they be old or young. And what the success was, he tells Ibid. p. 168. us a little after, that all their Virgins were sober and modest, and were wont to discourse concerning divine things, even while they were sitting at their Distaffs. Nor did they content themselves only to do thus at home, many of them freely exposing themselves to all manner of hazards and hardships: no pains were thought great, no dangers considerable, no difficulties insu∣perable, that they might enlarge the bounds of the Gospel, travelling into the most barbarous Nations, and to the remotest corners of the world. The divine and admirable Disciples of the Apostles (says H. Eccles. l. 3. c. 37. p. 109. Eusebius) built up the superstructures of those Churches, the foun∣dations whereof the Apostles had laid in all places where they came: they every where promoted the publication of the Gospel, sowing the seeds of that heavenly Doctrine throughout the whole world. For their minds being inflamed with the love of a more divine Philosophy, according to our Lords counsel, they distributed their estates to the poor; and leaving their own Countries, took upon them the office of Evangelists; preaching Christ, and delivering the Evangelical Wri∣tings to those who had not yet so much as heard of the Christian Faith. And no sooner had they founded the Faith in any forein Countries, and ordained guides and Pastors, to whom they committed the care of those new Plantations, but they presently betook themselves to other Nations, ratifying their Doctrine with the miraculous powers of that Divine Spirit that attended them: so that as soon as ever they began to preach, the people universally flocked to them, and chearfully and heartily embraced the worship of the true God, the great Creator of the world. In the number of these Evangelical Missionaries, that were of the first Apostolical succession, were Silas, Sylvanus, Crescens, Andro∣nicus, Trophimus, Marcus, Aristarchus, &c. as afterwards Pantaenus who went into India, Pothinus and Irenaeus from Smyrna into France, each successively becoming Bishop of Lyons, and infinite others mentioned in the Histories and Martyrologies of the Church, who counted not their lives to be dear unto them, so that they might finish their course with joy, and make known the mystery of the Gospel to the ends of the earth. XVI. FOURTHLY, Christianity recommended it self to the world by the admirable lives of its professors, which were so truly consonant to all the laws of virtue and goodness, as could not but recon∣cile the wiser and more unprejudiced part of the Gentile world to a bet∣ter opinion of it, and vindicate it from those absurd and sensless cavils
that were made against it. For when they saw Christians every where so se∣riously devout and pious, so incomparably chast and sober, of such hum∣ble and mortified tempers, so strictly just and righteous, so kind and cha∣ritable, not to themselves only, but to all mankind, they concluded there must be something more than humane in it: as indeed no argument is so convictive, as a demonstration from experience. Their singular piety, and the discipline of their manners weighed down all the disad∣vantages they were under. The divine and most admirable Apo∣stles of Christ (says Eusebius Ubi supr. c. 24. p. 94.) how rude soever they were in speech, were yet , of the most pure and holy lives, and had their minds adorned with all sorts of virtue. And such generally were the Christians of the succeed∣ing Ages; they did not entertain the world with a parcel of good words and a plausible story, but shewed their Faith by their works, and proved the divinity of their Religion by the heavenliness of their lives. We (says the Christian in Minucius Faelix M. Fael. Dial. non longe à sin. p. 31.) despise the pride and supercili∣ousness of Philosophers, whom we know to be debauched persons and always eloquent against those vices of which themselves are most guilty. For we measure not wisdom by mens garbs and habits, but by their mind and manners; nor do we speak great things so much as live them, glorying that we have attained what they earnestly sought, but could never find. Christians were then the only persons that really were what they pretended to, men heartily reformed from vice to vir∣tue: Being persuaded (as Justin Martyr tells Apol. II. p. 61. the Emperors) by the Word, we have renounced the Daemons, and through the Son worship the only and unbegotten Deity: and we who heretofore took pleasure in adulteries, do now embrace the strictest chastity; and who were ad∣dicted to magic arts, have devoted our selves to the benign and immor∣tal God: we who valued estate and riches before all things in the world, do now cast what we have in common, distributing to every one according to his need: we who by hatred and slaughters mutually raged against each other, and refus'd to sit at the same fire with those who were not of our own tribe, since Christ's appearing in the world, familiarly converse together, pray for our enemies, and for the conver∣sion of those that unjustly hate us, endeavouring to persuade them to live according to the excellent precepts of Christ, that so they may have just ground to hope for the same rewards with us from the great judge of the world. Indeed strange was the efficacy of the Christian Doctrine over the minds of men, Tertul. Apol. c. 3. p. 4. ad Nation. c. 1. p. 41. Orig. contr. Cels. l. 1. p. 9.15, 21, 36, 50, 53. lib. 2. p. 61. 85, 88, 110. lib. 3. p. 128, 147, 152, 157. lib. 4. p. 167. lib. 6. p. 306. lib. 7. p. 364. lib. 8. p. 409. & alibi passim. Lactant. lib. 3. c. 26. p. 328. lib. 4. c. 3. p. 351. which the Chri∣stian Apologists at every turn plead as an uncon∣troulable evidence of their Religion; that it made all sorts of persons that complied with it, chast and temperate, quiet and peaceable, meek and modest, and afraid of the least appearance and colour of what was evil. J. Mart. Orat. ad Graec. p. 40. Athenag. Legat. p. 13. Clem. Alex. Strem. l. 7. p. 706, 709, 714, 719, 728. Minuc. Fael. p. 26. 30 Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 7. p. 104. Orig. contr. Cels. l. 8. p. 385, 389, 392. Lactant. l. 1. c. 20. p. 108. l. 6. c. 1. p. 540. c. 24. p. 636. Epitom. c. 2. p. 736. When the Heathens derided them for the mean and unpompous solemnities of their Religion, they universally declared, that God re∣spected no man for any external excellencies or ad∣vantages, it was the pure and the holy soul he de∣lighted in; that he stood in no need of blood or smoke, perfumes and incense; that the greatest and best sacrifice was to offer up a mind truly devoted to him: that meekness and kindness, an humble heart, and an
innocent life, was the sacrifice with which God was well pleased, and infinitely beyond all Holocausts and Oblations; that a pious and devout mind was the fittest Temple for God to dwell in, and that to do ones duty, to abstain from sin, to be intent upon the offices and ministrations of Prayer and Praise, is the truest Festival; yea, that the whole life of a good man is nothing else but a holy and festival solemnity. This was the Religion of Christians then, and it rendred their profession amiable and venerable to the world; and forced many times its most violent op∣posers to fall down, and say that God was in them of a truth. But the less of this argument is said here, a full account having been given of it in a work peculiar to this subject. XVII. FIFTHLY, the Disciples of this holy and excellent Religi∣on gained innumerable Proselytes to their party by their patience and constancy under sufferings. They were immutably resolved to maintain their station, notwithstanding all the attempts made to beat them from it. They entertained the fiercest threatnings with an unshaken mind, and fearlesly beheld the racks and engins prepared for them; they laugh'd at torments, and courted flames, and went out to meet Death in its blackest dress: they died rejoycing, and triumphed in the midst of the greatest tortures; which hapning for some ages almost every day, could not but convince their enemies that they were in good earnest, that they heartily believed their Religion to be true, and that there must be a divine and supernatural power going along with it, that could sup∣port them under it; which Justin Martyr confesses, was one main in∣ducement of his conversion to Christianity. What particular methods of cruelty were used towards the Primitive Christians, and with how brave and generous a patience, with what evenness and tranquillity of mind they bore up under the heaviest and acutest torments, we have suf∣ficiently declared in another place: Prim. Christ. Part. II. Ch. 7. and therefore shall here only take a short survey of those ten famous Persecutions, that so eminently exercised the faith and patience of the Primitive Saints, and then collect the force of the argument resulting from it. And this the rather, because it will present us with the best prospect of the state of the Church in those ear∣ly ages of it. As to the particular dates and periods of some of these per∣secutions, different accounts are assigned by Sulpiius Severus, Eusebius, Orosius, Hierom, and others; we shall follow that which shall appear to be most likely and probable. XVIII. THE first that raised a general Persecution against the Chri∣stians, was Nero, as Tertullian Apol. c. 5. p. 6. tells the Gentiles; and for the truth of it, fers them to their own public Archives and Records A Prince of that wild and ungovernable temper, of such brutish and extravagant manners, that their own Writers scruple not to style him, a bease in humane shape, and the very monster of mankind. He was guilty of the most unbounded Pride and Ambition, Drunkenness, Luxury, and all manner of debau∣chery, Sodomy and Incest, which he attempted to commit with his own Mother. But cruelty seemed to predominate among his other vices; besides infinite others, he dispatched the greatest part of the Se∣nate, put to death his Tutor Seneca and his Wife, Lucan the Poet; nay, violated all the Laws of Nature, in falling upon his own near Relations: he was privy to, if not guilty of the death of his Father Claudius; kill'd his two Wives, Octavia and Poppaea, and murdered Antonia, because refusing to succeed in their bed; he poisoned his Brother Britannicus:
and to compleat all his villanies, fell next upon his own Mother Agrippi∣na, whom he hated for her free reproving his looseness and extravagan∣cy; and having first spoil'd her of all public honors, and caused her to be openly disgraced and derided, then thrice attempted her life by poi∣son, he at last sent an assassinate to stab her. And the tradition then went, that not content to do this, he himself came and beheld her naked corps, contemplating and handling its several parts; commending some and dis∣praising others. And if thus barbarous and inhumane towards his own Kindred and Subjects, we cannot think he was overfavourable to Chri∣stians; wanting this title (says Eusebius H. Eccles. l. 2. . 25. p. 67.) to be added to all the rest, to be styled the first Emperor that became an enemy to the Christian Reli∣gion, publishing Laws and Edicts for the suppressing of it; and prosecu∣ting those that professed it, with the utmost rigor in every place; and that upon this occasion. Among infinite other instances of this madness and folly, he took up a resolution to burn Rome, either as being offen∣ded with the narrowness of the streets, and the deformity of the build∣ings, or ambitious to become the author of a more stately and magnifi∣cent City, and to call it after his own name. But however it was, he caused it to be set on fire, about the XIX. of July, Ann. Christ. LXIV. The conquering flames quickly prevailed over that City, that had so often triumphed over the rest of the world, in six or seven days spoiling and reducing the far greatest part of it (ten Regions of fourteen) into ashes; laying waste Houses and Temples, and all the venerable Antiqui∣ties and Monuments of that place, which had been preserved with so much care and reverence for many ages; himself in the mean while from Mecaenas his Tower beholding the sad spectacle with pleasure and delight, and in the habit of a Player, singing the destruction of Troy. And when the people would but have searched the ruines of their own houses, he forbad them, not suffering them to reap what the mercy of the flames had spared. This Act (as well it might) expos'd him to all the hatred and detestation, wherewith an injur'd and abused people could resent it, which he endeavoured to remove by large promises, and great rewards, by consulting the Sibylline Books, and by public suppli∣cations and sacrifices to the gods. Notwithstanding all which, Taci∣tus Annal. l. 15. c. 44. p. 319. tells us, the people still believed him to be the author of the mis∣chief. This not succeeding, he sought to clear himself by deriving the odium upon the Christians, whom he knew to be sufficiently hateful to the people, charging them to have been the incendiaries, and proceed∣ing against them with the most exquisite torments. Having apprehended some, whom they either forced or persuaded to confess themselves guil∣ty, by their means great numbers of others were betrayed; whom Ta∣citus confesses, that not the burning of the City, but the common hatred made criminal. They were treated with all the instances of scorn and cruelty; some of them were wrapt up in the skins of Wild Beasts, and worried by Dogs; others crucified; others burnt alive, being clad in pa∣per coats, dipt in pitch, wax, and such combustible matter; that when day-light fail'd, they might serve for torches in the night. These spe∣ctacles Nero exhibited in his own Gardens, which yet the people enter∣tained with more pity than pleasure; knowing they were done not for the public benefit, but meerly to gratifie his own private rage and malice. Lit∣tle better usage did the Christians meet with in other parts of the Em∣pire, as appears from the inscription Ap. Grat.  citat. found at Clunia in Spain, dedicated
to Nero in memory of his having cleared the Province of those that had introduced a new Superstition amongst mankind. Under this Persecuti∣on suffered Tecla, Torques, Torquatus, Marcellus, and several others men∣tioned in the antient Martyrologies, especially the Apostles Peter and Paul; the one upon the Cross, the other by the Sword. XIX. THE troublesome vicissitudes and revolutions of affairs that hapned under the succeeding Emperors, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius; and the mild and merciful disposition of Vespasian and Titus, gave some rest to the Christians: till Domitian succeeding, began a SECOND PERSECUTION. A man of a temper vastly different from that of his Father, and his Brother; for though at first he put on a plausible carriage, yet he soon left off the vizor, and appeared like himself; la∣zy and unactive, ill-natur'd and suspicious, griping and covetous, proud and insolent: yea, so vainly ambitious as to affect Divinity, in all public Edicts assuming to himself, and in all Petitions and Addresses requiring from others the titles of Lord and God. He never truly loved any man; and when he most pretended it, it was a sure sign of that mans ruine. His cruelty he exercis'd first upon flies, thousands whereof he dispatched every day; next upon men, and those of all ranks and states: putting to death the most illustrious Senators, and persons of the great∣est honour and nobility upon the most trifling pretences; and many times for no cause at all. In the fierceness and brutality of his temper he equall'd Nero, Portio Neronis de crudelitate, as Tertullian stiles him; Loc. super. citat. nay, in this exceeded him: that Nero was content to command execu∣tion to be done at a distance, while Domitian took pleasure in behold∣ing his cruelties exercised before his eyes: An argument of a temper deeper died in blood. But the Christians, alas, bore the heaviest load of his rage and malice, whom he every where persecuted either by death or banishment. Under him S. John the Evangelist was sent for to Rome, and by his command thrown into a Cauldron of boiling oil: in the midst whereof, when the Divine Providence had miraculously preserved him, he immediately banished him into Patmos. He put to death his cousin∣german Fl. Clemens (at that time Consul) for being a Christian, and banished his Wife Fl. Domitilla (his own kinswoman also) upon the same account into the Island Pandataria. At length his brutish and bloody practices rendred him intolerable to his own friends and servants, who conspir'd against him (his own Wife Domitia being of the confede∣racy) and slew him. His successor Nerva abrogated his Acts, and recal∣led those whom he had proscribed and banished; among whom S. John taking the benefit of that Act of Revocation, quitted Patmos, and retur∣ned to Ephesus. XX. THE THIRD PERSECUTION commenced un∣der Trajan, whom Nerva had adopted to be his Successor. A Prince he was of excellent and incomparable virtues, whose justice and impar∣tiality, gentleness and modesty, munificence and liberality, kindness and affability rendred him infinitely dear and acceptable to the people; the extravagancies of his Predecessors not a little contributing to sweeten his Government to them. He was mild and dis-passionate, familiar and courteous; he shewed a great reverence to the Senate, by whose advice he usually acted; and they to requite him, gave him the title of Optimus, as whom they judged the best of all their Princes. He conversed freely and innocently with all men, being desirous rather to be beloved, than
than either fear'd or honour'd by the people. The glory of all which is exceedingly stain'd in the Records of the Church by his severe pro∣ceedings against the Christians. He looked upon the Religion of the Empire as daily undermin'd by this new way of Worship, that the num∣bers of Christians grew formidable, and might possibly endanger the peace and tranquillity of the Roman State; and that there was no bet∣ter way to secure to himself the favour of the gods, especially in his Wars, than to vindicate their cause against the Christians. Accordingly therefore he issued out orders to proceed against them, as illegal Societies, crected and acting contrary to the Laws; in which number all Colleges and Corporations were accounted, that were not L. 1. & 3. ss. de Colleg. & corp. Lib. 47. tit. 22. settled either by the Emperors constitution, or the Decree of the Senate; and the persons Ulplan de off. procons. l. 6. ib. l. 2. frequenting them adjudged guilty of High Treason. Indeed the Empe∣rors (as we have elsewhere observed) were infinitely suspicious of such meetings, as which might easily conspire into Faction and Treason: and therefore when Pliny Lib. 10. Epist. 42, & 43. interceded with Trajan in behalf of the City of Nicomedia, that being so subject to fires, he would constitute a corpora∣tion of Smiths, though but a small number, which might be easily kept in order, and which he promised to keep a particular eye upon: The Emperor answered, By no means, for we ought to remember (says he) that that Province, and especially those Cities are greatly disturbed by such kind of Factions; and whatever the title or the occasion be, if they meet together, they will be Heteriae, though less numerous than the rest. That they look'd upon the Christian Assemblies as in the number of these unlawful Corporations; and that under this pretence Trajan endeavou∣red to suppress them, will appear from Pliny's Letter to him. In the mean time he commanded them either to offer sacrifice to the gods, or to be punished as contemners of them. The people also in several places by popular tumults falling foul upon them. The chief of those who ob∣tained the Crown of Martyrdom under him, were S. Clemens Bishop of Rome, S. Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, and S. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, whom Trajan himself condemned, and sent to Rome, there to be thrown to wild Beasts. XXI. THE Persecution rag'd, as in the other parts of the Empire, so especially in the Provinces of Pontus and Bithynia, where Pliny the younger (who had some time since been Consul) then governed as Pro-Praetor with Consular power and dignity. Who seeing vast multitudes of Christians indicted by others, and pressing on of themselves to exe∣cution, and that to proceed severely against all that came, would be in a manner to lay waste those Provinces, he thought good to write to the Emperor about this matter; to know his pleasure in the case. His Letter, because acquainting us so exactly with the state of the Chri∣stians, and the manner of proceeding against them, and giving so eminent a testimony to their innocency and integrity, we shall here insert.
C. PLINIUS to the Emperor TRAJAN. IT is my custom, Sir, in all affairs wherein I doubt, to have recourse to you. For who can better either sway my irresolution, or instruct my ignorance? I have never been heretofore present at the examination and trial of Christi∣ans; and therefore know not what the crime is, and how far it is wont to be punished, or how to proceed in these enquiries. Nor was I a little at a loss, whether regard be to be had to difference of age, whether the young and the weak be to be distinguished from the more strong and aged? whe∣ther place may be allowed to repentance, and it may be of any advantage to him, who once was a Christian, to cease to be so? Whether the name alone without other offences, or the offences that go along with the name, ought to be punished? In the mean time towards those who as Christians have been brought before me, I have taken this course; I asked them whether they were Christians? if they confessed it, I asked them once and again, threatning punishment; if they persisted, I commanded them to be executed. For, I did not at all doubt but that, whatever their confession was, their stubbornness and inflexible obstinacy ought to be punished. Others there were guilty of the like madness, whom because they were Roman Citizens, I adjudged to be transmitted to Rome. While things thus proceeded, the error, as is usual, spreading farther, more cases did ensue. A nameless Libel was presented, containing the names of many who denied themselves to to be, or to have been Christians. These, when after my example they invo∣cated the gods, and offered Wine and Incense to your Statue (which for that purpose I had commanded to be brought together with the images of the gods) and had moreover blasphemed Christ (which its said none that are true Chri∣stians can be compelled to do) I dismiss'd; others mentioned in the Libel con∣fessed themselves Christians, but presently denied it, that they had indeed been such, but had renounced it; some by the space of three years, others many years since, and one five and twenty years ago. All which paid their reve∣rence and veneration to your Statue, and the images of the gods, and blas∣phemed Christ. They affirmed that the whole sum of that Sect or error lay in this, that they were wont upon a set solemn day to meet together be∣fore Sun-rise, and to sing among themselves a Hymn to Christ, as the God whom they worshipped, and oblige themselves by an Oath, not to commit any wickedness, but to abstain from Theft, Robbery, Adultery, to keep Faith, and when required, to restore any pledge intrusted with them. Which done, then to depart for that time, and to meet again at a common meal, to partake of a promiscuous and harmless food; which yet they laid aside, after I had pub∣lished an Edict, forbidding, according to your order, the Heteriae (or unlawful Assemblies) to be kept. To satisfie my self in the truth hereof, I commanded two Maidens called Deaconesses, to be examined upon the Wrack. But I perceived nothing but a lewd and immoderate Superstition, and therefore surceasing any farther process, I have sent to pray your ad∣vice: For the case seemed to me very worthy to be consulted about; especi∣ally considering the great numbers that are in danger: for very many of all ages and ranks, both men and women are, and will be called in question: the contagion of this Superstition having over-spred not only Cities, but Towns and Country Villages, which yet seems possible to be stopt and cur'd. It's very evident that the Temples, which were almost quite forsaken, begin
to be frequented, that the holy Rites and Solemnities of a long time neglected are set on foot again, and that Sacrifices are from all parts brought to be sold, which hitherto found very few to buy them. Whence 'tis easie to conjecture, what multitudes of persons might be reclaim'd, if place be given to repentance. This Letter was written, as is probable, about the year of our Lord CVII. Traj. IX. Trajan lying then at Antioch, in order to his Wars in the East, and where the Persecution was very hot. By which 'tis evi∣dent, what unreasonable and inveterate prejudices even the more mo∣derate and ingenuous part of the Gentile-world had entertained against the Christian Religion; that though so innocent and unblamable, as to extort an honourable Character from its greatest enemies, and most ma∣licious Apostates, though wracks and tortures could force out nothing to its disadvantage; yet rather than not express their resentments (what was unbecoming men of parts and breeding) they loaded it with ill names and hard words. Pliny we see here scruples not to style it not only an error, but madness, and a wicked and immoderate Superstition, charging the constant profession of it, for stubbornness, and an incura∣ble obstinacy, what in it self was the effect of the most brave and gene∣rous resolution. And the very same civility it found from his two inti∣mate friends, Tacitus and Suetonius, the one whereof calls it a Tait. Annal. l. 15. c. 44. p. 319. detest∣able, the other a Seton. in Neron. c. 16. p. 571. novel and mischievous Superstition. By this account also we see, that though the severity of the Persecution might tempt some to turn Renegades, yet that so vast was the spread which Christi∣anity had made in those parts, that this great man knew not how to deal with them. To direct him therefore in this affair, the Emperor retur∣ned this following Rescript. TRAJAN to PLINY, Greeting. AS to the manner of your procedure, my Secundus, in examining the causes of those who have been brought before you for being Chri∣stians, you have taken the course which you ought to take: for no certain and general Law can be so framed, as shall provide for all particular cases. Let them not be sought for; but if they be accus'd and convicted, let them be punished: yet so, that if any denies himself to be a Christian, and shall give evidence of it by doing sacrifice to our gods, although heretofore he has been suspected, let him be pardoned upon his repentance. But as for Libels, published without the name of the Authors, let them not be valid as to the Crimes they charge; for that were an ill precedent, and is not the usage of our Reign. Tertullian Apol. c. 2. c. 3. speaking of this Imperial Edict, calls it A sentence con∣founded by a strange necessity: it allows them not to be sought for, as if they were innocent, and yet commands them to be punished, as if they were guilty: it spares and rages, dissembles, and yet punishes. Why does he intangle himself in his own censure? if he condemns them, why does he not hunt them out? if he thinks them not to be search'd out, why does he not acquit them? Where Tertullian seems
to argue more like an Orator than Logician. For Trajan might be un∣willing the Christians should be nicely hunted out, and yet not think them innocent: he could not find them guilty of any enormous crime, but only of a strange and novel Superstition: and therefore while they conceal'd themselves, did not think it reasonable that they should be left to the malice and rapine of busie under-officers, who act∣ed under the Presidents and Governours of Provinces, meer Sycophants and calumniators, , as Ap. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 26. p. 147. Melito styles them in his Apology to M. Antoninus, impudent accusers, and ravenous devourers of other mens estates, of whom he complains, that under a pretence of the Imperial Edicts they day and night openly spoil and plunder the harmless and the innocent. These Trajan might think fit to restrain; but where there was notoriety of fact, where Christians were duly cited before the public Tribunals, and the charge substantial∣ly made good, there they were to be left to the sentence of the Law. But however it was, by this means the edg of their enemies fury was taken off; and though the popular rage might in some particular places still continue, yet the general force and rigour of the Persecution did abate and cease. XXII. TRAJAN dying at Selinus in Cilicia, Adrian (whom he had adopted) succeeded in the Empire. A Prince of excellent parts, and no inconsiderable learning, , as Deipnos. l. 8. c. 16. p. 361. Athenaeus calls him, a Prince greatly devoted to the Muses, and yet one in whom 'tis hard to say, whether vice or virtue had the upper hand; and which is more, who seemed to reconcile most vices with their contrary virtues. He highly honoured the Senate, without whose Authority he would never transact any affairs of moment; and upon solemn days would condescend to wait upon the Consuls to their own houses; and yet was proud and vainglorious, and ambitious of honour, which he greedily catcht at up∣on every little occasion. He was magnificent in his works, and liberal in his gifts; but withal, envious, detracting from the glory of his Prede∣cessor, censuring and discommending the most eminent Artists in all kind of faculties. He familiarly conversed with his friends, visited them in their sickness many times twice or thrice a day, treated them with the freedom and kindness of companions; and yet he was fierce and cruel: as is evident by the many persons of nobility and renown whom he put to death. But we have noted enough of his character elsewhere, in the life of S. Quadratus. He was addicted to Magic, and a great zealot for Religion; especially the Rites of Greece: but despis'd and hated all other Religions, upon which account he was no good friend to Chri∣stians. In his time, a FOURTH PERSECUTION was rais'd against them, and so Sulpitius Severus H. Sacr. l. 2. p. 142. positively calls it. I know Eu∣sebius followed by Orosius and some others, assigns the fourth Persecution to the Reign of M. Aurelius; but whoever impartially considers the state of things, will see that it ought to be fixed here. 'Tis true, we do not find any new Laws which this Emperor made against the Chri∣stians, but the Laws of his Predecessors were still in force, and the peo∣ple in most places were ready enough to run upon this errand of their own accord, and to sacrifice the poor innocent Christians to their own spight and malice. Whence Eusebius speaking of the Apologies presen∣ted to this Emperor, says, H. Eccles. l. 4. c. 3. p. 116. it was because wicked and ill-minded men began to vex and disturb the Christians. And S. Hierom De script in Quadrat. more particu∣larly
tells us, that the zeal which the Emperor shewed in being initiated into the holy mysteries and the Rites of Greece, gave opportunity and encouragement to the people (though without any particular Warrant) to fall upon them: and this he elsewhere Epist. ad Magn. Orat. p. 327. Tim. 2. calls a most grievous Persecuti∣on. And so indeed it was, as is evident, not only from the Apolo∣gies which both Quadratus and Aristides presented to the Emperor in be∣half of the Christians, but that when Arrius Antoninus Tertl. lib. ad Scapul. c. 4. p. 71. (whom most suppose to have been the same with him that succeeded Adrian) was Pro∣consul of Asia, and severely prosecuted the Christians there, all the Chri∣stians of the City where he resided as one man beset his Tribunal, openly confessing themselves to be Christians. He amazed at the multitude, caus'd some few of them to be executed, telling the rest, that if they had a mind to end their lives, they had Precipices and Halters enough at home, and need not crowd thither for an execution. Nay so high did it arise, that Serenius Granianus, one of the following Procon∣suls was forced to write to Adrian for its mitigation: which the Empe∣ror accordingly commanded by a Rescript, directed to Minucius Fun∣danus, Granianus his Successor in that Province, as he did also to several others; as Melito particularly tells us in his Apology. But though the fire seemed to be pretty well quenched at present, yet did it break out again in the succeeding Reign of Antoninus Pins, devouring many, whose sufferings are recorded in the Martyrologies of the Church; and and for the stopping whereof, Justin Martyr exhibited an Apology to this Emperor, which produced that excellent Letter of his to the Common Council of Asia, in favour of the Christians, which we have exemplified in the life of Justin Martyr. XXIII. TO Antoninus Pius succeeded M. Aurelius Antoninus, and his Brother L. Verus. M. Aurelius was a person of whom the Writers of his life deservedly speak great things. He was a good man, and a great Philosopher, and whom the Historian Eep. H.  8. p. 1919. says, 'tis easier to admire, than to commend. But he was infinitely superstitious in his Religion, and therefore easily blown up by the Priests and Philosophers that were about him into a prejudice against Christianity, and persuaded to set on foot the FIFTH PERSECUTION against the Christians, whom he endeavoured to curb and suppress by new Laws and Edicts, ex∣posing them to all the malice and fierceness of their enemies. The Per∣secution began in the Eastern parts about the seventh year of his Reign, where it continued almost all his time; and not content to stay there, spread it self into the West, especially France, where it rag'd with great severity. That the conflict was very sharp and fierce, may be guessed at by the crowd of Apologies that were presented to him by Justin Mar∣tyr, Melito, Athenagoras, and Apollinaris. In Asia S. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna was first condemned to the sire, and then run through with a Sword, with twelve more from Philadelphia, who suffered with him, and Germanicus who a little before was devoured by wild Beasts. At Rome, besides Ptolomy and Lucius, Justin the Martyr with his six com∣panions, Charito, Charitina, Euelpistus, Hierax, Peon, and Valerianus were beheaded. In the French persecution suffered Vettius Epagathus, a young man of incomparable piety and magnanimity; Blandina a Lady of singular virtue, who after infinite and inexpressible torments was tied to a beam in fashion of a Cross, and thrown to wild Beasts; Biblis, who though at first through frailty she denied the Faith, yet recovered
her courage, and expir'd in the midst of the acutest tortures. Pothinus Bishop of Lyons above XC. years old beaten and ston'd to death. San∣ctus a Deacon of Vien, together with Maturus, expos'd in the Amphi∣theater, tormented, and imprisoned several days together, presented to wild Beasts, plac'd in an iron chair red hot, and at last run through with a Spear. Attalus a Roman Citizen disgracefully led up and down in triumph, roasted in an iron chair, and then beheaded; as was also Alex∣ander the Physician, a Phrygian, who readily profess'd himself a Christian: and Ponticus a youth of fifteen years of age, who through all the me∣thods of cruelty and torment, which might have shaken a maturer age, entred into the Kingdom of heaven. A larger and more particular ac∣count of all whose Martyrdoms is recorded in the Letter written by the Churches of Lyons and Vien in France, to those of Asia and Phrygia, yet extant in Eusebius. At length the Emperor seems to have relaxed the Per∣secution, inclined to it, as is thought, by the remarkable victory which he gained in his German Wars, by the Prayers of the Christian Legion, when the fortunes of the Roman Empire lay at stake, and the Christians so signally, so immediately engaged heaven in its rescue and deliverance, by supplying them with rain, and fighting against the enemy with light∣ning and thunder. Whereupon the Emperor is said to have written to the Senat, acknowledging the greatness of the blessing, and command∣ing all just favour and indulgence to be shewed to the Christians. The substance of the story is universally own'd by the Gentile Writers, though out of spight to the Christians they either ascribe it to the power of Ma∣gic, or the prevalency of the Emperors own prayers. That there were such Letters written, is plain, in that Tertullian Apol. c. 5. p. 6. vide lib. ad Scap. c. 4. p. 71. who liv'd but a little af∣ter, cites them, and appeals to them; though I confess little stress can be laid upon the Epistle that is extant at this day. There is still extant Ap. Ulpian. l. 3. ff. §. 3. lib. 50. Tit. 2. a Law of M. Aurelius, and his Brother Verus, permitting those who follow the Jewish Superstition to obtain honours, and granting them guards to defend them from wrong and injury. By this very learned men Alciat. dis∣punct. l. 3. c. 8. A. August. ad Modesi. p. 336. Petit. de jur. Princip. c. 6. vide Selden de Synedr. l. 1. c. 8. p. 233. Raynaud. Indic. SS. Lugd. proleg. 3. p. 52. un∣derstand Christians, at least equally with the Jews; these two being com∣monly confounded by the Writers of those times, and Superstition the word by which they usually denote Christianity. But however it was, this Law was made before that German Victory, M. Aurelius not being engaged in that War, till after the death of his Brother Verus. XXIV. THE Christian Affairs were tolerably quiet and peaceable during the reigns of Commodus, Ael. Pertinax, and Julian, till Severus got into the Throne; A Prince witty and learned, prudent and politic, hardy and valiant, but withal crafty and subtil, treacherous and unfaith∣ful, bloody and passionate, and as the Historian Spartian. in vit. Sever. c. 14. p. 349. observes, of a nature truly answering to his name, Vere Pertinax, vere Severus. Under him began the SIXTH PERSECUTION: for though at first he shewed himself favourable to the Christians, yet afterwards he changed his mind, and gave ear to those who traduced them as an impious and in∣famous generation; a people that designed nothing but Treason and Rebellion against the State. Whereupon he not only suffered his Mini∣sters and Governours of Provinces to treat them with all imaginable cru∣elty; but he himself gave out Edicts, forbidding any under the most terrible penalties to profess either the Jewish or Christian Religion; which were executed with that rigor and inhumanity, that the Christi∣ans of those days verily believed that the times of Antichrist did then
take place. Martyrs of note whom this Persecution sent to heaven, were Victor Bishop of Rome, Leonidas Origen's Father beheaded at Alexandria, Serenus, Heraclides, Heron, another Serenus, and Herais a Catechumen, all Origen's Scholars, Potamiaena an illustrius Virgin, and her Mother Mar∣cella, after various torments, committed to the flames: and Basilides one of the Officers that had led them to execution. Faelicitas and Perpetua two noble Ladies, at Tuburbis in Mauritania, the one brought to bed but the day before, the other at that time a Nurse. Speratus and his compa∣nions beheaded at Carthage, by the command of Saturninus the Pro∣consul. Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons, and many thousands of his people martyred with him, whose names and sufferings though unknown to us, are honourably written in the Book of life. XXV. THE next that created any disturbance to the Christians, was Maximinus, by birth a Thracian; a man of base and obscure origi∣nals, of a mean and sordid education: he had been first a Shepherd, then a High-way man, and last of all a Souldier: He was of strength and stature beyond the ordinary size and standard; and his manners were as robust and boisterous as his constitution, . Herod. lib. . in Maxim. p. 253. and savoured wholly of the rudeness of his Edu∣cation. Never did a more cruel Beast (says the Historian Capitol. in vit. Maxim. c. 9. p. 609.) tread upon the earth, relying alto∣gether upon his strength, and upon that account reckoning himself almost immortal. He seiz'd upon whatever came in his way, plundering and destroying without any difference, without any Process or form of Law: his strength was the law of justice, and his will the measure of his actions. He spared none, but especially killed all that knew any thing of his mean descent, that none might reproach him with the ob∣scurity of his birth. Having slain his Master Alexander Mammaeus, that excellent and incomparable Prince, he usurped the Government, and manag'd it suitable to his own maxim, that the Empire could not be maintained but by cruelty. The SEVENTH PERSECUTION was raised by him. Indeed Sulpitius Severus admits not this into the number, and therefore makes no more than nine Pagan Persecutions, reserving the tenth for the times of Antichrist. But Eusebius H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 38 p. 228. expresly affirms, that Maximinus stirr'd up a Persecution against the Christians, and that out of hatred to his Predecessor, in whose Family many Chri∣stians had found shelter and patronage, but that it was almost wholly levelled against the Bishops and Ministers of Religion, as the prime au∣thors and propagators of Christianity. Whence Firmilian Bishop of Cappadocia, in his Letter to S. Cyprian, Inter Epist. pr. p. 14. says of it, that it was not a gene∣ral, but a local Persecution, that rag'd in some particular places, and espe∣cially in that Province where he liv'd, Serenianus the President driving the Christians out of all those Countries. He adds, that many dread∣ful Earthquakes happening in those parts, whereby Towns and Cities were overturned and swallowed up, added life and vigor to the Persecu∣tion, it being usual with the Gentiles, if a Famine or Pestilence, an Earth∣quake or Inundation happened, presently to fall foul upon the Christi∣ans, and conclude them the causes of all those evils and mischiefs that came upon the world. And this Origen . meant when he tells us, that he knew some places overturned with earthquakes, the cause whereof the
Heathens cast upon the Christians; for which their Churches were per∣secuted and burnt to the ground, and that not only the common people, but the wiser sort among them did not stick openly to affirm, that these things came for the sake of the Christians. Hereupon he wrote his Book De Martyrio, for the comfort and support of those that suffered in this evil time. XXVI. AFTER Maximinus reign'd Pupienus and Balbinus, to them succeeded Gordian, and to him Philip: all which time for at least ten years together, the Church enjoy'd a competent calmness, and tran∣quillity; when Decius was in a manner forced in his own defence to take the Empire upon him. A man of great activity and resolution, a stout Commander, a wise and prudent Governour, so universally ac∣ceptable for his modest and excellent carriage, that by the Sentence of the Senate he was voted not inferiour to Trajan, and had the Title of Optimus adjudged to him. But he was a bitter and implacable enemy to Christians, against whom he rais'd the EIGHTH PERSECU∣TION, which proved, though the shortest, the hottest of all the Per∣secutions that had hitherto afflicted and oppressed the Church. The Ecclesiastic Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 39. p. 234. Chron. ad Ann. CCLII. Oros. l. 7. c. 21. fol. 310. Niceph. l. 5. c. 27. p. 377. Historians generally put it upon the account of Decius his hatred to his Predecessor Philip, for being a Christian; whereas it is more truly to be ascribed to his zeal for the cause of declining Paganism, which he saw fatally undermin'd by Christianity, and that therefore there was no way to support the one, but by the ruine of the other. We have more than once taken notice of it in some of the following Lives, and therefore shall say the less here. Decius reigned somewhat above two years, during which time the storm was very black and vio∣lent, and no place but felt the dreadful effects of it. They were every where driven from their houses, spoil'd in their estates, tormented in their bodies, whips and prisons, fires and wild beasts, scalding pitch and melted wax, sharp stakes and burning pincers were but some of the me∣thods of their treatment; and when the old ones were run over, new were daily invented and contriv'd. The laws of nature and humani∣ty were broken down, friend betray'd his friend, and the nearest rela∣tive his own Father or Brother. Every one was ambitious to promote the Imperial Edicts, and thought it meritorious to bring a Christian to the stake. This Persecution swept away at Alexandria, Julian, Chronion, Epi∣machus, Alexander, Ammon, Zeno, Ptolomy, Ammonaria, Mercuria, Isidore, and many others mentioned by Dionysius Bishop of that Church; at Car∣thage, Mappalicus, Bassus, Fortunio, Paulus, Donatus, Martialis, &c. it crown'd Babylas Bishop of Antioch, Alexander of Jerusalem, Fabian Bi∣shop of Rome, Victoria, Anatolia, Parthenius, Marcellianus, and thou∣sands more: Nicephorus affirming it to be easier to count the Sands of the shore, than to reckon up all the Martyrs that suffered under this Per∣secution. Not to say any thing of those incredible numbers of Confes∣sors that were beaten, imprisoned, tormented; nor of the far greater number of those who betook themselves to a voluntary exile; chusing rather to commit themselves to the barrenness of Rocks and Mountains, and the mercy of wild beasts, than to those that had put off all reason and humanity. Among whom was Paul of Thebais, a youth of XV. years of age, who withdrew himself into the Egyptian Desarts, where finding a large and convenient Cavern in a Rock (which heretofore had been a Lib. 5. c. 29 p. 379.
private mint-house in the time of Antony and Cleopatra) he took up his abode and residence, led a solitary and Anchoretic course of life, and be∣came the Father of Hermites, and those who afterwards were desirous to retire from the world, and to resign up themselves to solitude, and a more strict mortified life. In this pious and devout retirement he continued till he was CXIII. years of age, and in the last period of his life was visi∣ted by Antonius, who had spent the greatest part of XC. years in those desart places, and who now performed the last offices to him in commit∣ting his dead body to the earth. XXVII. GALLƲS succeeded Decius as in his Government, so in his enmity to Christians, carrying on what the other had begun. But the cloud soon blew over; for he being cut off, was succeeded by Valerian, who entered upon the Empire with an universal applause and expectati∣on. In the beginning of his reign he was a great Patron of Christians, whom he treated with all offices of kindness and humanity, entertaining them in his own family; so that his Court seemed to be a little Church for Piety, and a Sanctuary for refuge to good men. But, alas, this plea∣sant Scene was quickly over; seduced by a chief Magician of Egypt, who persuaded him that the only way to prosper his affairs, was to restore the Gentile Rites, and to suppress Christianity, so hateful to the gods, he commenced a NINTH PERSECUTION, wherein he prosecu∣ted the Christians with all imaginable fury in all parts of the Empire. With what fierceness it rag'd in Egypt, is largely related by Dionysius of Alexandria, and we have in a great part noted in his Life. It's needless (says he Epist. ad Domit. & Did. ap. Euseb. l. 7. c. 11. p. 260.) particularly to reckon up the Christians that suffered in this Persecution: only this you may observe, that both men and women, young and old, Souldiers and Country people, persons of all ranks and ages, were some of them scourg'd and whipped, others beheaded, others overcoming the violence of flames, received the crown of Martyrdom. Cyprian elegantly and passionately bewails the miseries and sufferings which the Martyrs underwent, in his Letter to Nemesian, and the rest that were condemned to the mines. Nor did he himself escape, being behead∣ed at Carthage, as Xistus and Quartus had been before him, and the three hundred Martyrs De Massa Candida, who rather than do Sacrifice, chearfully leapt into a mighty pit of burning Lime, kindled for that pur∣pose, and were immediately stifled in the smoke and flames. In Spain suf∣fered Fructuosus Bishop of Tarragon, together with his two Deacons, Au∣gurius and Eulogius, at Rome, Xistus the Bishop, and S. Laurence his Deacon and Treasurer of that Church; at Caesarea, Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, who asham'd to think that they lay idle and secure, while so many others were contending for the Crown, unanimously went to the Judg, confess'd they were Christians, received their Sentence, and un∣derwent their Martyrdom. But the Divine Providence, which sometimes in this world pleads the cause of oppressed innocence, was resolved to pu∣nish the Emperor for his causless cruelty towards those, whose interest with heaven (while he continued favourable to them) had secured his happiness: and therefore did not only suffer the Northern Nations to break in upon him, but he himself was taken prisoner by Sapor King of Persia, who treated him below the rate of the meanest slave, used him as his foot-stool to get on horse-back, and after several years captivity cus'd him to be flay'd alive, and rub'd with salt, and so put a period to
his miserable life. A fair warning to his Son Gallienus, . Constant. M. Orat. ad SS. Coelum, cap. 24. pag. 600. who growing wiser by the mischiefs and miscarriages of his Father, stopt the Persecution, and restor'd peace and security to Christians. XXVIII. A long peace and prosperity (for except a little disturbance in the time of Aurelian, they met with no opposition through the reigns of Gallienus, Claudius, Tacitus, Florianus, Probus, Carus, and Numerian) had somewhat corrupted the manners of Christians, and therefore God was pleased to permit a TENTH PERSECUTION to come up∣on them to purge and winnow the rubbish and the chaff: the Ulcer began to putrifie, and it was time to call for the Knife and the Caustic. It began under Dioclesian and his Colleague Maximian. Dioclesian was a Prince active and diligent, crafty and subtil, fierce in his nature, but which he knew how cunningly to dissemble. His zeal for the Pagan Religion en∣gag'd him with all possible earnestness to oppose Christianity, which he carried on with a high hand, it being as the last, so the fiercest Persecuti∣on, like the last efforts of a dying enemy, that summons all his strength to give the parting blow. Dioclesian then residing at Nicomedia published his Edicts about the very solemnity of our Saviours Passion, command∣ing the Christian Churches to be pulled down, their Bibles to be burnt, the better sort of them to be branded with infamy, the vulgar to be made slaves; as by subsequent orders he commanded the Bishops to be every where imprisoned, and forced to Sacrifice. But these were but a praeludium to what followed after, other Proclamations being put forth, command∣ing those that refus'd to offer Sacrifice to be expos'd to all manner of torments. 'Twere endless to reckon up particular persons that suffer∣ed in this evil time. Eusebius who liv'd under this very Persecution, has recorded a vast number of them, with the Acts of their Martyrdom; too many to account for in this place. It may suffice to note from him, that they were scourged to death, had their flesh torn off with pincers, or rak'd off with pieces of broken pots, were cast to Lions and Tygers, to wild Boars and Bears, provoked and enrag'd with fire to set upon them, burnt, beheaded, crucified, thrown into the Sea, torn in pieces by the distorted boughs of Trees, or their legs miserably distended in the Stocks, roasted at a gentle fire, or by holes made on purpose had melted lead poured into their bowels. But impossible it is to conceive, much more to express the cruelties of that time. Eusebius himself who saw them, tells Lib. 8. c. 12. p. 307. us, that they were innumerable, and exceeded all relation. All which he assures they endured with the most admirable and un∣daunted patience; they throng'd to the Tribunals of their Judges, and freely told them what they were; despis'd the threatnings and barbarity of their enemies, and received the fatal and decretory Sentence with a smile; when persuaded to be tender of their lives, and to compassionate the case of their Wives and Children, they bore up against the tempta∣tion with a manly and Philosophic mind, , as he adds, yea rather with a soul truly pious and devoted unto God; so that neither fears nor charms could take hold upon them, at once giving undeniable evidences both of their own courage and fortitude, and of that Divine and unconceivable power of our Lord that went along with
them. The acutest torments did not shake the firmness and stability of their minds, but they could with as much unconcernedness lay down their lives (as Origen Contr. Cels. l. 7. p. 357. tells Celsus) as the best Philosopher could put off his coat. They valued their innocency above their case, or life it self, and suffici∣ently shewed they believed another state, by an argument beyond what any institution of Philosophy could afford. The great Philosophers of the Gentiles (as Eusebius Praepar. Evan. l. 1. c. 4. p. 13. reasons in this matter) as much as they talk of immortality, and the happiness of the future state, did yet shew that they look'd upon it only as a childish and a trifling report: whereas amongst us even boys and girls, and as to outward appearance, the mean∣est and rudest persons, being assisted by the power and aid of our Bles∣sed Saviour, do by their actions, rather than their words, demonstrate the truth of this great Principle, the immortality of the Soul. Ten years this Persecution lasted in its strength and vigor, under Dioclesian in the East, and Maximian in the West; and they thought, it seems, they had done their work, and accordingly tell the world in some ancient Inscripti∣ons, Ap. Gruter. pag. CCLXXX. num. 3. & 4. that they had utterly defaced the name and superstition of the Chri∣stians, and had restored and propagated the worship of the gods. But were miserably mistaken in the case; and as if weary of the work, laid down their purple, and retir'd to the solitudes of a private life. And though Galerius, Maximianus, Jovius Maximinus, Maxentius, and Licinius did what they could to set the Persecution on foot again, yet all in vain; both they and it in a very few years expiring and dwindling into nothing. XXIX. THUS we have seen the hardships and miseries, the torments and sufferings which the Christians were exposed to for several ages, and with how invincible a patience they went through with them. Let us now a little review the argument, and see what force and influence it had to convince the world of the truth of their Religion, and bring in Converts to the Faith. Tertullian Apolog. c. ult. p. 40. tells the Gentiles, That all their cruelty was to no purpose, that it was but a stronger invitation to bring over others to the party; that the oftner they mowed them down, the faster they sprang up again; and that the blood of Christians was a seed that grew up into a more plentiful harvest; that several among the Gentiles had exhorted their auditors to patience under suffering, but could never make so many Proselytes with all their fine discourses, as the Christians did by their actions: that that very obstinacy which was so much charged upon them was a tutor to instruct others. For who when they beheld such things, could not but be powerfully mov'd to enquire what really was within? who when he had once found it, would not embrace it? and having once embraced it, not be desirous to suffer for it; that so he may obtain the full Grace of God, and the pardon of his sins assured by the shedding of his blood. Lactantius De Justit. l. 5. c. 13. p. 494. mannages this argument with incomparable eloquence and strength of reason: his discourse is somewhat long, but not unworthy the Readers consideration. Since our number (says he) is always increased from amongst the Votaries of the Heathen deities, and is never lessened, no not in the hottest Perse∣cution, who is so blind and stupid, as not to see in which party true Wis∣dom does reside? But they, alas, are blinded with rage and malice, and think all to be fools, who when 'tis in their power to escape punishment, chuse rather to be tortured and to die; when as they might perceive by this, that that can be no such folly, wherein so many thousands throughout the whole world do so unanimously conspire. Suppose
women through the weakness of their Sex may miscarry (and they are pleased sometimes to style this Religion an effeminate and old-wives Su∣perstition) yet certainly men are wiser. If children and young men may be rash, yet at least those of a mature age and old men have a more sta∣ble judgment. If one City might play the fool, yet innumerable others cannot be supposed to be guilty of the same folly. If one Province, or one Nation should want care and providence, yet all the rest cannot lack understanding to judge what is right. But now when the Divine Law is entertain'd from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof, and every Sex, Age, Nation and Country serves God with one heart and Soul; when there is every where the same patience, and contempt of death, they ought to consider that there is some reason for it, and that it is not without cause, that it is maintained even unto death: that there is some fixed foundation when a Religion is not only not shattered by injuries and persecutions, but always increased and rendred more firm and stable. When the very common people see men torn in pieces by various engins of torment, and yet maintain a patience unconquerable in the midst of their tir'd tor∣mentors; they cannot but think what the truth is, that the consent of so many, and their perseverance unto death, cannot be in vain, nor that patience it self, without the Divine assistance, should be able to over∣come such exquisit tortures. High-way men and persons of the most ro∣bust constitutions are not able to bear such pulling asunder; they roar, and groan, and sink under pain, because not furnished with a Divine patience. But our very children (to say nothing of our men) and our tender women, do by silence conquer their tormentors; nor can the flames extort one sigh from them. Let the Romans go now, and boast of their Mutius and their Regulus, one of which delivered up himself to be put to death by his enemies, because he was ashamed to live a pri∣soner; the other thrust his hand into the fire when he saw he could not escape death. Behold, with us the weaker Sex, and the more delicate age suffers the whole body to be torn and burnt; not because they could not avoid it if they would, but voluntarily, because they trust in God. This is true virtue, which Philosophers in vain only talk of, when they tell us, that nothing is so suitable to the gravity and constancy of a wise man, as not by any terrors to be driven from his sentiments and opini∣ons; but that it is vertuous, and great indeed, to be tortur'd and die, ra∣ther than betray ones Faith, or be wanting in his duty, or do any thing that's unjust or dishonest, though for fear of death, or the acutest tor∣ment, unless they thought their own Poet rav'd, when he said, Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 3 p. 154. Justum & tenacem propositi virum, Non civium ardor prava jubentium, Non vultus instantis tyranni Mente quait solida. The Just man that resolved stands, Not Tyrants frowns, nor fierce commands, Nor all the peoples rage combin'd, Can shake the firmness of his mind. Than which nothing can be more truly said, if meant of those, who refuse no tortures, nor death it self, that they may preserve fi∣delity
and justice; who regard not the command of Tyrants, nor the Swords of the Governors, that they may with a constant mind pre∣serve real and solid liberty, wherein true Wisdom alone is to be main∣tained. Thus far that elegant Apologist. And certainly the truth of his rea∣sonings was abundantly verified by the experience of the World, Chri∣stians getting ground, and conquering opposition by nothing more, than their patience and their constancy, till they had subdued the Empire it self to the acknowledgment of the truth. And when once the great Constantine had entertained Christianity, it went along with wind and tide, and bore down all before it. And surely it might be no unplea∣sant survey, to consider what was the true state of Paganism under the first Christian Emperors, and how and by what degrees that Religion, which for so many ages had governed the world, slunk away into ob∣scurity and silence. But this is a business without the bounds of my present enquiry to search into. The end of the INTRODUCTION.
THE LIFE OF S. STEPHEN THE PROTOMARTYR. Act. Vii. LIX. And they stoned STEPHEN, calling vpon God. and saying. Lord Iesus receive my spirit. M. Burghers. sculpsit The violent opposition that Christianity at its first appearance met with both from Jews and Gentiles. St. Stephens Kindred unknown. One of the Seventy. The great Charity of the Primitive Believers. Dissention between
the Hebrews and Grecians. Hellenists who. The Original of Deacons in the Christian Church. The nature of their Office: the number and qua∣lification of the Persons. Stephens eminent accomplishments for the place. The envy and opposition of the Jews against him. The Synagogue of the Li∣bertines, what. Of the Cyrenians, Alexandrians, &c. Their disputa∣tion with St. Stephen, and the success of it. False Witnesses suborned to depose against him. The several parts of their charge considered. The mighty veneration of the Jews for their Temple and the Mosaic Institu∣tions. Its destruction by Titus; and their attempts to rebuild it under Julian frustrated by a miracle. Stephens Apology before the Sanhedrin. The Jews rage against him. He is encouraged by a vision. Stoning to death, what kind of punishment; the manner of it among the Jews. St. Ste∣phens Martyrdom. His Character, and excellent vertues. The time and place of his suffering. The place and manner of his burial. His body first discovered, when and how. The Story of its translation to Constan∣tinople. The miracles said to be done by his Reliques, and at his Memoriae. Several reported by St. Augustin. What credit to be given to them. Mi∣racles how long, and why continued in the Church. The vain pretences of the Church of Rome. I. THe Christian Religion being designed by God for the reformation of Mankind, and the rooting out that Barbarism and Idolatry wherewith the World was so over-grown, could not but meet with opposition, all corrupt Interests conspiring to give it no very welcom entertainment. Vice and Errour had too long usurped the Throne, to part with it by a tame and easie resignation, but would rather summon all their Forces against a Doctrin, that openly proclaimed the subversion and ruine of their Em∣pire. Hence this Sect was every where spoken against, equally opposed both by Jew and Gentile. The Gentiles despised it for its lateness and novelty, as having no antiquity to recommend it, nor could they endure that their Philosophy, which then every where ruled the Chair, should be controlled by a plain simple Doctrine, that pretended to no elabo∣rate Schemes, no insinuative strains of Eloquence, no nice and subtile arts of Reasoning, no abstruse and sublime Speculations. The Jews were vexed to see their expectations of a mighty Prince who should greatly exalt their State, and redeem it from that oppression and slavery under which it groaned, frustrated by the coming of a Messiah, who ap∣peared under all the circumstances of meanness and disgrace; and who was so far from rescuing them from the power of the Roman Yoke, that for their obstinacy and unbelief he threatned the final and irrevocable ruine of their Countrey, and by the Doctrine he published plainly told them he intended to abolish those ancient Mosaick Institutions, for which they had such dear regards, and so solemn a Veneration. Accordingly when he came amongst them, they entertained him with all the instances of cruelty and contempt, and whatever might expose him to the scorn and odium of the People; they vilified and reproached his person, as but the son of a Carpenter, a Glutton and a Drunkard, a Traitor and an Enemy unto Caesar; they sleighted his Doctrine as the talk onely of a rude and illiterate person, traduced his Miracles as tricks of Imposture, and
the effects of a black Confederacy with the infernal Powers. And when all this would not do, they violently laid hands upon him, and took away his life. And now one would have thought their spite and fury should have cooled and died: but malice and revenge are too fierce and hot to stop at the first attempt. On they resolve to go in these bloody methods, and to let the World see that the Disciples and Fol∣lowers must expect no better then their Master, it was not many Moneths before they took occasion to refresh their rage in St. Stephens Martyr∣dom: the History of whose Life and Death we now come to relate, and to make some brief Remarks upon it. II. THE sacred Story gives us no particular account either of the Countrey or Kindred of this Holy man. That he was a Jew is unque∣stionable, himself sufficiently owns the relation in his Apology to the People, but whether originally descended of the stock of Abraham, or of Parents incorporated and brought in by the gate of Proselytism, whether born at Jerusalem, or among the dispersed in the Gentile Pro∣vinces is impossible to determine. Ad Ann. XXXIV. n. 275, 298. Baronius (grounding his conjecture upon an Epistle of Lucian, of which more afterwards) makes him to have been one of Gamaliels Disciples, and fellow-Pupil with St. Paul, who proved afterwards his mortal enemy: but I must confess, I find not in all that Epistle the least shadow of probability to countenance that conjecture. Antiquity Epiph. Haer. XX. p. 27. Do∣roth. Synops. de Vit. App. in Bibl. PP. Tom. 3. p. makes him, probably enough, to have been one of the LXX Disciples, chosen by our Lord as Co-adjutors to the Apo∣stles in the Ministry of the Gospel: and indeed his admirable knowledge in the Christian Doctrine, his singular ability to defend the cause of Christs Messiaship against its most acute opposers, plainly argue him to have been some considerable time trained up under our Saviours im∣mediate institutions. Certain it is, that he was a man of great zeal and piety, endowed with extraordinary measures of that divine Spirit that was lately shed upon the Church, and incomparably furnished with mi∣raculous powers, which peculiarly qualified him for a place of honour and usefulness in the Church, whereto he was advanced upon this oc∣casion. III. THE Primitive Church among the many instances of Religion for which it was famous and venerable, was for none more remarkable then their Charity, they lived and loved as Brethren, were of one heart and one soul, and continued together with one accord. Love and Charity were the common soul that animated the whole body of Believers, and conveyed heat and vital spirits to every part. They prayed and wor∣shipped God in the same place, and fed together at the same table. None could want, for they had all in common. The rich sold their estates to minister to the necessiies of the poor, and deposited the money into one common Treasury, the care whereof was committed to the Apostles, to see distribution made as every ones case and exigency did require. But in the exactest harmony there will be some jars and discord, heaven onely is free from quarrels, and the occasions of offence. The Church increasing every day by vast numbers of Converts to the Faith, the Apostles could not exactly superintend the disposure of the Churches stock, and the making provision for every part, and were therefore probably forced to take in the help of others, sometimes more and sometimes less, to assist in this affair. By which means a due equality and proportion was not observed, but either through favour and partiality, or the oversight of
those that managed the matter, some had larger portions, others less re∣lief then their just necessities called for. This begat some present heats and animosities in the first and purest Church that ever was, Act. 6.1. the Grecians murmuring against the Hebrews, because their Widows were neglected in the daily ministration. IV. WHO these Grecians or Hellenists were, opposed here to the Hebrews, however a matter of some difficulty and dispute, it may not be unuseful to enquire. The opinion that has most generally obtained, is that they were originally Jews born and bred in Grecian or Heathen Countries, Joh. 7.35. of the dispersed among the Gentiles (the , the word  in the stile of the New Testament, as also in the Wri∣tings of the Fathers, being commonly used for the Gentile World) who accommodated themselves to their manner of living, spake the Greek Language, but altogether mixed with Hebraisms and Jewish forms of speech, (and this called Lingua Hellenistica) and used no other Bible but the Greek Translation of the Septuagint. Comment. de Hellenist. Qu. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. praeci∣pue pag. 232. &c. vid. etiam inter alios Bez. & Camer. in loc. A notion which Salmasius has taken a great deal of pains to confute, by shewing that never any People went under that notion and character, that the Jews in what parts of the World soever they were, were not a distinct Nation from those that lived in Palestine; that there never was any such peculiar distinct Hel∣lenistic Dialect, nor any such ever mentioned by any ancient Writer; that the Phrase is very improper to express such a mixt Language, yea rather that  implies one that expresseth himself in better Greek then ordinary, as  denotes one that studies to speak pure Attic Greek. Probable therefore it is, that they were not of the Hebrew race, but Greek or Gentile Proselytes, who had either themselves, or in their Ancestors deserted the Pagan Superstitions, and imbodied themselves in∣to the Jewish Church, taking upon them Circumcision and the observa∣tion of the Rites of the Mosaic Laws (which kind the Jews call  Proselytes of Justice,) and were now converted to Christianity. That there were at this time great numbers of these Proselytes at Jeru∣salem, is evident; and strange it were, if when at other times they were desirous to have the Gospel preached to them, none of them should have been brought over to the Faith. Even among the seven made choice of to be Deacons (most, if not all, of whom we may reasonably conclude to have been taken out of these Grecians) we find one ex∣presly said to have been a Proselyte of Antioch, as in all likelihood some if not all the other might be Proselytes of Jerusalem. And thus where ever we meet with the word  or Grecians in the History of the Apostolic Acts (as 'tis to be met with in two places more) we may, Act. 9.29.11.20. and in reason are to understand it. So that these Hellenists (who spake Greek, and used the Translation of the LXX) were Jews by Religion, and Gentiles by descent; with the  or Gentiles they had the same common Original, with the Jews the same common Profession; and therefore are not here opposed to Jews, (which all those might be sti∣led, who embrace Judaism and the Rites of Moses, though they were not born of Jewish Ancestors) but to the Hebrews, who were Jews both by their Religion and their Nation. And this may give us some pro∣bable account, why the Widows of these Hellenists had not so much care taken of them as those of the Hebrews, the persons with whom the Apostles in a great measure intrusted the ministration, being kinder to those of their own Nation, their Neighbours, and it may be Kindred,
then to those who onely agreed with them in the profession of the same Religion, and who indeed were not generally so capable of contribu∣ting to the Churches Stock as the native Jews, who had Lands and Posses∣sions, which they sold and laid at the Apostles feet. V. THE peace and quiet of the Church being by this means a little ruffled and discomposed, the Apostles, who well understood how much Order and Unity conduced to the ends of Religion, presently called the Church together, and told them, that the disposing of the Common Stock, and the daily providing for the necessities of the Poor, however conve∣nient and necessary, was yet a matter of too much trouble and distraction to consist with a faithful discharge of the other parts and duties of their Office, and that they did not judge it fit and reasonable to neglect the one, that they might attend the other; that therefore they should chuse out among themselves some that were duly qualified, and present them to them, that they might set them apart peculiarly to superintend this affair, that so themselves being freed from these incumbrances, might the more freely and uninterruptedly devote themselves to prayer and preaching of the Gospel. Not that the Apostles thought the care of the Poor an Office too much below them, but that this might be dischar∣ged by other hands, and they, as they were obliged, the better attend upon things of higher importance, Ministeries more immediately ser∣viceable to the souls of men. This was the first original of Deacons in the Christian Church, they were to serve Tables, that is, to wait upon the necessities of the Poor, to make daily provisions for their public Feasts, to keep the Churches Treasure, and to distribute to every one accor∣ding to their need. And this admirably agrees to one ordinary notion of the word  in Foreign Writers, . Lucian. Chronosol. scu de Legg. Saturnal. Tom. 2. p. 823. where 'tis used for that peculiar Servant who waited at Feasts, whose Office it was to distribute the por∣tions to every Guest, either according to the com∣mand of the , the Orderer of the Feast, or according to the rule of Equality, to give every one alike. But though 'tis true this was a main part of the Deacons Office, yet was it not the whole. For had this been all, the Apostles needed not to have been so exact and curious in their choice of persons, seeing men of an ordinary rank and of a very mean capacity might have served the turn, nor have used such solemn Rites of Consecration to Ordain them to it. No question therefore but their serving Tables implied also their attendance at the Table of the Lords Supper. (h. e. non olum) . Ignat. Epist. ad Trall. Append. Usser. p. 17. For in those days their Agapae or common Love-Feasts, (whereat both Rich and Poor sate down together) were at the same time with the Holy Eucharist, and both ad∣ministred every day, so that their ministration re∣spected both the one and the other. And thus we find it was in the practice of the Church: for so Justin Martyr tells us it was in his time, Apol. II. p. 97. that when the President of the Assembly had consecrated the Eucharist, the Deacons distributed the Bread and the Wine to all that were present, and after carried them to those who were necessarily absent from the Congregation. Nor were they restrained to this one particular Ser∣vice, but were in some cases allowed to Preach, Baptize, and Absolve Penitents, especially where they had the peculiar warrant and autho∣rity
of the Bishop to bear them out: nor need we look far beyond the present Story to find St. Philip, one of the Deacons here elected, both preaching the Gospel, and baptizing Converts with great success. VI. THAT this excellent Office might be duly managed, the Apo∣stles directed and enjoined the Church to nominate such persons as were fitted for it, pious and good men, men of known honesty and integri∣ty, of approved and untainted reputations, furnished and endowed with the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, wise and prudent men, who would discreetly discharge the trust committed to them. The number of these persons was limited to seven, probably for no other reason but because the Apostles thought these sufficient for the business; unless we will also suppose the whole body of Believers to have been disposed into seven several Divisions, for the more orderly and convenient ma∣nagery of their common Feasts, and distributions to the Poor, and that to each of these a Deacon was appointed to superintend and direct them; without further designing any peculiar Mystery, which Vid. Baron. ad Ann. 112. n. 7. Tom. 2. some would fain pick out of it. However the Church thought good for a long time to conform to this Primitive Institution, insomuch that the Fathers of the Conc. Neo-Caes. can. 15. Couc. Tom. 1. Col. 1484. Neo-Caesarean Council ordained, that in no City, how great soever, there should be more then seven Deacons, a Canon which they found upon this place: and Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. c. 19. p. 734. Sozomen tells us that in his time, though many other Churches kept to no certain number, yet that the Church of Rome in compliance with this Apostolical example, admitted no more then se∣ven Deacons in it. The People were infinitely pleased with the order and determination which the Apostles had made in this matter, and ac∣cordingly made choice of seven, whom they presented to the Apostles, who (as the solemnity of the thing required) first made their address to Heaven by Prayer for the divine blessing upon the undertaking, and then laid their hands upon them, an ancient symbolic Rite of Investiture and Consecration to any extraordinary Office. The issue of all was, that the Christian Religion got ground and prospered, Converts came flocking over to the Faith, yea very many of the Priests them∣selves, and of their Tribe and Family, of all others the most zealous and pertinacious asserters of the Mosaic Constitutions, the bitterest adversa∣ries of the Christian Doctrine, the subtlest defenders of their Religion, laid aside their prejudices, and embraced the Gospel. So uncontroula∣ble is the efficacy of divine truth, as very often to lead its greatest ene∣mies in triumph after it. VII. THE first and chief of the persons here elected, (who were all chosen out of the LXX Disciples, as Haeres. XX. p. 27. Epipanius informs us,) and whom the Ancients frequently stile Arch-deacon, as having the  (as Homil. XV. in Act. p. 555. Chrysostom speaks) the Primacy and Precedence among these new-elected Officers, was our St. Stephen, whom the Author of the Epistle to Epist. ad Hron. in Bibl. PP. Gr. Lat. p. 37. Hero under the name of Ignatius, as also the Interpo∣lator of that to the Ep. ad Trall. p. 6. Ibid. Trallians makes in a more peculiar manner to have been Deacon to St. James, as Bishop of Jerusalem. He is not onely pla∣ced first in the Catalogue, but particularly recommended under this character, a man full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost; he was exquisitly skilled in all parts of the Christian Doctrine, and fitted with great elo∣quence and elocution to declare and publish it; enriched with many miraculous gifts and powers, and a spirit of courage and resolution to encounter the most potent opposition. He preached and pleaded the
cause of Christianity with a firm and undaunted mind, and that nothing might be wanting to render it effectual, he confirmed his doctrine by many publick and unquestionable miracles, plain evidences and demon∣strations of the truth and divinity of that Religion that he taught. But Truth and Innocency, and a better Cause, is the usual object of bad mens Spight and Hatred. The zeal and diligence of his Ministry, and the extraordinary success that did attend it, quickly awakened the malice of the Jews, and there wanted not those that were ready to oppose and contradict him. So natural is it for Errour to rise up against the Truth, as Light and Darkness mutually resist and expel each other. VIII. THERE were at Jerusalem besides the Temple, where Sacri∣fices and the more solemn parts of their Religion were performed, vast numbers of Synagogues for Prayer and Expounding of the Law, where∣of the Jews themselves tell us there were not less then CCCCLXXX in that City. In these, or at least some apartments adjoining to them, there were Schools or Colledges for the instruction and education of Scholars in their Laws: many whereof were erected at the charges of the Jews who lived in Foreign Countries, and thence denominated after their names; and hither they were wont to send their Youth to be trained up in the knowledge of the Law, and the mysterious Rites of their Religion. Of these, five combined together to send some of their Societies to encounter and oppose St. Stephen. An unequal match!  (as Chrysostom calls it) a whole Army of wicked adversaries, Orat. in S. Steph. Tom. 6. p. 276. the chief of five several Synagogues are brought out against one, and him but a stripling too, as if they intended to op∣press him rather with the number of assailants, then to overcome him by strength of Argument. IX. THE first of them were those of the Synagogue of the Libertines; but who these Libertines were, is variously conjectured. Passing by Junius his conceit of Labra signifying in the Aegyptian Language the whole Precinct that was under one Synagogue, whence Labratenu, Jun. in loc. & in Gn. 8.4. or corruptly (says he) Libertini must denote them that belonged to the Sy∣nagogue of the Egyptians, omitting this as altogether absurd and fantastical, besides that the Synagogue of the Alexandrians is mentioned afterwards; Suidas tells us 'twas the name of a Nation, Suid. in voc. . but in what part of the World this People or Countrey were, he leaves us wholly in the dark. Most probably therefore it relates to the Jews that were emancipated and set at liberty. For the understanding whereof we must know that when Pompey had subdued Judaea, and reduced it under the Roman Go∣vernment, he carried great numbers of Jews captive to Rome, as also did those Generals that succeeded him, and that in such multitudes, that when the Jewish State sent an Embassy to Augustus, Josephus tells us, Antiquit. Jad. lib. 17. c. 12. p. 610. that there were about eight thousand of the Jews who then lived at Rome, that joined themselves to the Embassadors at their arrival thither. Here they continued in the condition of Slaves, till by degrees they were ma∣numitted and set at liberty, which was generally done in the time of Tiberius, Phil. de legat. ad Gai. p. 78. who (as Philo informs) suffered the Jews to inhabit the Transti∣berin Region: most whereof were Libertines, such who having been made Captives by the Fortune of War, had been set free by their Ma∣sters, and permitted to live after the manner of their Ancestors. They had their Proseucha's or Oratories, where they assembled, and perfor∣med their devotions according to the Religion of their Country: every
year they sent a Contribution in stead of first-fruits to Jerusalem, and deputed certain persons to offer sacrifices for them at the Temple. In∣deed afterwards (as we find in Tac. Annal. lib. 2. c. 85. p. 88. Tacitus and Sueton. in vit. Tb. 36 p. 334. Suetonius) by an Order of Senate he caused four thousand Libertini generis, of those Libertine Jews, so many as were young and lusty, to be transported into Sardinia to clear that Island of Robbers (the occasion whereof is related by Antiq. l. 18. c. 5. p. 623. Jose∣phus) and the rest, both Jews and Proselytes, to be banished the City, Tacitus adds, Italy it self. This occasion, I doubt not, many of these Libertine-Jews took to return home into their own Countrey, and at Je∣rusalem to erect this Synagogue for themselves and the use of their Countreymen who from Rome resorted thither, stiling it from themselves, the Synagogue of the Libertines; and such questionless St. Luke means, when among the several Nations that were at Jerusalem at the day of Pentecost, he mentions Strangers of Rome, and they both Jews and Pro∣selytes. X. THE next Antagonists were of the Synagogue of the Cyrenians, that is, Ap. Jph. An∣t Jad. lib. 16. c. 10. p. 561. Jews who inhabited Cyrene, a noted City of Libya, where (as ap∣pears from a Rescript of Augustus) great numbers of them did reside, and who were annually wont to send their holy Treasure or accustomed Offerings to Jerusalem, where also (as we see) they had their peculiar Sy∣nagogue. Accordingly we find among the several Nations at Jerusa∣lem, Act. 2.10. those who dwelt in the parts of Libya about Cyrene. Thus we read of Simon of Cyrene, whom the Jews compelled to bear our Saviours Cross; of Lucius of Cyrene, Act. 13.1.11.19, 20 a famous Doctor in the Church of Antioch; of men of Cyrene, who upon the persecution that followed St. Stephens death, were scattered abroad from Jerusalem, and preached as far as Phoenice, Cy∣prus, and Antioch. The third were those of the Synagogue of the Alexan∣drians, there being a mighty intercourse between the Jews at Jerusalem and Alexandria, where what vast multitudes of them dwelt, and what great priviledges they enjoyed, is too well known to need insisting on. The fourth were them of Cilicia, a known Province of the lesser Asia, the Metropolis whereof was Tarsus, well stored with Jews; it was S. Pauls birth-place, whom we cannot doubt to have born a principal part among these assailants, finding him afterwards so active and busie in S. Stephens death. The last were those of the Synagogue of Asia: where by Asia we are probably to understand no more then part of Asia properly so called, (as that was but part of Asia minor) viz. that part that lay near to Ephesus, in which sense 'tis plain Asia is to be taken in the New Testament. And what infinite numbers of Jews were in these parts, and especially at Ephesus, the History of the Apostles Acts does sufficiently inform us. XI. These were the several parties that were to take the Field, per∣sons of very different Countries, men skilled in the subtleties of their Religion, who all at once rose up to dispute with Stephen. What the par∣ticular subject of the disputation was, Loc.  citat. we find not, but may with St. Chry∣sostom conceive them to have accosted him after this manner. Tell us, Young man, what comes into thy mind thus rashly to reproach the Deity? Why doest thou study with such cunningly-contrived dis∣courses to inveigle and perswade the People? and with deceitful mi∣racles to undo the Nation? Here lies the crisis of the Controversie. Is it like that he should be God, who was born of Mary, that the ma∣ker of the World should be the son of a Carpenter? was not Bethlehem the place of his Nativity, and Nazareth of his education? canst thou
imagine him to be God, that was born upon Earth? who was so poor that he was wrapt up in swadling cloths and thrown into a manger? who was forced to fly from the rage of Herod, and to wash away his pollution by being baptized in Jordan? who was subject to hunger and thirst, to sleep and weariness? who being bound, was not able to escape, nor being buffeted, to rescue or revenge himself? who when he was hanged, could not come down from the Cross, but underwent a cursed and a shameful death? wilt thou make us believe that he is in Heaven, whom we know to have been buried in his Grave? that he should be the Life of the Dead, who is so near akin to Mortality himself? Is it likely that God should suffer such things as these? would he not rather with an angry breath have struck his adversaries dead at the first approach, and set them beyond the reach of making attempts upon his own person? either cease therefore to delude the People with these impostures, or prepare thy self to undergo the same fate. XII. IN answer to which we may imagine S. Stephen thus to have re∣plied upon them. And why, Sirs, should these things seem so incre∣dible? have you not by you the Writings of the Prophets? do you not read the Books of Moses, and profess your selves to be his Disci∣ples? did not Moses say, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear? Have not the Pro∣phets long since foretold that he should be born at Bethlehem, and conceived in the womb of a Virgin? that he should fly into Egypt, that he should bear our griefs and carry our sorrows? that they should pierce his hands and his feet, and hang him on a tree? that he should be bu∣ried, rise again, and ascend up to Heaven with a shout? Either now shew me some other in whom all these Prophecies were accomplished, or learn with me to adore as God our crucified Saviour. Blind and ignorant that you are of the predictions of Moses, you thought you crucified a meer man, but had you known him, you would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: you denied the Holy One, and the Just, and desired a Murderer to be granted to you, but put to death the Prince of Life. XIII. THIS is the sum of what that ingenious and eloquent Fa∣ther conceives S. Stephen did, or might have returned to their Enquiries. Which whatever it was, was delivered with that life and zeal, that evi∣dence and strength of reason, that freedom and majesty of elocution, that his Antagonists had not one word to say against it; they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake. So particularly did our Lord make good what he had promised to his Disciples, Luke 21.14, 15. Setle it in your hearts, not to meditate before what you shall answer, for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gain-say nor resist. Hereupon the men presently began to retreat, and departed the Lists, equally divided between shame and grief. Ashamed they were to be so openly baffled by one single adversary; vexed and troubled that they had not carried the day, and that the Religion which they opposed had hereby received such signal credit and confirmation. Cod. Bezae MS. & 2 Codd. H. Steph. And now being no longer able  (as the addition in some very ancient Manuscript Copies does elegantly express it) with open face to resist the truth, they betake themselves to clancular Arts, to sly and sinister Designs, hoping to accomplish by craft and subtlety what they could not carry by fairness and force of reason.
XIV. TO this purpose they tamper with men of debauched profli∣gate Consciences, to undermine him by false accusations, that so he might fall as a Sacrifice to their spight and malice, and that by the hand of public Justice. Ubi supra, pag. 278. S. Chrysostom brings them in with smooth and plau∣sible insinuations encouraging the men to this mischievous attempt. Come on, worthy and honourable Friends, lend your assistance to our declining cause, and let your Tongues minister to our Counsels and Contrivances. Behold a new Patron and Advocate of the GALI∣LAEAN is started up: one that worships a God that was buried, and preaches a Creator shut up in a Tomb; who thinks that he whom the Souldiers despised and mocked upon Earth, is now conversing with the Host of Angels in Heaven, and promises that he shall come to judge the World, who was not able to vindicate and right himself: His Disciples denied him, as if they thought him an Impostor, and yet this man affirms, that every tongue shall confess and do homage to him: himself was not able to come down from the Cross, and yet he talks of his second coming from Heaven; the vilest miscreants reproached him at his death, that he could not save either himself or them, and yet this man peremptorily proclaims him to be the Saviour of the World. Did you ever behold such boldness and impudence? or have you ever heard words of so much madness and blasphemy? Do you there∣fore undertake the cause, and find out some specious colour and pre∣tence, and thereby purchase to your selves glory and renown from the present Generation. XV. THE Wretches were easily persuaded to the undertaking, and to swear whatever their Tutors should direct them. And now the cause is ripe for action, the case is divulged, the Elders and the Scribes are dealt with, (and a little Rhetoric would serve to persuade them) the people possessed with the horrour of the Fact, the Sanhedrim is summoned, the Malefactor haled to the Bar, the Witnesses produced, and the charge gi∣ven in. They suborned men which said, we have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God; the false witnesses said, this man cea∣seth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and the Law: for we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us: that is, (that we may still proceed with that excellent man in opening the several parts of the charge) he has dared to speak against our wise and great Lawgiver, and blasphemed that Moses, for whom our whole Nation has so just a veneration; that Moses who had the whole Creation at his beck, who freed our Ancestors from the house of bondage, and with his rod tur∣ned the Waters into Walls, and by his prayer drowned the Egyptian Army in the bottom of the Sea; who kindled a fiery Pillar for a light by night, and without plowing or sowing fed them with Manna and Bread from Heaven, and with his rod pierced the Rock and gave them drink. But what do we speak of Moses, when he has whetted his tongue, and stretched it out against God himself, and set up one that is dead as an Anti-god to the great Creator of the World? He has not blushed to reproach the Temple, that holy place, where the divine Oracles are read, and the Writings of the Prophets set forth, the Re∣pository of the Shew-bread and the Heavenly Manna, of the Ark of the Covenant, and the Rod of Aaron; where the hoary and venerable heads of the High-priests, the dignity of the Elders, and the honour
of the Scribes is seen: this is the place which he has reviled and set at naught; and not this onely, but the Law it self; which he boldly declares to be but a shadow, and the ancient Rites but types and fi∣gures: he affirms the Galilaean to be greater then Moses, and the Son of Mary stronger then our Law-giver; he has not honoured the di∣gnity of the Elders, nor had any reverence to the society of the Scribes. He threatens us with a dead Master; the young man dreams sure, when he talks of Jesus of Nazareth rising again, and destroying this holy place: he little considers with how much wisdom it was con∣trived, with what infinite charges it was erected, and how long be∣fore it was brought to its perfection. And yet forsooth, this Jesus of Nazareth must destroy it, and change the customs which Moses delivered to us: our most holy Sabbath must be turned out of doors, Circumci∣sion abolished, the New-Moons rejected, and the Feast of Taberna∣cles laid aside; our Sacrifices must no longer be accepted with God, our Sprinklings and solemn Purgations must be done away: as if we knew not this Nazarens end, and as if one that is dead could revenge himself upon them that are living. How many of the ancient Pro∣phets and Holy men have been cruelly murdered, whose death none ever yet undertook to revenge? and yet this man must needs appear in the cause of this crucified Nazarene, and tell us of a dead man that shall judge us: Silly Impostor! to fright us with a Judge who is himself imprisoned in his own Grave. XVI. This then is the sum of the charge, that he should threaten the ruine of the Temple, and the abolition of the Mosaick Rites, and blasphe∣mously affirm that Jesus of Nazareth should take away that Religion which had been established by Moses, and by God himself. Indeed the Jews had an unmeasurable reverence and veneration for the Mosaick In∣stitutions, and could not with any patience endure to hear of their being laid aside, but accounted it a kind of blasphemy so much as to mention their dissolution. Little thinking in how short a time these things which they now so highly valued should be taken away, and their Tem∣ple it self laid level with the ground. Which a few years after came to pass by the Roman Army under the Conduct of Titus Vespasian the Roman General, when the City was sacked, and the Temple burnt to the ground. And so final and irrevocable was the sentence by which it was doomed to ruine, that it could never afterwards be re∣paired, Heaven it self immediately declaring against it. Insomuch that when Julian the Emperour, out of spight and opposition to the Chri∣stians, was resolved to give all possible encouragement to the Jews, and not only permitted but commanded them to rebuild the Temple, fur∣nishing them with all charges and materials necessary for the Work, (hoping that hereby he should prove our Saviour a false Prophet) no sooner had they begun to clear the Rubbish, and lay the Foundation, but a terrible Earthquake shattered the Foundation, killed the Undertakers, and shaked down all the buildings that were round about it. And when they again attempted it the next day, great balls of fire suddenly breaking out from under the Foundations consumed the Workmen and those that were near it, and forced them to give over the attempt. A strange instance of the displeasure of Heaven towards a place which God had fatally devoted to destruction. And this related not onely by Christian Socrab. H. Ecc. l. 3. c. 20. p. 193. Sozom. H. E. l. 5. c. 22. p. 631. Writers, but as to the substance of it, by the Heathen
A. Marcell. l. 23. non longe ab lt. Historian himself. And the same curse has ever since pursued and fol∣lowed them, they having been destitute of Temple and Sacrifice for sixteen hundred years together. Were that bloody Sanhedrim now in being, and here present, (says one of the Greg. Nissen. Ot.  S. Steph. T. 2. p. 791. Ancients speaking of this accusation) I would ask them about those things for which they were here so much concerned, what is now become of your once famous and renowned Temple? where are those vast stones, and incredible Piles of building? where is that Gold that once equalled all the other materials of the Temple? what are become of your legal Sacrifices? your Rams and Calves, your Lambs and Heifers, Pigeons, Turtles, and Scape-goats? if they therefore condemned Stephen to die, that none of these miseries might befal them, let them shew which of them they avoided by putting him to death; but if they escaped none of them, why then did they imbrue their hands in his innocent bloud? XVII. THE Court being thus set, and the Charge brought in and opened, that nothing might be wanting to carry on their mock Scene of Justice, they give him liberty to defend himself. In order whereunto while the Judges of the Sanhedrim earnestly lookt upon him, they disco∣vered the appearances of an extraordinary splendor and brightness upon his face, the innocency of his cause and the clearness of his conscience manifesting themselves in the brightness and chearfulness of his counte∣nance. The High-priest having asked him whether guilty or not, he in a large discourse pleaded his own cause to this effect: That what apprehensions soever they might have of the stateliness and magnifi∣cence of their Temple, of the glory and grandeur of its services and mi∣nistrations, of those venerable customs and usages that were amongst them, as if they looked upon them as indispensably necessary, and that 'twas blasphemy to think, God might be acceptably served without them; yet that if they looked back to the first originals of their Na∣tion, they would find, that God chose Abraham to be the Father and Founder of it, not when he lived in a Jerusalem, and worshipped God with the pompous services of a Temple, but when he dwelt among the Idolatrous Nations: that then it was that God called him from the impieties of his Fathers house, and admitted him to a familiar acquain∣tance and intercourse with himself; wherein he continued for many years without any of those external and visible Rites which they laid so much stress upon; and that when at last God entered into Cove∣nant with him, to give his posterity the Land of Canaan, and that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, he bound it upon him with no other ceremony, but onely that of Circumcision, as the Badge and Seal of that foederal compact that was between them: that without any other fixed Rite but this, the succeeding Patriarchs worshipped God for several Ages, till the times of Moses, a wise, lear∣ned, and prudent person, to whom God particularly revealed himself, and appointed him Ruler over his People, to conduct them out of the House of Bondage, a great and famous Prophet, and who was conti∣nually inculcating this Lesson to their Ancestors, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear; that is, that God in the latter days would send amongst them a mighty Prophet, who should do as Moses had done, introduce new Rites, and set up more excellent Institutions and ways of Worship, to whom they should yield all diligent attention, and ready obedience:
that when their fore-fathers had frequently lapsed into Idolatry, God commanded Moses to set up a Tabernacle, as a place of publick and so∣lemn Worship, where he would manifest himself, and receive the ad∣dresses and adorations of his People; which yet however was but a transient and temporary ministration, and though erected by the im∣mediate order of God himself, was yet after some years to give place to a standing Temple designed by David, but built by Solomon; state∣ly indeed and majestick, but not absolutely necessary, seeing that infi∣nite Being that made the World, who had the heaven for his throne, and the earth for his footstool, could not be confined within a material Tem∣ple, nor tied to any particular way of worship; and that therefore there could be no such absolute and indispensable necessity for those Mosai∣cal Rites and Ceremonies, as they pretended; especially when God was resolved to introduce a new and better Scene and state of things. But it was the humour of this loose and unruly, this refractory and undisciplinable generation, (as it ever had been of their Ancestors) to resist the Holy Ghost, and oppose him in all those methods, whereby he sought to reform and reclaim them; that there were few of the Prophets whom their fore-fathers had not persecuted, and slain them that had foretold the Messia's coming, the just and the holy Jesus, as they their unhappy posterity had actually betrayed and murdered him, without any due reverence and regard to that Law, which had been solemnly delivered to them by the ministry of Angels, and which he came to fulfil and perfect. XVIII. THE holy man was going on in the Application, when the patience of his Auditors, which had hitherto holden out, at this began to fail; that fire which gently warms at a distance, scorches when it comes too near; their consciences being sensibly stung by the too near approach of the truths he delivered, they began to fume and fret, and express all the signs of rage and fury. But he regardless of what was done below, had his eyes and thoughts directed to a higher and a nobler object, and looking up saw the heavens opened, and some bright and sen∣sible appearances of the divine majesty, and the holy Jesus clothed in the robes of our glorified nature, not sitting (in which sense he is usually de∣scribed in Scripture) but standing (as ready to protect and help, to crown and reward his suffering servant) at the right hand of God. So easily can Heaven delight and entertain us in the want of all earthly comforts, and divine consolations are then nearest to us, when humane assistances are farthest from us. The good man was infinitely ravished with the Vision, and it inspired his soul with a fresh zeal and courage, and made him long to arrive at that happy place, and little concerned what use they would make of it; he could not but communicate and impart his happiness; the Cup was full, and it easily overflowed; he tells his adversaries what himself beheld, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the son of man standing on the right hand of God. XIX. THE Heavenly Vision had very different effects, it encoura∣ged Stephen, but enraged the Jews, who now taking it pro confesso that he was a blasphemer, resolved upon his death, without any further pro∣cess. How furious and impatient is mis-guided Zeal! they did not stand to procure a Warrant from the Roman Governour (without whose leave they had not power to put any man to death) nay they had not the patience to stay for the judicial sentence of the Sanhedrim, but
acted the part of Zealots, (who were wont to execute vengeance upon Capital Offenders without staying for the ordinary formalities of Ju∣stice) and raising a great noise and clamour, and stopping their ears, that they might hear no further blasphemies, and be deaf to all cries for mer∣cy, they unanimously rushed upon him. But Zeal is superstitious in its maddest fury: they would not execute him within the Walls, lest they should pollute the holy City with his blood, but hurried him without the City, and there fell upon him with a shower of stones. Stoning was one of the four Capital punishments among the Jews, inflicted upon greater and more enormous crimes, especially Blasphemy, Idolatry, and strange Worship: Vid. P. Fag. in Exod. 21.16. and the Jews tell us of many particular circumstances used in this sort of punishment. The Malefactor was to be led out of the Consistory, at the door whereof a person was to stand with a Napkin in his hand, and a man on Horse-back at some distance from him, that if any one came and said, he had something to offer for the deliverance of the Malefactor, upon the moving of the Napkin the Horseman might give notice, and bring the offender back. He had two grave persons to go along with him to exhort him to confession by the way; a Crier went before him, proclaiming who he was, what his crime, and who the Witnesses; being come near the place of execution (which was two cubits from the ground) he was first stripped, and then stoned, and afterwards hanged, where he was to continue till Sun-set, and then being taken down, he and his Gibbet were both buried together. XX. SUCH were their customs in ordinary cases, but alass their greediness of St. Stephens bloud would not admit these tedious procee∣dings; onely one formality we find them using, which the Law requi∣red, Deut. 17.7. which was, that the hands of the Witnesses should be first upon him, to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the People: a Law surely contrived with great Wisdom and Prudence, that so the Witness, if for∣sworn, might derive the guilt of the bloud upon himself, and the rest be free; so thou shalt put the evil away from among you. Accordingly here the Witnesses putting off their upper garments (which rendred them less nimble and expedite, being loose and long, according to the mode of those Eastern Countries) laid them down at Sauls feet, a zealous Youth, at that time Student under Gamalicl, the fiery zeal and activity of whose temper made him busie no doubt in this, as we find he was in the fol∣lowing Persecution. An action which afterwards cost him tears and penitent reflections, Act. 22.20. himself preferring the Indictment against himself; When the bloud of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. Thus prepared they began the Tragedy, whose example was soon followed by the multitude. All which time the innocent and holy man was upon his knees, sending up his prayers faster to Heaven then they could rain down Stones upon him, piously recommending his own soul to God, and charitably interceding for his Murderers, that God would not charge this guilt upon them, nor severely reckon with them for it: and then gave up the Ghost, or as the sacred Historian elegantly expresses it, fell asleep. So soft a pillow is death to a good man, so willingly, so quietly does he leave the World, as a weary Labourer goes to bed at night. What Storms or Tempests soever may follow him while he lives, his Sun in spight of all the malice and cruelty of his enemies sets serene and calm; Mark the perfect and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.
XXI. THUS died S. Stephen, the Protomartyr of the Christian Faith, H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2. p. 38. obtaining  (says Eusebius) a reward truly answering to his name, a Crown. He was a man in whom the Vertues of a divine life were very eminent and illustrious; a man full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost. Admirable his Zeal for God and for Religion, for the propagating whereof he refused no pains, declined no troubles or difficulties: his courage was not baffled either with the angry frowns, or the fierce threatnings of his enemies, nor did his spirit sink, though he stood alone, and had neither Friend nor Kinsman to assist and comfort him; his constancy firm and unshaken, notwithstanding tem∣ptations on the one hand, and the dangers that assaulted him on the other: in all the oppositions that he met with, under all the torments and sufferings that he underwent, he discovered nothing but the meek and innocent temper of a Lamb, never betraying one passionate and re∣vengeful word, but calmly resigned up his soul to God. He had a cha∣rity large enough to cover the highest affronts, and the greatest wrongs and injuries that were put upon him; and accordingly after the exam∣ple of his Master, he prayed for the pardon of his Murderers, even while they were raking in his bloud. Ego sum Jesus Nazarenus, quem tu perseque∣ris. Quid mihi & tibi? Quare te erigis con∣tra me, ad tanta mala quae commisisti in me? Olim quidem debui perdere te, sed Stephanus meus oravit prote. O Saule lupe rapax, comedi∣sti; expecta paululum, & digeres. Dicam pla∣ne, elisus est filius perditionis. Nam si Sanctus STEPHANUS sic non orasset, Ecclesia PAULUM non haberet. Sed ideo erectus est Paulus, quia in terra inclinatus exauditus est Stephanus. Quod fecit persecutor, patitur prae∣dicator. August. Serm. 1. de S. Steph. Tom. 10. col. 1168. And the effectual fervent prayer of the righteous man availed much; Heaven was not deaf to his Petition, as appeared in the speedy conversion of S. Paul, whose admi∣rable change we may reasonably suppose to have been the birth of the good mans dying groans, the fruit of his Prayer and Interest in Heaven. And what set off all these excellencies, he was not elated with lofty and arrogant conceits, not thought more highly of himself then he ought to think, esteeming meanly of, and preferring others be∣fore himself. And therefore the Author of the Apostolic Lib. 8. cap. 46. Concil. Tom. 1. Col. 509. Constitutions brings in the Apostles commending S. Stephen for his humility, that though he was so great a person, and honoured with such singular and extraordinary Visions and Revelations, yet never attempted any thing above his place, did not consecrate the Eucharist, nor confer Or∣ders upon any; but (as became a Martyr of Christ , to preserve Order and Decency) he contented himself with the station of a Deacon, wherein he persevered to the last minute of his life. XXII. HIS Martyrdom hapned (say some) three years after our Saviours Passion, which Euodius Bishop of Antioch (if that Epistle were his cited by H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 3. p. 134. Nicephorus, which 'tis probable enough was not) extends to no less then seven years. Doubtless a very wide mistake. Sure I am Losupr. lan∣dat. Eusebius affirms, that it was not long after his ordination to his Deacons Office, and the Author of the Excerpta Chronologica published by Ad calc. Chro. Euseb. pag. 82. Scaliger more particularly, that it was some few days less then eight moneths after our Lords Ascension. He is generally supposed to have been young at the time of his Martyrdom; and Orat. in S. Stephbi supr. Chrsostom makes no scruple of styling him yoang man at every turn, though for what reason, I confess I am yet to learn. He was martyred without the Walls, near the Gate on the North side, that leads to Cedar, (as Ep. de Invent. S. Steph. ap. Sur. ad Aug. 3. Bed. de loc. S. c. 1. p. 363. T. 3. Broc. descript. Terr. s. pon. 328. Convic. Itin. l. 2. c. 11. p. 250. Lucian tells us) and which was afterwards called S. Stephens Gate; anciently (say some) stiled the Gate of Ephraim, or as others the Valley Gate, or the Fish Gate which stood on the East side of the City, where the place we are told is still shewed, where S. Paul sate when he kept
the clothes of them that slew him. Over this place (where ever it was) the Empress Euagr. H. Eccl. l. 1 c. 22. p. 280. Eudocia Wife of Theodosius, when she repaired the Walls of Jerusalem, erected a beautiful and stately Church to the honour of S. Stephen, wherein she her self was buried afterwards. The great Stone upon which he stood while he suffered Martyrdom, is Bed. ib. cap. 3. p. 364. said to have been afterwards removed into the Church built to the honour of the Apo∣stles upon Mount Sion, and there kept with great care and reverence: yea one of the Stones wherewith he was killed, being preserved by some Christian, was afterwards (as we are Bar. not. in Martyr Ram. ad Aug. 3. p. 475. ex Martyrol. S. Cyriac. told) carried into Italy, and laid up as a choice Treasure at Ancona, and a Church there built to the me∣mory of the Martyr. XXIII. THE Church received a great wound by the death of this pious and good man, and could not but express a very deep resentment of it: Devout men (probably Proselytes) carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation for him. They carried, or as the word  properly signifies, they dressed him up, and prepared the dead body for the burial. For we cannot reasonably suppose, that the Jews being at this time so mightily enraged against him, the Apostles would think it prudent further to provoke the exasperated humour by making a solemn and pompous Funeral. His burial (if we might believe Lucian. Ep. de invent. S. Steph. abi supr. & apud Bar. ad Ann. 415. p. 371 vid. Niceph. l. 14 c. 9. Tom. 2. p. 454. one of the An∣cients, who pretends 'twas revealed to him in a Vision by Gamaliel, whom many of the Ancients make to have been a Christian Convert) was on this manner. The Jewish Sanhedrim having given order that his Carcass should remain in the place of its Martyrdo to be consumed by wild Beasts; here it lay for some time night and day, untouched either by Beast or Bird of prey. Till Gamaliel comsonating the case of the holy Martyr, persuaded some religious Christian Proselytes, who dwelt at Jerusalem, and furnished them with all things  Isary for it, to go with all possible secrecy and fetch off his bod  hey brought it away in his own Carriage, and conveved it to  called Caphargamala, (corruptly, as is probable, for Caphargamala, otherwise  properly signifies the Town of Camels) that is, the Village of Gamaliel, twenty miles distant from Jerusalem; where a solemn mourning was kept for him seventy days at Gamaliels charge, who also caused him to be buried in the East side of his own Monument, where afterwards he was interred himself. The Greek Menaeon adds, that his body was put into a Coffin made of the wood of the Tree called Persea, . Menaeon Graecor. . sub lit. Σ. 111. (this was a large beau∣tiful Egptian Tree, as Histor. Plant. l. 4. c. 2. p. 286. Theophrastus tells us, of which they were wont to make Statues, Beds, Tables, &c.) though how they came by such ve∣ry particular intelligence (there being nothing of it in Gamaliels Revelation) I am not able to imagine. &c. c. 14. p. 19. Edit. Allat. Johannes Pho∣cas, a Greek Writer of the middle Age of the Church, agrees in the rela∣tion of his Interment by Gamaliel, but adds, that he was first buried in Mount Sion, in the house where the Apostles were assembled when our Lord came in to them, the doors being shut, after his resurrection, and after∣wards removed by Gamaliel to another place, oid. c. 15. p. 25. which (says he) was on the left side the City, as it looks towards Samaria, where a famous Mona∣stery was built afterwards. XXIV. BUT where ever his body was interred, it rested quietly for several Ages, till we hear of its being found out in the reign of Honorius;
for then as H. Eccl. l. 9. c. 16, 17. p. 817. Sozomen informs us, it was discovered at the same time with the bones of the Prophet Zachary, an account of both which he pro∣mises to give; and having spoken of that of the Prophet, there abrupt∣ly ends his History. But what is wanting in him is fully supplied by other hands, especially the forementioned Vid. loc. sapr. citat. & Phot. Cod. Cl. XXI. Col. 383. Lucian, Presbyter of the Town of Caphargamala in the Diocess of Jerusalem, who is very large and punctual in his account, the sum whereof (so far as concerns the present case, and is material to relate) is this. Sleeping one night in the Bapti∣sterium of his Church, (this was Ann. CCCCXV. Honor. Imper. XXI.) there appeared to him a grave venerable old man, who told him he was Gamaliel, bad him go to John Bishop of Jerusalem, and will him to re∣move his remains and some others (whereof S. Stephen was the princi∣pal) that were with him from the place where they lay. Three seve∣ral times the Vision appeared to him before he would be fully satisfied in the thing, and then he acquainted the Bishop with it, who comman∣ded him to search after the place. After some attempts, he found the place of their repository, and then gave the Bishop notice, who came and brought two other Bishops, Eleutherius of Sebaste, and Elentherius of Hieri∣cho, along with him. The Monument being opened, they found an Inscription upon S. Stephens Tomb-stone in deep Letters, CELIEL, signifying (says mine Author) the Servant of God; at the opening of the Coffin there was an Earthquake, and a very pleasant and delightful fra∣grancy came from it, and several miraculous cures were done by it. The remains being closed up again (onely some few bones, and a little of the dust that was taken out, and bestowed upon Lucian) were with great triumph and rejoicing conveyed to the Church that stood upon Mount Sion, the place where he himself while alive had discharged the Office of a Deacon. I add no more of this, but that this Story is not onely mentioned by Loc. citat. Photius, and before him by Marcel. Chron. Indct. XIII. p. m. 17. Marcellinus Comes, some∣times Chancellor or Secretary to Justinian, afterwards Emperour (who sets it down as done in the very same year, and under the same Consuls wherein Lucians Epistle reports it) but before both by De Script. Ecc. c. 46, 47. p. 55. Gennadius Presbyter of Marseilles, who lived Ann. CCCCXC. and many years be∣fore, and consequently not long after the time of Lucian himself; who also adds, that Lucian wrote a relation of it in Greek to all the Churches, which Avitus a Spanish Presbyter translated into Latine, whose Epistle is prefixed to it, wherein he gives an account of it to Balchonius Bishop of Braga, and sent it by Orosius into Spain. XXV. THESE remains (whether before or after, the Reader must judge by the sequel of the Story, though I question whether he will have faith enough to believe all the circumstances of it) were translated to Constantinople upon this occasion. Niceph. H. Ecc. lib. 14. c. 9. p. 454. Tom. 2. Eadem haet Menaeon Graec. . sab. lit. . 11. Alexander a Nobleman of the Senatorian Order, having a particular veneration for the Protomartyr, had erected an Oratory to him in Palestine, commanding that himself when dead being put into a Coffin like that of S. Stephen, should be bu∣ried by him. Eight years after, his Lady (whose name, say some, was Juliana) removing to Constantinople, resolved to take her husbands body along with her: but in a hurry she chanced to mistake S. Stephens Coffin for that of her husband, and so set forward on her journey. But it soon betrayed it self by an extraordinary odor, and some miraculous effects: the fame whereof flying before to Constantinople, had prepared the peo∣ple to conduct it with great joy and solemnity into the Imperial Palace.
Which yet could not be effected: for the sturdy Mules that carried the Treasure being come as far as Constantines Baths, would not ad∣vance one step further. And when unreasonably whipped and pricked, they spake aloud, and told those that conducted them that the Martyr was to be reposed and interred in that place. Which was accordingly done, and a beautiful Church built there. But certainly they that first added this passage to the Story, had been at a great loss for invention had not the Story of Balaams Ass been upon record in Scripture. I confess Bar. ad Ann. 439. Tom. 5. p. 681. Baronius seems not over-forward to believe this relation, not for the trifling and ridiculous improbabilities of it, but onely because he could not well reconcile it with the time of its being first found out by Lucian. Indeed my Authors tell us, that this was done in the time of Constantine, Metrophanes being then Bishop of Constantinople, and that it was onely some part of his remains buried again by some devout Christians, that was discovered in a Vision to Lucian, and that the Empress Pulcheria, by the help of her Brother Theodosius, pro∣cured from the Bishop of Jerusalem the Martyrs right hand, which being arrived at Constantinople, was with singular reverence and rejoy∣cing brought into the Palace, and there laid up, and a stately and magni∣ficent Church erected for it, set off with all rich and costly ornaments and advantages. XXVI. Marcell. Chro. Indict. VII. p. 24. Theodor. Lect. lib. 2. p. 568. AUTHORS mention another remove Ann. CCCCXXXIX. (and let the curious and inquisitive after these matters reconcile the different accounts) of his remains to Constantinople by the Empress Eu∣docia, Wife to Theodosius, who having been at Jerusalem upon some pious and charitable designs, carried back with her to the Imperial City the remains of S. Stephen, which she carefully laid up in the Church of S. Laurence. The Roman Ad VII. Maii p. 284. Martyrology says, that in the time of Pope Pelagius they were removed from Constantinople to Rome, and lodg'd in the Sepulchre of S. Laurence the Martyr in agro Verano, where they are honoured with great piety and devotion. But I find not any Author near those times mentioning their translation into any of these Western parts, except the little parcel which Vid. Avit. Ep. Praef. Ep. Lucian. Gen∣nad. de script. Eccl. in Oros. c. 39. p. 53. Marcell. Chron. p. 17. Orosius brought from Jerusalem (whither he had been sent by S. Augustin to know S. Hieroms sense in the Question about the Original of the Soul) which he received from Avi∣tus, who had procured it of Lucian, and brought it along with him into the West, that is, into Afric, for whether it went any further, I find not. XXVII. AS for the miracles reported to have been done by the re∣mains of this Martyr, Deglor. Mar∣tyr. lib. 1. cap. 33. p. 42. &c. Gregory Bishop of Tours, and the Writers of the following Ages have furnished the World with abundant instances, which I insist not upon, Superstition having been the peculiar genius and humour of those middle Ages of the Church, and the Christian World miserably over-run with an excessive and immoderate Veneration of the Reliques of departed Saints. However I can venture the Readers displeasure for relating one, and the rather because 'tis so solemnly aver∣red by Annot. in Mar∣tyr. Rom. ad Aug. III. p. 474. Baronius himself. S. Gaudiosus an African Bishop, flying from the Vandalic Persecution, brought with him a Glass Vial of S. Stephens blood to Naples in Italy, where it was famous especially for one miracu∣lous effect, that being set upon the Altar, at the time of Mass it was annually wont upon the third of August (the day whereon S. Stephens body was first discovered) to melt and bubble, as if it were but newly shed.
But the miracle of the miracle lay in this, that when Pope Gregory the XIII. reformed the Roman Kalendar, and made no less then ten days difference from the former, the bloud in the Vial ceased to bubble upon the third of August according to the old computation, and bubbled upon that that fell according to the new Reformation. A great justification I confess (as Baronius well observes) of the divine Authority of the Gregorian Kalendar, and the Popes Constitutions: but yet it was ill done to set the Kalendars at variance, when both had been equally justi∣fied by the miracle. But how easie it was to abuse the World with such tricks, especially in these later Ages, wherein the Artifice of the Priests was arrived to a kind of perfection in these affairs, is no difficult matter to imagin. XXVIII. LET us then look to the more early Ages, when Cove∣tousness and Secular Interests had not so generally put men upon Arts of craft and subtlety; and we are told both by Lucian and Photius, Loc. ane eleat. that at the first discovery of the Martyrs body many strange miraculous cures were effected, seventy three healed onely by smelling the odor and fragrancy of the body; in some Daemons were cast out, others cu∣red of Issues of Bloud, Tumours, Agues, Fevers, and infinite other distem∣pers that were upon them. But that which most sways with me, is what S. Augustin reports of these matters; who seems to have been in∣quisitive about matters of Fact, De Civ. Di. lib. 22. cap. 8. col. 1346. &c. Tom. 5. as the Argument he managed did re∣quire. For being to demonstrate against the Gentiles that miracles were not altogether ceased in the Christian Church, among several others he produces many instances of Cures miraculously done at the remains of S. Stephen, brought thither (as before we noted) by Orosius from Jerusalem; all done thereabouts, and some of them in the place where himself lived, and of which (as he tells us) they made Books, which were solemnly published, and read to the People, whereof (at the time of his Writing) there were no less then seventy written of the Cures done at Hippo (the place where he lived) though it was not full two years since the memorial of S. Stephens Martyrdom had begun to be celebrated in that place, besides many whereof no account had been gi∣ven in writing. To set down all were to tire the Readers patience be∣yond all recovery, a few onely for a specimen shall suffice. At the Aquae Tibilitanae Projectus the Bishop bringing the remains of the Martyr, in a vast multitude of People a blind woman desiring to be brought to the Bishop, and some Flowers which she brought being laid upon them, and after applied to her eyes, to the wonder of all she instantly received her sight. Lucillus Bishop of Synica near Hippo, carrying the same re∣mains, accompanied with all the people, was suddenly freed from a de∣sperate disease, under which he had a long time laboured, and for which he even then expected the Chirurgeons Knife. Eucharius a Spanish Pres∣byter, then dwelling at Calama (whereof Possidius who wrote S. Augu∣stins Life was Bishop) was by the same means cured of the Stone, which he had a long time been afflicted with, and afterwards recovered of another distemper, when he had been given over for dead. Martialis an ancient Gentleman in that place of great note and rank, but a Pagan, and highly prejudiced against the Christian Faith, had been often in vain sollicited by his Daughter and her Husband (both Christians) to turn Christian, especially in his sickness, but still resented the motion with indignation. His Son-in-law went to the place dedicated to S. Stephens
Martyrdom, and there with prayers and tears passionately begged of God his Conversion. Departing he took some Flowers thence with him, which at night he put under his Fathers head; who slept well, and in the morning called for the Bishop, in whose absence (for he was at that time with S. Augustin at Hippo) the Presbyters were sent for; at whose coming he acknowledged himself a Christian, and to the joy and and admiration of all, was immediately baptized. As long as he lived he often had these words in his mouth, and they were the last words that he spake (for he died not long after) O Christ receive my spirit, though utterly ignorant that it was the Protomartyrs dying speech. XXIX. MANY passages of like nature he relates done at his own See at Hippo, and this among the rest. Ten children of eminency at Cae∣sarea in Cappadocia (all the children of one man) had for some notorious misdemeanour after their Fathers death been cursed by their Mother, whereupon they were all seized with a continual trembling and shaking in all parts of their body. Two of these, Paulus and Palladia, came over into Afric, and dwelt at Hippo, notoriously known to the whole City. They arrived fifteen days before Easter, where they frequented the Church, especially the place dedicated to the Martyrdom of S. Ste∣phen every day, praying that God would forgive them, and restore them to their health. Upon Easter-day the Young man praying as he was wont at the accustomed place, suddenly dropt down, and lay like one asleep, but without any trembling, and awaking found himself perfect∣ly restored to health, who was thereupon with the joyful acclamations of the People brought to S. Augustin, who kindly received him, and after the public devotions were over, treated him at Dinner, where he had the whole account of the misery that befel him. The day after, when the narrative of his Cure was to be recited to the People, his sister also was healed in the same manner and at the same place, the particular cir∣cumstances of both which S. Augustin relates more at large. XXX. WHAT the judicious and unprejudiced Reader will think of these and more the like instances there reported by this good Father, I know not, or whether he will not think it reasonable to believe, that God might suffer these strange and miraculous cures to be wrought in a place where multitudes yet persisted in their Gentilism and infidelity, Vid. Aug. loc. cit. initio cap. and who made this one great objection against the Christian Faith, that whatever miracles might be heretofore pretended for the confirmation of Christian Religion, yet that now they were ceased, when yet they were still necessary to induce the World to the belief of Christianity. Certain it is, that nothing was done herein, but what did very well con∣sist with the wisdom and the goodness of God, who as he is never wont to be prodigal in multiplying the effects of his omnipotent power be∣yond a just necessity, so is never wanting to afford all necessary eviden∣ces and methods of conviction. That therefore the unbelieving World (who made this the great refuge of their infidelity) might see that his arm was not grown effoete and weak, that he had not left the Chri∣stian Religion wholly destitute of immediate and miraculous attesta∣tions, he was pleased to exert these extraordinary powers, that he might baffle their unbelief, and silence their objections against the divinity of the Christian Faith. And for this reason God never totally withdrew the power of working Miracles from the Church, till the World was in a manner wholly subdued to the faith of Christ. And then he left it
to be conducted by more humane and regular ways, and to preserve its Authority over the minds of men by those standing and innate chara∣cters of Divinity, which he has impressed upon it. 'Tis true that the Church of Rome still pretends to this power, which it endeavours to justifie by appealing to these and such like instances. But in vain, and to no purpose; the pretended miracles of that Church being generally trifling and ludicrous, far beneath that gravity and seriousness that should work upon a wise and considering mind, the manner of their operation obscure and ambiguous, their numbers excessive and immo∣derate, the occasions of them light and frivolous, and after all, the things themselves for the most part false, and the reports very often so mon∣strous and extravagant, as would choke any sober and rational belief, so that a man must himself become the greatest miracle that believes them. I shall observe no more, then that in all these cases related by S. Augustin, we never find that they invocated or prayed to the Martyr, nor begged to be healed by his merits or intercession, but immediately directed their addresses to God himself.
THE LIFE OF S. PHILIP THE DEACON and EVANGELIST. Mic. Burghers sulpsit. Sect. 8.38. He comanded the Charet to stand still: and they went downe both into the water both PHILLIP and the EVNVCH. and he baptized him. His Birth-place. The confounding him with S. Philip the Apostle. His election to the Office of a Deacon. The dispersion of the Church at Jeru∣salem. Philips preaching at Samaria. Inveterate prejudices between the
Samaritans and the Jews. The great success of S. Philips Ministry. The Impostures of Simon Magus, and his embracing Christianity. The Christians at Samaria confirmed by Peter and John. Philip sent to Gaza. His meeting with the Aethiopian Eunuch. What Aethiopia here meant. Candace who. The Custom of retaining Eunuchs in the Courts of the Eastern Princes. This Eunuch who. His Office. His Religion and great piety. His Conversion and Baptism by S. Philip. The place where he was baptized. The Eunuchs return, and propagating Chri∣stianity in his own Country. Philips journey to Caesarea, and fixing his abode there. His four daughters Virgin-Prophetesses. His death. I. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 449. ad An∣noch. p. 95. S. PHILLIP was born (as Isidore the Peleusiot plain∣ly intimates) at Caesarea, a famous Port-Town be∣tween Joppa and Ptolemais in the Province of Sa∣maria; but whether he had any other warra  it then his own conjecture, I know  being some circumstances however that  probable. He has been by some both  and of later times for want of a due regard to things and persons, carelesly confounded with S. Philip the Aposile. A mistake of very ancient date, and which seems to have been embraced by some of the most early Writers of the Church. But whoever consi∣ders that the one was an Apostle, and one of the Twelve, the other a Deacon onely, and one of the Seven, chosen out of the People, and set apart by the Apostles, that they themselves might attend the more im∣mediate Ministeries of their Office, that the one was dispersed up and down the Countrey, while the other remained with the Apostolical Col∣ledge at Jerusalem, that the one though commissionated to Preach and to Baptize, could not impart the Holy Ghost (the peculiar prerogative of the Apostolical Office) will see just reason to force him to acknow∣ledge a vast difference between them. Our S. Philip was one of the Seventy Disciples, and S. Stephens next Colleague in the Deacons Office, erected for the conveniency of the Poor, and assisting the Apostles in some inferiour Services and Ministrations: which shews him to have been a person of great esteem and reputation in the Church, endowed with miraculous powers, full of Wisdom, and of the Holy Ghost; which were the qualifications required by the Apostles in those who were to be constituted to this place. In the discharge of this Ministery he con∣tinued at Jerusalem for some moneths after his election, till the Church being scattered up and down, he was forced to quit his station: as what wonder if the Stewards be dismissed, when the Houshold is broken up? II. THE Protomartyr had been lately sacrificed to the rage and fury of his Enemies: but the bloudy Cloud did not so blow over, but increa∣sed into a blacker tempest. Cruelty and revenge never say it is enough, like the temper of the Devil, whose malice is insatiable and eternal. Stephens death would not suffice, the whole Church is now shot at, and they resolve (if possible) to extirpate the Religion it self. The great Engineer in this Persecution was Saul, whose active and fiery genius, and passionate concern for the Traditions of the Fathers, made him pur∣sue the design with the Spirit of a Zealot, and the rage of a Mad-man. Having furnished himself with a Commission from the Sanhedrim, he quickly put it in execution, broke open Houses, seized whoever he met
with, that looked but like a Disciple of the crucified Jesus, and without any regard to Sex or Age, beat, and haled them unto prison, plucking the Husband from the bosom of his Wife, and the Mother from the em∣braces of her Children, blaspheming God, prosecuting and being inju∣rious unto men, breathing out nothing but slaughter and threatnings where-ever he came; H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. p. 39. whence Eusebius calls it the first and most grie∣vous Persecution of the Church. The Church by this means was for∣ced to retire, the Apostles onely remaining privately at Jerusalem, that they might the better superintend and steer the affairs of the Church, while the rest were dispersed up and down the neighbouring Coun∣tries, publishing the glad tidings of the Gospel, and declaring the na∣ture and design of it in all places where they came; so that what their Enemies intended as the way to ruine them, by breaking the knot of their Fellowship and Society, proved an effectual means to enlarge the bounds of Christianity. Thus excellent perfumes, while kept close in a box, few are the better for them, whereas being once, whether casual∣ly or maliciously spilt upon the ground, the fragrant scent presently fills all corners of the house. III. AMONG them that were thus dispersed was our Evangelist, so stiled not from his Writing, but preaching of the Gospel. He dire∣cted his journey towards the Province of Samaria, and came into a City of Samaria (as those words may be read) probably Gitton, the birth∣place of Simon Magus; though it's safest to understand it of Samaria it self. This was the Metropolis of the Province, had been for some Ages the Royal Seat of the Kings of Israel, but being utterly destroyed by Hyrcanus, had been lately re-edified by Herod the Great, and in honour of Augustus () by him stiled Sebaste. The Samaritans were a mixture of Jews and Gentiles, made up of the remains that were left of the Ten Tribes which were carried away captive, and those Heathen Colo∣nies which the King of Babylon brought into their room; and their Re∣ligion accordingly was nothing but Judaism blended with Pagan Rites, though so highly prized and valued by them, that they made no scru∣ple to dispute place, and to vie with the Worship of the Temple at Je∣rusalem. Upon this account there had been an ancient and inveterate pique and quarrel between the Jews and them, so as utterly to refuse all mutual intercourse with each other. Joh. 4.9. Hence the Samaritan Woman wondred, that our Lord being a Jew, should ask drink of her, who was a Woman of Samaria; for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. They despised them at the rate of Heathens, devoted them under the most solemn execrations, allowed them not to become Proselytes, nor to have any Portion in the Resurrection of the Just, suffered not an Israelite to eat with them, no nor to say Amen to their Blessing, nor did they think they could fasten upon our Saviour a greater Character of reproach, then to say that he was a Samaritan, and had a Devil. But God regards not the prejudices of men, nor always with-holds his kind∣ness from them, whom we are ready to banish the Lines of Love and Friendship. 'Tis true the Apostles at their first mission were charged not to go in the way of the Gentiles, Matth. 1.5. nor to enter into any City of the Samari∣tans. But when Christ by his death had broken: down the partition wall, Eph. 2.14, 15. & seq. and abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances, then the Gospel came and preached peace as well to them that were afar off, as to them that were nigh. Philip therefore freely
preached the Gospel to these Samaritans, so odious, so distastful to the Jews: to which he effectually prepared his way by many great and uncontrollable miracles, which being arguments fitted to the capacities, and accommodate to the senses of the meanest, do easiliest convey the truth into the minds of men. And the success here was accordingly, the people generally embracing the Christian Doctrine, while they be∣held him curing all manner of diseases, and powerfully dispossessing daemons, who with great horror and regret were forced to quit their residence, to the equal joy and wonder of that place. IV. IN this City was one Simon, born at a Town not far off, who by Sorcery and Magic Arts had strangely insinuated himself into the reverence and veneration of the People. A man crafty and ambitious, daring and insolent, whose Diabolical sophistries and devices, had for a long time so amazed the eyes of the Vulgar, that they really thought him (and for such no doubt he gave out himself) to be the supreme Di∣vinity, probably magnifying himself as that divine Power, that was to visit the Jews as the Messia, or the Son of God; among the Samaritans, giving out himself to be the Father, (as Lib. 1. c. 20. p. 115. Irenaeus assures us,) , as his Countryman Apol. II. p. 69. vid. Tert. de praeser. Haeret. c. 46. p. 219. Justin Martyr tells us the People worshipped him, as the first and chiefest Deity; as afterwards among the Gentiles he stiled himself the Holy Ghost. And what wonder if by this train of Ar∣tifices the People were tempted and seduced to admire and adore him. And in this case things stood at S. Philips arrival, whose greater and more unquestionable miracles quickly turned the Scale. Imposture cannot bear the too near approach of Truth, but flies before it, as dark∣ness vanishes at the presence of the Sun. The People sensible of their errour, universally flocked to S. Philips Sermons, and convinced by the efficacy of his Doctrine, and the power of his Miracles, gave up them∣selves his Converts, and were by Baptism initiated into the Christian Faith: Yea the Magician himself astonished at those mighty things which he saw done by Philip, professed himself his Proselyte and Disci∣ple, and was baptized by him; being either really persuaded by the convictive evidence of Truth, or else for some sinister designs craftily dissembling his Belief and Profession of Christianity. A piece of Arti∣fice which H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 1. p. 39. Eusebius tells us, his Disciples and Followers still observed in his time, who in imitation of their Father, like a Pest or a Leprosie, were wont to creep in among the Christian Societies, that so they might with the more advantage poison and infect the rest, many of whom ha∣ving been discovered, had with shame been ejected and cast out of the Church. V. THE fame of S. Philips success at Samaria quickly flew to Jeru∣salem, where the Apostles immediately took care to dispatch some of their own number to confirm these new Converts in the Faith. Peter and John were sent upon this errand, who being come, prayed for them, and laid their hands upon them, ordaining probably some to be Go∣vernors of the Church, and Ministers of Religion; which was no sooner done, but the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost fell upon them. A plain evidence of the Apostolic Power: Philip had converted and ba∣ptised them, but being onely a Deacon, (as Eplph. Haeres. XXI. p. 29. Epiphanius and Christ. Hor. 18. in  p. . Chrysostom truely observe) could not conser the Holy Ghost, this being a faculty bestowed onely upon the Apostles. Simon the Magician observing this, that a power of working miracles was conveyed by the imposition of
the Apostles hands, hoped by obtaining it to recover his credit and re∣putation with the people; to which end he sought by such methods as were most apt to prevail upon himself, to corrupt the Apostles by a sum of money, to confer this power upon him. Peter resented the mo∣tion with that sharpness and severity that became him, told the Wretch of the iniquity of his offer, and the evil state and condition he was in, advised him by repentance to make his Peace with Heaven, that if possi∣ble, he might prevent the miserable fate that otherwise did attend him. But what passed between Peter and this Magician both here, and in their memorable encounter at Rome (so much spoken of by the Ancients) we have related more at large in another place Antiquit. App. Life of S. Pt. Sect. 8. v. 1 Sect. 9. . 4.. VI. WHETHER S. Philip returned with the Apostles to Jerusalem, or (as Hil. 19. in Act. App p. 585. Chrysostom thinks) staid at Samaria, and the parts thereabouts, we have no intimations left upon Record. . Chrysost. ibid. p. 586. But where-ever he was, an Angel was sent to him with a message from God, to go and instruct a Stranger in the Faith. The Angel one would have thought had been most likely himself to have managed this business with success. But the wise God keeps Method and Order, and will not suffer an Angel to take that Work which he has put into the hands of his Ministers. The sum of his Commission was to go to∣ward the South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza, which is desart: A circumstance, which whether it relate to the way, or the City, is not easie to decide, it being probably true of both. Gaza was a City anciently famous for the strange efforts of Sampsons strength, for his captivity, his death, and the burial of himself and his enemies in the same Ruine. It was afterwards sacked and laid wast by Alexander the Great, and as Geograph. l. 16. p. 759. Zach. 2.4, Jer. 47.5. Strabo notes, remained wast and desart in his time; the Prophetical curse being truly accomplished in it, Gaza shall be forsaken; a Fate which the Prophet Jeremy had foretold to be as certain, as if he had seen it already done, baldness is come upon Gaza. So certainly do the divine threatnings arrest and take hold of a proud and impenitent People; so easily do they set open the Gates for ruine to enter into the strongest and best fortified Cities, where Sin has once undermined, and stript them naked of the divine protection. VII. NO sooner had S. Philip received his Orders, though he knew not as yet the intent of his journey, but he addressed himself to it, he arose and went: he did not reason with himself whether he might not be mistaken, and that be a false and deluding Vision that sent him upon such an unaccountable errand, and into a Desart and a Wilderness, where he was more likely to meet with Trees and Rocks, and wild Beasts, then Men to preach to: but went however, well knowing God never sends any upon a vain or a foolish errand. An excellent instance of obedience; as 'tis also recorded to Abrahams eternal honour and commendation, that when God sent his Warrant, he obeyed and went out, not knowing whither he went. As he was on his journey, he espied coming towards him a man of Aethiopia, an Eunuch of great authority under Candace Queen of the Aethiopians; who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jeru∣salem to worship; though in what part of the World the Countrey here spoken of was situate (the word being variously used in Scripture) has been some dispute. Doroh. Synops. p. 148. Dorotheus and Sopi. ap. Hier. de Strip Eccl. in Cre∣scent. Sophronius of old, and some later Writers, place it in Arabia the Happy, not far from the Persian Gulf: but
it's most generally conceived to be meant of the African Aethiopia, lying under or near the torrid Zone, the People whereof are described by Homer, to be , the remotest part of mankind; and accor∣dingly Hier. ad Paul. Tom. 3. p. 7. S. Hierom says of this Eunuch, that he came from Aethiopia, that is, ab extremis mundi finibus, from the farthest corners of the World. The Countrey is sometimes stiled Cusch, probably from a mixture of the Ara∣bians, who inhabiting on the other side of the Red Sea, might send over Colonies hither, who setling in these parts, communicated the names of Cush and Sabaea to them. The manners of the People were very rude and barbarous, and the People themselves, especially to the Jews, con∣temptible even to a Proverb; Amos 9.7. Are ye not as the children of the Aethiopians unto me, O children of Israel, saith the Lord? nay the very meeting an Aethiopian was accounted an ill omen, and an unlucky prognostication. But no Country is a Bar to Heaven, the grace of God that brings salvation plucks up the enclosures, and appears to all; so that in every Nation, he that feareth God and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him. VIII. BUT we cannot reasonably suppose that it should be meant of Aethiopia at large, especially as parallel at this day with the Abys∣sine Empire, but rather of that part of the Countrey whose Metropo∣lis was called Meroe, and Saba (as 'tis called both by Antiq. Jud. l. 2. c. 5. p. 58. Josephus, and the Abyssines themselves at this day) situate in a large Island, encompas∣sed by the Nile, and the Rivers of Astapus, and Astoborra, as Josephus in∣forms us,: for about these parts it was (as Hist. Nat. l. 6. c. 29. p. 105. Pliny tells us) that Queens had a long time governed under the title of Candace, a custom (as we find in Strabo) first commencing in the time of Augustus, when a Queen of that name having for her incomparable Vertues been dear to the People, her successors in honour of her took the title of Candace, in the same sense that Ptolomy was the common name of the Kings of Egypt, Artaxerxes of the Kings of Persia, and Caesar of the Roman Emperours. Indeed Oecumenius was of opinion that Candace was one∣ly the common name of the Queen-mothers of Aethiopia, . Oecumen. Comment. in Act. VIII. p. 82. that Nation not giving the name of Fathers to their Kings, as acknowledging the Sun onely for their Common Father, and their Prin∣ces the Sons of that common Parent. But in this I think he stands alone, and contradicts the general Vote and Suffrage of the Ancients, which affirms this Nation to have been subject to Wo∣men; sure I am H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. p. 40. Eusebius expresly says, 'twas the custom of this Coun∣trey to be governed by Queens even in his time. The name of the pre∣sent Queen (they say) was Lacasa, daughter of King Baazena, and that she outlived the death of our Saviour four Years. IX. Among the great Officers of her Court she had one (if not more) Eunuch, probably to avoid suspicion, it being the fashion of those Eastern Countries (as it still is at this day) to imploy Eunuchs in places of great trust and honour, and especially of near access to, and attendance upon Queens. . Herod. lib. 8. Auctor Sinnaces, insigni familia ac perinde opibus, & proxime hale Abdus, ademptae viri∣litatis, non despectum id apud barbaros, ultro∣que potentiam habet. Tacit. Ann. l. 6. c. 31. p. 182. For however among us the very name sounds vile and contemptible, yet in those Coun∣tries 'tis otherwise, among the Barbarians (says Herodotus) that is, the Eastern People, Eunuchs are persons of the greatest esteem and value. Our Eunuchs name (as we find it in the Confession made by Extat ad Bzov. Annal. Eccl. ad Ann. 1524.  XXXII. p. 543. Zaga Zabo Embassador from the Aethio∣pian
Emperour) was Indich; , a potent Courtier, an Officer of State of prime Note and Quality, being no less then High-Trea∣surer to the Queen; nor do we find that Philip either at his Con∣version or Baptism found fault with him for his place or greatness. Certainly Magistracy is no ways inconsistent with Christianity, the Church and the State may well agree, and Moses and Aaron go hand in hand. Peter baptized Cornelius, and S. Paul Sergius the Proconsul of Cyprus into the Christian Faith, and yet neither of them found any more fault with them for their places of Authority and Power then Philip did here with the Lord Treasurer of the Aethiopian Queen. For his Religion, he was, if not a Proselyte of Justice (as some think) circumcised, and under an obligation to observe the Rites and Pre∣cepts of the Law of Moses, at least a Proselyte of the Gate, (in which respect it is that one of the Ancients calls him a Jew) Pont. Diac. in vit. Cypr. p. 11. entered al∣ready into the knowledge of the true God, and was now come to Jerusalem (probably at the solemnity of the Passover, or the Feast of Pentecost) to give publick and solemn evidences of his devotion. Though an Aethiopian, and many thousand miles distant from it, though a great Statesman, and necessarily swallowed up in a croud of business, yet he came to Jerusalem for to worship. No way so long, so rugged and difficult, no charge or interest so dear and great, as to hinder a good man from minding the concernments of Religion. No slender and trifling pretences, no little and ordinary occasions should excuse our attendance upon places of public Worship; behold here a man that thought not much to take a journey of above four thousand miles, that he might appear before God in the solemn place of divine adoration, the place which God had chosen above all other parts of the World, to place his name there. X. HAVING performed his homage and worship at the Temple, he was now upon his return for his own Countrey; nor had he left his Religion at Church behind him, or thought it enough that he had been there; but improved himself while travelling by the way: even while he sate in his Chariot (as Homil. 19. in Act. p. 585. Tantus amator Legis divinae{que} scientiae fuit, at etiam in vhi∣culo sacras li∣teras legeret. Hier. Epist. ad Paulin. T. 3. p. 7 Chrysostom observes) he read the Scriptures: a good man is not willing to lose even common minutes, but to redeem what time is possible for holy uses; whether sitting or walking, or jour∣nying, our thoughts should be at work, and our affections travelling towards Heaven. While the Eunuch was thus imployed, a Messenger is sent to him from God: the best way to meet with divine communi∣cations, is to be conversant in our duty. By a voice from Heaven, or some immediate inspiration, Philip is commanded to go near the Chariot, and address himself to him. He did so, and found him reading a Se∣ction or Paragraph of the Prophet Isaiah, concerning the death and suf∣ferings of the Messia, his meek and innocent carriage under the bloody and barbarous violences of his enemies, who dealt with him with all cruelty and injustice. This the Eunuch not well understanding, nor knowing certainly whether the Prophet meant it of himself or another, desired S. Philip to explain it; who being courteously taken up into his Chariot, shewed him that all this was meant of, and had been accom∣plished in the Holy Jesus, taking occasion thence to discourse to him of his Nativity, his Actions and Miracles, his Sufferings and Resurrection from the dead, and his Ascension into Heaven, declaring to him the whole system of the Christian Faith. His discourse wanted not its de∣sired
effect; the Eunuch was fully satisfied in the Messiaship and Divine Authority of our Saviour, and wanted nothing but the solemn Rite of Initiation to make him a Christian Proselyte. Being come to a place where there was conveniency of Water, he desired that he might be baptized, and having professed his Faith in the Son of God, and his hearty embracing the Christian Religion, they both went down into the Water, where Philip baptized him, and washed this Aethiopian white. XI. The place where this Eunuch was baptized, Annot. in Act. 8.36. Beza by a very wide mistake makes to be the River Eleutherus, which ran near the Foot of Mount Lebanon in the most Northern Borders of Palestine, quite at the other end of the Countrey: Descript. Terr. Sanct. p. m. 330. Brocard places it near Nehel Escol, or the Torrent of the Grape, the place whence the Spies fetched the bunch of Grapes; on the left side of which Valley about half a League runs a Brook not far from Sicelech, in which this Eunuch was baptized. But Euseh. de loc. Hebr. in voc. . p. 66. Eusebius and Hieron. de loc. Hebr. in voc. Besur. S. Hierom (followed herein by Ad. Martyr. VIII. Idus Jun. Ado the Martyrologist) more probably place it near Bethsoron, (where we are told Cotovic. Itin. l. 2. c. 9. p. 247. it is still to be seen at this day) a Village 20 miles distant from Jerusalem in the way between it and Hebron, near to which there was a Spring bubling up at the foot of a Hill. S. Hierom adds, that it was again swallowed up in the same ground that produced it, and that here it was that Philip bapti∣zed the Ethiopian. Which was no sooner done, but Heaven set an ex∣traordinary seal to his Conversion and Admission into the Christian Faith, (especially if it be true what some very ancient Manuscripts add to the passage, V. 39. . od. Alexand. in Bibl. Reg. Angl. aliique plures Codd. MSs. that being baptized, the Holy Ghost fell upon him, furnishing him with miraculous gifts and powers, and that Philip was immediate∣ly snatched away from him. XII. Though the Eunuch had lost his Tutor, yet he rejoiced that he had found so great a treasure, the knowledge of Christ, and of the true way to Heaven, and he went on his journey with infinite Peace and Tranquillity of mind, satisfied with the happiness that had befallen him. Being returned into his Country, he preached and propagated the Christian Faith, and spread abroad the glad tidings of a Saviour: in which respect Com. in Esai. 53. T. 5. p. 195. S. Hierom stiles him the Apostle of the Ethiopians, and the Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. p. 40 Cyril. Catech. XVII. p. 457. Psal. 68.31. Ancients generally make that prediction of David fulfilled in him, Ethiopia shall stretch out her hands unto God, and hence the Ethiopians are wont to glory (as appears by the Apud Brov. ubi supr. vid. Godig. de re∣bus Acyssin 1. c. 18 p. 113. Confession made by the Ahyssin Em∣bassador) that by means of this Eunuch they received Baptism almost the first of any Christians in the World. Indeed they have a constant tradition that for many Ages they had the knowledge of the true God of Israel, from the time of the Queen of Sheba (and Seba being the name of this Countrey, as we noted before, makes it probable she might govern here) her name (they tell us) was Maqueda, who having learnt from So∣lomon the knowledge of the Jewish Law, and received the Books of their Religion, taught them her Subjects, and sent her Son Meilech to Solomon to be instructed and educated by him; the Story whereof may be read in that Confession more at large. I add no more concerning the Eunuch then what Synops. u∣bi supr. vid. etiam Sophr. ap. Hier. in Cres. Dorotheus and others relate, that he is reported to have suf∣fered Martyrdom, and to have been honourably buried, and that disea∣ses were cured, and other miracles done at his Tomb even in his time. The Traditions of the Countrey more particularly tell us, that the Eu∣nuch being returned home, first converted his Mistress Candace to the Ap. Godign. loc. itat. p. 117.
Christian Faith, and afterwards by her leave propagated it throughout Aethiopia, till meeting with S. Matthew the Apostle, by their joint-endea∣vours they expelled Idolatry out of all those parts. Which done, he crossed the Red Sea, and preached the Christian Religion in Arabia, Persia, India, and many other of those Eastern Nations, till at length in the Island Taprobana, since called Ceilon, he sealed his Doctrine with his blood. XIII. GOD, who always affords what is sufficient, is not wont to mul∣tiply means farther then is necessary. Philip having done the errand upon which he was sent, was immediately caught and carried away, no doubt by the ministry of an Angel, and landed at Azotus, anciently Ashdod, a Philistin City in the borders of the Tribe of Dan, famous of old for the Temple and residence in it of the Idol Dagon, and the capti∣vity of the Ark kept for some time in this place, and now enlightned with S. Philips preaching, who went up and down publishing the Gospel in all the parts hereabouts till he arrived at Caesarea. This City was heretofore called Turris Stratonis, and afterwards rebuilt and enlarged by Herod the Great, and in honour of Augustus Caesar, to whom he was greatly obliged, by him called Caesarea; for whose sake also he erected in it a stately palace of Marble, called Herods Judgment Hall, wherein his Nephew ambitious of greater honours and acclamations then became him, had that fatal execution served upon him. It was a place remark∣able for many devout and pious men; here dwelt Cornelius, who toge∣ther with his Family being baptized by Peter, was in that respect the first fruits of the Gentile World: hither came Agabus the Prophet, who foretold S. Paul his imprisonment and martyrdom: here S. Paul himself was kept prisoner, and made those brave and generous Apologies for himself, first before Felix, as afterwards before Fesius and Agrippa. Here also our S. Philip had his House and Family, to which probably he now retired, and where he spent the remainder of his life: for here many years after we find S. Paul and his company, Act. 21 8, 9. coming from Ptolemais in their journey to Jerusalem, entering into the house of Philip the Evange∣list, which was one of the seven, and abiding with him; and the same man had four daughters, Virgins, which did prophesie. These Virgin-Prophetesses were endowed with the gift of foretelling future events; for though prophecy in those times implied also a faculty of explaining the more abstruse and difficult parts of the Christian Doctrine, and a peculiar abi∣lity to demonstrate Christs Messiaship from the predictions of Moses and the Prophets, and to express themselves on a sudden upon any difficult and emergent occasion, yet can we not suppose these Virgins to have had this part of the prophetic faculty, or at least that they did not pub∣licly exercise it in the Congregation. This therefore unquestionably respected things to come, and was an instance of Gods accomplishing an an ancient promise, that in the times of the Messia, Act. 2.17, 18. he would pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, on their sons, and daughters, servants and handmaidens, and they should prophecy. The names of two of these daughters the Greek Menaeon tells us were Hermione and Eutychis, who came into Asia after S. Johns death, and the first of them died, and was buried at Ephesus. XIV. HOW long S. Philip lived after his return to Caesarea, and whe∣ther he made any more excursions for the propagation of the Faith, is not certainly known. Synops. de Vit. App. loc. citat. Dorotheus, I know not upon what ground, will
have him to have been Bishop of Trazellis, a City in Asia: others con∣founding him with S. Philip the Apostle, make him resident at Hierapolis in Phrygia, where he suffered Martyrdom, and was buried (say they) together with his Daughters. Most probable it is that he died a peaceable death at Caesarea, where his Daughters were also buried, as some ancient Martyrologies inform us; where his House and the apart∣ments of his Virgin-Daughters were yet to be seen in Hi. Epitaph. Pa. ad E∣so. T. 1. p. 172. S. Hieroms time, visited and admired by the noble and religious Roman Lady Paula in her journey to the Holy Land. The End of S. PHILIP's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. BARNABAS THE APOSTLE. S. BARNABAS APOSTOLUS. MI  DEL ET SCULPSIT. His Sirname Joses. The Title of Barnabas whence added to him. His Countrey and Parents. His Education and Conversion to Christianity. His generous charity. S. Pauls address to him, after his Conversion. His
Commission to confirm the Church of Antioch. His taking S. Paul into his assistance. Their being sent with contributions to the Church at Jerusalem. Their peculiar separation for the ministry of the Gentiles. Imposition of hands the usual Rite of Ordination. Their travels through several Countries. Their success in Cyprus. Barnabas at Lystra taken for Jupiter, and why. Their return to Antioch. Their Embassy to Je∣rusalem about the controversie concerning the legal Rites. Barnabas sedu∣ced by Peters dissimulation at Antioch. The dissension between him and S. Paul. Barnabas his journey to Chyprus. His voyage to Rome, and preaching the Christian Faith there. His Martyrdom by the Jews in Cyprus. His Burial. His body when first discovered. S. Matthews Hebrew Gospel found with it. The great priviledges hereupon conferred upon the See of Salamis. A description of his person and temper. The Epistle anciently published under his name. The design of it. The pra∣ctical part of it excellently managed under the two ways of Light and Darkness. I. THE proper, and (if I may so term it) original name of this Apostle (for with that title S. Luke, and after him the Ancients constantly honour him) was Joses, by a softer termination familiar with the Greeks for Joseph, and so the Kings, and several other Manuscript Copies read it. It was the name given him at his Circumcision, in ho∣nour no doubt of Joseph, one of the great Pa∣triarchs of their Nation, to which after his em∣bracing Christianity, the Apostles added that of Barnabas; Joses, who by the Apostles was sirnamed Barnabas, either implying him a Son of Pro∣phecy, eminent for his prophetic gifts and endowments, or denoting him (what was a peculiar part of the Prophets Office) a Son of Consolation, . Chrysost. Homil. XI. in Act. App. p. 529. for his admirable dexterity in erecting troubled minds, and leading them on by the most mild and gentle methods of persua∣sion: Vid. Notker. Martyr. ad III. Id. Jan. ap. Ca∣is. Antiq. Lect. Tom. 6. though I rather conceive him so stiled for his generous charity in resreshing the bowels of the Saints; especially since the name seems to have been imposed upon him upon that occasion. He was born in Cy∣prus, a noted Island in the Mediterranean Sea, lying between Cilicia, Sy∣ria, and Egypt; a large and fertile Countrey, the Theatre anciently of no less then nine several Kingdoms, so fruitful and richly furnished with all things that can minister either to the necessity or pleasure of mans life, that it was of old called Macaria, or The Happy; and the Historian reports, . Flor. lib. 3. . p. 67. that Portius Cato having conquered this Island, brought hence, greater treasures into the Exchequer at Rome, then had been done in any other triumph. But in nothing was it more happy, or upon any account more memorable in the Records of the Church, then that it was the Birth-place of our Apostle, whose Ancestors in the troublesome times of Antiochus Epiphanes, or in the Conquest of Judaea by Pompey and the Roman Army, had fled over hither (as a place best secured from Vio∣lence and Invasion) and setled here. II. He was descended of the Tribe of Levi, and the line of the Priest∣hood, which rendred his Conversion to Christianity the more remarka∣ble, all interests concurring to leaven him with mighty prejudices against
the Christian Faith. But the grace of God delights many times to exert it self against the strongest opposition, and loves to conquer, where there is least probability to overcome. His Parents were rich and pious, and finding him a beautiful and hopeful youth (says my Alexand. M∣ah.  S. Barna. inte vit. a S. M. extat. ap. sur. ad J. XI. p. 1. vi. . Author, deri∣ving his intelligence concerning him, as he tells us, from Clemens of Ale∣xandria, and other ancient Writers) they sent, or brought him to Jeru∣salem, to be trained up in the knowledge of the Law, and to that end committed him to the tutorage of Gamaliel, the great Doctor of the Law, and most famous Master at that time in Israel, at whose Foot he was brought up together with S. Paul; which if so, might lay an early foun∣dation of that intimate familiarity that was afterwards between them. Here he improved in learning and piety, frequenting the Temple, and devoutly exercising himself in Fasting and Prayer. Ibid. . VI. We are further told, that being a frequent Spectator of our Saviours miracles, and among the rest, of his curing the Paralitie at the Pool of Bethesda, he was soon convinced of his Divinity, and persuaded to deliver up himself to his discipline and institutions: and as the nature of true goodness is ever communicative, he presently went and acquainted his Sister Mary with the notice of the Messia, who hastned to come to him, and importuned him to come home to her house, where our Lord afterwards (as the Church continued to do after his decease) was wont to assemble with his Disciples, and that her Son Mark was that young man, Mark 14.1. who bore the Pitcher of Water, whom our Lord commanded the two Disciples to fol∣low home, and there prepare for the celebration of the Passover. III. BUT however that was, he doubtless continued with our Lord to the last, and after his Ascension stood fair to be chosen one of the twelve, if it be true (what is generally taken for granted, though I think without any reason, Loc. supr citat Chrysostom I am sure enters his dissent) that he is the same with Joseph called Barsabas, who was put candidate with Matthias for the Apostolate in the room of Judas. However that he was one of the LXX. Str. l. 2. P. 412. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. p. 38. ex lm. Hot. l. 7.  Alex. pag. . Clemens Alexandrinus expresly affirms, as others do after him. And when the necessities of the Church dayly increasing, required more then ordinary supplies, he according to the free and noble spirit of those Times, having Lands of good value, sold them and laid the money at the Apostles feet. If it be enquired how a Levite came by Lands and Pos∣sessions, when the Mosaick Law allowed them no particular portions, but what were made by public provision, it needs no other answer then to suppose that this Estate was his Patrimonial Inheritance in Cyprus, where the Jewish Constitutions did not take place: and surely an Estate it was of very considerable value, and the parting with it a greater cha∣rity then ordinary, otherwise the sacred Historian would not have made such a particular remark concerning it. IV. THE Church being dispersed up and down after S. Stephens Martyrdom, we have no certain account what became of him, in all pro∣bability he staid with the Apostles at Jerusalem, where we find him not long after S. Pauls Conversion. For that fierce and active Zealot be∣ing miraculously taken off in the height of his rage and fury, and putting on now the innocent and inoffensive temper of a Lamb, came after some little time to Jerusalem, and addressed himself to the Church. But they not satisfied in the reality of his change, and fearing it might be nothing but a subtle artifice to betray them, universally shunned his company; and what wonder if the harmless Sheep fled at the sight of the Wolf that
had made such havock of the Flock: till Barnabas presuming probably upon his former acquaintance, entered into a more familiar converse with him, introduced him to the Apostles, and declared to them the manner of his Conversion, and what signal evidences he had given of it at Damascus in his bold and resolute Disputations with the Jews. V. THERE is that scattereth, and yet increaseth: the dispersion of the Church by Sauls Persecution proved the means of a more plentiful harvest, the Christian Religion being hereby on all hands conveyed both to Jews and Gentiles. Act. 11.20. Among the rest some Cyprian and Cyrenean Converts went to Antioch, where they preached the Gospel with mighty success; great numbers both of Jews and Proselytes (wherewith that Ci∣ty did abound) heartily embracing the Christian Faith. The news whereof coming to the Apostles at Jerusalem, they sent down Barnabas to take an account of it, and to setle this new Plantation. Being come he rejoiced to see that Christianity had made so fair a progress in that great City, earnestly pressing them cordially and constantly to persevere in that excellent Religion which they had entertained; himself like a pious and a good man undergoing any labours and difficulties; which God was pleased to crown with answerable success, the addition of mul∣titudes of new Converts to the Faith. But the work was too great to be managed by a single hand: to furnish himself therefore with suitable assistance, he went to Tarsus, to enquire for S. Paul lately come thither. Him he brings back with him to Antioch, where both of them conti∣nued industriously ministring to the increase and establishment of the Church for a whole year together; and then and there it was that the Dis∣ciples of the Holy Jesus had the honourable name of Christians first so∣lemnly fixed upon them. VI. IT hapned about this time, or not long after, that a severe famine (foretold by Agabus a Christian Prophet that came down to Antioch) pres∣sed upon the Provinces of the Roman Empire, and especially Judaea, whereby the Christians, whose estates were exhausted by their conti∣nual contributions for the maintenance of the Poor, were reduced to great extremities. The Church of Antioch compassionating their mise∣rable case, agreed upon a liberal and charitable supply for their relief, which they intrusted with Barnabas and Paul, whom they sent along with it to the Governours of the Churches, that they might dispose it as necessity did require. Ritual. Graecor. in promot. Oeco∣nom. p. 281. This charitable Embassie the Greek Rituals no doubt respect, when in the Office at the Promotion of the Magnus Oe∣conomus, or High Steward of the Church (whose place it was to manage and dispose the Churches Revenues) they make particular mention of the Holy and most famous Barnabas the Apostle, and generous Martyr. Ha∣ving discharged their trust, Act. 12.25. they returned back from Jerusalem to An∣tioch, bringing along with them John sirnamed Mark, the son of Mary, sister to Barnabas, whose house was the sanctuary, where the Church found both shelter for their persons, and conveniency for the solemnities of their Worship. VII. THE Church of Antioch being now sufficiently provided of spiritual Guides, our two Apostles might be the better spared for the con∣version of the Gentile World. As they were therefore engaged in the duties of Fasting and Prayer, and other public exercises of their Reli∣gion, the Spirit of God by some prophetic afflatus or revelation made to some of the Prophets there present, commanded that Barnabas and
Saul should be set apart to that peculiar Ministry, to which God had designed them. Accordingly having fasted and prayed, hands were so∣lemnly laid upon them, to denote their particular designation to that service. Imposition of hands had been a ceremony of ancient date. Even among the Gentiles they were wont to design persons to public Functions and Offices by lifting up, or stretching out the hand, whereby they gave their Votes and Suffrages for those imployments. But herein though they did , stretch forth, they did not lay on their hands; which was the proper Ceremony in use, and of far greater standing in the Jewish Church. When Moses made choice of the seventy Elders to be his Co-adjutors in the Government, it was (say the Jews) by laying his hands upon them: and when he constituted Joshua to be his Successor, he laid his hands on him, and gave him the charge before all the Congrega∣tion. This custom they constantly kept in appointing both Civil and Ecclesiastical Officers, and that not onely while their Temple and Polity stood, but long after the fall of their Church and State. For so Itinerar. p. 73. Ben∣jamin the Jew tells us, that in his time all the Israelites of the East, when they wanted a Rabbin or Teacher in their Synagogues, were wont to bring him to the  as they call him the , or Head of the Captivity, residing at Babylon, (at that time R. Daniel the son of Hasdai) that he might receive  power by imposition of hands to become Preacher to them. From the Jews it was together with some other Rites transferred into the Christian Church, in ordain∣ing Guides and Ministers of Religion, and has been so used through all Ages and Periods to this day. Though the  and the  are not of equal extent in the writings and practice of the Church; the one implying the bare Rite of laying on of hands, while the other denotes Ordination it self, and the intire solemnity of the action. Whence the Lib. 8. c. 28. col. 494. Apostolical Constitutor speaking of the Presbyters interest in this af∣fair, says , he lays on his hands, but he does not or∣dain; meaning it of the Custom then, and ever since, of Presbyters lay∣ing on their hands together with the Bishop in that solemn action. VIII. BARNABAS and Paul having thus received a divine Com∣mission for the Apostleship of the Gentiles, and taking Mark along with them as their Minister and attendant, immediately entered upon the Province. And first they betook themselves to Seleucia, a neighbour City seated upon the influx of the River Orontes into the Mediterranean Sea: hence they set sail for Cyprus, Barnabas's Native Country, and arri∣ved at Salamis, a City heretofore of great account, the ruines whereof are two miles distant from the present Famagusta, where they undanted∣ly preached in the Jewish Synagogues. From Salamis they travelled up the Island to Paphos, a City remarkable of old for the Worship of Venus, Divapotens Cypri, the tutelar Goddess of the Island, who was here worshipped with the most wanton and immodest Rites, and had a famous Temple dedicated to her for that purpose, concerning which the Inhabi∣tants have a Cotovic. Itin. l. 1. c. 16. p. 100. Tradition that at S. Barnabas his Prayers it fell flat to the ground; and the ruines of an ancient Church are still shewed to Travellers, and under it an Arch, where Paul and Barnabas were shut up in Prison. At this place was the Court or Residence of the Praetor, or President of the Island (not properly , the Proconsul, for Cyprus was not a Proconsular but a Praetorian Province) who being altogether guided by the counsels and sorceries of Bar-Jesus, an eminent Magician, stood off
from the Proposals of Christianity, till the Magician being struck by S. Paul with immediate blindness for his malicious opposition of the Gospel, this quickly determined the Governours belief, and brought him over a Convert to that Religion, which as it made the best offers, so he could not but see had the strongest evidences to attend it. IX. Act. 13.13. LEAVING Cyprus, they sailed over to Perga in Pamphilia, famous for a Temple of Diana; here Mark weary it seems of this itinerant course of life, and the unavoidable dangers that attended it, took his leave and returned to Jerusalem, which laid the foundation of an unhappy difference, that broke out between these two Apostles afterwards. The next place they came to was Antioch in Pisidia, where in the Jewish Synagogue S. Paul by an elegant Oration converted great numbers both of Jews and Proselytes, but a persecution being raised by others, they were forced to desert the place. Thence they passed to Iconium, a noted City of Lycaonia, where in the Synagogues they preached a long time with good success, till a conspiracy being made against them, they withdrew to Lystra, the inhabitants whereof upon a miraculous cure done by S. Paul, treated them as gods come down from Heaven in humane shape; S. Paul as being principal Speaker, they termed Mer∣cury, the interpreter of the gods; Barnabas they looked upon as Jupiter, their soveraign deity, either because of his Age, or (as Homil. XXX in Act. App. p. 361. Chrysostom thinks) because he was , for the gravity and come∣liness of his person, being (as antiquity represents him) a very goodly man, and of a venerable aspect, wherein he had infinitely the advantage of S. Paul, who was of a very mean and contemptible presence. But the malice of the Jews pursued them hither, and prevailed with the People to stone S. Paul, who presently recovering, he and Barnabas went to Derbe, where when they had converted many to the Faith, they returned back to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, and so through Pi∣sidia to Pamphylia, thence from Perga to Attalia, confirming as they came back the Churches which they had planted at their first going out. At Attalia they took Ship, and sailed to Antioch in Syria, the place whence they had first set out, where they gave the Church an account of the whole success of their travels, and what way was made for the propagation of Christianity in the Gentile World. X. THE restless enemy of all goodness was vexed to see so fair and smooth a progress of the Gospel, and therefore resolved to attempt it by the old subtle arts of intestine divisions and animosities: what the en∣vious man could not stifle by open violence, he sought to choke by sowing tares. Act. 15.1. Some zealous Converts coming down from Jerusalem to Antioch, started this notion, which they asserted with all possible zeal and stiffness, that unless together with the Christian Religion they joined the observance of the Mosaic Rites, there could be no hopes of salvation for them. Paul and Barnabas opposed themselves against this heterodox opinion with all vigour and smartness, but not able to beat it down, were dispatched by the Church to advise with the Apostles and Brethren at Jerusalem about this matter. Whither they were no sooner come, but they were kindly and courteously entertained, and the right hand of fellowship given them by the three great Apostles, Peter, James, and John, and an agreement made between them, that where-ever they came, they should betake themselves to the Jews, while Paul and Bar∣nabas applied themselves unto the Gentiles. And here probably it was
that Mark reconciled himself to his Uncle Barnabas, which, Alexand. Mo∣nach. ubi supr. n. XV. one tells us, he did with tears and great importunity, earnestly begging him to for∣give his weakness and cowardice, and promising for the future a firmer constancy and more undanted resolution. But they were especially care∣ful to mind the great affair they were sent about, and accordingly opened the case in a public Council convened for that purpose. And Peter ha∣ving first given his sentence, that the Gentile Converts were under no such obligation, Paul and Barnabas acquainted the Synod what great things God by their Ministry had wrought for the conversion of the Gentiles, a plain evidence that they were accepted by God without the Mosaic Rites and Ceremonies. The matter being decided by the Coun∣cil, the determination was drawn up into the form of a Synodical Epi∣stle, which was delivered to Barnabas and Paul, to whom the Council gave this elogium and character, that they were men that had hazarded their lives for the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, with whom they joyned two of their own, that they might carry it to the Churches. Being come to Antioch they delivered the Decrees of the Council, wherewith the Church was abundantly satisfied, and the controversie for the present laid asleep. XI. IT was not long after this, that S. Peter came down to Antioch, Gal. 2.11. who loth to exasperate the zealous Jews, withdrew all converse with the Gentile Converts, contrary to his former practice, and his late vote and suffrage in the Synod at Jerusalem. The minds of the Gentiles were greatly disturbed at this, and the Convert Jews tempted by his example, abstain from all communion with the Gentiles; nay, so strong was the temptation, that S. Barnabas himself was carried down the stream, and began now to scruple, whether it was lawful to hold communion with the Gentiles, with whom before he had so familiarly conversed, and been so eminently instrumental in their conversion to Christianity. So pre∣valent an influence has the example of a great or a good man to deter∣mine others to what is good or bad. How careful should we be what course we take, lest we seduce and compel others to walk in our crooked paths, and load our selves with the guilt of those that follow after us? S. Paul shortly after propounded to Barnabas that they might again visit the Churches wherein they had lately planted the Christian Faith: he liked the motion, but desired his Cousin Mark might again go along with them, which S. Paul would by no means consent to, having found by his cowardly deserting them at Pamphylia, how unfit he was for such a troublesome and dangerous service. This begat a sharp contest, and ripened into almost an irreconcilable difference between these two holy men. Which as at once it shews, that the best are men of like passions and infirmities with others, subject to be transported with partiality, and carried off with the heats of an irregular passion, so it lets us see how great a matter a little fire kindles, and how inconsiderable an occasion may minister to strife and division, and hazard the breach of the firmest cha∣rity and friendship. The issue was that the  (as Comment. i Esa. 11. p. 55. Tom. 2. Theo∣doret stiles these two Apostles) this sacred pair, that had hitherto equally and unanimously drawn the Yoke of the Gospel, now drew several ways, and in some discontent parted from each other; S. Paul taking Silas went to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, while Barnabas accom∣panied with his Cousin Mark set sail for Cyprus, his own Countrey. XII. THUS far the sacred Historian has for the main gone before
us, who here breaks off his accounts concerning him. What became of him afterwards we are left under great uncertainty. Doroth. Sy∣nops. Bibl. PP. Tom. 3. p. 148. col. 2. Dorotheus and the Recogn. lib. 1. c. 7. p. 400. Edit. Paris. 1672. Clemen∣ti. Homil 1. . 7. p. 549. ib. Epit. de Gest. B. Petr. c. 7. ib. p. 752. Author of the Recognitions, and some other Writings attributed to S. Clemens, makes him to have been at Rome, and one of the first that preached the Christian Faith in that City; for which Bron. ad Ann. 51. n. 52.54. not. ad Martyr. Rom. p. 359. Baronius falls foul upon them, not being willing that any should be thought to have been there before S. Peter, though after him (and 'tis but good manners to let him go first) he is not unwilling to grant his being there. Lea∣ving therefore the difference in point of time, let us see what we find there concerning him. At his first arrival there about Autumn he is said thus publicly to have addressed himself to the People, . O ye Romans give ear. The Son of God has appeared in the Countrey of Judaea, promising eternal life to all that are willing to embrace it, and to lead their lives according to the will of the Fa∣ther that sent him. Wherefore change your course of life, and turn from a worse to a better state, from things temporal to those that are eternal. Acknowledge that there is one onely God, who is in Hea∣ven, and whose world you unjustly possess before his righteous face. But if you reform, and live according to his Laws, you shall be tran∣slated into another World, where you shall become immortal, and enjoy the ineffable glories and happiness of that state. Whereas if you persist in your infidelity, your souls after the dissolution of these bodies, shall be cast into a place of flames, where they shall be eter∣nally tormented under the anguish of an unprofitable and too late Repentance. For the present life is to every one the onely space and season of repentance. This was spoken with great plainness and simplicity, and without any artificial Schemes of Speech, and according∣ly took with the attentive populacy: while the Philosophers and more inquisitive heads entertained the discourse with scorn and laughter, (this indeed the Clement. ib. c. 8, 9, 10. Author of the , and the Epitom. c. 8. & seq. Epitome , somewhat differently from the Recognitions, refers to his being at Alexandria) setting upon him with captious questions and syllogisms, and sophistical Arts of Reasoning. But he taking no notice of their im∣pertinent questions, went on in his plain discourse, concluding that he had nakedly laid these things before them, and that it lay at their door whether they would reject or entertain them; that for his part he could not without prejudice to himself not declare them, nor they without infinite danger disbelieve them. XIII. DEPARTING from Rome, he is by different Writers made to steer different courses. The Clem. & Epi∣tom. ibid. Ale∣xand. Monach. loc. cit. n. 13, 14. Greeks tell us he went for Alexan∣dria, and thence for Judaea: The Baron. ad An. 51. n. 54. Sanct. de praed. S. Jac. T. 3. c. 1 n. 9. Writers of the Roman Church (with whom agrees Synops. in Bibl. PP. p. 148. T. 3. Dorotheus in this matter) that he preached the Gospel in Liguria, and founded a Church at Milain, whereof he became the first Bishop, propagating Christianity in all those parts. But however that was, probable it is that in the last periods of his life he returned unto Cyprus, where my Alexand. ib. n. XVIII. & seq. Author tells us, he converted many, till some Jews from Syria coming to Salamis, where he then was, enraged with fury set upon him as he was disputing in the Synagogue, in a corner whereof they shut him up till night, when they brought him forth, and after infinite tortures, stoned him to death. He adds (and the faith of it must rest upon the credit of the Relater, who Ad Ann. 485. v. 4. p. 428. Baronius tells us, lived at the same time when his corps was first found out) that they
threw his body into the fire with an intent to consume it, but that the flames had not the least power upon it, and that Mark his Kins∣man privately buried it in a Cave not far distant from the City, his Friends resenting the loss with solemn lamentation. I omit the miracles reported to have been done at his Tomb: the remains of his body were discovered in the reign of Theod. Lect. H. Eccl. l. 2. p. 557. Alex. Mon. loc. cit. n. XXXI. Zeno the Emperour ( Niceph. H. Ecc. l. 16. c. 37. p. 716. Tom 2. Nicephorus by a mi∣stake makes it the XII. year of Anastasius) Ann. CCCCLXXXV. dug up under a Bean or Carob Tree, and upon his Brest was found S. Matthews Gospel written with Barnabas his own hand, which Anthemius the Bishop took along with him to Constantinople, where it was received by the Emperour with a mighty reverence, and laid up with great care and diligence. The Emperour as a testimony of his joy, honouring the Epi∣scopal See of Salamis with this Prerogative, that it should be sedes , independent upon any Foreign Jurisdiction, a Priviledge rati∣fied by Justinian the Emperour, whose Wife Theodora was a Cypriot: The Emperour also greatly enriched the Bishop at his return, comman∣ding him to build a Church to S. Barnabas over the place of his inter∣ment, which was accordingly erected with more then ordinary stateli∣ness and magnificence. 'Tis added in the Alex. ut spr n. XXIX, XXX. Story, that these remains were discovered by the notice of S. Barnabas himself, who three several times appeared to Anthemius; which I behold as a meer addition to the Story, designed onely to serve a present turn. For Peter sirnamed the Fuller, then Patriarch of Antioch, challenged at this time a jurisdiction over the Cyprian Churches as subject to his See; this Anthemius would not agree to, but stiffly asserted his own rights, and how easie was it to take this occasion of finding S. Barnabas his body, to add that of the appearances to him, to gain credit to the cause, and advance it with the Emperor? And accordingly it had its designed effect; and whoever reads the whole Story, and the circumstances of the apparitions, as related by my Author, will see that they seem plainly calculated for such a pur∣pose. XIV. FOR his outward form and shape, he is thus represented by the Id. Ibid. n XVIII. Ancients. He was a man of a comely countenance, a grave and venerable aspect, his eye-brows short, his eye chearful and pleasant, darting some∣thing of majesty, but nothing of sowrness and austerity, his speech sweet and obliging; his garb was mean, and such as became a man of a morti∣fied life, his gate composed and unaffected, grave and decent. This ele∣gant structure was but the lodging of a more noble tenant, a Soul richly furnished with divine graces and vertues, a profound humility, diffusive charity, firm faith, an immoveable constancy, and an unconquerable pa∣tience, a mighty zeal, and an unwearied diligence in the propagating of Christianity, and for the good of Souls. So entirely did he devote him∣self to an ambulatory course of life, so continually was he imployed in running up and down from place to place, that he could find little or no time to leave any Writings behind him for the benefit of the Church; at least none that have certainly arrived to us. Indeed anciently there were some, and De pudicit. c. 20. p. 582. vid. Philastr. de Hae∣res. c. 60. Tertullian particularly, who supposed him to be the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, an opinion generally rejected and thrown out of doors: there is also an Epistle still extant under his name of great antiquity frequently cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, and his Scholar Origen (to pass by others) the latter of whom stiles it the Contr. Cels. lib. 1. p. 49. Catholic Epistle of Barnabas, but placed by H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25. p. 97. Eusebius among the ,
the Writings that were not genuine. The frame and contexture of it is intricate and obscure, made up of uncouth Allegories, forced and im∣probable interpretations of Scripture, though the main design of it is to shew, that the Christian Religion has superseded the Rites and Usages of the Mosaic Law. The latter part of it contains an useful and excel∣lent exhortation managed under the notion of two ways, the one of light, the other of darkness, the one under the conduct of the Angels of God (, those illuminating Ministers, as he calls them,) the other under the guidance of the Angels of Satan, the Prince of the ini∣quity of the Age. Under the way of light he presses to most of the particular duties and instances of the Christian and the Spiritual life, which are there with admirable accuracy and succinctness reckoned up: Under that of darkness he represents those particular sins and vices, which we are to decline and shun; and I am confident the pious Reader will not think it time lost, nor repent his pains to peruse so ancient and use∣ful a discourse. Thus then he expresses himself. XV. Eva. Epist. p. 28. Edit. Vess. THE way of life is this. Whoever travels towards the appointed place, will hasten by his works to attain to it. And the knowledge that is given us how to walk in this way is this: Thou shalt love thy Creator. Thou shalt glorifie him who redeemed thee from death. Thou shalt be simple in heart, and being rich in spirit shalt not join thy self to him that walks in the way of death. Thou shalt hate to do that which is displeasing unto God. Thou shalt hate all manner of hypocrisie. Thou shalt not forsake the Command∣ments of the Lord. Exalt not thy self, but be of an humble mind. Thou shalt not assume glory to thy self. Neither shalt thou take evil counsel against thy neighbor. Thou shalt not add boldness to thy soul. Thou shalt not commit fornication, nor be guilty of adultery or buggery. Thou shalt not neglect Gods command in cor∣recting other mens impurity, nor shalt thou have respect of persons, when thou re∣provest any man for his faults. Thou shalt be meek and silent, and stand in awe of the words which thou hearest. Thou shalt not remember evil against thy brother. Thou shalt not be of a double and instable mind, doubting whether thus or thus. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord in vain. . Thou shalt love thy neighbor above thy life. Thou shalt not destroy a child by abortion, nor make it away when it is born. Thou shalt not with-hold thy hand from thy son, or from thy daughter, but from their youth shalt teach them the fear of the Lord. Be not desirous of thy neighbours goods, nor covet much. Neither shalt thou heartily join with the proud, but shalt be numbred with the just and the humble. Entertain trials and temptations when they happen to thee, as instruments of good. Thou shalt not be double minded, nor of a deceitful tongue, for a double tongue is the snare of death. Thou shalt be subject to the Lord, and to Masters as Gods representatives, in reverence and fear. Thou shalt not command thy Maid or Man-servant with bitterness and severity, those especially that hope in God, lest thou thy self prove one that fearest not him, who is over both: For he came not to call men according to outward appearance, but those whom his Spirit did prepare. Thou shalt communicate to thy neighbour in all things, and shalt not call what thou hast thine own: For if ye mutually partake in incorruptible things, how much more in things that are corruptible. Be not rash with thy tongue, for the mouth is the snare of death. Keep thy soul as chast as thou canst, stretch not forth thy hands to take, and shut them when thou shouldst give. Love all those that speak to thee the word of the Lord, as the apple of thine eye. Remember the day of judgment night and day. Sek out daily the faces of holy men, and searching by the Word, go forth to
exhort, and by it study to save a soul. And with thy hands shalt thou labour for the redemption of thy sins. Delay not to give, nor begrutch when thou art charitable. Give to every one that asks thee; and thou shalt know who is the good recompenser of the reward. Thou shalt keep the things which thou hast received, neither adding to them, nor taking from them. Thou shalt ever hate a wicked person. Judge righteously. Make no Schism. Make peace between those that are at difference, reconciling them to each other. Confess thy sins, and come not to prayer with an evil conscience. This is the way of Light. XVI. BUT now the way of darkness is crooked and full of curses. For it is the way of eternal death attended with punishment; wherein are things destructive to their souls, idolatry, audaciousness, heighth of domi∣nation, hypocrisie, double-heartedness, adultery, murder, rapine, pride, trans∣gression, deceit, malice, arrogance, witchcraft, magic, covetousness, want of the fear of God. Persecuters of good men, haters of the truth, men who love but do not know the wages of righteousness. Persons that adhere not to what is good, nor who by righteous judgment regard the case of the Widow and the Orphan; watchful not for the fear of God, but for what is evil: great stran∣gers to meekness and patience. Lovers of vanity, greedy of revenge, who com∣passionate not the poor, nor endeavour to relieve the oppressed, prone to de∣traction, not knowing their Maker, murderers of children, defacers of Gods workmanship, such as turn away themselves from the needy, add affliction to the afflicted, plead for the rich, and unjustly judge the poor, sinners altogether. And having thus described these two different ways, he concludes his discourse with a hearty and passionate exhortation, that since the time of rewards and punishments was drawing on, they would mind these things, as those that were taught of God, searching after what God required of them, and setting themselves to the practice of it, that they might be saved at the day of judgment. I have no more to remark concerning this excellent person, then to add the character gi∣ven of him by a pen that could not err, he was a good man, full of faith, Act. 11.24. and of the Holy Ghost. The End of S. BARNABAS'S Life.
THE LIFE OF S. TIMOTHY THE APOSTLE and EVANGELIST. S. TIMOTHEUS. Michael Burghers sulpsit. S. Timothies Countrey and Kindred. His religious education. The great advantages of an early piety. Converted to Christianity by S. Paul, and made choice of to be his companion. Circumcised by S. Paul, and
why. This no contradicting S. Pauls doctrine concerning Circumcision. His travels with S. Paul for the propagation of the Faith. His return from Thessalonica, and S. Pauls two Epistles to that Church. S. Timo∣thy consecrated Bishop of Ephesus. The consent of antiquity herein. Or∣dination in those times usually done by prophetic designation, and the rea∣son of it. Timothies age enquired into. The importance of  and  (let no man despise thy youth,) the words shewed to be used by the best Writers for a considerable Age. S. Pauls first and second Epistle to him, and the importance of them. The manners of the Ephesians noted. Their festival called . S. Timothies martyrdom. The time of his death, place of his burial, and translation of his body. His weak and infirm constitution. His great abstinence, and admirable zeal. S. Pauls singu∣lar affection for him. Different from Timotheus in S. Denys the Areo∣pagite. Another Timothy, S. Pauls Disciple, martyred under Antoninus. I. S. TIMOTHY was, as we may probably conceive, a Lycaonian, born at Lystra, a noted City of that Province. He was a person in whom the Jew, the Gentile, and the Christian met altogether. His Father was by birth a Greek, by Religion a Gentile, or if a Proselyte, at most but  a Proselyte of the Gate, who did not oblige themselves to circumcision, and the rites of Moses, but onely to the observance of the se∣ven precepts of the sons of Noah: his Mother Eunice, daughter to the de∣vout and pious Lois, . Chrysost. Ho∣mil. 1. in 2 Tim. p. 1627. was a Jewess, who yet scrupled not to marry with this Greek, An argument that the partition wall now tottered, and was ready to fall, when Jew and Gentile began thus to match together. His Mother and Grandmother were Women very eminently vertuous and holy, and seem to have been amongst the first that were converted to the Christian Faith. Nor was it the least instance of their piety, the care they took of his education, instructing him in the knowledge of divine things, and seasoning his tender years with vertuous and sober principles, 2 Tim. 3.15. so that from a child he was acquainted with the holy Scriptures, whereby he was admirably prepared for the reception of Christianity, and furnished for the conduct of a strict pious life. . Plut. de liber. educ. pag. 4. And indeed Religion never thrives more kindly, then when 'tis planted betimes, and the foun∣dations of it laid in an early piety. For the mind being then soft and tender, is easily capable of the best impressions, which by degrees insi∣nuate themselves into it, and insensibly reconcile it to the difficulties of an holy life, so that what must necessarily be harsh and severe to a man that endeavours to rescue himself from an habitual course of sin, the other is unacquainted with, and goes on smoothly in a way that's become pleasant and delightful. None start with greater advantages, nor usually persevere with a more vigorous constancy, then they who remember their Creator in the days of their youth, and sacrifice the first fruits of their time to God and to Religion, before corrupt affections have clapt a bias upon their inclinations, and a train of vices depraved, and in great mea∣sure laid asleep the natural notions of good and evil. II. PREPARED by so excellent a culture in the Jewish Religion, God was pleased to transplant him into a better soil. S. Paul in pursuance of his Commission to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles had come as far as
Antioch in Pisidia, thence to Iconium, and so to Lystra, where the mira∣culous cure of an impotent Cripple made way for the entertainment of the Christian Doctrin. Among others there converted, we are S. Mt. de S. Timoth. p. Sur. ad Jan 24. n. . 1. p 41. told were S. Timothies Parents, who courteously treated and entertained the Apostle at their house, wholly resigning up their Son to his care and conduct. About two years after in his review of these late Plantations he came again to Lystra, where he made choice of Timothy, Act. 16.1, 2, 3. recommen∣ded to him by the universal testimony of the Christians thereabouts, as an Evangelist, to be his assistant and the companion of his travels, that he might have somebody always with him, with whom he could intrust matters of importance, and whom he might dispatch upon any extraor∣dinary affair and exigence of the Church. Indeed Timothy was not circumcised, for this being a branch of the Paternal Authority, did not lie in his mothers power: this was notoriously known to all the Jews, and this S. Paul knew would be a mighty prejudice to his Ministry where ever he came. For the Jews being infinitely zealous for Circumcision, would not with any tolerable patience endure any man to preach to them, or so much as to converse with them, who was himself uncircumcised. That this obstacle therefore might be removed, he caused him to be circum∣cised, becoming in lawful matters all things to all men, that he might gain the more. Admirable (says Homil. XXXIV. in Act. App p.  Chrysostom) the wisdom and prudence of S. Paul, who had this design in it, , he circumcised him, that he might take away Circumcision, that is, be the more acceptable to the Jews, and by that means the more capable to undeceive them in their opinion of the necessity of those legal Rites. At other times we find him smartly contending against Circumcision as a justification of the Mosaic Institutions, and a virtual undermining the great ends of Christianity. Nor did he in this instance contradict his own Doctrin, or unwarrantably symbolize with the Jews; it being onely (as Str  7. pag. . Clemens of Alexandria observes concerning this passage) a pru∣dent condescension to the present humour of the Jews, whom he was unwilling to disoblige, and make them wholly fly off, by a too sudden and violent rending them from the circumcision in the flesh, to bring them over to the circumcision of the heart. So that he who thus ac∣commodates himself for the salvation of another, can no ways be char∣ged with dissimulation and hypocrisie; seeing he does that purely for the advantage of others, which he would not do for any other reason, or upon account of the things themselves: this being  the part of a wise and kind Instructer, who is a true lover of God, and the souls of men. III. S. PAƲL thus fitted with a meet companion, forwards they set in their Evangelical Progress, and having passed through Phrygia and Galatia, came down to Troas, thence they set sail for Samothracia, and so to Neapolis, whence they passed to Philippi, the Metropolis of that part of Macedonia: where being evil intreated by the Magistrates and Peo∣ple, they departed to Thessalonica, whence the sury and malice of the Jews made them fly to Beraea. Here they met with people of a more generous and manly temper ready to embrace the Christian Doctrin, but yet not till they had first compared it with the predictions which the Prophets had made concerning the Messiah. But even here they could not escape the implacable spirit of the Jews, so that the Christians were forced privately to conduct S. Paul to Athens, while Silas and Timothy,
not so much the immediate objects of their spight and cruelty, staid be∣hind, to instruct and confirm the Converts of that place. Whether they came to him during his stay at Athens, is uncertain: S. Luke takes no farther notice of them, till their coming to him at Corinth, his next re∣move. 1 Thess. 3.1, 2, 3. Where at their first arrival (if it was not at Athens) S. Paul di∣spatched away Timothy to Thessalonica, to enquire into the state of Chri∣stianity in that City, and to confirm them in the belief and profession of the Gospel, — 2. v. 17, 18, 19. for he seems to have had a more peculiar kindness for that Church, having since his last being there, more then once resolved him∣self to go back to them, but that the great Enemy of Souls had still thrown some rub in the way to hinder him. IV. 1 Thess. 3.6, 7, & seqq. FROM Thessalonica Timothy returned with the welcom news of their firmness and constancy notwithstanding the persecutions they endu∣red, their mutual charity to each other, and particular affection to S. Paul; news, wherewith the good man was infinitely pleased: As certainly no∣thing can minister greater joy and satisfaction to a faithful Guide of Souls, then to behold the welfare and prosperity of his People. Nor did his care of them end here, but he presently writes his first Epistle to them, to animate them under their sufferings, and not to desert the Christian Religion, because the Cross did attend it, but rather to adorn their Christian Profession by a life answerable to the holy designs and precepts of it. In the front of this Epistle he inserted not onely his own name, but also those of Silas and Timothy, partly to reflect the greater honour upon his fellow-workers, partly that their united authority and consent might have the stronger influence and force upon them. The like he did in a second Epistle, which not long after he sent to them, to supply the want of his personal presence, whereof in his former he had given them some hopes, and which he himself seemed so passionately to desire. Eighteen months at least they had continued at Corinth, when S. Paul resolved upon a journy to Jerusalem, where he staid not long, but went for Antioch, and having travelled over the Countries of Galatia and Phrygia to establish Christianity lately planted in those parts, came to Ephesus, where though he met with great opposition, yet he preached with greater success, and was so wholly swallowed up with the concerns of that City, that though he had resolved himself to go into Macedonia, he was forced to send Ti∣mothy and Erastus in his stead, who having done their errand, returned to Ephesus, to assist him in promoting the affairs of Religion in that place. V. S. PAƲL having for three years resided at Ephesus and the parts about it, determined to take his leave, and depart for Macedonia. And now it was (as himself plainly intimates, 1 Tim. 1.3. and the Ancients generally con∣ceive) that he constituted Timothy Bishop and Governour of that Church; he was the first Bishop (says H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. p. 73. Eusebius) of the Province or Diocess of Ephesus; he did , says the Martyr. Tim. ap. Phot. Cod. CCLIV. col. 1401. Author in Photius, first act as Bishop of Ephesus, and in the Council of Chalcedon XXVII Bishops are said successively to have sitten in that Chair, whereof S. Timothy was the first. Conc. Chalced. Act. XI. Conc. Tom. 4. col. 609. In the Lib. 7. c. 47. col. 451. Apostolical Constitutions he is expresly said to have been ordained Bishop of it by S. Paul, or as he in Photius expresseth it a little more after the mode of his time, he was ordained and enthroned (or installed) Bishop of the Metropolis of the Ephesians by the great S. Paul. Ephesus was a great and populous City, and the Civil Government of the Proconsul, who resided there reached over the whole Lydian or Pro∣consular
Asia. And such in proportion the Ancients make the Eccle∣siastical Jurisdiction of that Church, Homil. XV. in 1 Tim. p. 1606. S. Chrysostom affirming it to be plain and evident, that Timothy had the Church, or rather the whole Nation of Asia committed to him; to him (says Argum. in 1 ad Tim p. 462 Theodoret) divine S. Paul committed , the care and the charge of Asia; upon which ac∣count a little after Com. in 1 Tim. 3. p. 475. T. 3. he calls him the Apostle of the Asians. As for the manner of his Ordination, or rather designation to the ministeries of Religion, it was by particular and extraordinary designation, God im∣mediately testifying it to be his will and pleasure; thence it is said to have been done , 1 Tim. 1.18. 1 Tim. 4.14. according to some preceding predictions concerning him, and that he received it not onely by the lay∣ing on of hands, but by prophesie, that is, as Homil. V. in 1 Tim. p. 1545. Chrysostom truly explains it, by the Holy Ghost; it being part of the Prophetic Office (as he adds, and especially it was so at that time) not onely to fore-tell future events, but to declare things present, God extraordinarily manifesting whom he would have set apart for that weighty Office. Thus Paul and Bar∣nabas were separated by the special dictate of the Holy Ghost, and of the Governours of the Ephesine Churches that met at Miletus, it is said, that the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops, or Over-seers of the Church. And this way of election by way of prophetic revelation continued in use at least during the Apostolic Age: Epist. ad Co∣rinth. pag. 54. Clemens in his Epistle to the Corin∣thians, tells us that the Apostles preaching up and down Cities and Countries, constituted their first-fruits to be the Bishops and Deacons of those who should believe, , making trial of them by the spirit: and another Clem. Al. lib. . ap. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 23. p. 92. Clemens reports of S. John, that visiting the neighbour Churches about Ephesus, he ordained Bishops, and such as were signified, or pointed out to him by the spirit. VI. THIS extraordinary and miraculous way of chusing Bishops and Ecclesiastic Officers, besides other advantages, begat a mighty reverence and veneration for the Governours of the Church, who were looked upon as God's choice, and as having the more immediate character of Heaven upon them. And especially this way seemed more necessary for S. Timothy then others, to secure him from that contempt which his youth might otherwise have exposed him to. For that he was but young at that time, is evident from S. Pauls counsel to him, 1 Tim. 4.12. so to de∣mean himself, that no man might despise his youth: the Governours of the Church in those days were , in respect of their age as well as office, and indeed therefore stiled Elders, because they usually were persons of a considerable age that were admitted into the Orders of the Church. This Timothy had not attained to. And yet the word , youth, admits a greater latitude then we in ordinary speech con∣fine it to. In Orator. p. 266. Tom. 1. Cicero tells us of himself, that he was adolescentulus, but a very youth when he pleaded Roscius's cause; and yet Noct. Attic. l. 15. c. 28. p. 383. A. Gellius proves him to have been at that time no less then XXVII years old. Alexander the son of Aristobulus is called Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 13. p. 480. , a youth, at the time of his death, when yet he was above thirty. Hiero in Hist. l. 1. p. 11. Edit 8. ubi vid. Casaub. Com∣ment. p. 129. & ejusd. exercit. ad Baron. Appar. n. 99 p. 154. Polybius is stiled , a very young man, whom yet Casaubon proves to have been XXXV years of Age; and the same Historian speaking of T. Flaminius his making War upon Philip of Macedon, says he was , a very young man, for that he was not above thirty years old: it being (as Casaubon ob∣serves) the custom both of Greek and Latine Writers to extend the ju∣ventus, or youthful age from the thirtieth till the fortieth year of a mans
life. To which we may add what Grotius observes, that  answer∣ing to the Hebrew  denotes the Military Age, Annot. in loc. all that civil and manly part of a mans life that is opposed to Old Age; so that Timothies youth, without any force or violence to the word, might very well consist with his being at least thirty, or five and thirty years of age, and he so sti∣led onely comparatively with respect to that weighty Function, which was wont to be conferred upon none but grave and aged men. But of this enough. VII. Acts 20.2, 3, &c. S. TIMOTHY thus fixed at Ephesus, did yet accompany S. Paul some part of his journey into Greece, at least went to him thither upon some urgent affairs of the Church, and then returned to his charge. Not long after which S. Paul wrote his first Epistle to him, to encourage him in his duty, and direct him how to behave himself in that eminent Station wherein he had set him. And because the success of the Ministry does in a great measure depend upon the persons imployed in it, he gives him more particular rules how to proceed in this matter, and how the per∣sons ought to be qualified, whom he admitted to that honourable and important Office, , as H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 34. p. 189. Nicephorus speaks, excellently representing in that Epistle, as in a short draught, the life and conversation of the sacred Governours of the Church, describing the tempers and manners of those who are appoin∣ted to be the Guides and Ministers of Religion. Well he knew also that crafty Teachers and false Apostles were creeping into the Church, whose principles and practices he remarks, warning him to beware of them, and to stand continually upon his guard against them. The holy man followed his instructions, and was no doubt faithful to his trust, which he managed with all care and diligence. About six years after, S. Paul being then a Prisoner at Rome, wrote a second Epistle to him (for that this Epistle was written at his first coming to Rome, we have shewed elsewhere Antiq. Apost. Life of S. Paul Sect. 7. n. 5. 2 Tim. 4.9.) to excite him to a mighty care and fidelity in his business, and in undermining the false and subtle insinuations of Sedu∣cers. In it he orders Timothy to come to him with all speed to Rome, who accordingly came, and joined with him in the several Epistles writ∣ten thence to the Philippians, Colossians, and to Philemon, as his name in the front of those Epistles does abundantly declare. During his stay at Rome he was upon some occasion cast into prison, and thence released and set at liberty about the time of S. Pauls enlargement, as he clearly intimates in the close of his Epistle to the Hebrews; Hebr. 13.23, 24. after which he came back to Ephesus, nor is it probable that he any more removed from thence, till his translation into Heaven. And here it was that he became acquainted with S. John, whose Apostolical Province mainly lay in Asia, and the parts about Ephesus; and so the Ap. Bolland. Januar. XXIV Acts under the name of Poly∣crates, one of his successors (doubtless of good antiquity, being those mentioned and made use of by Photius) report, that he conversed with, and was an auditor of S. John the Divine, who lay in the bosom of our Lord. VIII. THE Ephesians were a people of great looseness and impiety, their manners were wanton and effeminate, prophane and prodigal: they banished Hermodorus onely because he was more sober and thrifty then the rest, Strab. Geogr. lib. 14. enacting a Decree, Let none of ours be thrifty. They were strangely bewitched with the study of Magic and the Arts of Sorcery and Divination; miserably over-run with with Idolatry, especially the
Temple and Worship of Diana, for which they were famous through the whole World. Among their many Idolatrous Festivals they had one called Martyr. Timoth. Apost. ap. Phot. Cod. 254. col. 1401, 1404. Com. de S. Timoth. S. Metaphr. apud Sur. ad Jan. XXIV. n. 9, 10. Fragment. vit. S. Timoth. Graece ap. P. Halloix in vit. Po∣lycarp. p. 558. forsan ex Act. S. Timoth. à Poly∣crat. (uti alunt) scriptis, quae eadem habent, ap. Bolland. ad Januar. XXIV. p. 566. ΚΑΤΑΓΩΓΙΟΝ, which was cele∣brated after this manner; Habiting themselves in an antic dress, and covering their faces with ugly Vizors, that they might not be known, with Clubs in their hands, they carried Idols in a wild and a frantic manner up and down the more emi∣nent places of the City, singing certain Songs and Verses to them; and without any compassion or respect either to Age or Sex, setting upon all persons that they met, they beat out their brains, glorying in it as a brave atchievement, and a great honour to their gods. This cursed and execrable custom gave just offence to all pious and good men, especially S. Timothy, whose spirit was grieved to see God so openly dishonoured, humane nature sunk into such a deep dege∣neracy, and so arbitrarily transported to the most savage barbarities by the great murderer of souls. The good man oft endeavoured to reclaim them by lenitive and mild intreaties; but alas gentle Physic works little upon a stubborn constitution. When that would not do, out he comes to them into the midst of the street upon one of these fatal so∣lemnities, and reproves them with some necessary sharpness and severity. But cruelty and licentiousness are too headstrong to brook opposition: impatient of being controlled in their wild extravagancies, they fall up∣on him with their Clubs, beat and drag him up and down, and then leave him for dead, whom some Christians finding yet to breath, took up, and lodged him without the Gate of the City, where the third day after he expired. He suffered martyrdom on the thirtieth day of the fourth moneth, according to the Asian computation, or in the Roman ac∣count on the XXII of January, as the Greek Church celebrates his me∣mory, or the XXIV, according to the Latine. It happened (as some will have it) in the time of Nerva, while others more probably refer it to the reign of Domitian, it being done before S. John's return from his banishment in Patmos, which was about the beginning of Nerva's reign. Being dead, the Christians of Ephesus took his body, and decent∣ly interred it in a place called Pien, Piron (says De Vit. & Obit. SS. c. 86. p. 542. Isidore, who adds that 'twas a Mountain) where it securely rested for some Ages, till Hieron. adv. Vigil. p. 122. Tom. 2. Niceph. Eccl. H. l. 2. c. 43. p. 210. Me∣taphr. ubi supr. n. X. Con∣stantine the Great, or as others, his son Constantius caused it to be transla∣ted to Constantinople, and laid up together with those or S. Andrew and S. Luke, in the great Church erected by Constantine to the holy Apostles. IX. HE was a man of no very firm and healthful constitution, fre∣quent distempers assaulting him, besides the constant infirmities that hung upon him. Which S. . Chrysost. Homil. I. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom. 1. p. 5. Chrysostom conceives were in a great measure owing to his extraordi∣nary temperance, and too frequent fastings. An effectual course to subdue those youthful lusts which S. Paul cautioned him to shun, there being no such way to extinguish the fire, as to with∣draw the fewel: he allowed himself no delicious Meats, no generous Wines; Bread and Water was his usual Bill of Fare, till by excessive abstinence, and the meaness and courseness of his diet he had weakned his appetite, and rendred his stomach unfit to serve the
ends of nature. Insomuch that S. Paul was forced to impose it as a kind of law upon him, 1 Tim. 5.23. that he should no longer drink water, but use a little wine for his stomachs sake, and his often infirmities. And yet in the midst of this weak tottering carcase there dwelt a vigorous and sprightly mind, a soul acted by a mighty zeal, and inspired with a true love to God: he thought no difficulties great, no dangers formidable, that he might be serviceable to the purposes of Religion, and the interest of souls; he flew from place to place with a quicker speed, and a more un∣wearied resolution, then could have been expected from a stronger and a healthier person, now to Ephesus, then to Corinth, oft into Macedo∣nia, then to Italy, crossing Sea and Land, and surmounting a thousand hazards and oppositions: in all which (as Loc. citat. pag. 7. Chrysostoms words are) the weakness of his body did not prejudice the divine Philosophy of his mind; so strangely active and powerful is Zeal for God, so nimbly does it wing the soul with the swiftest flight. And certainly (as he adds) as a great and robust body is little better for its health, which has nothing but a dull and a heavy soul to inform it; so bodily weakness is no great impediment, where there is a quick and a generous mind to animate and enliven it. X. THESE excellent Vertues infinitely endeared him to S. Paul, who seems to have had a very passionate kindness for him, never mentioning him without great tenderness, and titles of reverence and respect: some∣times styling him his son, 1 Thess. 3.2. his brother, his fellow-labourer, Timotheus our bro∣ther, and Minister of God, and our fellow-labourer in the Gospel of Christ; sometimes with additions of a particular affection and honourable re∣gard, 2 Tim. 1.2. Timothy, my dearly beloved son; Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord: and to the Church at Philippi more expresly, I trust to send Timotheus shortly to you, Philip. 2.19, 20, &c. for I have no man like-minded (, equally dear to me as my self) who will naturally care for your state: for all seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christs; but ye know the proof of him, that as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the Go∣spel. And because he knew that he was a young man, and of a temper easily capable of harsh and unkind impressions, he entered a particular caution on his behalf with the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.10, 11. If Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear, for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do: let no man therefore despise him, but conduct him forth in peace, that he may come unto me. Instances of a great care and tenderness, and which plainly suppose Timothy to have been an extraordinary person. His very calling him his dearly beloved son, Homil. 1. in 2 Tim. p. 1626. Chrysostom thinks a sufficient argument of his Vertue. For such affection not being founded in Na∣ture, can flow from nothing but Vertue and Goodness, the lovely and essential ornaments of a divine and a holy soul. We love our children not onely because witty, or handsom, kind and dutiful, but because they are ours, and very often for no other reason; nor can we do otherwise, so long as we are subject to the Impressions and the Laws of Nature. Whereas true Goodness and Vertue have no other Arts but their own naked worth and beauty to recommend them, nor can by any other ar∣gument challenge regard and veneration from us. XI. SOME dispute there has been among the Writers of the Church of Rome, whether our S. Timothy was the same with him, to whom Dio∣nysius the Areopagite dedicates the books said to be written by him; and troops of arguments are mustered on either side. But the foun∣dation
of the controversie is quite taken away with us, who are sufficiently assured, that those Books were written some hundreds of years after S. Denys his head was laid in the dust. However it may not be improper to remarque, that besides ours, Bishop of Ephesus, we are Pet. de Natal. Hist. SS. l. 1.24. Naucler. Chron. vol. 2. gener. 6. confer. Adon. Martyr. ad XII. Kal. Jul. vid. Usser. de pri∣mord. c. 3. p. 31. told of another S. Timothy, Disciple also to S. Paul, the son of Pudens and Priscilla, who is said to have lived unto a great Age, till the times of Antoninus the Emperour, and Pius Bishop of Rome, and that he came over into Britain, converted and baptized Lucius King of this Island, the first King that ever embraced the Christian Faith. Pius Bishop of Rome in a Concil. Tom. 1. col. 576. Letter to Justus Bishop of Vienna (which though suspected by most, is yet owned by Bar. ad Ann. 166. n. 1.2. Baronius) reckons him among the Presbyters that had been educated by the Apostles, and had come to Rome, and tells us that he had suffered martyrdom: accordingly the Martyrol. Rom. ad Mart. 24. p. 190. Roman Martyrology informs us, that he obtained the Crown of Martyrdom under Antoninus the Em∣perour. A Story which as I cannot confute, so I am not over-forward to believe, nor is it of moment enough to my purpose more particularly to enquire about it. The End of S. TIMOTHY's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. TITUS BISHOP of CRETE. MICHAEL BURGHERS DIELINE ET SCULP. S. Titus His Country enquired into. The report of his noble extract. His education and conversion to Christianity. His acquaintance with, and accompanying S. Paul to the Synod at Jerusalem. S. Pauls refusing to circumcise him, and why.
His attending S. Paul in his travels. Their arrival in Crete. Titus constitu∣ted by him Bishop of that Island. The testimonies of the Ancients to that pur∣pose. The intimations of it in S. Pauls Epistle to him. S. Pauls censure of the People of Crete, justified by the account which Gentile Writers give of their evil manners. A short view of the Epistle it self. The directions concerning Ecclesiastic persons. His charge to exhort and convince gain-sayers. Crete abounding with Heretical Teachers. Jewish Fables and Genealogies what, and whence derived. The Aeones and  of the ancient Gnostics bor∣rowed from the  of the Heathen Poets. This shewn by particu∣lar instances. Titus commanded to attend S. Paul at Nicopolis. His coming to him into Macedonia. His following S. Paul to Rome, and departure into Dalmatia. The Story of Pliny the Youngers being con∣verted by him in Crete, censured. His age and death. The Church ere∣cted to his memory. I. THE ancient Writers of the Church make little mention of this holy man, who, and whence he was, is not known, but by uncertain probabili∣ties. Hri. 1. in Tit pag 1693. S. Chrysostom conjectures him to have been born at Corinth, for no other reason, but because in some ancient Copies (as still is in several Manu∣scripts at this day) mention is made of S. Act. 18.7. Pauls going at Corinth into the house of one [Titus] named Justus, one that worshipped. The Writers of later Ages generally make him to be born in Crete, better known by the modern name of Candia, a noble Island (as the Flor. H. Rom. l. 3. c. 7. p. 65. Historian calls it, who adds that the onely cause of the Romans making War there, was a desire to conquer so brave a Countrey,) in the Aegean Sea, not more fa∣mous of old for being the birth-place of Jupiter, the Soveraign of the Heathen gods, and the Daedalean Labyrinth said to be in it, then of late for its having been so long the seat of War between the Turkish Empe∣rour and the State of Venice. Antiquity has not certainly conveyed down to us any particular notice of his Parents, though, might we be∣lieve the account which some give, he was of no common extract, but of the Blood Royal, his pedigree being derived from no less then Minos King of Crete, . [Legend. sine dubio . Menaeon Graec. . sub lit. μ 111. whom the Poets make the son of Jupiter, and for the equity of his Laws, and the impartial justice of his Go∣vernment, prefer him to be one of the three great Judges in the infernal Regions, whose place it is to determine mens future and eternal state; while Historians more truly affirm him to have been the son of Xanthus King of that Island, and that he succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. But I pass by that. II. BUT whatever his Parentage was, we are sure that he was a Greek, Ubi supr. probably both by Nation and Religion. The Greek Church in their public Offices, give us this account of his younger years, and con∣version to Christianity: . Men. ib. that being sprung from noble Parents, his youth was consecrated to Learning and a generous Education. At twenty years old he heard a voice, which told him, he must depart thence, that he might save his soul, for that all his Learning else would be of little advantage to him. Not satisfied with the warning, he de∣sired
again to hear the voice. A year after he was again commanded in a Vision to peruse the Volume of the Jewish Law. He opened the Book, and cast his eye upon that of the Prophet, Keep silence before me, Isa. XLI. 1. O Islands, and let the people renew their strength: let them come near, let them speak: let us come near together to judgment, &c. Whereupon his Uncle at that time Proconsul of Crete, having heard the fame of our Lords mi∣racles in Judaea, sent him to Jerusalem, where he continued till Christs ascension, when he was converted by that famous Sermon of S. Peters, whereby he gained at once three thousand souls. I cannot secure the truth of this Story, though pretended to be derived out of the Acts, said to be written by Zenas the Lawyer, mentioned by S. Paul: an au∣thority, I confess, which without better evidence, I dare not encourage the Reader to lay too much stress upon. Let us therefore come to some∣what more certain and unquestionable. III. BEING arrived in Judaea, or the parts thereabouts, and convinced of the truth and divinity of the Christian faith, he became S. Pauls Con∣vert and Disciple, though when or where converted we find not. Like∣ly it is, either that he followed S. Paul in the nature of a companion and attendant, or that he incorporated himself into the Church of Antioch: where when the famous controversie arose concerning Circumcision and the Mosaic Institutions, as equally necessary to be observed with the belief and practice of Christianity, Act 15.1, 2. they determined that Paul and Bar∣nabas, and certain others of them should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question; nay, a very ancient Cod. Bezae MS. ad Act. 15.2. MS. adds, that when Paul earnestly persuaded them to continue in the Doctrine which they had been taught, those very Jewish Zelots who came down to Antioch, and had first started the scruple, did themselves desire Paul and Barnabas and some others to go and consult with the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, and stand to their sentence and determination of the case. In the number of those who were sent upon this Evangelical Embassy was our S. Titus, Gal. 1.2, &c. whom S. Paul (encouraged to this journey by a particular revelation) was willing to take along with him. No sooner were they come to Jerusalem, but Spies were at hand, some zealous Jews pretending them∣selves to be Christian Converts, insinuated themselves into S. Pauls com∣pany and acquaintance, narrowly observing what liberty he took in point of legal Rites, that thence they might pick an accusation against him. They charged him that he preached to, and conversed with the Gentiles, and that at this very time Titus an uncircumcised Greek was his intimate familiar; a scandal which there was no way to avoid, but by cir∣cumcising him, that so it might appear that he had no design to undermine the Rites and Customs of the Law. This S. Paul (who knew when to give ground, and when to maintain his station) would by no means consent to: he who at another time was content to circumcise Timothy, a Jew by the mothers side, that he might please the Jews to their edifi∣cation, and have the fairer advantage to win upon them, refused here to circumcise Titus a Gentile, that he might not seem to betray the liber∣ties of the Gospel, harden the Jews in their unreasonable and inveterate prejudices against the Heathens, and give just ground of scandal and discouragement to the Gentiles, and make them fly off to a greater di∣stance from Christianity. Accordingly he resisted their importunity with an invincible resolution, and his practice herein was immediately justified by the decretory Sentence of the Council, summoned to deter∣mine this matter.
III. THE affair about which they were sent being dispatched in the Synod, he returned no doubt with S. Paul to Antioch, and thence accompa∣nied him in his travels, till having gone over the Churches of Syria and Cili∣cia, they set sail for Crete. For that period of time I conceive with Histor. Apost. ad ann. Christ. 46. Capellus most probable for their going over to that Island, rather then with Ad ann. 57. n. 212. Baro∣nius and others to place it at S. Pauls coming out of Macedonia into Greece, which he supposes to have been by a Sea-voyage, passing by the Cycladae Islands through the Aegean Sea, or with In Argum. E∣pist. ad Tit. Act. 27.7. Grotius to refer it till his Voyage to Rome, founding his conjecture upon a double mistake, that S. Paul and his company put in and staid at Crete, when 'tis onely said that they sailed under it, and passed by it, and that Titus was then in the company, whereof no footsteps or intimations appear in the Story. Sailing therefore from some Port in Cilicia, they arrived at Crete, where S. Paul industriously set himself to preach and propagate the Christian Faith, delighting (as much as might be) to be the first messenger of the glad tidings of the Gospel to all places where he came, not planting in another mans line, or building of things made ready to his hand. But because the care of other Churches called upon him, and would not permit him to stay long enough here to see Christianity brought to a due maturity and perfection, he constitu∣ted Titus Bishop of that Island, that he might nourish that infant-Church, superintend its growth and prosperity, and manage the Government and Administration of it. This the Ancients with one mouth declare, He was the first Bishop (says H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. p. 73. Eusebius) of the Churches in Crete: the Apostle consecrated him Bishop of it, so Praef. in Tit. p. 419. T. 5. S. Ambrose; so Doroth. Synops. p. 148. Dorotheus, and Ap. Hier. de Script. in Tit. Sophro∣nius; he was (says Homil. 1. in Tit. p. 1692. Chrysostom) an approved person, to whom , the whole Island was intirely committed, that he might exercise power and jurisdiction over so many Bishops: he was by S. Paul ordained Bishop of Crete, though a very large Island, that he might ordain Bishops un∣der him, says Argum. Epist. ad Tit. Tom. 3. Theodoret expresly. To which might be added the testi∣monies of Theophylact, Oecumenius, and others, and the subscription at the end of the Epistle to Titus, (which though not dictated by the same hand, is ancient however) where he is said to have been ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians. And Argum. in 1 ad Tim. p. 1519. S. Chrysostom gives this as the reason, why of all his Disciples and Followers S. Paul wrote Epistles to Titus and Timothy, and not to Silas or Luke, because he had committed to them the care and government of Churches, while he reserved the others as attendants and ministers to go along with himself. IV. NOR is this meerly the arbitrary sense of Antiquity in the case, but seems evidently founded in S. Pauls own intimation, Tit. 1.5. where he tells Titus, For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee, that is, I constituted thee Governour of that Church, that thou mightst dispose and order the affairs of it according to the rules and di∣rections which I then gave thee. Ordain Elders] he means Bishops (says Homil. 2. in Tit. p. 1700. vid. etiam Theoph. & Oc∣cumen. in loc. Chrysostom) as elsewhere I have oft explained it. Elders in every City] he was not willing (as he adds) that the whole administration of so great an Island should be managed by one, but that every City might have its proper Governour to inspect and take care of it, that so the burden might be lighter by being laid upon many shoulders, and the people at∣tended with the greater diligence. Indeed Crete was famous for number of Cities above any other Island in the World, thence stiled of old He∣catompolis, the Island of an hundred Cities. In short, plain it is, that Titus
had power of Jurisdiction, Ordination, and Ecclesiastical Censures, above any other Pastors or Ministers in that Church conferred and derived upon him. V. SEVERAL years S. Titus continued at his charge in Crete, when he received a summons from S. Paul, then ready to depart from Ephesus. The Apostle had desired Apollos to accompany Timothy and some others whom he had sent to Corinth, but he chusing rather to go for Crete, by him and Zenas he wrote an Epistle to Titus, to stir him up to be active and vigilant, and to teach him how to behave himself in that station wherein he had set him. And indeed he had need of all the counsels which S. Paul could give him, who had so loose and untoward a generation of men to deal with. For the Countrey it self was not more fruitful and plenteous then the manners of the people were de∣bauched and vicious. Tit. 1.3. S. Paul puts Titus in mind what a bad character one of their own Poets (who certainly knew them best) had given of them: . The Cretians are always Liars, Evil Beasts, Slow-bellies. This Verse Homil. III. in Tit. pag. 1707. S. Chry∣sostom supposes the Apostle took from Callimachus, who makes use in∣deed of the first part of it, charging the Cretians to be like themselves, notorious Liars, in pretending that Jupiter was not onely born, but died among them, and that they had his Tomb with this Inscription, ΕΝΤΑΥΘΑ ΖΑΝ ΚΕΙΤΑΙ, Here lies Jupiter, when as the deity is immortal: whereupon the good Father perplexes himself with many needless difficulties in reconciling it. Whereas in truth S. Paul bor∣rowed it not from Callimachus, but Epimenides, a native of Crete, famous among the Ancients for his Raptures and Enthusiastic divinations, , as In vit. Solon. pag. 84. Plutarch says of him. From him Callimachus cites part of the Verse, . Callim. Hymn. . p. 1. . Vet. Schol. ibi. and applies it to his particular pur∣pose, while S. Paul quotes it intire from the Au∣thor himself. This witness (says he) is true. And indeed that herein he did not bely them, we have the concurrent testimonies of most Heathen Writers, who charge the same things upon them. . Suid. in voc. . Eadem Mich. Apostol. in eod. verb. . Psell. de ope∣rat. Damon. p. 37. So famous for lying, that  and  became proverbial, to lie like a Cretian, and to cousen a cheat, and nothing more obvious then mendax Creta. Histor. l. 6. p. 681. & l. 4. p. 386. Edit. L Bata Polybius tells us of them, that no where could be found more subtle and deceitful Wits, and generally more wicked and pernicious Counsels; that their Manners were so very sor∣did and covetous, that of all men in the World the Cretians were the only persons who accounted nothing base or dishonest, that was but gain∣ful and advantagious. Besides they were idle and impatient of labour, gluttonous and intemperate, unwilling to take any pains farther then to make provision for the flesh; as the natural effect of ease, idleness, and plenty, they were wanton and lascivious, and prone to the vilest and basest sort of lust,  (as Deipnosoph. l. 13. pag. 601. Athenaeus informs us) outragiously mad upon that sin that peculiarly derives its name from Sodom. And such being the case, what wonder if S. Paul bids Titus re∣prove
them sharply, seeing their corrupt and depraved manners would ad∣mit of the sharpest lancets, and the most stinging corrosives he could ap∣ply to them. VI. IN the Epistle it self the main body of it consists of rules and directions for the several ranks and relations of men: and because Spi∣ritual and Ecclesiastical affairs are of all others most considerable, he first instructs him in the qualifications of those whom he should set apart to be Bishops, and Guides of Souls, that they be holy and harmless, in∣nocent and inoffensive, such as had not divorced and put away their first Wife that they might marry a second, whose children were sober and re∣gular, and trained up in the Christian Faith; that they be easie and treatable, meek and unpassionate, free from the love of Wine, and a de∣sire after riches by sordid and covetous designs; that they be kind and hospitable, lovers of goodness and good men, modest and prudent, just and honest, strict and temperate, firm and constant in owning and asser∣ting the Doctrines of Christianity that have been delivered to them, that being thoroughly furnished with this pure Evangelical Doctrine, they may be able both to persuade and comfort others, and mightily to convince those that resist and oppose the truth. And certainly it was not without great reason, that the Apostle required that the Guides and Governours of the Church should be thus able to convince gain∣sayers. For whatever Authors report of Crete, that it bred no Serpents or venomous Creatures, yet certain it is that the poison of Errour and Heresie had insinuated it self there together with the entertainment of Christianity, Tit. 1.10. there being many unruly and vain talkers, especially they of the Circumcision, Verse 14. who endeavoured to corrupt the Doctrine of the Gospel with Jewish Fables, groundless and unwarrantable Traditions, mystical and Cabalistic explications, —3.9. and foolish questions and genealogies. For the Jews, borrowing their notions herein from the Schools of Plato, were fallen into a vein of deriving things from an imaginary generation, first Binah or Understanding, then Achmoth or Cochmah Wisdom, and so till they came to Milcah the Kingdom, and Schekinah or the Divine Presence. Much after the same rate as the Poets of old deduced the pedigrees of their gods, they had first their several  their conjunctions, the coupling and mixing of things together, and thence proceeded their  their genealogies or generations; out of Chaos came Erebus and the dark Night, the conjunction of whom begot Aether and the Day, and thence Hesiod. Theo∣gon p.m. 466. Hesiod proceeds to explain the whole Pagan Theology concerning the original of their gods. VII. IN imitation of all which, and from a mixture of all together the Valentinians, Basilidians, and the rest of the Gnostic crew formed the sensless and unintelligible Schemes of their  and XXX Aeo∣nes, divided into three Classes of Conjunction; in the first were four couples, Profundity and Silence, Mind and Truth, the Word and Life, Man and the Church: in the second five, viz. Profound and Mixture, Ageratus and Ʋnion, &c. in the third six, the Paraclete and Faith, Pa∣tricos and Hope, &c. Of all which if any desire to know more, they may (if they can understand it) find enough in Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Epi∣phanius, to this purpose. The Haeres. XXXI pg. 76. vid. Ter∣tull. de Prae∣script. Haeret. c. 7. p. 204. last of whom not onely affirms expresly that Valentinus and his Party introduced , the fabulous and Poetic fancies of the Heathens, but draws a particular parallel be∣tween Hesiods Theogonia, and their thirty Aeones or Ages, consisting
of fifteen Couples or Conjugations, Male and Female, which he shews exactly to agree both in the number, design, and order of them. For instance, Valentinus his Tribe begins thus; Ampsiu that is Profundity Auraan that is Silence. Bucua that is Mind Tharthuu that is Truth. Ʋbucua that is Word Thardeadie that is Life. Merexa that is Man Atarbarba &c. that is Church. &c. All which was nothing but a trifling and fantasti∣cal imitation of Hesiods Progeny and generation of the gods, . Id. ibid. which being joined in conjugations succeeded in this order; Chaos, Night; Erebus, Earth; Aether, Day; &c. There being (as he observes) no difference between the one Scheme and the other, but onely the change and altera∣tion of the names. This may suffice for a Speci∣men to shew whence this idle Generation bor∣rowed their extravagant conceits, though there were that had set much what the like on foot be∣fore the time of Valentinus. By such dark and wild notions and prin∣ciples the false Apostles both in Crete and elsewhere, sought to undermine the Christian Doctrin, mixing it also with principles of great looseness and liberty, that they might the easilier insinuate themselves into the af∣fections of men, whereby they brought over numerous Proselytes to their Party, of whom they made merchandise, Tit. 1.11. gaining sufficient advantage to themselves. So that 'twas absolutely necessary that these mens mouths should be stopped, and that they should not be suffered to go on under a shew of such lofty and sublime speculations, and a pretence of Chri∣stian liberty, to pervert men from the Christian Religion, and the plain∣ness and simplicity of the Gospel. Having done with Ecclesiastics, he proceeds to give directions for persons of all Ages and Capacities, whe∣ther old or young, men or women, children or servants, and then of more public concernment, Rulers and People, and indeed how to de∣port our selves in the general carriage of our lives. In the close of the Epistle he wishes him to furnish Zenas and Apollos, the two Apostoli∣cal Messengers by whom this Letter was conveyed to him, with all things necessary for their return, commanding that he himself with all conve∣nient speed should meet him at Nicopolis (though where that was is not certain, whether Nicopolis in Epirus, so called from Augustus his Victory there over Antony and Cleopatra, or rather Nicopolis in Thrace, upon the River Nesus, not far from the borders of Macedonia, whither S. Paul was now going, or some other City, whereof many in those parts of that name) where he had resolved to spend his Winter. And that by with∣drawing
so useful and vigilant a Shepherd he might not seem to expose his Flock to the fury and the rage of the Wolves, he promises to send Artemas or Tychicus to supply his place during his absence from them. VIII. S. PAƲL departing from Ephesus was come to Troas, where though he had a fair opportunity to preach the Gospel offered to him, yet (as himself tells us) he had no rest in his spirit, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13. because he found not Titus his brother, whom he impatiently expected to bring him an account of the state of the Church of Corinth; whether Titus had been with him, and been sent upon this errand, or had been commanded by him to take Corinth in his way from Crete, is not known. Not meeting him here, away he goes for Macedonia, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6, 7. & 13, 14, 15. where at length Titus arrived and com∣forted him under all his other sorrows and difficulties, with the joyful news of the happy condition of the Church of Corinth, and how readily they had reformed those miscarriages, which in his former Epistle he had charged upon them, fully making good that great character which he had given of them to Titus, and whereof they gave no inconsiderable evidence in that kind and welcom entertainment which Titus found amongst them. Soon after S. Paul having received the Collections of the Mace∣donian Churches for the indigent Christians at Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 8.6, 15, 16. sent back Titus and with him S. Luke to Corinth, to excite their charity, and prepare their contributions against his own arrival there, and by them he wrote his second Epistle to that Church. IX. TITƲS faithfully discharged his errand to the Church of Co∣rinth and having dispatched the services for which he was sent, returned, we may suppose, back to Crete. Nor do we hear any further news of him till S. Pauls imprisonment at Rome, whither he came (if my Pet. de Natal. Hist. SS. lib. 7. c. 108. Author say true) about two years after him, and continued with him till his mar∣tyrdom, whereat he was present, and together with S. Luke committed him to his Grave. An account, which I confess I am the less inclined to believe, 2 Tim. 4.10. because assured by S. Paul himself, that before his death Titus had left him, and was gone into Dalmatia, a Province of Illyricum, to plant that fierce and warlike Nation with the Gospel of Peace, taking it pro∣bably in his way in order to his return for Crete. And this is the last notice we find taken of him in the Holy Writings, nor do the Records of the Church henceforward furnish us with any certain Memoirs or Re∣marques concerning him. Indeed were the Story which some tell us true, one thing alone were enough to make him memorable to poste∣rity, I mean his converting Pliny the Younger, that learned and eloquent man, Proconsul of Bithynia, and intimate Privy Counsellor to Trajan the Emperour. For so they tell us Pet. de Natal. loc. cit. ex Act. S. Titi à Zena (uti. sertur) script. Fl. Pseu∣do-Dext. Chron. ad Ann. CCXX., that returning from his Province in Bithynia, he landed in Crete, where the Emperour had commanded him to erect a Temple to Jupiter: which was accordingly done, and no soo∣ner finished, but S. Titus cursed it, and it immediately tumbled to the ground. The man, you may guess was strangely troubled, and came with tears to the Holy man, to request his counsel, who advised him to begin it in the name of the God of the Christians, and it would not fail to prosper. He did so, and having finished it, was himself, together with his son baptized. Nay some to make the Story perfect, add, that he suffered martyrdom for the Faith at Novocomum a City of Insubria in Italy, where he was born. The Reader I presume will not expect I should take pains to confute this Story, sufficiently improbable in it self, and which I behold as just of the same Metal, and coined in the
same Mint with that of his Master Trajans soul being delivered out of Hell by the prayers of S. Gregory the Great, so gravely told, so seriously believed by many, not in the Greek Church onely, but in the Church of Rome: nay, which the whole East and West, (if we may believe Damascen. Serm. . Da∣mascen) held to be , true and uncontrollable. X. S. TITƲS lived, as the Ancients tell us, to a great age, dying about the ninety fourth year of his life. He died in peace (says Ap. Hieron. de Script. in Tito. Sophro∣nius and De vit. & ob. SS. c. 87. p. 542. Isidore) and lies buried in Crete: the Ad diem. IV Jan. p. 16. Roman Martyrology adds, that he was buried in that very Church, wherein S. Paul ordained him Bishop of that Island. I understand him where a Church was afterwards built, it not being likely there should be any at that time. At Candia, the Metropolis of the Island, there is, or lately was, an ancient and beau∣tiful Cotovic. Itin. lib. 1. c. 12. p. 60. Church dedicated to S. Titus, wherein under the high Altar his re∣mains are said to be honourably laid up, and are both by the Greeks and Latins held in great veneration. Though what is become of them since that famous City lately fell into the hands of the Turk, that great Scourge of Christendom, is to me unknown. His Festival is celebrated in the Western Church on the IV day of January, in the Greek Church August the XXV, and among the Christians in Aegypt (as appears by the Arabic Calendar published by De Synedr. Tom. 3. c. 15. p. 396. Mr. Selden) the XXII of the Moneth Barmahath, answering to our March the XVIII, is consecrated to his memory. The End of S. TITUS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE. Micha. Burgh. deli. et sculp. S. DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA. Dionysius born at Athens. The quality of his Parents. His Domestic studies. His foreign Travels. Egypt frequented as the staple place of all recondite Learning. His residence at Heliopolis. The strange and mi∣raculous
Eclipse at our Saviours Passion. Dionysius his remarques upon it. His return to Athens, and being made one of the Judges of the Areo∣pagus. The nature of this Court: the number and quality of its Judges. S. Paul arraigned before it: his discourse, and its success. Dionysius his conversion. His further instruction by Hierotheus. Hierotheus, who. Dionysius constituted Bishop of Athens. A brief account of his Story according to those that confound him with Dionysius Bishop of Paris. These shewn to be distinct. The Original and procedure of the mistake en∣quired into. A probable account given of it. Dionysius his Martyrdom at Athens, and the time of it. A fabulous miracle reported of his Scull. The description of his person, and the hyperbolical commendations which the Greeks give of him. The Books ascribed to him. These none of his. Apollinaris (probably) shewed to be the Author of them. Several passages of the Ancients noted to that purpose. Books why oft published under other mens names. These Books the Fountain of Enthusiasm and mystical Theology. A passage in them instanced in to that purpose. I. S DIONYSIƲS was born at Athens, the Eye of Greece, and Fountain of Learning and Hu∣manity, the only place that without competi∣tion had for so many Ages maintained an uncon∣trolled reputation for Arts and Sciences, and to which there was an universal confluence of per∣sons from all parts of the World to accomplish themselves in the more polite and useful Studies. Though we find nothing particularly concern∣ing his Parents, yet we may safely conclude them to have been persons of a noble quality, at least of a better rank than ordinary, seeing none were admitted to be Areopagite Judges (as Isoer. Orat. Arcopag. p. 147. vii. Maxim. Prolog. Oper. S. Dionys. Pref. pag. 34. one who knew very well informs us) , unless they were nobly born, and eminently exem∣plary for a vertuous and a sober life. Being born in the very midst of Arts and Civility, his education could not but be learned and ingenuous, especially considering the advantages of his birth and fortunes. Ac∣cordingly he was Suid. in voc. . p. 744. instructed in all the learned Sciences of Greece, where∣in he made such vast improvements, that he easily out-stript any of his time: scarce any Sect or Institution in Philosophy then in vogue, which he had not considered and made trial of: it does not indeed appear to which of them he particularly devoted and applied himself; and they who suppose him to have addicted himself to the School of Plato, do it, I conceive for no other reason, then because the Doctrin contained in the Books that bear his name, seems so neer of kin to the principles of that noble Sect. II. BUT it was not an homebred Institution, or all the advantages which Athens could afford, that could fill the vast capacities of his mind, which he therefore resolved to polish and improve by foreign Travels. Being in the prime and vigour of his Youth, about the age of XXV . years, he took with him one Apollophanes a Rhetorician, his fellow-stu∣dent, and (if p. 349. Tm. 1 Syncellus say true) his Kinsman, who was afterwards at Smyrna, Master to Polemon the Laodicean, as he was to Aristides the fa∣mous Philosopher and Apologist for the Christians. Thus furnished with a suitable Companion, he is said to have gone for Egypt, to converse
with their Philosophers and Wise Men, that he might perfect himself in the Study of the Mathematics, and the more mysterious and recondite parts of Learning. Egypt had in all Ages been looked upon as the prime School not onely of Astrology, but of the more abstruse and uncom∣mon speculations of Theology; and the great Masters of Wisdom and Di∣vinity among the Gentiles never thought they had gained enough, till they had crowned their Studies by conversing with the Egyptian Sages. Hence it was frequented by Orpheus, Homer, Solon, Thales, by Pythago∣ras and Plato, and whom not? nay of Pythagoras Stromat. lib. 1. p. 302. Clemens of Alexandria reports that he suffered himself to be circumcised, that so he might be admitted , to the concealed Rites and Notions of their Re∣ligion, and be acquainted with their secret and mystical Philosophy. The place he fixed at was Heliopolis, a City between Coptus and Alexan∣dria, where the Egyptian Priests for the most resided, as a place admira∣bly advantagious for the contemplation of the Heavenly bodies, and the Study of Philosophy and Astronomy; and where Geograph. lib. 17. p. 806. Strabo (who lived much about this time) tells us he was shewed the habitations of the Priests, and the apartments of Pl and Eudoxus, who lived here thir∣teen years; nay, a very ancient Alexand. Po∣lyhist. Hist. de Judaeis ap. Eu∣seb. praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 17. p. 419. Historian assures us, that Abraham him∣self lived here, and taught the Egyptian Priests Astronomy, and other parts of Learning. III. DIONYSIƲS no doubt plied his Studies in this place, during whose stay there, one memorable accident is reported. The Son of God about this time was delivered up at Jerusalem to an acute and shameful death by the hands of Violence and Injustice; when the Sun, as if ashamed to behold so great a wickedness, hid his head, and put on mourning to wait upon the Funerals of its Maker. This Eclipse was contrary to all the known Rules and Laws of Nature, it hapning in a Full Moon, when the Moon is in its greatest distance from the Sun, and consequently not liable to a conjunction with him, the Moon moving it self under the Sun from its Oriental to its Occidental point, and thence back by a retrograde motion, causing a strange defection of light for three hours together. That there was such a wonderful and preternatu∣ral darkness over all the Earth for three hours at the time of our Saviours suffering, whereby the Sun was darkned, is unanimously attested by the Evangelical Historians; and not by them onely, but Chronic. lib. 13. apud Euseb. Chron. ad Ann. Chr. XXXII. vid. Graeca ET. ΛΓ p. 202. vid. Orig. contr. Cels. l. 2. p. 80. & Chro. Alexandr. ad Ann. Tiber. XVIII. Indict. 4. Olymplad. CCII. 4. p. 520. Phlegon Trallianus sometimes servant to the Emperour Trajan, speaks of an Eclipse of the Sun that hapned about that time, , the greatest of any that had been ever known, whereby the day was turned into night, and the Stars appeared at noon-day, an Earthquake also ac∣companying it, whereby many houses at Nice in Bithynia were overtur∣ned. Apollophanes beholding this strange Eclipse, cried out to Diony∣sius that these were changes and revolutions of some great affairs, to whom the other replied, that either God suffered, or at least sympathized and bore part with him that did. I confess these passages are not to be found in the most ancient Writers of the Church: but that ought to be no just exception, when we consider what little care was then taken to con∣sign things to writing, and how great a part of those few ancient Records that were written were quickly lost, whereof Eusebius sufficiently com∣plains; not to say, that a great many writings might, and did escape his notice; and Prolog. ante oper. S. Dionys. p. 36. Maximus, I remember, answering the objection, that the Books ascribed to S. Denys are not mentioned by Eusebius, tells us, that
himself had met with several pieces of the Ancients, of which not the least footstep in Eusebius. But however that be, it concludes not against the matter of fact, many things though never entered upon Re∣cord, being as to the substance of them, preserved by constant Tradi∣tion and Report. I deny not but that the several Authors who report this passage, might immediately derive it out of the Epistles said to be written to S. Polycarp and Apollophanes. But then cannot suppose that the Author of these Epistles did purely feign the matter of fact of his own head, but rather delivered what Tradition had conveyed down to his time. Indeed that which would more shrewdly shake the founda∣tion of the Story, if it be true, is what Trct. XXXV. in Matth. fl. vi. Ep. tol. 1. Origen supposes, that this darkness that was over all the Earth, and the Earthquake that attended our Lords Passion, extended no farther then Judaea, as some of the Prodigies no farther then Jerusalem. But to what degrees of truth or probability that opinion may approve it self, I leave to others to enquire. IV. DIONYSIƲS having finished his Studies at Heliopolis, retur∣ned to Athens, incomparably fitted to serve his Countrey, and accor∣dingly was advanced to be one of the Judges of the Areopagus, a place of great honour and renown. The Areopagus was a famous Senate-house built upon a Hill in Athens, wherein assembled their great Court of Ju∣stice, , as Arislid. Tom. 1. p. 331. one calls it, the most sacred and venerable Tribunal in all Greece. Under their co∣gnizance came all the greater and more capital Causes, and especially matters of Religion, blasphemy against the gods, and contempt of the holy mysteries; and therefore S. Paul was arraigned before this Court, as a setter forth of strange gods, when he preached to them concerning Jesus and Anastasis, or the Resurrection. None might be of this Council but persons of birth and quality, wise and prudent men, and of very strict and severe manners, and so great an awe and reverence did this solemn and grave Assembly strike into those that sate in it, that Loco supr. lan∣dat. Isocrates tells us, that in his time, when they were somewhat degenerated from their ancient Vertue, however otherwise men were irregular and exorbitant, yet once chosen into this Senate, they presently ceased from their vicious inclinations, and chose rather to conform to the Laws and Manners of that Court, , then to continue in their wild and debauch'd course of life. They were exactly upright and impar∣tial in their proceedings, and heard causes at night, or in the dark, that the person of the Plaintiff or the Pleader might have no undue influence upon them. Their sentence was decretory and final, and from their de∣termination lay no appeal. Their number was uncertain, by some re∣strained to nine, by others enlarged to thirty one, by others to fifty one, and to more by some. Indeed the Novemviri, who were the Basileus or King, the Archon, the Polemarchus, and the six Thesmothetae, were the constant Seminary and Nursery of this great Assembly, who having dis∣charged their several Offices, annually passed into the Areopagus, and therefore when Socrates was condemned by this D. Laert. l. 2. in vit. S. at. p. 115. Court, we find no less then two hundred fourscore and one, giving their Votes against him, — Caetera vid. apud R. Volaterran. Comment. Urban. l. 8. tl. 318. besides those whose White Stones were for his absolution: and in an ancient Inscription up∣on a Column in the Acropolis at Athens, erected to the memory of Rufus Festus, Proconsul of Greece, and one of these Judges, mention is made of the Areopagite Senate of three hundred.
V. IN this grave and venerable judicature sate our S. Denys, when S. Paul about the year XLIX or L, came to Athens, where he resolutely asserted the cause of Christianity against the attempts of the Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers, who mainly appeared against it. The Athenians, who were infinitely curious and superstitious in matters of Religion, not knowing what to make of this new and strange Doctrin that he taught, presently brought him before the Areopagite-Senate, to whom the pro∣per cognizance of such causes did belong. Here in a neat and eloquent discourse, delivered not with greater freedom of mind, then strength of reason, he plainly demonstrated the folly and absurdity of those many vain deities, whom they blindly worshipped, explained to them that in∣finite Being that made and governed the World, and what indispensable obligations he had laid upon all Mankind to worship and adore him, and how much he had enforced all former engagements to gratitude and obedience, to repentance and reformation by this last and best dispensa∣tion, by sending his Son to publish so excellent a Religion to the World. His discourse however entertained by some with scorn and laughter, and gravely put off by others, yet wanted not a happy influence upon many, whom it convinced of the reasonableness and divinity of the Christian Faith: among whom was our Dionysius, one of the Judges that sate up∣on him, and Damaris his wife (for so Desacerdot. l. 4. c. 7. p. 67. T. 4. Ambros. Epist. 82. p. 198. Tom. 3. S. Chrysostom and others make her) and probably his whole house. An Hild. in passio. S. Dionys. n. 6, 7, 8. ap. Sur. Octob. IX. p. 122. Author (I confess I know not by what Authority) relates a particular dispute between Dionysius and S. Paul concerning the Ʋnknown God, who as God-man was to appear in the latter Ages to reform the World; this the Apostle shewed to be the Holy Jesus, lately come down from Heaven, and so satisfied S. Denys that he prayed him to intercede with Heaven, that he might be fully confirmed in this belief. The next day S. Paul having restored sight to one that was born blind, charged him to go to Dionysius, and by that token claim his promise to be his Convert; who being amazed at this sight, readily renounced his Idolatry, and was with his house baptized into the Faith of Christ. But I know the credit of my Author too well to lay any great stress upon this relation, and the rather because I find that Baronius himself is not willing to venture his Faith upon it. To which I might add Loc. supr. citat. S. Chrysostoms observation, that the Areopagite was converted , onely by S. Pauls discourse, there being no miracle that we know of, that might promote and further it. VI. BEING baptized, he was, we are S. Metaphr. ap. Sur. ibid. Maxim. Syncel. ubi supr. Psendo-Dionys. de di∣vin. nomin. c. 2. p. 175. T. 1. told, committed to the care and tutorage of S. Hierotheus, to be by him further instructed in the Faith, a person not so much as mentioned by any of the Ancients, which creates with me a vehement suspicion, that it is onely a feigned name, and that no such person ever really was in the World. Indeed the . Greek Me∣naeon makes him to have been one of the Nine Senators of the Areopagus, to have been converted by S. Paul, and by him made Bishop of Athens, and then appointed Tutor to S. Denys. Pseudo-Dext. Chron. ad. Ann. Chr. LXXI. Others make him by birth a Spaniard, first Bishop of Athens, and then travelling into his own Coun∣trey, Bishop of Segovia in Spain. And both I believe with equal truth. Nor probably had such a person ever been thought of, had there not been some intimations of such an instructor in Dionysius his Works, con∣firmed by the Scholiasts that writ upon him, and afterwards by others improved into a formal Story: As for S. Dionysius he is made to travel with S. Paul for three years after his Conversion, and then to have
been constituted by him Bishop of Athens; so that it was necessary it seems to pack Hierotheus into Spain, that room might be made for him. Indeed that Dionysius was, and that without any affront to S. Hierotheus, the first Bishop of Athens, we are assured by an Authority that cannot be doubted, Apud Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. p. 74. & l. 4. c. 23. p. 144. Dionysius the famous Bishop of Corinth (who lived not long after him) expresly affirming it; and Niceph. H. Ecc. l. 2. c. 20. p. 167. Nicephorus adds, what is probable enough, that it was done with S. Pauls own hands. I shall but mention his journey to Jerusalem to meet the Apostles, who are said to have come from all parts of the World to be present at the last hours of the Blessed Virgin, and his several Visitations of the Churches in Phrygia and Achaia, to plant or confirm the Faith. VII. ALL which, supposing they were true, yet here we must take our leave. For now the Writers of his Life generally make him pre∣pare for a much longer journey. Having setled his affairs at Athens, and substituted a Successor in his See, he is said to go to Rome (a brief ac∣count of things shall suffice, where no truth lies at the bottom:) at Rome he was dispatched by S. Clemens into France, where he planted the Faith, and founded an Episcopal See at Paris, whence after many years, about the ninetieth year of his Age, he returned into the East, to converse with S. John at Ephesus, thence back again to Paris, where he suffered mar∣tyrdom, and among infinite other miracles reported of him, he is said to have taken up his head, after it had been cut off by the Executioners, and to have carried it in his hands (an Angel going before, and an hea∣venly Chorus attending him all the way) for two miles together, till he came to the place of his interment, where he gently laid it and himself down, and was there honourably entombed. This is the sum of a very tedious Story. A Story so improbable in it self, so directly contrary to what Sa. Hist. lib. 2. pag. 143. Severus Sulpitius affirms, that none were martyred for the Faith in France, till the fifth Persecution under the reign of M. Aurelius Antoni∣nus; that I shall not spend much time in its confutation. Especially when the thing has been unanswerably done by so many learned and ingenious men in the Church of Rome, and by none more effectually then Sirmond and Launoy, who have cleared it beyond all possibilities of just exception. VIII. INDEED we find in several very ancient Usuard. Mar∣tyr. Calend. Octob. & VII. Id. Octob. Mar∣tyr. Bede VII. Id. Octob. Martyrologies, as also in Greg. Turon. Hist. Franc. lib. 1. c. 28. p. 265. Edit. Du. Chsn. Gregory Bishop of Tours, who reports it out of the Acts of Saturninus the Martyr, that one Dionysius with some others was sent by the Bishop of Rome into France in the time of Decius the Emperour, Ann. Chr. CCL. where he preached the Christian Faith, and became Bishop of Paris, and after great torments and sufferings, was beheaded for his resolute and constant profession of Religion, and accordingly his mar∣tyrdom is recorded in the most ancient Martyrologies, upon a day di∣stinct from that of the Athenian Dionysius, and the same miracles ascribed to him, that are reported of the other. And that this was the first and true foundation of the Story, I suppose no wise man will doubt. Nor indeed is the least mention made of any such thing, I am sure not any in Writer of Name and Note, till the times of Charles the Great: When V. Epist. e∣ja. & Hilduin. Rescript. apud Surdoc. citat. Ludovicus Emperour, and King of France wrote to Hilduin Abbot of S. Denys, to pick up what ever Memoirs he could find concerning him, either in the Books of the Greeks or Latines, or such Records as they had at home, and to digest and compile them into orderly Tracts. He did so, and furnished out a very large and par∣ticular
relation, which was quickly improved and defended by Hinemar Bishop of Rhemes, Scholar to Hilduin, and Anastasius Bibliothecarius of Rome, to whom the Greek Writers of that and the following Ages rea∣dily gave their Vote and Suffrage. Nor has a late J. Mabillon not. ad Epist. Hincmar. inter Analect. Veter. p. 63. Author much men∣ded the matter in point of antiquity, who tells us that in a convention of Bishops in France held Ann. DCCCXXV. ten years before Hilduin wrote his Areopagitics, mention is made of S. Dionysius his being sent into France by Clemens S. Peters Successor. For we can easily allow that there might about that time be some blind and obscure Tradition, though the fragment of the Synod, which he there produces, speaks not one sylla∣ble of this Dionysius his being the Areopagite, or having any relation to Athens. In short the case seems plainly this: IX. HILDƲIN set on by his potent Patron, partly that he might exalt the honour of France, partly to advance the reputation of his particular Convent, finding an obscure Dionysius to have been Bishop of Paris, re∣moves him an Age or two higher, and makes him the same with him of Athens, a person of greater honour and veneration, and partly from the Records, partly from the Traditions currant among themselves, draws up a formal account of him from first to last; adding 'tis like what he thought good of his own, to make up the Story. These Commentaries of his, we may suppose, were quickly conveyed to Rome, where being met with by the Greeks, who came upon frequent Embassies to that See about that time, they were carried over to Constantinople, out of which Methodius (who had himself been Aprocrisiarius or Embassador from Nicephorus the Greek Patriarch to Pope Paschal at Rome, and after infinite troubles was advanced to the Patriarchat of Constantinople,) furnishes himself with materials to write the life of Dionysius: for that he had them not out of the Records of his own Church is plain, in that when Hilduin set upon composing his Arcopagitics, he expresly says Rescript. ad Ludov. Imper. n. 10. ibid., that the Greeks had writ∣ten nothing concerning the Martyrdom of S. Denys, the particulars whereof, by reason of the vast distance, they could not attain. Out of Hilduin therefore, or at least some reports of that time, Methodius must needs derive his intelligence; but most probably from Hilduin, between whose relation and that of Methodius, there is so exact an agreement, not onely in particular passages, but oft-times in the very same words, as Respons. dis∣cuss. cap. 9. p. 120. Monsieur Launoy has demonstrated by a particular collation. Me∣thodius his Tract was by the Greek Embassadors quickly brought from Constantinople to Rome, where Epist. ad Ca∣rol. Calv. Imp. apud. Sur. ibid. p. 132. Anastasius confesses he met with it, tran∣slated it into Latine, and thence transmitted it into France, where it was read, owned, and published by Extat apud. Sur. ubi supr. & Mabillon. lec. citat. Hincmar, as appears by his Epistle to Charles the Emperour. Where he plainly tells us, that no sooner had he read this Life written by Methodius, but he found it admirably to agree with what he had read in his Youth (he means I doubt not, the Writings of Hilduin) by whom and how the Acts of S. Denys and his companions came to the knowledge of the Romans, and thence to the notice of the Greeks. This is the most likely pedigree and procedure of the Story that I can think of; and from hence how easie was it for the after-Wri∣ters both of the Western and the Eastern Church to swallow down a Story, thus plausibly fitted to their taste? Nor had the Greeks any rea∣son over-nicely to examine, or reject what made so much for the ho∣nour of their Church and Nation, and seemed to lay not France onely, but the whole Western Church under an obligation to them, for furnish∣ing
them with so great and excellent a person. But to return to our Dionysius. X. THOUGH we cannot doubt but that he behaved himself with all diligence and fidelity in the discharge of his Office; yet because the Ancients have conveyed down no particulars to our hands, we shall not venture upon reports of false, or at best doubtful credit. No∣thing of certainty can be recovered of him, more then what Aristides the Christian Philosopher (who himself lived, and was probably born at Athens, not long after Dionysius) relates in the Apud Usuard. & Adon. Mart. V. Non. Octobr. Apology which he pub∣lished for the Christian Religion, that after a most resolute and eminent confession of the Faith, after having undergone several of the severest kinds of torment, he gave the last and great testimony to it, by laying down his life. This was done, as is most probable, under the reign of Domitian, as is confessed (betraid into it by a secret instinct of truth) by Abbot Hilduin, Methodius, and their followers: while others extend it to the times of Trajan, others to the reign of Adrian, who entered upon the Empire Ann. CXVII. partly that they might leave room enough for the account which they give of him, partly to preserve the Authori∣ty of his Writings, wherein a passage is cited out of Ignatius his Epistles, written just before his Martyrdom, Ann. CVII. The Reader I hope will not expect from me an account of the miracles said to be done by him either before or since his death, or of the fierce contests that are be∣tween several places in the Roman Church concerning his Reliques. One passage however I shall not omit. In a Village in Luxemburg not far from Treves is a Church dedicated to S. Denys, wherein is kept his Scull, at least a piece of it, on the Crown whereof there is a white Cross while the other parts of the Scull are black. This common Tradition, and some Vid. Author. citat. ap. P. Hal∣loix. not. ad vit. Dionys. p. 241. Authors to avouch it, will have to be made, when S. Paul laid his hands upon him at his consecration. Which if so, I have no more to observe, but that Orders (which the Church of Rome make a Sacra∣ment) did here even in a literal sense confer an indeleble character and mark upon him. XI. HIS , the shape and figure of his body is by the . Greek Menaeon thus described: he was of a middle stature, slender, fair, but inclining to paleness, his nose gracefully bending, hollow-eyed with short eye-brows, his ear large, his hair thick and white, his beard mo∣derately long, but very thin. For the image of his mind expressed in his discourses, and the excellent conduct of his life, the Greeks accord∣ing to their magnifying humour as well as language, bestow most hyper∣bolical elogies and commendations on him. Ibid. They stile him, , the Sacred Interpreter and contemplator of hid∣den and unspeakable mysteries, and an unsearchable depth of heavenly knowledge; , the Trinity-Divine, the divine instrument of those enlive∣ning graces that are above all comprehension. They say of him that his life was wonderful, his discourse more wonderful; his tongue full of light, his mouth breathing an holy fire; but his mind , most exactly like to God; with a great deal more of the like na∣ture up and down their Offices. And certainly were the notions which he has given us of the coelestial Hierarchy and Orders of An∣gels, and the things of that supramundane State, as clear and cer∣tain, as some would persuade us, he might deserve that title which
Vid. Anasias-Biblioth. Epist. ap. Sur. loc. cit. p. 132. Chrysost. de Pseud Preph. p. 401. Tom 6. others give him , the Wing, or the Bird of Heaven. XII. THE great and evident demonstration of his Wisdom and Elo∣quence, we are told Suid. in voce , p. 745. Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20. p. 167., are the Works which he left behind him, the No∣tions and Language wherewith they are clothed, being so lofty and sub∣lime, as are scarcely capable to be the issue of a meer mortal creature. Books infinitely intricate and perplext (as our Countreyman Epist. ad Ca∣rol. Calv. Franc. Reg. ap. Usser. Epist. Hibern. p. 59. Johannes Scotus, who first translated them into Latine, tells us) far beyond the reach of Modern apprehensions, and which few are able to pierce into, both for their Antiquity, and sublimeness of those Heavenly Mysteries, whereof they treat. A Work so grateful to all specula∣tive Enquirers, into the natures of things, and the more abstruse and recondite parts of Learning, that (if Suidas say true) some of the Heathen Philosophers, and particularly Proclus, often borrows not onely his notions, but his very words and phrases from him; whence he suspects, that some of the Philosophers at Athens stole those Books of his mentioned in the Epistle Dedicatory to S. Timothy, and which now are wanting, and published them under their own names. But had I been to make the conjecture, I should rather have suspected that this Pseudo-Dionysius fetched his speculations, and good part of his expressions from Plotinus, Iamblichus, and the rest of the later Plato∣nists. For certainly one egg is not more like another, then this mans Divi∣nity is like the Theology of that School, especially as explained by the Philosophers who lived in the first Ages of Christianity. That our Dionysius was not the Author of the Books at this day extant under his name, I shall not concern my self to shew. For however it be conten∣ded for by many with all imaginable zeal and stifness, yet want there not those, and men of note, even in the Roman Communion, who clear∣ly disown and deny it; as among the Reformed it has been largely dis∣proved by many, and by none with greater learning and industry then Monsieur Daille, who has said whatever is necessary, if not more then enough upon this argument: though as to the date of their birth and first appearance, when he thrusts them down to the sixth Century, he takes somewhat off from the antiquity, which may with probability be allowed them. XIII. WHO was the particular Author of these Books, is not easie to determine. Among the several conjectures about this matter, none methinks deserves a fairer regard, then what Annot. in Act. Apost. c. 17. Laurentius Valla tells us some learned Greeks of his time conceived, that it was Apollinaris, but whether Father or Son, it matters not, both being men of parts, and of the same strain and humour, Socrat. H. Ecc. l. 2. c. 46. p. 160., both of them Masters in all the learning of the Greeks, though of the two the Son was most likely to be the man. Certain it is, that Apollinaris was , as H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 18. p. 623. Socr. loc. citat. Sozomen de∣scribes him, trained up to all sorts of Learning, and skilled in the artifi∣ces and frames of Words and Speeches, and Ep. LXXIV. p. 125. Tom. 2. S. Basil says of him, that be∣ing indued with a facility of writing upon any argument, joined with a great readiness and volubility of language, he filled the World with his Books: though even in his Theologic Tracts he sought not to esta∣blish them by Scripture-proofs, but from humane arguments and ways of reasoning: , as Leont. de Sect. Act. IV. p. 446. another also says of him. He was born and bred at Alexan∣dria,
(then which no place more famous for Schools of Humane Learning, especially the Profession of the Platonic Philosophy) and afterwards lived at Laodicea, where he was so intimately familiar with the Gentile-Philosophers, that Theodotus Bishop of the place forbad him (though in vain) any longer to keep company with them, fearing lest he might be perverted to Paganism; as afterwards George his successor excommuni∣cated him for his insolent contempt in not doing it. This is said to have given the first occasion to his starting aside from the Orthodox Do∣ctrines of the Church. For resenting it as an high affront, and being Socrat. ib. p. 161., prompted with a bold conceit of his sophistical Wit, and subtle ways of reasoning, he began to innovate in matters of Doctrine, and set up a Sect after his own name. And certainly whoever thoroughly considers Apollinaris his principles, as they are represented by Socrat. . ci∣tat. Socrates, Sn. l. 6. c. 27. p. 676. ex Ep. Nian. de Ne∣c. Sozomen, Thdor. l. 5. c. 3. p. 20. Theodoret, Basil. ubi supr. Basil, and Epiph. Haeres. 77. p. 421. Epi∣phanius, will find many of them to have a great affinity with the Platonic notions, and some of them not un-akin to those in Dionysius his Books, and that as to the Doctrine of the Trinity they were right in the main, which Ibid. vid. . loc. citat. Socrates particularly tells us the Apollinarians confessed to be consubstantial. To which I add, what a learned Dr. Stillingfl. his Answer to Cress. Apolog. c. 2. §. 17. p. 133. man of our own has observed upon this argument, that Apollinaris and his followers were guilty of forging Ecclesiastical Writings, which they fastned upon Gr∣gory Thaumaturgus, Athanasius, and Pope Julius, as De Sect. Act. VIII. p. 527. Leontius particu∣larly proves at large. So that they might be probably enough for∣ged in the School of Apollinaris, either by himself, or some of his Dis∣ciples XIV. IT makes the conjecture look yet more favourable, that there was one Vid. Collat. Catol. cum Se∣vean. Co. Tr. 4.  1767. Dionysius, a friend probably of Apollinaris, to whom he is said to have written that famous Epistle that went under the name of Pope Julius: and then among his own Scholars he had a Timotheus (condemned together with his Master by . H. Ecc.  5. c. , 10. p. 21. Damasus, and the Synod at Rome) so that they might easily enough take occasion from their own to vent their conceptions under the more venerable names of those an∣cient and Apostolic persons. Or, which is more probable, Apollinaris himself so well versed in the arts of counterfeiting, might from them take the hint to compose and publish them under the name of the an∣cient Dionysius. Nor indeed could he likely pitch upon a name more favourable and agreeable to his purpose, a man born in the very Center of Learning and Eloquence, and who might easily be supposed to be bred up in all the Institutions of Philosophy, and in a peculiar manner acquainted with the Writings and Theorems of Plato and his Followers, so famous, so generally entertained in that place. And there will be the more reason to believe it still, when we consider, that Socrat. l. 3. c. 16. p. 187. Apollinaris reduced the Gospels and the Writings of the Apostles into the form of Dialegues in imitation of Plato among the Greeks. And then for the stile, which is very lofty and affected, we noted before how peculiarly qualified Apollinaris was with a quick invention of words, and a sophi∣stical way of speech, and the Soom. l. 6. c. 25. p. 672. Historian observes that the great instru∣ment by which he set on foot his Heresie, and wherein he had a singular talent, was , artificial Schemes of Words, and subtle ways to express himself. Soom. l. 5. c. 18. p. 623. Besides he was an incomparable Poet (not onely the Father but the Son) to the study whereof he peculiarly addicted him∣self, and wrote Poems to the imitation, and the envy of the best among
the Heathens. In imitation of Homer he writ Heroic Poems of the Hi∣story of the old Testament till the reign of Saul, Comedies after the man∣ner of Menander, Tragoedies in imitation of Euripides, and Odes in imita∣tion of Pindar: he composed Divine Hymns, Id. l. 6. c. 25. p. 671. that were publicly sung in the Churches of his separation, and Songs which men sung both in their Feasts and at their Trades, and even women at the Distaff. By this means he was admirably prepared for lofty and poetic strains, and might be easily tempted, especially the matter admitting it, to give way to a wanton and luxuriant fansie in the choice, composition, and use of words. And certainly never was there a stranger heap (, Maximus himself calls it) of sublime, affected, bombast, and poetic phrases, then is to be met with in these Books attributed to S. Denys. XV. IF it shall be enquired, why a man should after so much pains chuse to publish his Labors rather under another mans name then his own; there needs no other answer, then that this has been an old trade, which some men have taken up, either because 'twas their humor to lay their own children at other mens doors, or to decline the censure which the notions they published were likely to expose them to, or principally to conci∣liate the greater esteem and value for them, by thrusting them forth un∣der the name of those, for whom the World has a just regard and vene∣ration. As for Monsieur Dailles conjecture, De Script. Dio∣nys. c. 39. p. 221. that the reason why several learned Volumes were written and fastned upon the Fathers of the an∣cient Church, was to vindicate them from that common imputation of the Gentiles, who were wont to charge the Christians for being a rude and illiterate generation, whose Books were stuffed with nothing but plain simple Doctrines, and who were strangers to all kind of Learning and Eloquence; that to obviate this objection, several took upon them to compose Books full of Learning and Philosophy, which they pub∣lished under the names of the first preachers and propagaters of the Chri∣stian Faith, and that this particularly was the case of the Recognitions ascribed to Clemens, and the Writings attributed to Dionysius: The first I grant very likely and rational, the Recognitions being probably writ∣ten about the second Century, when (as appears from Celsus his Book against the Christians) this objection was most rife, and when few lear∣ned discourses had been published by them: But can by no means allow it as to the second, Dionysius his Works being written long after the Learning and Eloquence of the Christians had sufficiently approved it self to the World, to the shame and conviction, the envy and admi∣ration of its greatest Enemies. And there was far less need of them for this purpose, if it be true what Daille himself so confidently asserts, and so earnestly contends for, that they were not written till the begin∣ning of the sixth Century, about the year DXX. when there were few learned Gentiles left to make this objection, Heathenism being almost wholly banished out of the civilized World. XVI. BUT whoever was their genuine Parent, or upon what account soever he wrote them, it is plain, that he laid the foundation of a mysti∣cal and unintelligible Divinity among Christians, and that hence procee∣ded all those wild Rosicrucean notions, which some men are so fond of, and the life and practice whereof they cry up as the very soul and perfe∣ction of the Christian State. And that this Author does immediately minister to this design, let the Reader judge by one instance, and I assure
him 'tis none of the most obscure and intricate passages in these Books. I have set it down in its own Language as well as ours, not being confi∣dent of my own version (though expressed word for word;) for I pre∣tend to no great faculty in translating what I do not understand. Thus then he discourses concerning the knowledge of God. . Dionys. de Divin. Nomin. cap. 7. p. 238. God (saith he) is known in all things, and without all things: he is known by knowledge, and by ignorance: there is both a cogitation of him, and a word, and a science, and a touch, and a sense, and an opinion, and an imagination, and a name, and all other things; and yet he is neither thought, nor spo∣ken, nor named. He is not any thing of those things that are, nor is he known in any of the things that are; he is both all things in all, and nothing in nothing; out of all things he is known to all and out of nothing to nothing. These are the things which we rightly discourse concerning God. And this again is the most divine knowledge of God, that which is known by ignorance, according to the union that is above understanding; when the mind getting at a distance from all things that are, and having dismissed it self, is united to those super-illustrious Beams, from whence and where it is en∣lightned in the unfathomable depth of wisdom. More of this and the like stuff is plentifully scattered up and down these Books. And if this be not mystical and profound enough, I know not what is; and which certainly any man but one well versed in this sort of Theology, would look upon as a strange Jargon of non sense, and contradiction. And yet this is the height of devotion and piety, which some men earnestly press after, and wherein they glory. As if a man could not truly understand the mysteries of Religion, till he had resigned his reason, nor be a Chri∣stian, without first becoming an Enthusiast, nor be able to speak sense, unless in a Language which none can understand. Writings falsly attributed to him. De Coelesti Hierarchia. Lib. I. De Divinis Nominibus. I. De Ecclesiastica Hierarchia. I. De Mystica Theologia. I. Epistolae ad Caium. IV. Ad Dorotheum I. Ad Sosipatrum. Epistola I. Ad Polycarpum. I. Ad Demophilum. I. Ad Titum. I. Ad Joannem Evangelistam. I. Ad Apollophanem. I. The End of S. DIONYSIUS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. CLEMENS BISHOP of ROME. Michael Burghers delineavit et sculpsit. S. CLEMENS ROMANUS. His birth-place. His Parents, Kindred, Education, and Conversion to Chri∣stianity noted out of the Books extant under his name. His relation to the Imperial Family shewed to be a mistake. His being made Bishop of
Rome. The great confusion about the first Bishops of that See. A proba∣ble account endeavoured concerning the order of S. Clemens his succession, and the reconciling it with the times of the other Bishops. What account given of him in the ancient Epistle to S. James. Clemens his appointing Notaries to write the Acts of the Martyrs, and dispatching Messengers to propagate the Gospel. The Schism in the Church of Corinth; and Cle∣mens his Epistle to that Church. An enquiry into the time when that Epistle was written. The Persecution under Trajan. His proceeding against the Heteriae. A short relation of S. Clemens his troubles out of Simeon Metaphrastes. His banishment to Cherson. Damnatio ad Metalla, what. The great success of his Ministry in the place of his exile. S. Clemens his Martyrdom, and the kind of it. The anniversary mi∣racle reported on the day of his solemnity. The time of his Martyrdom. His genuine Writings. His Epistle to the Corinthians: the commen∣dations given of it by the Ancients. Its Stile and Character. The great modesty and humility that appears in it. The fragment of his second Epistle. Supposititious Writings. The Recognitions; their several ti∣tles, and different editions. Their Antiquity, what. A conjecture con∣cerning the Author of them. The censures of the Ancients concerning the corrupting of them, considered. The Epistle to S. James. I. IT makes not a little for the honour of this Ve∣nerable Apostolical Man, (for of him all anti∣quity understands it) that he was Fellow-la∣bourer with S. Paul, and one of those, whose names were written in the Book of Life. He was born at Rome, upon Mount Caelius, as, besides others, the Vit. Clement. Concil. Tom. 1. col. 74. Pontifical under the name of Da∣masus, informs us. His Fathers name was Fau∣stinus, but who he was, and what his Profession and course of life is not recorded. Indeed in the Book of the Recogni∣tions, and the  (mentioned by the Ancients, and lately pub∣lished) we have more particular accounts concerning him: Books which however falsly attributed to S. Clemens, and liable in some cases to just exception, yet being of great antiquity in the Church, written not long after the Apostolic Age (as we shall shew hereafter) we shall thence derive some few notices to our purpose, though we cannot absolutely engage for the certainty of them. There we find S. Clemens brought in, giving this account of himself. II. HE Recogn. l. 7 n. 8. p. 476. Clem. Homil. 12. n. 8. p. 678. Epitom. . 76. p. 781. Edit. Paris. was descended of a noble race, sprung from the family of the Caesars, his Father Faustinianus, or Faustus, being near a kin to the Em∣perour (I suppose Tiberius) and educated together with him, and by his procurement matched with Mattidia, a woman of a prime Family in Rome. He was the youngest of three sons, his two elder Brothers be∣ing Faustinus and Faustus, who after changed their names for Nicetas and Aquila. His Mother, a Woman it seems of exquisit beauty, was by her husbands own brother strongly sollicited to unchast embraces. To avoid whose troublesome importunities, and yet loth to reveal it to her hus∣band, lest it should break out to the disturbance and dishonour of their Family, she found out this expedient: she pretended to her husband that she was warned in a dream together with her two eldest sons to de∣part for some time from Rome. He accordingly sent them to reside at
Athens, for the greater conveniency of their education. But hearing nothing of them, though he sent Messengers on purpose every year, he resolved at last to go himself in pursuit of them; which he did, leaving his youngest son, then twelve years of age, at home, under the care of Tu∣tors and Guardians. Recogn. l. 2. . 1. p. 399. . Hom. 1. p. 540. Epist. p. 49. S. Clemens grew up in all manly Studies, and ver∣tuous actions, till falling under some great dissatisfactions of mind con∣cerning the immortality of the soul, and the state of the other life, he applied himself to search more narrowly into the nature and the truth of things. After having baffled all his own notions, he betook himself to the Schools of the Philosophers, where he met with nothing but fierce contentions, endless disputes, sophistical and uncertain arts of reasoning; thence he resolved to consult the Egyptian Hierophantae, and to see if he could meet with any who by arts of Magic was able to fetch back one of those who were departed to the invisible World, the very sight of whom might satisfie his curious enquiries about this matter. While he was under this suspense, he heard of the Son of God his appearing in the world, and the excellent doctrins he had published in Judaea, where∣in he was further instructed by the ministry of S. Barnabas, who came to Rome. Him he followed first to Alexandria, and thence after a little time to Judaea. Arriving at Caesarea he met with S. Peter, by whom he was instructed and baptized, whose Companion and Disciple he conti∣nued for a great part of his life. III. THIS is the sum of what I thought good to borrow from those an∣cient Writings. As for his relations, what various misadventures his Father and Mother, and his two Brothers severally met with, by what strange accidents they all afterwards met together, were converted and baptized into the Christian Faith, I omit, partly as less proper to my purpose, partly because it looks more like a dramatic Scene of Fansie, then a true and real History. As to that part of the account of his be∣ing related to the Imperial Family, though it be more then once and again confidently asserted by H. Fee. l. 2. c. 35. p. 191. l. 3. c. 2. & 18. p. 247. Nicephorus (who transcribes a good part of the Story) and by Euther. Lugd. ad Valerian. de contempt. Mund. Anonym. de vit. Petr. & Paul. ap. P. Jun. not. in Clem. Ep. ad Co∣rinth. others before him, yet I cannot but behold it as an evident mistake, arising from no other Fountain then the Story of Flavius Clemens the Consul, who was Cousin-german to the Emperour Domitian, and his Wife Flavia Domitilla near akin also to the Empe∣rour; concerning whose conversion to, and martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, we have Primit. Christ. p. 1. ch. 3. elsewhere given an account from the Writers of those Times. Probable it is, that S. Clemens for the main attend S. Peters motions, and came with him to Rome, where he had at last the Govern∣ment of that Church committed to him. Synops. de vit. App. in Bibl. PP. Tom 3. p. 150. col. 1. Dorotheus tells us, that he was the first of the Gentiles that embraced the Christian Faith, and that he was first made Bishop of Sardica, a City in Thrace, afterwards called Triaditza, and then of Rome. But herein I think he stands alone, I am sure has none of the Ancients to join with him; unless he understands it of another Clemens, whom the Chron. Alex. p. 508. Chronicon Alexandrinum also makes one of the LXX Disciples, but withall seems to confound with ours. That he was Bishop of Rome, there is an unanimous and unquestionable agreement of all ancient Writers, though they strangely vary about the place and order of his coming to it. The Writers of the Roman Church, how great words soever they speak of the constant and uninter∣rupted succession of S. Peters Chair, are yet involved in an inextricable labyrinth about the succession of the four first Bishops of that See,
scarce two of them of any note bringing in the same account. I shall not attempt to accommodate the difference between the several Schemes that are given in, but onely propose what I conceive most likely and probable. IV. EVIDENT it is both from Adv. Heres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232. Irenaeus and Epiph. Haeres. XXVII. p. 51. vid. Ham. Dis∣sert. V. c. 1. p. 256. Epiphanius, as also before them from Cal. adv. Pro∣cl. & Caius an ancient Writer, and from Dionys. Epist. ad Rom. apud Euseb. l. 2. c. 25. p. 68. Dionysius Bishop of Co∣rinth, that Peter and Paul jointly laid the Foundations of the Church of Rome, and are therefore equally stiled Bishops of it, the one as Apostle of the Gentiles (as we may probably suppose) taking care of the Gentile Christians, while the other as the Apostle of the Circumcision, applied him∣self to the Jewish Converts at Rome. For we cannot imagine, that there being such chronical and inveterate prejudices between Jews and Gentiles, especially in matters of Religion, they should be suddainly laid aside, and both enter-common in one public Society. We know that in the Church of Jerusalem till the destruction of the Temple, none were admitted but Jewish Converts: and so it might be at first at Rome, where infinite numbers of Jews then resided, they might keep themselves for some time in distinct assemblies, the one under S. Paul, the other under Peter. And some foundation for such a conjecture there seems to be even in the Apostolic History, Act. 28.23, 24, 25, 28, 39, 31. where S. Luke tells us, that S. Paul at his first coming to Rome being rejected by the Jews turned to the Gentiles, declaring to them the salvation of God, who gladly heard and enter∣tained it, and that he continued thus preaching the Kingdom of God, and receiving all that came in unto him for two years together. This I look upon as the first setled foundation of a Gentile Church at Rome, the further care and presidency whereof S. Paul might devolve upon Linus (whom the interpolated Ignatius makes his Deacon or Minister) as S. Peter having established a Church of Jewish Converts might turn it over to S. Clemens, of whom De Praescript. Haeret. c. 32. p. 213. Tertullian expresly says, that Peter ordained him Bishop of Rome. Accordingly the Compiler of the Lib. 7. c. 47. col. 451. Apostolic Constitutions makes Linus to be ordained Bishop of Rome by S. Paul, and Clemens by S. Pe∣ter. He says indeed that Linus was the first, and so he might very well be, seeing S. Paul (whatever the Modern Writers of that Church say to the contrary) was some considerable time at Rome, before S. Peter came hither. Linus dying, was probably succeeded by Cletus or Ana∣cletus (for the Greeks, and doubtless most truly, generally make him the same person) in his distinct capacity. At which time Clemens, whom S. Peter had ordained to be his Successor, continued to act as President over the Church of Jewish Converts: and thus things remained till the death of Cletus, when the difference between Jew and Gentile being quite worn off, the entire Presidency and Government of the whole Church of Rome might devolve upon S. Clemens as the surviver; and from this period of time, the years of his Episcopacy, according to the common computation, are to begin their date. By this account, not onely that of De Schism. Donat. lib. 2. p. 38. Optatus and the A Bucher. edit. comment. in Vict. Can. Pasch. c. 15. p. 269. Bucherian Catalogue may be true, who make Clemens to follow Linus, but also that of Baronius and many of the Ancients, who make both Linus and Cletus to go before him, as we can allow they did as Bishops and Pastors of the Gentile Church. As for a more distinct and particular account of the Times, I thus compute them: Peter and Paul suf∣fered Martyrdom in the Neronian persecution (as we have elsewhere probably shewed) Ann. LXV. After which Linus sate twelve years, four moneths, and twelve days: Cletus twelve years, one (but as Baronius, se∣ven)
moneths, and eleven days, which between them make XXV years, and extend to Ann. Chr. XC. after which if we add the nine years, eleven moneths, and twelve days, wherein Clemens sate sole Bishop over that whole Church, they fall in exactly with the third year of Trajan, the time assigned for his Martyrdom, by Eusebius, Hierom, Damasus, and many others. Or if with Petavius, Ricciolus, and some others, we assign the Martyrdom of Peter and Paul, Ann. LXVII. two years later, the computation will still run more smooth and easie, and there will be time enough to be allowed for the odd moneths and days assigned by the dif∣ferent accounts, and to make the years of their Pontificat compleat and full. Nor can I think of any way, considering the great intricacy and perplexity of the thing, that can bid fairer for an easie solution of this matter. For granting Clemens to have been ordained by S. Peter for his successor, (as several of the Ancients expresly affirm) and yet withall (what is evident enough) that he died not till Ann. Chr. C. Traj. III. it will be very difficult to find any way so proper to reconcile it. As for that fansie of Contr. Carpo∣crat. Haeres. XXVII. p. 51. vid. Clem. Epist. ad Corinth. p. 69. Epiphanius, that Clemens might receive imposition of hands from Peter, but refused the actual exercise of the Episcopal Office, so long as Linus and Cletus lived: he onely proposes it as a conjecture, founded meerly upon a mistaken passage of Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians, and confesses 'tis a thing wherein he dare not be positive, not being confident whether it were so or no. V. MIGHT the ancient Extat Grace & Lat. inter PP. Apost. à Co∣teler. dit. Epistle written to S. James the Brother of our Lord, under the name of our S. Clemens, be admitted as a competent evidence, there we find not onely that Clemens was constituted Bishop by S. Peter, but with what formality the whole affair was transacted. It tells us that the Apostle sensible of his approaching dissolution, presented Clemens before the Church as a fit person to be his Successor; the good man with all imaginable modesty declined the honour, which S. Peter in a long discourse urged upon him, and set out at large the particular du∣ties both of Ministers in their respective Orders and Capacities, as also of the people; which done, he laid his hands upon him, and compelled him to take his seat. How he administred this great but difficult Pro∣vince, the Ecclesiastical Records give us very little account. The Au∣thor of the Lib. Pontif. in vit. Clem. Conc. T. 1. col. 74. Pontifical that fathers himself upon Pope Damasus, tells us, that he divided Rome into seven Regions, in each of which he appointed a Notary, who should diligently enquire after all the Martyrs that suf∣fered within his division, and faithfully record the Acts of their Mar∣tyrdom. I confess the credit of this Author is not good enough abso∣lutely to rely upon his single testimony in matters so remote and distant: though we are otherwise sufficiently assured, that the custom of Nota∣ries taking the Speeches, Acts, and Sufferings of the Martyrs did obtain in the early ages of the Church. Besides this, we are told by others that he dispatched away several persons to preach and propagate the Christian Religion in those Countries, whither the sound of the Gospel had not yet arrived. Nor did he onely concern himself to propagate Christianity, where it wanted, Hegesip. ap. Ex∣seb. l. 3. c. 16. p. 88. but to preserve the peace of those Chur∣ches where it was already planted. For an unhappy Schism having bro∣ken out in the Church of Corinth, they sent to Rome to require his ad∣vice and assistance in it, who in the name of the Church, whereof he was Governour, wrote back an incomparable Epistle to them, to com∣pose and quel , as Epist. ad Co∣rinth, p. 2. he calls it, that impious and abo∣minable
Sedition that was arisen amongst them. And indeed there seems to have been a more intimate and friendly intercourse between these two Churches in those times, then between any other mentioned in the Writings of the Church. The exact time of writing this Epistle is not known, the date of it not being certainly determinable by any notices of Antiquity, or any intimations in the Epistle it self. The conjecture that has obtained with some of most note and learning is, that it was writ∣ten before the destruction of Jerusalem, while the Temple and the Levi∣tical ministration were yet standing. Which they collect, I suppose, from a Ibid. pag. 53. passage, where he speaks of them in the present tense. But who∣ever impartially considers the place, will find no necessary foundation for such an inference, and that S. Clemens his design was onely to illustrate his Argument, and to shew the reasonableness of observing those parti∣cular Stations and Ministries which God has appointed us, by alluding to the Ordinances of the Mosaic Institution. To me it seems most proba∣ble to have been written a little after the Persecution under Domitian, and probably not long before Clemens his exile. For excusing the no sooner answering the Letters of the Church of Corinth, he Ib pag. 1. tells them it was , by reason of those calami∣ties and sad accidents that had happened to them. Now plain it is, that no Persecution had been raised against the Christians, especially at Rome, from the time of Nero till Domitian. As for Mr. Youngs conjecture from this place, that it was written in the time of his banishment; he forgot to consider that the Epistle was written not in Clemens his own name, but in the person of the Church of Rome. A circumstance that renders the place incapable of being particularly applied to him. VI. BY a firm patience and a prudent care he weathered out the stormy and troublesom times of Domitian, and the short but peaceable reign of Nerva. When alas the clouds returned after rain, and began to thicken into a blacker storm in the time of Trajan, an excellent Prince in∣deed, of so sweet and plausible a disposition, of so mild and inoffensive a conversation, that it was ever after a part of their solemn acclamation at the choice of a new elected Emperour, MELIOR TRAJANO Entrop. H. Rom. l. 8. non longe ab initie., better then Trajan. But withall he was zealous for his Religion, and up∣on that account a severe enemy to Christians. Among several Laws enacted in the beginning of his reign, he published one (if Ad. Ann. 100. . VIII. Tom. 2. Baronius, which I much question, conjecture the time aright, for Epist. 97. l. 10 Plinies Epistle, upon which he seems to ground it, was probably written at least nine or ten years after) whereby he forbad the Heteriae, the Societies or Colledges erected up and down the Roman Empire, whereat men were wont to meet, and liberally feast under a pretence of more convenient dispatch of business, and the maintainance of mutual love and friend∣ship; which yet the Roman State beheld with a jealous eye, as fit Nur∣series for Treason and Sedition. Under the notion of these unlawful combinations, the Christian Assemblies were looked upon by their Ene∣mies; for finding them confederated under one common President, and constantly meeting at their solemn Love-feasts, and especially being of a way of Worship different from the Religion of the Empire, they thought they might securely proceed against them as illegal Societies, and contemners of the Imperial constitution, wherein S. Clemens as head of the Society at Rome, was sure to bear the deepest share. And in∣deed it was no more then what himself had long expected, as appears
from his Letter to the Corinthians; where having spoken of the tor∣ments and sufferings which the Holy Apostles had undergone, he tells them Ubi supr. p. 9., that he looked upon himself and his people as , set to run the same race, , and that the same fight and conflict was laid up for them. VII. SIMEON the Metaphrast in the account of his Habetur Graec. & Lat. inte∣grum ap. Coteier. loc. cit. p. 826. Martyrdom, (much what the same with that Life of S. Clemens, said to be written by an uncertain Author, published long since by Lazius at the end of Ab∣dias Babylonius) sets down the beginning of his troubles to this effect. S. Clemens having converted Theodora, a noble Lady, and afterwards her Husband Sisinnius, a Kinsman and favourite of the late Emperour Nerva, the gaining so great a man quickly drew on others of chief note and quality to embrace the Faith. So prevalent is the example of religious Greatness to sway men to Piety and Vertue. But Envy naturally ma∣ligns the good of others, and hates the Instrument that procures it. This good success derived upon him the particular odium of Torcutianus, Id. ibid. p. 832. a man of great power and authority at that time in Rome, who by the in∣feriour Magistrates of the City, excited the People to a mutiny against the Holy Man, charging him with Magic and Sorcery, and for being an enemy and blasphemer of the gods, crying out either that he should do sacrifice to them, or expiate his impiety with his blood. Mamertinus Praefect of the City, a moderate and prudent man, being willing to ap∣pease the uproar, sent for S. Clemens, and mildly persuaded him to com∣ply. But finding his resolution inflexible, he sent to acquaint the Em∣perour with the case, who returned this short Rescript, that he should either sacrifice to the gods, or be banished to Cherson, a disconsolate City beyond the Pontic Sea. Mamertinus having received the Impe∣rial Mandat, unwillingly complied with it, and gave order that all things should be made ready for the Voyage, and accordingly he was transpor∣ted thither, to dig in the Marble Quarries, and labour in the Mines. Damnatio ad Metalla is a punishment frequently mentioned in the Roman Laws, where it is said to be proxima morti poena L. 28. ff. de poen.lib. 48. Tit. 19., the very next to ca∣pital punishments. Indeed the usage under it was very extreme and rigorous: for besides the severest labour and most intolerable hardship, the condemned person was treated with all the instances of inhumanity, whiped and beaten, chained and fettered, deprived of his estate L. 36. ubi supr. l. 12. ff. de jur. fisc. l. 49. Tit. 14. l. 1. de bon. dam∣nat. l. 8. Quitest. fac. poss. §. 4., which was forfeited to the Exchequer, and the person himself perpetually de∣graded into the condition of a Slave, and consequently rendred inca∣pable to make a Will. And not this onely, but they were further ex∣posed to the most public marks of Infamy and Dishonour, Cypr. Epist. 77. ad Nemes. p. 155 Euseb. l. 8. c. 12. p. 307. their heads half shaved, their right eye bored out, their left leg disabled, their fore∣heads branded with an infamous mark, a piece of disgrace first used in this case by Sueton. in vit. Calig. c. 27. p. 428. Caligula (and the Historian notes it as an instance of his cruel temper) and from him continued till the times of Constantine, who abolished it by a L. 2. Cod. Th. de poen. l. 9. Tit. 40. Law Ann. Chr. CCCXV. not to mention the hunger and thirst, the cold and nakedness, the filth and nastiness, which they were forced to conflict with in those miserable places. VIII. ARRIVING at the place of his uncomfortable exile, he found vast numbers of Christians condemned to the same miserable fate, whose minds were not a little erected under all their pressures at the sight of so good a man, by whose constant preaching, and the frequent mira∣cles that he wrought, their Enemies were converted into a better opi∣nion
of them and their Religion, the Inhabitants of those Countries daily flocking over to the Faith, so that in a little time Christianity had beaten Paganism out of the Field, and all Monuments of Idolatry thereabouts were defaced and overturned. The fame whereof was quickly carried to the Emperour, who dispatched Aufidianus the President to put a stop to this growing Sect, which by methods of terrour and cruelty he set upon, putting great numbers of them to death. But finding how rea∣dily and resolutely they pressed up to execution, and that this days Martyrs did but prepare others for to morrows Torments, he gave over contending with the multitude, and resolved to single out one of note above the rest, whose exemplary punishment might strike dread and terrour into the rest. To this purpose S. Clemens is pitched on, and all temptations being in vain tried upon him, the Executioners are com∣manded to carry him aboard and throw him into the bottom of the Sea, where the Christians might despair to find him. This kind of death was called , and was in use not onely among the Greeks, as appears by the instance mentioned by Biblioth. l. 16. Diodorus Siculus, but the Ro∣mans, as we find in several Malefactors condemned to be thrown into the Sea both by Sueton. in vit. Tib. c. 62. p. 366. Vul. Gallic. in Avid. Cass. c. 4. p. 247. Mark 9.42. Tiberius and Avidius Cassius. To this our Lord has respect, when in the case of wilful scandal, he pronounces it better for the man that a Mill-stone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the bottom of the Sea. Where though Com. in Matt. 18. p. 53. Tom. 9. S. Hierom tells us that this punishment was usual among the ancient Jews in case of more enormous crimes, yet do I not remember that any such capital punishment ever prevailed among them. I shall not here relate what I find concerning the strange and miraculous discovery of S. Clemens his body, nor the particular miracle of a little Child preserved in the Church erected to him in the middle of the Sea for a whole year together (though solemnly averred by Serm. de mi∣ra. in Puer. à S. Clor. fact. ap. Sur. Novemb. 23. & Gr. & Lat. ap. Coteler. p. 837. Ephraem Bishop of the place) as despairing they would ever find a be∣lief wide enough to swallow them, nor those infinite other miracles said to be done there; it shall onely suffice to mention one; that upon the Anniversary solemnity of his Martyrdom the Sea retreats on each side into heaps, and leaves a fair and dry passage for three miles together to the Martyrs Tomb, erected within a Church, built (as it must be sup∣posed by Angels) within the Sea, and the Peoples devotions being en∣ded, the Sea returns to its own place, , says Ibid. p. 841. one of my Authors, God by this means doing honour to the Martyr. I onely add, that these Traditions were currant before the time of Gregory Bishop of Tours, De mirac. l. 1. c. 35, 36. p. 46. who speaks of them with great re∣verence and devotion. S. Clemens died (as both Lib. 3. c. 34. p. 106. Eusebius and De Script. Eccl. in Clem. S. Hie∣rome witness, for I heed not the account of the Alexandrin Chronicon, which places it four years after, Trajan VII. though the Consuls which he there assigns properly belong to the IV. of that Emperour) in the third year of Trajan, a little more then two years after his banishment, after he had been sole Bishop of Rome nine years six moneths and so many days, ubi supra. say Baronius and others, though Bucherius his Catalogue, more to be trusted (as being composed before the death of Pope Liberius, Ann. CCCLIV.) nine years eleven moneths and twelve days. His mar∣tyrdom happened on the XXIV. of November, according to Baronius and the ordinary Roman computation, but on the nineth of that Moneth, says the little Martyrology published by Ann. 4. Olymp. CCXX. Ind. 1. p. 594. Bucherius, and which unquestionably was one of the true and genuine Calendars of the an∣cient Lors. pr. cltat. p. 29.
Church. He was honoured at Rome by a Church erected to his memory, yet standing in De Script. i Clement. S. Hieroms time. IX. THE Writings which at this day bear the name of this Aposto∣lic man, are of two sorts, Genuine or Supposititious. In the first Class is that famous Epistle to the Corinthians, so much magnified by the Ancients,  (as Adv. Haeres. l. 3. ap. Eusb. l. 5. c. 6. p. 170. Irenaeus calls it) the most excellent and ab∣solute writing, , says Lib. 3. c. 16. p. 88. Eusebius a truly great and admirable Epistle, and very useful as De Script. Eccles. in Clm. S. Hierom adds,  as Cod. CXII. col. 289. Photius stiles it, worthy of all esteem and veneration, , as Ibid. c. 38. p. 110. Eusebius assures us, received by all, and indeed reverenced by them next to the Holy Scriptures, and therefore publicly read in their Churches for some Ages, even till his time, and it may be a long time after. The stile of it (as Cod. CXXVI. col. 305. Photius truely observes) is very plain and simple, imitating an Ecclesiastical and unaffected way of Writing, and which breaths the true genius and spirit of the Apostolic Age. It was written upon occasion of a great Schism and Sedition in the Church of Corinth, begun by two or three factious persons against the Governours of the Church, who envying either the gifts, or the authority and esteem of their Guides and Teachers, had attempted to depose them, and had drawn the greatest part of the Church into the Conspiracy: whom therefore he endeavours by soft words and hard Arguments to reduce back to Peace and Unity. His modesty and humility in it are peculiarly discernable, not onely that he wholly writes it in the name of the Church of Rome, without so much as ever mentioning his own, but in that he treats them with such gentle and mild persuasives. No∣thing of sowreness, or an imperious lording it over Gods heritage to be seen in the whole Epistle. Had he known himself to be the infallible Judge of Controversies, to whose sentence the whole Christian World was bound to stand, invested with a supreme unaccountable Power, from which there lay no Appeal, we might have expected to have heard him argue at another rate. But these were the Encroachments and Usur∣pations of later Ages, when a spirit of Covetousness and secular ambi∣tion had stifled the modesty and simplicity of those first and best Ages of Religion. There is so great an affinity in many things both as to Words and Matter between this and the Epistle to the Hebrews, as tem∣pted Eusebius and S. Hierom of old, and some others before them, Ibid. to conclude S. Clemens at least the Translator of that Epistle. This Epistle to the Corinthians after it had been generally bewailed as lost for many Ages, was not more to the benefit of the Church in general, then the honour of our own in particular, some forty years since published here in England, a treasure not sufficiently to be valued. Besides this first, there is the fragment of a second Epistle, or rather Homily, containing a serious exhortation and direction to a pious life: ancient indeed, and which many will persuade us to be his, and to have been written many years before the former, as that which betrays no footsteps of trouble∣som and unquiet times: but Eusebius, S. Hierom, Losis suprecitat. and Photius assure us that it was rejected, and never obtained among the ancients equal ap∣probation with the first. And therefore though we do not perempto∣rily determine against its being his, yet we think it safer to acquiesce in the judgment of the Ancients, then of some few late Writers in this matter. X. AS for those Writings that are undoubtedly spurious and suppo∣sititious,
disown'd (as Ibid. pag. 110. Eusebius says) because they did not , retain the true stamp and character of Orthodox Apostolic Doctrin, though the truth is, he speaks it onely of the Dialogues of Peter and Appion, not mentioning the Decre∣tal Epistles, as not worth taking notice of, there are four extant at this day that are entitled to him, the Apostolical Canons and the Constitutions (said to be penned by him, though dictated by the Apostles) the Re∣cognitions, Praef. to Pri∣mit. Christia∣nity. and the Epistle to S. James. For the two first, the Aposto∣lic Canons and Constitutions, I have declared my sense of them in ano∣ther place, to which I shall add nothing here. The Recognitions succeed, conveyed to us under different titles by the Ancients, sometimes stiled S. Clemens his Acts, History, Chronicle, sometimes S. Peters Acts, Itinerary, Priods, Dialogues with Appion, all which are unquestionably but diffe∣rent inscriptions (or it may be parcels) of the same book. True it is what Cod. CXII. col. 289. Photius suspected, and Praefat. ad Gaudent. p. 397. Rufinus (who translated it) expresly tells us, that there were two several editions of this Book, differing in some things, but the same in most. And it deserves to be considered, whether the  mentioned by H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 18. p. 248. Nicephorus, and which he says the Church received, and denies to be those meant by Eusebius, and those Clementine Homilies lately published under that very name, be not that other Edition of the Recognitions, seeing they exactly answer Rufinus his Character, differing in some things, but in most agreeing with them. There is yet a third Edition, or rather Abstract out of all, stiled , &c. Clemens his Epitome of the Acts, Travels, and Preachings of S. Peter, agreeing with the former, though keeping more close to the Homilies then the other. This I guess to have been compi∣led by Simeon the Metaphrast, as for other reasons, so especially because the appendage added to it by the same hand concerning Clemens his martyrdom is word for word the same with that of Metaphrastes, the close of it onely excepted, which is taken out of S. Ephraems Homily of the miracle done at his Tomb. XI. THE Recognitions themselves are undoubtedly of very great antiquity, Pseudo-Isid. p. 28. written about the same time, and by the same hand (as Blondel probably conjectures) with the Constitutions about the Year CLXXX, or not long after. Sure I am, they are cited by Philocal. c. 23. p. 81, 82. Origen as the Work of Clemens in his Periods, and his large quotation is in so many words Recognit. l. 10. ex∣tant in them at this day. Nay before him we meet with a very long fragment of Bardesanes the Extat ap. Eu∣seb. Praep. Evan. l. 6. c. 10. p. 273 & seq. vid. Re∣cogn. lib. 9. p. 503. &c. Syrian (who flourished Ann. CLXXX.) con∣cerning Fate, word for word the same with what we find in the Recog∣nitions, and it seems equally reasonable to suppose that Bardesanes had it thence, as that the other borrowed it from him. Nay what if Bardesanes himself was the Author of these Books? 'Tis certain that he was a man of great parts and learning, a man prompt and eloquent, Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 30. p. 151. Epiph. Haeres. LVI. p. 207., an acute and subtle Disputant, heretically enclined, for he came out of the School of Valentinus, whose uncouth notions he had so deeply im∣bibed, that even after his recantation, he could never get clear from the dregs of them, as Eusebius informs us: though Epiphanius tells us he was first Orthodox, and afterwards fell into the errours of that Sect, like a well fraighted Ship that having duly performed its Voyage, is cast away in the very sight of the Harbour. He was a great Mathematician and Astrologer, Enstb Praep. Evang. l. 6. c.  p. 273., accurately versed in the Chaldaean learning, and wrote incomparable Dialogues concerning
Fate, which he dedicated to the Emperour Antoninus. And surely none can have looked into the Recognitions, but he mus see what a conside∣rable part the Doctrines concerning Fate, the Genesis, the Influence of the Stars and heavenly Constellations, and such like notions make there of S. Peters and S. Clemens his Dialogues and Discourses. To which we may add what Photius has observed, Ubi supre. and is abundantly evident from the thing it self, that these Books are considerable for their clearness and perspicuity, their eloquent stile, and grave Discourses, and that great variety of Learning that is in them, plainly shewing their Composer to have been a Master in all Humane Learning, and the Study of Philoso∣phy. I might further remarque, that Bardesanes seems to have had a peculiar genius for Books of this nature, it being particularly Epip. loc. cit. noted of him, that besides the Scriptures, he traded in certain Apocryphal Wri∣tings. He wrote Euseb. H. Eccl. ubi supr. de Script. Eccl. in Bardes., which S. Hierom renders infi∣nite Volumes, written indeed for the most part in Syriac, but which his Scholars translated into Greek, though he himself was sufficiently skil∣ful in that Language, as Epiphanius notes. In the number of these Books might be the Recognitions, plausibly fathered upon S. Clemens, who was notoriously known to be S. Peters Companion and Disciple: and were but some of his many Books now extant, I doubt not but a much greater affinity both in stile and notions would appear between them. But this I propose onely as a probable conjecture, and leave it at the Readers pleasure either to reject or entertain it. I am not igno∣rant that both Apol. adv. Ru∣fin. p. 219. S. Hierom and Phot. Cod. CXII. col. 289. Photius charge these Books with haeretical Opinions, especially some derogatory to the honour of the Son of God, which it may be Rufinus (who Apolog. pro Orig. ap. Hieron. Tom. 4. p. 195. confesses the same thing, and supposes them to have been inserted by some haeretical hand) concealed in his Translation: Nay Haeres. XXX. p. 65. Epiphanius tells us, that the Ebionites did so ex∣tremely corrupt them, that they scarce left any thing of S. Clemens sound and true in them, which he observes from their repugnancy to his other Writings, those Encyclical Epistles of his (as he calls them) which were read in the Churches. But then its plain, he means it onely of those Copies which were in the possession of those haeretics, probably not now extant, nor do any of those particular adulterations which he says they made in them, appear in our Books, nor in those large and to be sure uncorrupt fragments of Bardesanes and Origen is there the least con∣siderable variation from those Books which we have at this day. But of this enough. XII. THE Epistle to S. James the brother of our Lord is, no doubt, of equal date with the rest, in the close whereof the Author pretends that he was commanded by S. Peter to give him an account of his Tra∣vels, Discourses, and the success of his Ministry, under the title of Cle∣mens his Epitome of Peters popular preachings, to which he tells him he would next proceed. So that this Epistle originally was nothing but a Praeface to S. Peters Acts or Periods (the same in effect with the Recogni∣tions) and accordingly in the late Edition of the Clementine Homilies (which have the very Title mentioned in that Epistle) it is found prefi∣xed before them. Loc. supra citat. This Epistle (as Photius tells us) varied according to different Editions, sometimes pretending that it, and the account of S. Pe∣ters Acts annexed to it, were written by S. Peter himself, and by him sent to S. James; sometimes that they were written by Clemens at S. Peters in∣stance and command. Whence he conjectures that there was a twofold
Edition of S. Peters Acts, one said to be written by himself, the other by Clemens, and that when in time the first was lost, that pretending to S. Clemens did remain: For so he assures us he constantly found it in those many Copies that he met with, notwithstanding that the Epistle and Inscription were sometimes different and various. By the Original whereof now published appears the fraud of the Factors of the Romish Church, who in all Latine Editions have added an Appendix almost twice as large as the Epistle it self. And well had it been, had this been the onely instance, wherein some men to shore up a tottering Cause, have made bold with the Writers of the ancient Church. His Writings. Genuine. Epistola ad Corinthios. Doubtful. Epistola ad Corinth. secunda. Supposititious. Epistola ad Jacobum Fratrem Domini. Recognitionum lib. 10. , seu, Homiliae Clementinae. Constitutionum App. lib. 8. Canones Apostolici. The End of S. CLEMENS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. SIMEON BISHOP of JERUSALEM. Micha. burgh. deli. et sculp. S. SYMEON HIEROSOLYMITANUS. The heedless confounding him with others of the like name. His Parents and near Relation to our Saviour. The time of his Birth. His strict Education and way of Life. The Order and Institution of the Recha∣bites,
what. His conversion to Christianity. The great care about a Successor to S. James Bishop of Jerusalem. Simeon chosen to that place, when and why. The causes of the destruction of the Jewish state. The original and progress of those Wars briefly related. The miserable state of Jerusalem by Siege, Pestilence, and Famine. Jerusalem stormed. The burning of the Temple, and the rage of the Fire. The number of the Slain and Captives. The just accomplishment of our Lords predictions. The many Prodigies portending this destruction. The Christians forewarned to depart before Jerusalem was shut up. Their withdrawment to Pella. The admirable care of the Divine Providence over them. Their return back to Jerusalem, when. The flourishing condition of the Christian Church there. The occasion of S. Simeons Martyrdom. The infinite jealousie of the Roman Emperours concerning the line of David. Simeons appre∣hension and crucifixion. His singular torments and patience. His great age, and the time of his death. I. IT cannot be unobserved by any that have but looked into the Antiquities of the Church, what confusion the identity or similitude of names has bred among Ecclesiastic Writers, especially in the more early Ages, where the Records are but short and few. An instance whereof, Vid. Caron. A∣lexandr. Olymp. CCXX. Ind. I. Traj. VII. & Ann. sequent. p. 594. were there no other, we have in the person of whom we write: Whom some will have to be the same with S. Simon the Cana∣nite, one of the twelve Apostles; others confound him with Simon, one of the four brethren of our Lord, while a third sort make all three to be but one and the same person: the sound and similitude of names giving birth to the several mistakes. For that Simeon of Jerusalem was a person altogether distinct from Simon the Apostle, is undeniably evi∣dent from the most ancient Martyrologies both of the Greek and the Latine Church, where vastly different accounts are given concerning their persons, imployments, and the time and places of their death; Simon the Apostle being martyred in Britain, or as others in Persia, while Si∣meon the Bishop is notoriously known to have suffered in Palestine or in Syria. Nor are the testimonies of Dorotheus, Sophronius, or Isidore, considerable enough to be weighed against the Authorities of Hegesip∣pus, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and others. But of this enough. II. S. Simeon was the son of Hgesip. ap. Euseb. l. 3. c. 11. p. 87. Epiph. Hae∣res. LXVI. p. 274. & omnia antiqua Martyro∣logia, Adonis, Bedae, Notkeri, Usuardi apud Bolland. de Vit. SS. ad diem XVIII. Febr. pag. 53, 54. Cleophas, brother to Joseph, husband to the Blessed Virgin, and so his Father had the honour to be Uncle to our Saviour, in the same sense that Joseph was his Fa∣ther. His Mother (say Hgesip. ib. c. 32. p. 104. Nicph. l. 3. c. 16. p 245. some) was Mary the Wife of Cleophas, mentioned in the History of the Gospel, Sister or Cousin-german to the Mother of our Lord: And if so, he was by both sides nearly related to our Savior. He was born (as appears from his Age, and the date of his Martyrdom assigned by Eusebius) Ann. Mundi 3936. thirteen years according to the Vulgar computation before our Saviours Incarnation. His Education was according to the severest rules of Religion professed in the Jewish Church, being entered into the Order of the Rechabites, as may be probably collected from the Ancients. For Ibid. l. 2. c. 23. p. 65. Hegesippus informs us, that
when the Jews were busily engaged in the Martyrdom of S. James the Just, a Rechabite Priest, one of the Generation of the sons of Rechab mentioned by the Prophet Jeremy, stept in, and interceded with the People to spare so just and good a man, and one that was then praying to Heaven for them. This person Haeres. LXXVIII. p. 441. Epiphanius expresly tells us was S. Simeon the son of Cleophas, and Cousin-german to the holy Martyr. The Rechabites were an ancient Institution, founded by Jonadab the son of Rechab, who flourished in the reign of Jehu, and obliged his posterity to these following Rules, to drink no Wine, sowe no Fields, Jer. 35.2, 3, &c. plant no Vineyards, build no Houses, but to dwell onely in Tents and Taberna∣cles. All which precepts (the last onely excepted, which Wars and Foreign Invasions would not suffer them to observe) they kept with the most religious reverence, and are therefore highly commended by God for their exact conformity to the Laws of their Institution, and brought in to upbraid the degeneracy of the House of Israel, in viola∣ting the Commands he had laid upon them. They continued it seems (and so God had promised them, that they should not want a man to stand before him for ever) till the very last times of the Jewish Church, though little notice be taken of them, as indeed they are but once mentioned throughout the whole History of the Bible, and that onely accidentally, and then too no less then three hundred years after their first Institution. Probable it is, that in after-times all Rechabites were not Jonadabs im∣mediate descendants, but that all were accounted such, who took upon them the observance of the same Rules and Orders which Jonadab had prescribed to his immediate posterity. It further seems probable to me, that from these Rechabites, the Essenes, that famous Sect among the Jews, borrowed their Original; that part of them especially, that dwelt in Towns and Cities, and in many things conformed themselves to the Rules of the civil and sociable life. For as for the  described Lib. . p. 891. & seq. by Philo, they gave up themselves mainly to solitude and contemplation, lived in Forests and among Groves of Palm-trees, and shunned all intercourse and converse with other men. While the Practic part of them (more par∣ticularly taken notice of by De Bell. Jud. l. 2. . p. 785. & Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2. p. 617. Josephus) though abstaining from marriage, and despising the riches and pleasures of this World, did yet reside in Cities, and places of Public Concourse, labour in their several Trades and Callings, maintain Hospitality, and were united in a common Col∣ledge and Society, where they were kept to a solemn observance of the great duties of Religion, and devoted to the Orders of a very strict pious life. And among these, I doubt not, the Rechabites were incor∣porated and swallowed up, though it may be together with the gene∣ral name of Essenes, they might still retain their particular and proper name. But to return. III. HIS first Institution in Christianity was probably laid under the Discipline of our Lord himself, whose Auditor and Follower Ap. Eseb. l. 3. c. 32 p. 104. Hegesip∣pus supposes him to have been; and in all likelihood he was one of the LXX Disciples, in which capacity he continued many years, when he was advanced to a place of great honour and eminency in the Church. About the Year LXII. S. James the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem by the arti∣fices of Ananus the High-Priest, had been cruelly martyred by the Jews. The providing for whose place was so far thought to be the concern∣ment of the whole Christian Church, that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord are said Ibid. c. 11. p. 86. vid. lib. . c. 22. p. 142. to have come from all parts to advise and consult with those
of our Saviours Kindred and Relations, about a fit Successor in his room. None was thought meet to be a Candidate for the place, but one of our Lords own Relations; and accordingly with one consent they devolved the honour upon Simeon, our Lords next Kinsman, whom they all judged most worthy of the place. I know Eusebius seems to in∣timate that this Election was made not onely after S. James his death, but after the destruction of Jerusalem, between which there was the distance of no less then eight or nine years. But (besides that Eusebius makes the destruction of Jerusalem immediately to succeed upon S. James his Martyrdom, when yet there was so great a space) it's very unreasona∣ble to suppose that so famous and eminent a Church, a Church newly Constituted, and planted in the midst of the most bitter and inveterate Enemies, should for so long a time be destitute of a Guide and Pastor, espe∣cially seeing the Apostles were all long since dispersed into several re∣mote quarters of the World: Not to say that most of the Apostles were dead before that time; or if they had not, could not very con∣veniently have returned and met together about this affair in so dismal and distracted a state of things, as the Roman Wars, and the utter ruine and overthrow of the Jewish Nation had then put those parts into. Be∣sides that Chron. ad Ann. Chr. LXII. Eusebius himself elsewhere places Simeons succession imme∣diately after S. James his Martyrdom. Nor is the least vacancy in that See mentioned by any other Writer. The Ann. 1. Olym∣piad. CCXII. Indict. XI. Vespas. 2. p. 580. Chronicle of Alexandria places his succession Ann. LXIX. for it tells us, that this year S. James the Apostle and Patriarch of Jerusalem (whom S. Peter at the time of his going to Rome, as his proper See, had ordained to that place; this passage, 'tis plain the Publisher for want of rightly distinguishing, did not under∣stand) dying, Simeon or Simon was made Patriarch in his room. But this account is against the Faith of all the Ancients, who make S. James to have suffered Martyrdom several years before; nor do any of them say that he was ordained by S. Peter, many of them expresly affirming, that he immediately received his Consecration from the hands of our Lord himself. IV. HOW he managed the affairs of that Church, is not distinctly known, few particular accounts of things being transmitted to us. Con∣fident we may be that his presidency was attended with sufficient trou∣ble and difficulty, not onely from the malicious and turbulent temper of that People, whom he was continually exposed to, but because it fell in with the most black and fatal period of the Jewish Church. For the sins of that Nation being now ripe for Vengeance, and having filled up the measure of their iniquities by their cruel usage of the Apostles and Messengers of our Saviour, their barbarous treatment of S. Stephen, and afterward of S. James the great, and their last bloudy murder of S. James the less, but above all, by their insolent and merciless carriage towards the Son of God, and the Saviour of the World, the wrath of God came upon them to the uttermost, and the Romans broke in upon them, and took away both their Place and Nation. The sum whereof, because containing such re∣markable passages of Providence, such instances of severe displeasure to∣wards a People, that for so many Ages had enjoyed the peculiar influen∣ces of the Divine Favour, and whose destruction at last so evidently ju∣stified the predictions of our Saviour, and made such immediate way for the honour and advancement of Christianity, we shall here relate. V. THE Jews, a stubborn and unquiet People, impatiently resented
the tyranny of the Roman Yoke, which seemed heavier to their necks then it did to other Nations, because they looked upon themselves as a more free-born People, and were elated with those great Charters and Immunities which Heaven had immediately conferred upon them. This made them willing to catch at any opportunity to re-assert themselves into their ancient liberty. A thing which they more unanimously at∣tempted under the Government of Jsep. de Be. Judaic. l. 2. c. 4. p. 798. Egesip. de excid. Hier∣sol. l. 2. c. 14. p. 272, &c. Cestius Florus, whom Nero had sent to be Procurator of that Province: by whose intolerable oppres∣sions and insolent cruelties for two years together, nothing abated by prayers and importunities, and the solicitations of potent Intercessors, their patience was tired out, and they broke out into Rebellion. The fatal assault began first at Ibid . p. 809. Caesarea, which instantly like lightning spread it self over the whole Nation, till all places were full of Bloud and Vio∣lence. Florus unable himself to deal with them, called in to his assistance Cestius Gallus the President of Syria, who came from Antioch with an Army, took Joppa and some other places, and sate down before Jerusa∣lem, but after all was forced to depart, and indeed to fly with his whole Army, leaving all his Warlike Instruments and Provisions behind him. The news of this ill success was soon carried to Ibid. l. 3. c. 1. p. 830. Nero, then residing in Achaia, who presently dispatched Vespasian (a man of prudent Conduct, experienced Valour, the best Commander of his time) to be General of the Army. He coming into Syria, united the Roman Forces, fell into Galilee, burnt Gadara, and destroyed Jotapata, where Ib. . p. 850. Egesep. l. 3. c. 18. p. 351. Josephus himself was taken Prisoner. He pursued his Conquests with an unwearied di∣ligence, Victory every where attending upon his Sword, and was prepa∣ring to besiege Jerusalem Ibid. l. 5 . p. 892., when hearing of the distractions of Italy by the death of Nero, and the Usurpations of Galba, Otho, and Vellius, he resolved for Rome, to free it from those unhappy incumbrances that were upon it; whose resolutions herein were so far applauded by the Army, that they presently proclaimed him Emperour. Who thereupon hast∣ned into Egypt to secure that Countrey, a place of so considerable im∣portance to the Empire. VI. FROM Alexandria Ibid. . p 93. Vespasian remanded his son Titus back into Judaea to carry on the War, who thought no way quicker to bring it to a period, then to attempt the Capital City, to strike at Jerusalem it self, and accordingly put all things in readiness to besiege it. The state of Ibid. l. 6. c. 1. p. 904. . p. 910. Jerusalem at this time was very sad. That place, whose honour and security once it was to be a City at unity within it self, was now torn in pieces with intestine Factions; and how unlikely is that Kingdom long to stand, that is once divided against it self? Simon the son of Giora, a bold and ambitious man, had possessed himself of the upper City; John who headed the Zealots, an insolent and ungovernable Generation, com∣manded the lower parts, and the out-skirts of the Temple; the inner parts whereof were secured by Eleazar the son of Simon, who had drawn over a considerable number of the Souldiers to his Party; and all those mutually quarrelling with, and opposing one another. Titus with his Army approaching, a little before the Paschal solemnity begirt the City, drawing it by degrees into a closer Siege, he straitly block'd up all avenues and passages of escape, building a Wall of thirty nine Ibid. l. 6. . p. 936. Furlongs, which he strengthened with thirteen Forts; whereby he prevented all possibi∣lity either of coming into, or going out of the City. And now was exactly accomplished, what our Lord had some time since told them
would come to pass, Luke 19.41, 42, 43, 44. when he beheld the City and wept over it, saying, if thou hadst known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! but now they are hidden from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee, because thou knowst not the time of thy visitation. The truth is, who ever would be at the pains to compare what our Lord has said concerning this War and the sackage of Jerusalem, ; Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 7. p. 81. with the accounts given of them by Josephus, would find so just a correspondence be∣tween the prophecy and the success, as would tempt him to think that the Historian had taken his measures as much from our Lords predictions as from the event of things. But to proceed: Terms of mercy were offered upon surrender, but scornfully rejected, which exasperated the Roman Army to fall on with greater fierceness and severity. And now God and Man, Heaven and Earth seemed to fight against them. Besides the Roman Army without, and the ir∣reconcilable Factions and Disorders within, a Ibid. . p. 937. & l. 7. . p. 954. Famin (hastned by those vast multitudes that had flocked to the Passover) raged so horribly within the City, that they took more care to prey upon one another, and to plunder their Provisions, then how to defend themselves against the common Ene∣my: thousands were starved for want of Food, who died so fast, that they were not capable of performing to them the last Offices of Humanity, but were forced to throw them upon common heaps; nay were redu∣ced to that extremity, that some offered violence to all the Laws of Nature, among which was . ubi supr. Mary the daughter of Eleazar, who being undone by the Souldiers, and no longer able to bear the force and rage of Hunger, boiled her sucking child and eat him. So plainly had our Lord foretold the daughters of Jerusalem, that the days were coming, in the which they should say, blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. VII. TITƲS went on with the Siege, and finding that no methods either of kindness or cruelty would work upon this obstinate genera∣tion of men, gave order that all things should be made ready for a storm. Having gained the Tower of Antonia, the Jews fled to the Temple which was hard by, the Ib. . &c. p. 956. Out-gates and Porches whereof were immediately set on fire, the Jews like persons stupified and amazed, never endeavouring to quench it. Titus, the sweetness of whose nature ever enclined him to pity and compassion, was greatly desirous to have spared the People, and saved the Temple. But all in vain; an obscure Souldier threw a Firebrand into the Chambers that were about the Temple, which pre∣sently took fire, and though the General ran and stormed, and com∣manded to put it out, yet so great was the clamour and confusion, that his Orders could not be heard; and when they were, it was too late, the conquering and triumphant Flames prevailing in spight of all oppo∣sition, and making their way with so fierce a Ibid. . p. 959. rage, as if they threatned to burn up Mount Sion to the very roots. So effectually did our Saviours Commination take place, who told his Disciples, when they admired the stately and magnificent buildings of the Temple, Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. And that nothing might be wanting to verifie our Lords praedi∣ction, Turnus Rufus was commanded to plow up the very foundations
of it. How sad a sight must it needs be to behold all things hurled in∣to a mixture of Bloud, Smoke, and Flames! the Jews were slain like Sheep, or Dogs, and many to prevent the Enemies Sword, voluntarily leapt into the Fire; the Ibid. . p. 968. number of them that perished in this Siege amounting to no less then eleven hundred thousand, besides ninety seven thousand that were made Slaves; the infinite multitudes that from all parts had flocked to the Feast of the Passover, and were by the Roman Ar∣my crowded up within the City, rendring the account not improbable. VIII. SUCH was the period of the Jewish Church and State; thus fell Jerusalem, (by far the most eminent City not of Judaea onely, but of the whole East, as Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 14 p. 8. Pliny himself confesses) notwithstanding its antiqui∣ty, wealth, and strength, after it had stood from the time of David MCLXXIX. years. And memorable it is, that this fatal Siege began a little before the Passover, about that very time when they had so bar∣barously treated and put to death the Son of God. So exact a propor∣tion does the Divine Justice sometimes observe in the retributions of its Vengeance. A Fate not onely predicted by our Lord and his Apostles, but lately presignified by immediate Jsph. ubi up. l. 7. . p 960. Prodigies and Signs from Heaven. A blazing Comet in the fashion of a Sword, hung directly over the Ci∣ty for a whole year together. In the Feast of Unleavened Bread, a little before the breaking out of the War, at Nine of the Clock of the Night, a light suddenly shined out between the Altar and the Temple, as bright as if it had been Noon-day. About the same time a Heifer as she was led to sacrifice, brought forth a Lamb in the very midst of the Temple. The East Gate of the inner part of the Temple, all of massy Brass, and which twenty men could hardly shut, after it had been fast locked and barred, was at night seen to open of its own accord. Chariots and Armies were beheld in the Air, all in their Martial Postures, and preparing to surround the City. At Pentecost when the Priests entered into the in∣ner Temple, they first perceived a noise and motion, and immediately heard a voice that said, , Let us depart hence. And four years before ever the War began, while all things were peaceable and secure, one Jesus, a plain Country Fellow, pronounced many dread∣ful woes against the Temple, the City, and the People, wherein he con∣tinued, especially at festival times, notwithstanding all the cruelties used towards him for seven years together, when some made a shift to dispatch him by a violent death. But alas, an Angel it self cannot stop men that are riding Post towards their own de∣struction. So little will warnings, or threatnings, , Joseph. loc. citat. or miracles signifie with them, whom Heaven hath once given up to an incurable infatua∣tion. IX. BUT it's high time to return and enquire, in the midst of this sad and calamitous state of things what became of S. Simeon and the Chri∣stians of that place. And of them we find, that being timely warned by the caution which our Lord had given them, that when they should see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, and the abomination of desolation (that is the Roman Army) standing in the holy place, they should then flee unto the Mountains, betake themselves to some obscure place of refuge; and ha∣ving been lately commanded by a particular Eusch. l. 3. c.  p. 75. Epiph. Haeres. XXIX. p. 58. Haere. XXX. p. 59. de Pod. & men. p. 537. revelation communicated to some pious and good men among them, (which says Epiphanius was done by the ministry of an Angel,) to leave Jerusalem, and go to Pella, they
universally withdrew themselves, and seasonably retreated thither, as to a little Zoar from the flames of Sodom, and so not one perished in the common mine. This Pella was a little Town in Coelo-Syria beyond Jordan, deriving its name probably from Pella a City of Ma∣cedonia, as being founded and peopled by the Macedonians of Alexan∣ders Army, who sate down in Asia. That its inhabitants were Gen∣tiles, it's plain, in that the Joseph. Antiq. Jad. l. 13. c. 23. p. 462. Jews under Alexander Jannaeus their King sacked it, because they would not receive the Rites of their Reli∣gion. And God 'tis like on purpose directed the Christians hither, that they might be out of the reach of the Besom of Destruction that was to sweep away the Jews where-ever it came. Nor was it a less remarkable instance of the care and tenderness of the Divine Provi∣dence over them, that when Cestius Gallus had besieged Jerusalem, on a sudden he should unexpectedly break up the Siege, at once giving them warning of their danger, and an opportunity to escape. How long Si∣meon and the Church continued in this little Sanctuary, and when they returned to Jerusalem, appears not. If I might conjecture, I should place their return about the beginning of Trajans reign, when the fright being sufficiently over, and the hatred and severity of the Romans asswa∣ged, they might come back with more safety. Certain it is, that they re∣turned before Epiph. de Pond. & Mens. ibid. Adrians time, who forty seven years after the devasta∣tion coming to Jerusalem in order to its reparation, found there a few houses, and a little Church of Christians built upon Mount Sion, in that very place where that Ʋpper Room was, into which the Disciples went up when they returned from our Lords Ascension. Here the Christians who were returned from Pella, kept their solemn Assemblies, and were so renowned for the flourishing state of their Religion, and the emi∣nency of their Miracles, that Aquila the Emperours Kinsman, and whom he had made Governour and Overseer of the rebuilding of the City, being convinced, embraced Christianity. But still pursuing his old Ma∣gic and Astrological studies, notwithstanding the frequent admonitions that were given him, he was cast out of the Church. Which he re∣sented as so great an affront, that he apostatized to Judaism, and after∣wards translated the Bible into Greek. But to return back to Simon; confident we may be that he administred his Province with all diligence and fidelity, in the discharge whereof God was pleased to preserve him as a person highly useful to his Church, to a very great Age, till the mid∣dle of Trajans reign, when he was brought to give his last testimony to his Religion, and that upon a very slight pretence. X. THE Roman Emperors were infinitely jealous of their new establi∣shed Sovereignty, and of any that might seem to be Corrivals with them, especially in Palestine and the Eastern parts. For an ancient and con∣stant tradition (as appears besides Josephus, both from Suetonius and Ta∣citus) had been entertained throughout the Eust, that out of Judaea should arise a Prince, that should be the great Monarch of the World. Which though Josephus to ingratiate himself with the Romans, flatter∣ingly applied to Vespasian, yet did not this quiet their minds, but that still they beheld all that were of the line of David with a jealous eye. . Chron. Alexandr. ad Ann. 1. Olympiad. CCXIII. Indict. XV. Vespas. V. p. 586. eadem habet de Domitian ad An. 1. Olymp. CCXVIII. Ind. V. Domit. XIII. p. 590. This made Domitian, Vespasians son resolve to destroy all that were of
the blood royal of the house of Judah; upon which account two Ne∣phews of S. Jude one of the brothers of our Lord were brought before him, and despised by him for their poverty and meanness, as persons ve∣ry unlikely to stand competitors for a Crown. The very same Indict∣ment was brought against our aged Bishop; for some of the Sects of the Euseb. l. 3. c. 32. p. 103. 104. Jews not able to bear his activity and zeal in the cause of his Religion, and finding nothing else to charge upon him, accused him to Atticus, at that time Consular Legat of Syria, for being of the Posterity of the Kings of Judah, and withall a Christian. Hereupon he was apprehended and brought before the Proconsul, who commanded him for several days to∣gether to be wracked with the most exquisit torments. All which he underwent with so composed a mind, so unconquerable a patience, that the Proconsul and all that were present were amazed to see a person of so great age able to endure such and so many tortures: at last he was commanded to be crucified. He suffered in CXX. year of his age, and in the X. year of Trajans reign, Ann. Chr. CVII. (the Alexandrin Chroni∣con An. 4. Olymp. CCXX. Ind. . p. 594. places it Traj. VII. Ann. Chr. as appears by the Consuls, CIV. though as doubtful of that, he places it again in the following year) after he had sate Bishop of Jerusalem (computing his succession from S. James his Martyrdom) XLIII, or XLIV. years; Animadv. ad Epiph. Haeres. LXVI. p. 266 Petavius makes it no less then XLVII. though Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople (probably by a mistake of the figure) assign him but XXIII. A longer proportion of time then a dozen of his immediate successors were able to make up, God probably lengthening out his life, that as a skilful and faithful Pilot he might steer and conduct the Affairs of that Church in those dismal and stormy days. The End of S. SIMEON'S Life.
THE LIFE OF S. IGNATIUS BISHOP of ANTIOCH. . Michael Burghers delineavit et sculpsit. S. IGNATIUS ANTIOCHENUS. His Originals unknown. Called Theophorus, and why. The Story of his being taken up into our Saviours arms, refuted. His Apostolic education. S. Johns Disciple. His being made Bishop of Antioch. The eminency
of that See. The order of his succession stated. His prudent Govern∣ment of that Church. The tradition of his appointing Antiphonal hymns by revelation. Trajans persecuting the Church at Antioch. His discourse with Ignatius. Ignatius his cruel usage. His sentence passed. His be∣ing transmitted to Rome: and why sent so far to his execution. His ar∣rival at Smyrna, and meeting with S. Polycarp. His Epistles to several Churches. His coming to Troas, and Epistles thence. His arrival at Porto Romano. Met on the way by the Christians at Rome. His ear∣nest desire of martyrdom. His praying for the prosperity of the Church. The time of his Passion. His being thrown to wild Beasts. What kind of punishment that among the Romans. The collection of his Remains, and their transportation to Antioch; and the great honours done to them. The great plenty of them in the Church of Rome. Trajans surceasing the Persecution against the Christians. The dreadful Earthquakes happening at Antioch. Ignatius his admirable Piety. His general solicitude for the preservation and propagation of the Christian Doctrine, as an Apostle. His care, diligence, and fidelity as a Bishop. His patience and fortitude as a Martyr. His Epistles. Polycarps commendation of them. I. FINDING nothing recorded concerning the Countrey or Parentage of this Holy Man, I shall not build upon meer fansie and conjecture. He is ordinarily stiled both by himself and o∣thers Theophorus, which though like Justus it be oft no more then a common Epithet, yet is it sometimes used as a proper name. It is writ∣ten according to the different accents, either , and then it notes a divine person, a man whose soul is full of God, and all holy and divine qualities, , as Ignatius himself is said to explain it; or , and so in a passive signification it implies one that is born or carried by God. And in this latter sense he is said to have derived the title from our Lords taking him up into his Arms. For thus we are told, that he was that very Child whom our Saviour took into his arms, Mark 9.36. Matt. 18.2, 3, 4. and set in the midst of his Disciples, as the most lively instance of Innocency and Humi∣lity. And this affirmed (if number might carry it) not onely by the Maenaeon Grae∣cor. . Greeks in their public Rituals, by Metaphr. ad Decembr. 20. Graec. & Lat. apud Cottler. p. 991. Metaphrastes, Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 35. p. 192. Nicephorus, and others, but (as the Primate of Armagh Annot. in Ig∣nat. Act. p. 37. . Men. Graec. loc. citt. observes from the Manuscripts in his own possession) by two Syriac Writers, more ancient then they. But how confidently or generally soever it be reported, the Story at best is precarious and uncertain, not to say absolutely false and ground∣less. Sure I am Homil. in S. Ignat. p. 506. Tom. 1. S. Chrysostom (who had far better opportunities of knowing then they) expresly affirms of Ignatius, that he never saw our Saviour, or enjoyed any familiarity or converse with him. II. IN his younger years he was brought up under Apostolical Institu∣tion: so Ibid. p. 499. Chrysostom tells us, that he was intimately conversant with the Apostles, educated and nursed up by them, every where at hand, and made partaker , both of their familiar discourses, and
more secret and uncommon Mysteries. Which though 'tis probable he means of his particular conversation with S. Peter and Paul, yet some of the forementioned Authors, and not they onely, but the Act. Ignat. p. 1. &. 5. Edit. Usser. Acts of his Martyrdom, written as is supposed by some present at it, further assure us, that he was S. Johns Disciple. Being fully instructed in the Doctrines of Christianity, he was for his eminent parts, and the great Piety of his life, chosen to be Bishop of Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, and the most famous and renowned City of the East; not more remarkable among Foreign Writers for being the Oriental Seat of the Roman Emperours, and their Vice-Roys and Governours; then it is in Ecclesiastics for its eminent entertainment of the Christian Faith, its giving the venerable title of Christians to the Disciples of the Holy Jesus, and S. Peters first and peculiar refidence in this place. Whence the Synod of Ap. Theod. H. Eccl. l. 5. 9. p. 211. Constantino∣ple assembled under Nectarius, in their Synodical Epistle to the Western Bishops, deservedly call it, the most ancient and truly Apostolic Church of Antioch, in which the honourable name of Christians did first commence. In all which respects it is frequently in the Writings of the Church by a proud kind of title stiled , or the City of God. That Ignatius was constituted Bishop of this Church, is allowed on all hands, though as to the time and order of his coming to it, almost the same difficulties occur, which before did in Clemens his succession to the See of Rome, possibly not readily to be removed but by the same method of solution, easily granted in this case by Ad Ann. 45. n. 14. vid. Ad. Martyr. Rom. Feb. 1. p. 88. Baronius himself, and some other Writers of note in that Church. I shall not need to prove what is evident enough in it self, and plainly acknowledged by the Ancients, that Peter and Paul planted Christianity in this City, and both concurred to the foundation of this Church, the one applying himself to the Jews, the other to the Gentiles. And large enough was the Vineyard to admit the joint-en∣deavours of these two great Planters of the Gospel, it being a vast po∣pulous City, containing at that time according to S. Chrysostoms compu∣tation no less then two hundred thousand souls. But the Apostles (who could not stay always in one place) being called off to the Ministry of other Churches, saw it necessary to substitute others in their room, the one resigning his trust to Euodius, the other to Ignatius. Hence in the Apostolic Constitutions Lib. 7. c. 47. p. 451. Euodius is said to be ordained Bishop of Antioch by S. Peter, and Ignatius by S. Paul; till Euodius dying, and the Jewish Converts being better reconciled to the Gentiles, Ignatius succeeded in the sole care and Presidency over that Church, wherein he might possi∣bly be afterwards confirmed by Peter himself. In which respect proba∣bly the Author of the Ad Ann. Tib. XIX. p. 526. Alexandrine Chronicon meant it, when he affirms that Ignatius was constituted Bishop of Antioch by the Apostles. By this means he may be said both immediately to succeed the Apostle, as Orig. Hom. 6. in Lc. p. 214. Ori∣gen, Easeb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 36. p. 106. Eusebius, Athan. de Sy∣nod. Arim. & Seleu. p. 922. Athanasius, and Chryss. loc. cit. p. 500. Chrysostom affirm, and withall to be the next after Euodius, as Hier. de script. in Ignat. S. Hierom, Socr. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 8. p. 313. Socrates, Metaphr. ubi supr. Metaphrastes and others place him. However Euodius dying, and he being setled in it by the Apostles hands, might be justly said to succeed S. Peter; in which sense it is that some of the Ancients expresly affirm him to have received his Consecration from S. Peter, , says De Immutab. Dialog. 1. p. 33. Tom. 4. Theodoret; and so their own Jo. Malel Chron. l. 10. ap. Usser. Not. in Epist. ad Antioch. pag. 107. Historian relates it, that Peter coming to Antioch in his passage to Rome, and finding Euodius
lately dead, committed the Government of it to Ignatius, whom he made Bishop of that place: though it will be a little difficult to recon∣cile the Times to an agreement with that account. III. SOMEWHAT above forty years S. Ignatius continued in his charge at Antioch, (Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople assigns him but four years, the figure μ for forty, being probably through the careless∣ness of Transcribers slipt out of the account) in the midst of very stormy and tempestuous times. But Act. Igat. p. 1, 2. he like a wise and prudent Pilot sate at the Stern, and declined the dangers that threatned them by his prayers and tears, his fastings and the constancy of his preaching, and those inde∣fatigable pains he took among them, fearing lest any of the more weak and unsetled Christians might be overborn with the storms of Persecu∣tion. Never did a little calm and quiet interval happen, but he rejoiced in the prosperity of the Church: though as to himself he somewhat impa∣tiently expected and longed for Martyrdom, without which he accoun∣ted he could never perfectly attain to the love of Christ, nor fill up the duty and measures of a true Disciple, which accordingly afterwards be∣came his portion. Indeed as to the particular acts of his Government, nothing memorable is recorded of him in the Antiquities of the Church, more then what H. Eccl. loc. citat. Socrates relates (by what authority, I confess, I know not) that he saw a Vision, wherein he heard the Angels with alternate hymns celebrating the honour of the holy Trinity, in imitation where∣of he instituted the way of Antiphonal hymns in the Church of Antioch, which thence spread it self over the whole Christian Church. Whether this Story was made on purpose to out-vie the Arrians who were wont on the Sabbaths and Lords-days to sing alternate hymns in their Congre∣gations, with some tart reflections upon the Orthodox, insomuch that Chrysostom was forced to introduce the same way of singing into the Or∣thodox Assemblies; or whether it was really instituted by Ignatius, but afterwards grown into dis-use, I will not say. Certain it is, that Flavia∣nus afterwards Bishop of Antioch in the reign of Constantius is Theodoret. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 24. p. 107. said to have been the first that thus established the Quire, and appointed Davids Psalms to be sung by turns, which thence propagated it self to other Churches. S. Ambrose was the first that brought it into the Western Church, reviving (says the Sigebert. Chr. ad Ann. Chr. 387. Historian) the ancient institution of Ignatius, long disused among the Greeks. But to return. IV. IT was about the year of Christ CVII. When Trajan the Em∣perour swelled with his late Victory over the Scythians and the Daci, about the nineth year of his reign came to Antioch, to make preparation for the War which he was resolved to make upon the Parthians and Armenians. He entered the City with the Pomps and Solemnities of a triumph, and as his first care usually was about the concernments of Re∣ligion, he began presently to enquire into that affair. Indeed he Act. ib. p. 2. loo∣ked upon it as an affront to his other Victories to be conquered by Chri∣stians; and therefore to make this Religion stoop, had already commen∣ced a Persecution against them in other parts of the Empire, which he re∣solved to carry on here. S. Ignatius (whose solicitude for the good of his Flock made him continually stand upon his guard) thinking it more prudent to go himself, then stay to be sent for, of his own A. Ign. p. 3. accord pre∣sented himself to the Emperour, between whom there is said to have passed a large and particular discourse, the Empire wondring that he dared to transgress his Laws, while the good man asserted his own inno∣cency,
and the power which God had given them over evil Spirits, and that the gods of the Gentiles were no better then Daemons, there being but one supreme deity, who made the World, and his onely begotten Son Jesus Christ, who though crucified under Pilate, had yet destroyed him that had the power of sin, that is, the Devil, and would ruine the whole Power and Empire of the Daemons, and tread it under the feet of those, who carried God in their hearts. The issue was, that he was cast into prison, where (if what the . Greek Rituals and some others report, be true) he was for the constancy and resolution of his Profession, sub∣jected to the most severe and merciless torments, whipped with Plum∣batae, Scourges with leaden Bullets at the end of them, forced to hold fire in his hands, while his sides were burnt with papers dipt in oil, his feet stood upon live coals, and his flesh was torn off with burning Pincers. Having by an invincible patience overcome the malice and cruelty of his Tormenters, the Emperour pronounced the Act. Martyr. p. 4. final sentence upon him, that being incurably over-run with Superstition, he should be carried bound by Souldiers to Rome, and there thrown as a prey to wild Beasts. The good man heartily rejoiced at the fatal decree, I thank thee, O Lord (said he) that thou hast condescended thus perfectly to honour me with thy love, and hast thought me worthy with thy Apostle Paul to be bound with iron chains. With that he chearfully embraced his chains, and ha∣ving fervently prayed for his Church, and with tears recommended it to the divine care and providence, he delivered up himself into the hands of his Keepers, that were appointed to transport him to the place of execution. V. IT may justly seem strange, and 'twas that which puzled the great Animadv. ad Euseb. Chron. p. 207. Scaliger, why he should be sent so vast a way from Antioch in Syria to be martyred at Rome. Whereof these probable accounts may be ren∣dred. First, It was usual with the Governours of Provinces, where the malefactors were more then ordinarily eminent, either for the qua∣lity of their persons, or the nature of their crimes, to send them to Rome, that their punishment might be made exemplary in the eye of the World. Secondly his enemies were not willing he should suffer at home, where he was too much honoured and esteemed already, and where his death would but raise him into a higher Veneration with the People, and settle their minds in a firmer belief of that Faith, which he had taught them, and which they then saw him sealing with his bloud. Thirdly, by so long a journey, they hoped that in all places where he came, men would be more effectually terrified from embra∣cing that Religion, which they saw so much distasted and resented by the Emperour, and the profession whereof could not be purchased but at so dear a rate; besides the probability, that by this usage the con∣stancy of Ignatius himself might be broken, and he forced to yield. Fourthly, they designed to make the good mans punishment as severe and heavy as they could, and therefore so contrived it, that there might be a concurrence of circumstances to render it bitter and grievous to him. His great age, being then probably above fourscore years old, the vast length and tediousness of the journey, (which was not a little encreased by the , as Hil. cit. p. 504. S. Chrysostom ob∣serves, their going the farthest way about, for they went not the direct passage to Rome, but by infinite windings, divertee from place to place) the trouble and difficulty of the passage, bad at all times, but much
worse now in Winter, the want of all necessary conveniencies and ac∣commodations for so aged and infirm a person, the rude and merciless usage of his Keepers, who treated him with all ruggedness and inhuma∣nity: From Syria even to Rome both by Sea and Land I fight with Beasts, night and day I am chained to ten Leopards, (which is my military guard) who, the kinder I am to them, are the more cruel and fierce to me, as Epist. ad Rom. p. 23. & ap. Eu∣seb. l. 3. c. 36. p. 107. him∣self complains. Besides what was dearer to him then all this, his credit and reputation might be in danger to suffer with him, seeing at so great a distance the Romans were generally more likely to understand him to suffer as a Malefactor for some notorious crime, then as a Martyr for Re∣ligion, and this Martyr. ubi spr. p. 995. Metaphrastes assures us, was one particular end of his sending thither. Not to say that beyond all this, the Divine Provi∣dence (which knows how to bring good out of evil, and to over-rule the designs of bad men to wise and excellent purposes) might the rather permit it to be so, that the leading so great a man so far in triumph, might make the Faith more remarkable and illustrious, that he might have the better opportunity to establish and confirm the Christians, Vid. Chrysost. Homil. cit. pag. 505. who flocked to him from all parts as he came along; and by giving them the example of a generous Vertue, arm them with the stronger resolu∣tion to die for their Religion, and especially that he might seal the truth of his Religion at Rome, where his death might be , (as Chrysostom speaks) a Tutor of Piety, Ibid. and teach , the City that was so famous for Arts and Wisdom, a new and bet∣ter Philosophy then they had learned before. To all which may be ad∣ded, that this was done not by the Provincial Governour, who had in∣deed power of executing capital punishments within his own Province (which seems to have been the main ground of Scaligers scruple) but immediately by the Emperour himself, whose pleasure and command it was that he should be sent to Rome; whither we must now follow him to his Martyrdom: in the account whereof we shall for the main keep to the Acts of it, written in all probability by Philo and Agathopus, the Companions of his Journey, and present at his Passion; two ancient Versions whereof the incomparable Bishop Ʋsher first recovered and published to the World. VI. BEING Act. Ignat. pag. 5. consigned to a guard of ten Souldiers, he took his leave of his beloved Antioch (and a sad parting no doubt there was be∣tween him and his people; who were to see his face no more) and was conducted on foot to Seleucia, a Port-town of Syria, about sixteen miles distant thence, the very place whence Paul and Barnabas set sail for Cy∣prus. Here going aboard, after a tedious and difficult Voyage they ar∣rived at Smyrna, a famous City of Ionia, where they were no sooner set on shore, but he went to salute S. Polycarp Bishop of the place, his old Fellow-Pupil under S. John the Apostle. Joyful was the meeting of these two Holy men, S. Polycarp being so far from being discouraged, that he rejoiced in the others chains, and earnestly pressed him to a firm and final perseverance. Hither came in the Country round about, especially the Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons of the Asian Churches, to behold so venerable a sight, to partake of the holy Martyrs prayers and bles∣sing, and to encourage him to hold on to his consummation. To re∣quite whose kindness, and for their further instruction and establishment in the Faith, he wrote Eseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 36. p. 107. Letters from hence to several Churches, one to the Ephesians, wherein he commends Onesimus their Bishop for his sin∣gular
charity; another to the Magnesians, a City seated upon the River Meander, which he sent by Damas their Bishop, Bassus and Apollonius Presbyters, and Sotio Deacon of that Church; a third to the Trallians by Polybius their Bishop, wherein he particularly presses them to subje∣ction to their spiritual Guides, and to avoid those pestilent haeretical do∣ctrines that were then risen in the Church. A fourth he wrote to the Christians at Rome, to acquaint them with his present state, and passio∣nate desire not to be hindred in that course of Martyrdom, which he was now hastening to accomplish. VII. HIS Keepers a little impatient of their stay at Smyrna, set sail for Troas, a noted City of the lesser Phrygia, not far from the ruines of the ancient Troy: where at his arrival he was not a little refreshed with the news that he received of the Persecution ceasing in the Church of Antioch. Hither several Churches sent their Messengers to visit and sa∣lute him, and hence he dispatched two Epistles, one to the Church at Philadelphia, to press them to Love and Unity, and to stand fast in the truth and simplicity of the Gospel, the other to the Church of Smyrna, from whence he lately departed, which he sent, as also the former, by Burrhus the Deacon, whom they and the Ephesians had sent to wait upon him; and together with that (as Loc. cit. p. 1. Eusebius informs us) he wrote pri∣vately to S. Polycarp, particularly recommending to him the care and oversight of the Church of Antioch, for which as a vigilant Pastor he could not but have a tender and very dear regard; though very learned men (but certainly without any just reason) think this not to have been a distinct Epistle from the former, but jointly directed and intended to S. Polycarp and his Church of Smyrna. Which however it be, they con∣clude it as certain that the Epistle to S. Polycarp now extant, is none of it, as in which nothing of the true temper and spirit of Ignatius does appear, while others of great note not improbably contend for it as genuine and sincere. From Troas they sailed to Neapolis, a maritime Town of Mace∣donia, thence to Philippi, Act. 16.11.12. a Roman Colony (the very same journey which S. Paul had gone before him,) where (as Epist. Poly∣carp. ad Philip. p. 13. on longe ab nit. S. Polycarp intimates in his Epistle to that Church) they were entertained with all imaginable kindness and courtesie, and conducted forwards in their journey. Hence they passed on foot through Macedonia and Epirus, till they came to Epidamnum a City of Dalmatia, where again taking Ship they sailed through the Adriatic, and arrived at Rhegium a Port-Town in Italy, whence they directed their course through the Tyrrhenian Sea to Puteo∣li, Ignatius desiring (if it might have been granted) thence to have gone by Land, that he might have traced the same way, by which S. Paul went to Rome. After a day and a nights stay at Puteoli, a prosperous wind quickly carried them to the Roman Port, the great Harbour and Station for their Navy, built near Ostia at the mouth of Tyber, about sixteen miles from Rome, whither the holy Martyr longed to come, as much desirous to be at the end of his Race, as his Keepers weary of their voyage, were to be at the end of their journey. VIII. THE Christians at Rome daily expecting his arrival, were come out to meet and entertain him, and accordingly received him with an equal resentment of joy and sorrow. Glad they were of the presence and company of so great and good a man, but quickly found their joy allayed with the remembrance, how soon, and by how severe a death he was to be taken from them: and when some of them did but intimate,
that possibly the People might be taken off from desiring his death, he expressed a pious indignation, intreating them to cast no rubs in his way, nor do any thing that might hinder him, now he was hastening to his Crown. Being conducted to Rome, he was presented to the Praefect of the City, and as 'tis probable, the Emperours Letters concerning him were delivered. In the mean time while things were preparing for his Martyrdom, he and the Brethren that resorted to him improved their time to pious purposes; he prayed with them, and for them, heartily recommended the state of the Church to the care and protection of our blessed Saviour, and earnestly solicited Heaven, that it would stop the Persecution that was begun, and bless Christians with a true love and charity towards one another. That his punishment might be the more pompous and public, one of their solemn Festivals, the time of their Sa∣turnalia, and that part of it when they celebrated their Sigillaria, was pitched on for his Execution: at which times they were wont to enter∣tain the People with the bloudy Conflicts of the Gladiators, and the hunting of, and fighting with wild Beasts. Accordingly on the XIII. of the Kalends of January, that is, December XX. he was brought out into the Amphitheatre, and according to his own fervent desire, that he might have no other grave but the bellies of wild Beasts, the Lions were let loose upon him, whose roaring alarm he entertained with no other con∣cernment, then that now as Gods own Corn he should be ground between the teeth of these wild Beasts, and become White Bread for his heavenly Master. The Lions were not long doing their work, but quickly di∣spatched their Meal, and left nothing but what they could not well de∣vour, a few hard and solid bones. This throwing of persons to wild Beasts was accounted among the Romans, Paul. JC. Sent. lib. 5. Tit. 23. L. 3. §. 5. ff. ad leg. Cornel. de Si∣car. & Venef. inter summa supplicia, and was never used but for very capital offences, and towards the vilest and most despicable Malefactors, under which rank they beheld the Chri∣stians, who were so familiarly destined to this kind of death, that (as Apolog. c. 40. p. 32. Tertullian tells us) upon any trifling and frivolous pretence, if a Famin or an Earthquake did but happen, the common out-cry was, Christianos ad Leones, Away with the Christians to the Lions. IX. AMONG other Christians that were mournful spectators of this Tragic Scene, were the Deacons I mentioned, who had been the Companions of his Journey, who bore not the least part in the sorrows of that day. And that they might not return home with nothing but the account of so sad a Story, Act. Ignat. p. 8. Metaphr. loc. cit. Men. Graec. . Hieron. de Script. in Ignat. they gathered up the bones which the wild Beasts had spared, and transported them to Antioch, where they were joyfully received, and honourably entombed in the Coemetery without the Gate that leads to Daphne. A passage which Chrysostom according to his Rhetorical Vein elegantly amplifies as the great honour and treasure of that place. From hence in the reign of Euagr. H. Ecc. l. 1. c. 16. p. 274. Theodosius they were by his command, with mighty pomp and solemnity removed to the Tychaeon within the City, a Temple heretofore dedicated to the public Genius of the City, but now consecrated to the memory of the Martyr. And for their Translation afterwards to Rome, and the miracles said to be done by them, they that are further curious may enquire. Bolland. ad diem 1. Febr. p. 35. &c. For indeed I am not now at leisure for these things. But I can direct the Reader to one that will give him very punctual and par∣ticular account of them, and in what places the several parcels of his Re∣liques are bestowed; no less then five Churches in Rome enriched with
them, besides others in Naples, Sicily, France, Flanders, Germany, and indeed where not. And verily but that some men have a very happy faculty at doing wonders by multiplication, a man would be apt to won∣der how a few bones (and they were not many which the Lions spared) could be able to serve so many several Churches. I could likewise tell him a long story of the various travels and donations of S. Ignatius his head, and by what good fortune it came at last to the Jesuites Col∣ledge at Rome, where it is richly enshrined, solemnly and religiously worshipped, but that I am afraid my Reader would give me no thanks for my pains. X. ABOUT this time, or a little before, while Trajan was yet at An∣tioch, he stopped, or at least mitigated the Persecution against Christians: For having had an account from Epist. 97. l. 10. Euseb l. 3. c. 34. p 105. J. Malel. Chron. l. 11. ap. Usser. not. in Ignat. Epist. p. 43. Pliny the Proconsul of Bithynia (whom he had imployed to that purpose) concerning the innocency and sim∣plicity of the Christians, that they were a harmless and inoffensive Ge∣neration; and lately received a Letter from Extat ap. Jo. Malel. loc. cit. ap. Usser. Appen. Ignat. p. . vid. Excerpt. er Jo. Antioch. à Val. edit. p. 818. Tiberianus Governour of Palestina Prima, wherein he told him that he was wearied out in exe∣cuting the Laws against the Galilaeans, who crouded themselves in such multitudes to execution, that he could neither by persuasions nor threat∣nings keep them from owning themselves to be Christians, further pray∣ing his Majesties advice in that affair: Hereupon he gave command, that no inquisition should be made after the Christians, though if any of them offered themselves, execution should be done upon them. So that the fire which had hitherto flamed and burnt out, began now to be extin∣guished, and onely crept up and down in private corners. There are that tell Sim. Metaphr. Martyr. Ignat. apud Coteler. p. 1002. us that Trajan having heard a full account of Ignatius and his sufferings, and how undauntedly he had undergone that bitter death, repented of what he had done, and was particularly moved to mitigate and relax the Persecution: whereby (as Metaphrastes observes) not onely Ignatius his Life, but his very death became , the Procurer of great peace and prosperity, and the glory and esta∣blishment of the Christian Faith. Some not improbably conceive, that the severe judgments which hapned not long after, might have a peculiar influence to dispose the Emperours mind to more tenderness and pity for the remainder of his life. For during his abode at Antioch, there were dreadful and unusual Dio. Cass. Hist. Rom. l. 68. & Xiphil. in vit. Traj. p. 249, 250, 251. Jo. Malel. Chro. l. 10. ubi supr. Earthquakes, fatal to other places, but which fell most heavy upon Antioch, at that time filled more then ordi∣nary with a vast Army and confluence of People from all parts of the World. Among thousands that died, and far greater numbers that were maimed and wounded, Pedo the Consul lost his life, and Trajan him∣self, had he not escaped out at a window, had undergone the same fate. Accidents which I doubt not prepared his mind to a more serious consi∣deration and regard of things. Though these calamities happened not till some years after Ignatius his death. XI. WHETHER these judgments were immediate instances of the divine displeasure for the severity used against the Christians, and particularly for their cruelty to Ignatius, I will not say. Certain it is, that the Christian Church had a mighty loss in so useful and excellent a person. For he was a good man, one in whose brest the true spirit of Religion did eminently dwell, a man of very moderate and mortified affections, in which sense he doubtless intended that famous saving, so much celebrated by the Ancients, ,
my Love is crucified, that is, (for to that purpose he explains it in the ve∣ry words that follow) his appetites and desires were crucified to the World, and all the lusts and pleasures of it. We may with Orat. supr. laud. p. 499. S. Chryso∣stom consider him in a threefold capacity, as an Apostle, a Bishop, and a Martyr. As an Apostle (in the larger acception of the word, he being , as the Men. Graet. . Greek Offices stile him, the im∣mediate successor of the Apostles in their See,) he was careful to diffuse and propagate the genuine Doctrine which he had received of the Apostles, and took a kind of Oecumenical care of all the Churches; even in his passage to Rome he surveyed , as H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 36. p. 106. Eusebius tells us, the Diocesses, or Churches, that belonged to all the Cities whither he came, confirming them by his Sermons and Exhortations, and direct∣ing Epistles to several of the principal, for their further order and esta∣blishment in the Faith. As a Bishop, he was a diligent, faithful and in∣dustrious Pastor, infinitely careful of his charge; which though so ex∣ceedingly vast and numerous, he prudently, instructed, governed, and superintended, and that in the midst of ticklish and troublesome times, above forty years together. He had a true and unchangeable love for his People, and when ravished from them in order to his Martyrdom, there was not any Church to whom he Epist. ad. Eph. p. 9. ad Magnes. p. 15. ad Tral∣lian. p. 20. ad Rom. p. 25. ad Philaelph p. 31 ad Smyrn. p. 37. wrote, but he particularly beg∣ged their prayers to God for his Church at Antioch, and of some of them desired that they would send , a divine Embassador thi∣ther on purpose to comfort them, and to congratulate their happy de∣liverance from the Persecution. And because he knew that the prospe∣rity of the Church and the good of Souls were no less undermined by Heresie from within, then assaluted by Violence and Persecution from without, he had a peculiar eye to that, and took all occasions of warn∣ing the Church to beware of Hereticks and Seducers, , as he stiles Epist. ad Smyrn p 34. & Easeb. ubi supr. them, those beasts in the shape of men, whose wild notions and brutish manners began even then to embase Religion, and corrupt the simplicity of the Faith. Indeed he duly filled up all the measures of a wise Governour, and an excellent Guide of Souls, and Ubi supr. p. 500. &c. S. Chrysostom runs through the particular characters of the Bishop deli∣neated by S. Paul, and finds them all accomplished and made good in him; with so generous a care (says he Ibid. p. 499.) so exact a diligence did he pre∣side over the flock of Christ, even to the making good what our Lord describes, , as the utmost pitch and line of Episcopal fidelity, to lay down his life for the sheep; and this he did with all courage and fortitude; which is the last consideration we shall remarque concerning him. XII. AS a Martyr he gave the highest testimony to his fidelity, and to the truth of that Religion which he both preached and practised. He gloried in his sufferings as his honour and his priviledge, and looked upon his chains, , he calls Epist. ad Eph. p. 6. them, as his Jewels and his Ornaments: he was raised above either the love or fear of the present state, and could with as much ease and freedom (says Lo. landat. Chryso∣stom) lay down his life, as another man could put off his clothes. The truth is, his soul was strangely inflamed with a desire of Martyrdom, he wished every step of his Journey to meet with the wild Beasts that were prepared for him, and tells the Epista Rom. 2.23. & apud  Romans, he desired nothing more then they might presently do his Work, that he would invite and court them speedily to devour him, and if he found them backward, as they had
been towards others, he would provoke and force them. And though the death he was to undergo was most savage and barbarous, and dres∣sed up in the most horrid and frightful shapes, enough to startle the fir∣mest resolution, yet could they make no impression  (as the Men. Graec ubi supr. Greeks say of him) upon his impregnable ada∣mantine mind, any more then the dashes of a Waye upon a Rock of Marble, Let the fire (said he Epist. ad Rom. p. 24. & ap. E∣seb. ubi supr.) and the Cross, the assaults of wild Beasts, the breaking of bones, cutting of limbs, battering the whole body in pieces, yea and all the torments which the Devil can invent come upon me, so I may but at∣tain to be with Jesus Christ; professing he thought it much better to die for Christ, then to live and reign the sole Monarch of the World. Ex∣pressions certainly of a mighty Zeal, and a divine Passion wound up to its highest note. And yet after all, this excellent person was humble to the lowest step of abasure: he oft Epist. ad Eph. p. 9. ad Rom. p. 25. Epist. ad Trall. p. 17. professes that he looked upon him∣self as an Abortive, and the very least of the Faithful in the whole Church of Antioch, and that though it was his utmost ambition, yet he did not know whether he was worthy to suffer for Religion. I might in the last place enter into a discourse concerning his Epistles (the true Indices of the piety and divine temper of his mind,) those seven I mean, enumera∣ted and quoted by Eusebius, and collected by S. Polycarp, as Epist. Polycar. p. 23. edit. Usser. & ap. Euseb. loc. cit. p. 108. himself ex∣presly testifies; but shall forbear, despairing to offer any thing confide∣rable after so much as has been said by learned men about them: onely observing, that in the exceptions to the argument from S. Polycarps te∣stimony, little more is said even by those who have managed it to the best advantage, then what might be urged against the most genuine writing in the World. I add S. Polycarps character of these Epistles, whereby he recommends them as highly useful and advantagious, that they contain in them Instructions and Exhortations to Faith and Patience, and whatever is necessary to build us up in the Religion of our Lord and Sa∣viour. His Writings. Genuine. Ad Ephesios Epistola. I. Ad Magnesianos. I. Ad Trallianos. I. Ad Romanos. I. Ad Philadelphenos. I. Ad Smyrnaeos. I. Doubtful. Epistola ad Polycarpum. Spurious. Ad Mariam Cassobolitam. I. Ad Tarsenses. I. Ad Antiochenos. I. Ad Philippenses. I. Ad Heronem. I. Ad B. Virg. Mariam. I. Ad Joannem Apostolum. II. The End of S. IGNATIUS'S Life.
THE LIFE OF S. POLYCARP BISHOP of SMYRNA. Miachel Burghers delineavit et sculpsit. S. POLYCARPUS. The place of his Nativity. The honour and eminency of Smyrna. His edu∣cation under S. John. By him constituted Bishop of Smyrna. Whether the same with the Bishop to whom S. John committed the young man.
S. Polycarp the Angel of the Church of Symyrna mentioned in the Apoca∣lyps. Ignatius his arrival at Smyrna. His Letters to that Church, and to S. Polycarp. His Journey to Rome about the Quartodeciman Con∣troversie. The time of it enquired into. Anicetus his succession to the See of Rome. His reception there by Anicetus. Their mutual kindness notwithstanding the difference. His stout opposing Heretics at Rome. His sharp treatment of Marcion, and mighty zeal against those early cor∣rupters of the Christian Doctrin. Irenaeus his particular remarques of S. Polycarps actions. The Persecution under M. Antoninus. The time of Polycarps Martyrdom noted. The acts of it written by the Church of Smyrna: their great esteem and value. S. Polycarp sought for. His Martyrdom foretold by a dream. His apprehension. Conducted to Smyr∣na. Irenarchae, who. Polycarps rude treatment by Herodes. His being brought before the Proconsul. Christians refused to swear by the Em∣perours genius, and why. His pious and resolute answers. His slight∣ings the Proconsuls threatnings. His sentence proclaimed. Asiarchae who. Preparation for his burning. His Prayer before his death. Mi∣raculously preserved in the fire. Dispatched with a Sword. The care of the Christians about his Remains: this far from a superstitious venera∣tion. Their annual meeting at the place of his Martyrdom. His great Age at his death. The day of his Passion. His Tomb how honoured at this day. The judgments happening to Smyrna after his death. The Faith and Patience of the Primitive Christians noted out of the Preface to the Acts of his Martyrdom. His Epistle to the Philippians. Its usefulness. Highly valued and publicly read in the ancient Church. The Epistle it self. I. S POLYCARP was born towards the latter end of Nero's reign, or it may be a little sooner, his great Age at the time of his death, with some other circumstances rendring it highly probable, if not certain. Uncertain it is where he was born, and I see no sufficient reason to the contrary, why we may not fix his Nativity at Smyrna, an eminent City of Ionia in the lesser Asia, the first of the seven that entered their claim of being the birth-place of the famous Strab. Geo∣graph. l. 14. p. 646. Homer, in memory whereof they had a Library, and a four-square Portico, called Homereum, with a Temple and the Statue of Homer adjoining to it, and used a sort of brass Coin, which they called , after his name, and probably with his Image stampt upon it. A place it was of great honour and renown, . . Oxon. II. p 47. Evdem habt Marm. XXVIII. p. 129. CXLIII. p. 277. Append. XV. p. 296. and has not onely very magnificent ti∣tles heaped upon it by the Writers of those Times, but in several ancient Inscriptions, set up by the public Order of the Senate, not long after the time of Adrian, it is stiled, The chief City of Asia, both for beauty and greatness, the most splendid, the Metropolis of Asia, and the Ornament of Ionia. But it had a far greater and more honourable Privi∣lege to glory in, if it was (as we suppose) the place of S. Polycarp's Nativity, however of his Education, the seat of his Episcopal care and charge, and the Scene of his Tragoedy and Martyrdom. The Greeks
in their Menaeon, report that he was educated at the charge of a certain noble Matron (whose name we are told was Callisto) a woman of great Piety and Charity, who when she had exhausted all her Cranaries in re∣lieving the Poor, had them suddenly filled again by S. Polycarps prayers. The circumstances whereof are more particularly related by Pionius (who suffered, if, which I much question, it was the same under the De∣cian Persecution) to this Pion. vit. S. Polycarp. ex MS. Graec. apud. Bolland. Ja∣nuar. XXVI. p. 696. effect. Callisto warned by an Angel in a dream sent and redeemed Polycarp (then but a child) of some who sold him, brought him home, took care of his education, and finding him a Youth of ripe and pregnant parts, as he grew up, made him the Major-domo and Steward of her house; whose charity it seems he dispenced with a very liberal hand, insomuch that during her absence, he had emptied all her Barns and Store-houses to the uses of the Poor. For which being char∣ged by his Fellow-Servants at her return, she not knowing then to what purpose he had imployed them, called for the Keys, and commanded him to resign his trust, which was no sooner done, but at her entrance in, she found all places full, and in as good condition as she had left them, which his prayers and intercession with Heaven had again reple∣nished. As indeed Heaven can be sometimes content rather to work a Miracle, then Charity shall suffer and fare the worse for its kindness and bounty. In his younger years he is said to have been instructed in the Christian Faith by Bucolus, whom the same . Menaeon elsewhere informs us S. John had consecrated Bishop of Smyrna; however Act. Ignat. p. 5. Hieron. de Script. in Poly∣carp. E. sib.  p. 81 Authors of more unquestionable credit and ancient date tell us, that he was S. Johns Disciple, and not his onely, but as Adv. eres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 233. & ap. Eusth. l. 4. c. 14. p. 127. Irenaeus, who was his Scholar (fol∣lowed herein by S. Hierom) assures us, he was taught by the Apostles, and familiarly conversed with many who had seen our Lord in the Flesh. II. BƲCOLƲS the vigilant and industrious Bishop of Smyrna being dead, (by whom S. Polycarp was, as we are Pion. c. 3. n. 12. ubi supr. told, made Deacon and Ca∣techist of that Church, an Office which he discharged with great dili∣gence and success,) Polycarp was ordained in his room, according to Bu∣colus his own prediction, who as the Men. 23. Febr. hi spr. Greeks report, had in his life time fortold that he should be his Successor. He was constituted by S. John, say the Tirtull. de prae∣script. Haeretic. c. 32. p. 213. Hieron. ubi apr. vid. Suid. in vo .  l. 3. c. 2 p. 225. Myr. Rom. ad 20. Jan p. 1. Ancients generally; though citat. Irenaeus followed herein by the Olp. CCXXIV. 1. Anton. XXI. p. 602. Chronicle of Alexandria, affirms it to have been done by the Apostles, whether any of the Apostles besides S. John were then alive, or whether he means Apostolic persons (commonly stiled Apostles in the Writings of the Church) who joined with S. John in the consecration. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 36. p 16. Eusebius says, that Polycarp was familiarly conversant with the Apostles, and re∣ceived the Government of the Church of Smyrna from those who had been Eye-witnesses and Ministers of our Lord. It makes not a little for the honour of S. Polycarp, and argues his mighty diligence and solicitude for the good of souls, that (as we shall note more anon) Ignatius passing to his Martyrdom, wrote to him, and particularly recommended to him the inspection and oversight of his Church at Antioch, knowing him (says Ib. p. 1. Eusebius) to be truly an Apostolical man, and being assured that he would use his utmost care and fidelity in that matter. The Ad. Ann. 1. Olynpiad. CCXX. In∣di. . XIII. ann. Tray 4. p. 594. Author of the Alexandrian Chronicle tells us, that it was the Bishop of Smyrna (who could not well be any other then S. Polycarp) to whom S. John committed the tutorage and education of the young man, whom he took up in his Visitation, who ran away, and became Captain of a Company of loose and debauched High-way men, and was afterwards reduced
and reclaimed by that Apostle. But seeing Clemens Alexandrinus, who relates the Story, sets down neither the name of the Bishop, nor the City, though he Ap. Eusebd. 3. c. 23 p. 92. confesses there were some that made mention of it, nor is this circumstance taken notice of by any other ancient Writer, nor that Bishops neglecting of his charge well consistent with S. Polycarps care and industry, I shall leave the Story as I find it. Though it cannot be denied but that Smyrna was near to Ephesus, as S. Clemens says that City also was, and that S. John seems to have had a more then ordinary regard to that Church, it being next Ephesus, the first of those seven famous Asian Churches, to whom he directed his Epistles, and S. Polycarp at this time Bishop of it: for that he was that Angel of the Church of Smyrna, to whom that Apocalyptical Epistle was sent, is not onely highly pro∣bable, but by a Usser. Prole∣gom. ad Ignat. Epist. c. 2. p. 9. learned man put past all question. I must confess that the character and circumstances ascribed by S. John to the Angel of that Church seem very exactly to agree with Polycarp, and with no other Bishop of that Church (about those times especially) that we read of in the History of the Church. And whoever compares the account of S. Polycarps Martyrdom, with the notices and intimations which the Apocalypst there gives of that persons sufferings and death, will find the prophecy and the event suit together. That which may seem to make most against it, is, the long time of his presidency over that See: seeing by this account he must sit at least LXXIV years Bishop of that Church, from the latter end of Domitians reign (when the Apocalyps was written) to the Persecution under M. Aurelius, when he suffered. To which no other solution needs be given, then that his great, nay extreme Age at the time of his death renders it not at all improbable; especially when we find several Ages after, that Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, sate LXXIV years Bishop of that place. III. IT was not many years after S. Johns death, when the Persecution under Trajan began to be reinforced, wherein the Eastern parts had a very large share. Ann. Chr. CVII. Ignatius was condemned by the Empe∣rour at Antioch, and sentenced to be transported to Rome in order to his execution. In his voyage thither he put in at Smyrna, to salute and converse with Polycarp, these holy men mutually comforting and en∣couraging each other, and conferring together about the affairs of the Church. From Smyrna Ignatius and his company sailed to Troas, whence he sent back an Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, wherein he endeavours to fortifie them against the errours of the Times which had crept in amongst them, especially against those who undermined our Lords hu∣manity, and denied his coming in the Flesh, affirming him to have suffered onely in an imaginary and phantastic body. An opinion, (which as it deserved) he severely censures, and strongly refutes. He further pres∣ses them to a due observance and regard of their Bishop, and those spiri∣tual Guides and Ministers which under him were set over them; and that they would dispatch a messenger on purpose to the Church of An∣tioch, to congratulate that peace and tranquillity which then began to be restored to them. Besides this he wrote particularly to S. Polycarp, whom he knew to be a man of an Apostolic temper, a person of singular faithfulness and integrity, recommending to him the care and superin∣tendency of his disconsolate Church of Antioch. In the Epistle it self, as extant at this day, there are many short and useful rules and precepts of life, especially such as concern the Pastoral and Episcopal Office.
And here again he renews his request concerning Antioch, that a messen∣ger might be sent from Smyrna to that Church, and that S. Polycarp would write to other Churches to do the like; a thing which he would have done himself, had not his hasty departure from Troas prevented him. And more then this we find not concerning Polycarp for many years after, till some unhappy differences in the Church brought him upon the public Stage. IV. IT happened that the Quartodeciman controversie about the observation of Easter began to grow very high between the Eastern and Western Churches, each standing very stifly upon their own way, and justifying themselves by Apostolical practice and tradition. That this fire might not break out into a greater flame, S. Polycarp Iren. apud. Ex∣seb. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 14. p. 127. undertakes a journey to Rome to interpose with those who were the main supports and champions of the opposite party, and gave life and spirit to the con∣troversie. Though the exact time of his coming hither cannot precisely be defined, yet will it in a great measure depend upon Anicetus his suc∣cession to that See, in whose time he came thither. Now evident it is that almost all the ancient. Catalogues place him before Soter, and next to Pius, whom he succeded. This succession Chron. ad An. CLIV. Eusebius places Ann. Chr. CLIV. a computation certainly much truer then that of Baronius, who places it in the year CLXVII. and consonantly to this the Chronicle of Alexandria Loc. infra cit. places S. Polycarps coming to Rome Ann. Chr. CLVIII. Anton. Imp. XXI. 'Tis true indeed that in two ancient Catalogues of the Bi∣shops of Rome, set down by De Schism. Donatist. l. 2. p. 38. Optatus and Epist. CLXV ad Generos. col. 751. S. Augustine, Anicetus is set be∣fore Pins, and made immediately to succeed Hyginus; by which account he must be removed fifteen years higher, for so long Eusebius positively says Pius sate. And methinks it seems to look a little this way, that Eusebius having given an account of the Emperour Antoninus Pius his Rescript in behalf of the Christians (granted by him in his third Consulship, Ann. Chr. CXL. or thereabouts) immediately adds that about the time of the things H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 14. p. 127. spoken of Anicetus governed the Church of Rome, and Polycarp came thither upon this errand; the late peace and indul∣gence granted to the Christians probably administring both opportunity and encouragement to his journey. But seeing this Scheme of Times contradicts Eusebius his plain and positive account in other places, and that most ancient Catalogues, especially that of Lib. 3. c. 3. & ap. Eus. l. 4. c. 13. p. 126. Irenaeus and Ap. Euseb. ib. c. 22. p. 142. Hegesippus (who both lived and were at Rome in the time of Anicetus himself) con∣stantly place Anticetus next to Pius, I dare not disturb this ancient and almost uncontrolled account of things, till I can meet with better evi∣dence for this matter. But when ever it was, over he came to Anicetus to confer with him about this affair. Which makes me the more won∣der at the learned Monsieur Anubt. in En∣seb. p. 109. Valois, who with so peremptory a confi∣dence denies that Polycarp came to Rome upon this errand, and that it was not the difference about the Paschal solemnity, but some other con∣troversies that brought him thither, when as Ap. Euseb. loc. cit. vid. etiam. Chron. Alex. ad An. 2. Olym. 224 Ind. X. p. 602. ubi habet, . Irenaeus his express words are, (if Eusebius rightly represent them) that he came to Rome to confer and discourse with Anicetus, , by reason of a certain controversie concerning the day whereon Easter was to be celebrated. 'Tis true he Ib. . 5. c. 24. pag. 193. says, that they differed a little , about some other things, but this hindred not, but that the other was the main errand and inducement of his Voyage thither: though even about that (as he adds) there was no great contention between them. For
those holy and blessed souls knowing the main and vital parts of Reli∣gion not to be concerned in Rituals and external observances, mutually saluted and embraced each other. They could not indeed so satisfie one another, as that either would quit the customs which they had observed, but were content still to retain their own sentiments, without violating that charity, which was the great and common Law of their Religion. In token whereof they communicated together at the Holy Sacrament; and Anicetus to put the greater honour upon S. Polycarp, gave him leave to consecrate the Eucharist in his own Church: after which they parted peaceably, each side though retaining their ancient Rites, yet maintaining the peace and communion of the Church. The ancient Synod. à Papp. edit. gr. l. p. 3. & Concil. Tom. 1. col. 583. edit. noviss. Synodicon tells us that a Provincial Synod was held at Rome about this matter by Anicetus, Polycarp, and ten other Bishops, where it was decreed that Easter should not be kept at the time, nor after the Rites and manner of the Jews, but be celebrated , on the eminent and great Lords day that followed after it. But improbable it is that S. Polycarp should give his Vote to any such determination, when we know that he could not agree with Anicetus in this controversie, and that he left Rome with the same judgment and practice herein, wherewith he came thither. V. DURING his stay at Iren. adv. hae∣res. l. 3. c. 3. p. 233. & ap. Eu∣sib. l. 4. c. 14. Rome he mainly set himself to convince gain∣sayers, testifying the truth of those Doctrines which he had received from the Apostles, whereby he reclaimed many to the Communion of the Church, who had been infected and over-run with errours, espe∣cially the pernicious heresies of Marcion, and Valentinus. And when Marcion meeting him one day accidentally in the street, and ill resenting it that he did not salute him, called out to him, Polycap, . Men. Graecor. ubi. supr. own us; the good man replied in a just indignation, I own thee to be the first-born of Satan. So religiously cautious (says Irenaeus) were the Apostles and their followers, not so much as by discourse to communicate with any that did adul∣terate and corrupt the truth; observing S. Pauls rule, Tit. 3.9, 10. A man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition reject; knowing that he that is such is perverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself. Indeed S. Polycarps pious and devout mind was fermented with a mighty zeal and abhorrency of the poysonous and pestilent prin∣ciples, which in those times corrupted the simplicity of the Christian Faith, in so much that when at any time he heard any thing of that na∣ture, he was wont Iren. Epist. ad Florin. ap. Eu∣seb. l. 5. c. 20. p. 188. presently to stop his ears, and cry out, Good God, in∣to what times hast thou reserved me, that I should hear such things! imme∣diately avoiding the place where he had heard any such discourse. And the same dislike he manifested in all the Epistles, which he wrote either to neighbour-Churches, or particular persons, warning them of errours, and exhorting them to continue stedfast in the truth. This zeal against Heretics, and especially his carriage towards Marcion, we may suppose he learnt in a great measure from S. John, of whom he was wont to Iren. l. 3. c. 3. p. 233. & ap. Enseb. l. 4. c. 14. tell, that going into a Bath at Ephesus, and espying Cerinthus the Heresiarch there, he presently started back, Let us be gone (said he to his Compa∣nious) lest the Bath, wherein there is Cerinthus, the enemy of the truth, fall upon our heads. This passage (says Irenaeus) some yet alive heard from S. Polycarps own mouth, and himself no doubt among the rest; for so
he tells us Epist. ad. Flo∣rin. ubi supr. elsewhere, that in his youth when he was with S. Polycarp in the lesser Asia, he took such particular notice of things, that he per∣fectly remembred the very place where he used to sit while he discour∣sed, his goings out and coming in, the shape of his body, and the manner of his life, his discourses to the People, and the account he was wont to give of his familiar converse with S. John, and others who had seen our Lord, whose sayings he rehearsed, and whatever they had told him con∣cerning our Saviour, concerning his Miracles and his Doctrine, which themselves had either seen or heard, agreeing exactly with the relations of the Sacred History. All which Irenaeus tells us he particularly took notice of, and faithfully treasured them up in his mind, and made them part of his constant meditation. These are all the material remarks which I find among the Ancients concerning Polycarp during the time of his Government of the Church at Smyrna. Indeed there are several Miracles and particular passages of his life related by the above-mentio∣ned Pionius, which tend infinitely to exalt the honour of this holy man. But seeing the Author is obscure, and that we can have no reasonable satisfaction who he was, and whence he borrowed his notices and ac∣counts of things, I chuse rather to suspend my belief, then to entertain the Reader with those (at best uncertain) relations which he has gi∣ven us. VI. IN the reign of M. Antoninus and L. Verus, began a severe Per∣secution, (whether fourth or fifth, let others enquire) against the Chri∣stians, Melito Bishop of Sardis, who lived at that time, and dedicated his Apology to the Emperours, making mention of Apud Euseb. l. 4. c. 26. p. 147., new Edicts and Decrees which the Emperours had issued out through Asia, by virtue whereof impudent and greedy Infor∣mers spoiled and vexed the innocent Christians. But the storm increa∣sed into a more violent tempest about the seventh year of their reign, Ann. Chr. CLXVII. when the Emperour Marcus Antoninus designing an expedition against the Jul. Capit. in vit. M. Antonin. c. 13. p. 181. Marcomanni, the terrour of whom had sufficiently awakened them at Rome, summoned the Priests together, and began more solemnly to celebrate their Religious Rites, and no doubt but he was told that there was no better way to propitiate and atone the gods, then to bear hard upon the Christians, generally looked upon as the most open and hateful enemies to their gods. And now it was that S. Polycarp af∣ter along and diligent discharge of his duty in his Episcopal station re∣ceived his Crown. So vastly wide of the mark are the later Men. Graec . Greeks, making him in their public Offices to suffer Martyrdom under the Decian Persecution. Nor much nearer is that of H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 22. p. 284. Socrates (however he fell into the errour) who tells us that he was martyred under Gordianus. Mistakes so extravagant, that there needs no more to confute them, then to mention them. Concerning his Sufferings and Martyrdom we have a full and particular relation in a Letter of the Church of Smyrna writ∣ten not long after his death to the Church of Philomelium (or more truly Philadelphia) and in the nature of an Encyclical Epistle, to all the Dioceses () of the Holy Catholic Church; the far greatest part whereof Eusebius has inserted into his History, leaving out onely the be∣ginning and the end, though the entire Epistle together with its ancient Version, or rather Paraphrase, is since published by Bishop Ʋsher. It was penned by Euaristus, and afterwards (as appears by their several subscriptions at the end of it) transcribed out of Irenaeus his Copy by
Caius, contemporary and familiar with Irenaeus, out of his by one So∣crates at Corinth, and from his by Pionius, who had with great diligence found it out. A piece it is that challenges a singular esteem and reve∣rence both for the subject matter and the antiquity of it, with which Animadv. ad Easeb. Chr. ad N. MMCLXXXIII. p. 221. Scaliger thinks every serious and devout mind must needs be so affected, as never to think it has enough on't: professing for his own part that he never met with any thing in all the History of the Church, with the reading whereof he was more transported, so that he seemed no longer to be himself. Which effect that it may have upon the pious well-disposed Reader, we shall present him with this following ac∣count. VII. THE Persecution growing hot at Epist. Eccles. Smyrn. de Mart. Polycarp. Edit. Usser. p. 16. & apad Euseb. l. 4. c. 15. p. 129. Smyrna, and many having already sealed their confession with their bloud, the general out-cry was, Away with the impious, (or the Atheists, such they generally called and accounted the Christians) let Polycarp be sought for. The good man was not disturbed at the news, but resolved to endure the brunt: till his friends, knowing his singular usefulness, and that our Lord had gi∣ven leave to his Disciples, when persecuted in one City to flee to ano∣ther, prevailed with him to withdraw into a neighbouring Village, where with a few companions he continued day and night in prayer, earnestly interceding with Heaven (as afore-time it had ever been his custom) for the peace and tranquillity of all the Churches in the World. Three days before his apprehension falling at night as he was at prayer into a trance, he dreamt that his Pillow was on fire, and burned to ashes; which when he awakened, he told his friends was a prophetic presage, that he should be burnt alive for the cause of Christ. In the mean time he was every where narrowly sought for, upon notice whereof his friends perswaded him to retire into another Village, whither he was no soo∣ner come but his enemies were at hand, who seizing upon a couple of youths (one of whom by stripes they forced to a confession,) were by them conducted to his lodging. Entering the house at Evening, they perceived him to be in bed in an upper Room; and though upon notice before hand of their coming he might easily have saved himself by slipping into another house, yet he refused, saying, The will of the Lord be done. Understanding his Persecutors were there, he came down and saluted them with a very chearful and gentle countenance; in so much that they who had not hitherto known him, wondered to behold so venerable a person, of so great age, and so grave and composed a presence, and what needed all this stir to hunt and take this poor old man. He nothing concerned, ordered a Table to be spread, and Provi∣sions to be set upon it, inviting them to partake of them, and onely re∣questing for himself, that in the mean while he might have one hour for Prayer. Leave being granted, he rose up, and betook himself to his devotions, wherein he had such mighty assistances of divine grace, that he continued praying near two hours together, heartily recommending to God the case of all his friends and acquaintance, whether great or little, honourable or ignoble, and the state of the Catholic Church throughout the World, all that heard him being astonished at it, and many of them now repenting that so divine and venerable an old man should be put to death. VIII. HIS prayer being ended, and they ready to depart, he was set upon an Ass, and (it being then the Great Sabbath, though what that
Great Sabbath was, learned men, I believe, will hardly agree till the com∣ing of Elias) conducted into the City. As they were upon the Road, they were met by Herod and his Father Nicetes, who indeed were the main Springs of the Persecution, and had put the tamult into motion. This Herod was an Irenarcha, one of those, ad quos tuendae publicae Pacis vigilantia pertinebat, as Epist. CLIX. col. 720. CLX. c. 722. vid. l. 18. § 4. ff. de maner. & honor. Tit. 4. & l. 6. §. 2. ff. de custod. & exhib. reor. T. 3. S. Augustin describes them; their Office was most what the same with that of our modern Justices of the Peace, they being set to guard the Provinces, and to secure the public peace and quietness within their several Jurisdictions, to prevent and suppress Riots and Tu∣mults, Robberies, and Rapines, and to enquire into the Companions and Receivers of all such persons, and to transmit to the Magistrates the examinations and notices which they had received of such matters. They were appointed either by the Emperour himself, or the Praefecti Praetorio, or the Decurio's; and at this time the custom in the Provinces of the lesser Asia was, that every City did yearly send ten of the names of their principal persons to the Governour of the Province, who chose out one to be the Irenarcha, the Keeper, or Justice of the Peace. Being afterwards found grievous and troublesom to the People, they were taken away by a Law of the younger C. Th. l. unic. Tit. 14. de Hi∣renarch. Theodosius, though the Of∣fice remained under another name. This Office at Smyrna was at this time managed by this Herod, whom Ad Ann. CLXIX. n. 7. Baronius conjectures to be A. Gell. noct. Att. l. 1. c. 2. p. 2. J. Capit. in vit. M. Anton. c. 3. p. 151. Herodes At∣ticus, a man of consular dignity, and of great learning and eloquence, and who had been Tutor to the present Emperour. Certain it is that that Herod governed in the free Cities of Philastr. de vit. Sophist. l. 2. in Herod. p. m. 646. & l. 1. in Polemon. p. 642. Asia, and resided sometimes at Smyrna: though it cramps the conjecture, that the name of that Herods Father was Atticus, of this Nicetes, unless we will suppose him to have had two names. But whoever he be, a great enemy he was to Polycarp, whom meeting upon the way, he took him up into his Chariot, where both he and his Father by plausible insinuations sought to un∣dermine his constancy, asking him what great harm there was in saying, My Lord the Emperour, and in sacrificing, by which means he might escape. This was an usual way of attempting the Christians; not that they made any scruple to acknowledge the Emperour to be their Lord, (none were so forward, so earnest to pay all due subjection and reve∣rence to Princes) but because they knew that the Romans, too apt to flatter the ambition of their Emperours into a fondly usurpt Divinity, by that title usually understood God, as Apolog. c. 34 p. 28. Tertullian tells them; in any other notion of the word they could as freely as any call him Lord, though, as he adds, even Vid. Sueton. in vit. Aug. c. 53. p. 192. Augustus himself modestly forbad that title to be ascribed to him. IX. S. POLYCARP returned no answer to their demand, till im∣portunately urging him, he replied, that he would not at any rate com∣ply with their persuasions. Frustrated of the ends which they had upon him, they now lay aside the Vizor of their dissembled friendship, and turn their kindness into scorn and reproaches, thrusting him out of the Chariot with so much violence, that he bruised his thigh with the fall. Whereat nothing daunted, as if he had received no hurt, he chear∣fully hastned on to the place of his execution under the conduct of his Guard; whither when they were come, and a confused noise and tumult was arisen, a voice came from Heaven (heard by many, but none seen who spake it,) saying, Polyearp be strong, and quit thy self like a man, Immediately he was brought before the public Tribunal, where a great
shout was made, all rejoicing that he was apprehended. The Procon∣sul (whose name was L. Statius Quadratus,) this very year, as Orat. Sacr. 4. Aristi∣des the Orator who lived at this time at Smyrna informs us, the Procon∣sul of Asia, (as not long before he had been Consul at Rome,) asked him whether he was Polycarp? which being confessed, he began to persuade him to recant; Regard, said he, thy great age, swear by the genius of Caesar, repent, and say with us, take away the impious. These were , as my Authors truly observe, their usual terms and proposals to Christians, who stoutly refused to swear by the Emperours genius; upon which account the Heathens generally traduced them as Traitors and Enemies to the State, though to wipe off that charge, they openly pro∣fessed Tert. Apol. c. 32. p. 28. Orig. contr. Cels. l. 8. p. 421., that though they could not swear by the fortune of the Empe∣rour, (their genii being accounted deities, whom the Christians knew to be but daemons, and cast out at every turn) yet they scrupled not to swear by the Emperours safety, a thing more august and sacred, then all the genii in the World. X. THE Holy Martyr looking about the Stadium, and with a severe and angry countenance, beholding the croud, beckned to them with his hand, sighed and looked up to Heaven, saying, (though quite in another sense then they intended) Take away the impious. The Procon∣sul still persuaded him to swear, with promise to release him, withall urging him to blaspheme Christ; for with that temptation they were wont to assault Christians, and thereby to try the sincerity of their Re∣negado's, a course which Epist. ad Tra∣jan. Imp. Ep. 97. l. 10. Pliny tells us he observed towards Apostate Christians, though he withall confesses, that none of them that were really Christians could ever be brought to it. The motion was resen∣ted with a noble scorn, and drew from Polycarp this generous confession, Fourscore and six years I have served him, and he never did me any harm, how then shall I now blaspheme my King and my Saviour? But nothing will satisfie a malicious misguided Zeal: the Proconsul still importuned him to swear by Caesars genius; to whom he replied, Since you are so vainly ambitious that I should swear by the Emperours genius, as you call it, as if you knew not who I am, hear my free confession, I am a Christian. If you have a mind to learn the Christian Religion, appoint me a time, and Ile instruct you in it. The Proconsul advised him to persuade the People; he an∣swered, To you I rather chuse to address my discourse; for we are com∣manded by the Laws of our Religion to give to Princes and the Powers or∣dained of God, all that due honour and reverence, that is not prejudicial and contrary to the precepts of Religion. As for them (meaning the com∣mon Herd) I think them not competent Judges, to whom I should apologize, or give an account of my Faith. XI. THE Proconsul now saw 'twas in vain to use any further per∣suasives and intreaties, and therefore betook himself to severer Argu∣ments: I have wild Beasts at hand (said he) to which Ile cast thee, unless thou recant. Call for them (cried the Martyr) for we are immutably resolved not to change the better for the worse, accounting it fit and comely onely to turn from Vice to Vertue. Since thou makest so light of wild Beasts (ad∣ded the Proconsul) I have a Fire that shall tame thee, unless thou repent. Thou threatnest me with a Fire (answered Polycarp) that burns for an hour, and is presently extinct, but art ignorant alas of the Fire of eternal damna∣tion and the judgment to come, reserved for the wicked in the other World. But why delayest thou? bring forth what ever thou hast a mind to. This
and much more he spake with a pleasant and chearful confidence, and a divine grace was conspicuous in his very looks, so far was he from cowardly sinking under the great threatnings made against him. Yea the Proconsul himself was astonished at it, though finding no good could be done upon him, he commanded the Crier in the middle of the Stadium thrice to make open Proclamation (as was the manner of the Romans in all Capital Trials) Polycarp has confessed himself a Christian. Whereat the whole multitude both of Jews and Gentiles that were present, (and probable it is that the , the Common-Council, or Assembly of Asia, might about this time be held at Smyrna for the celebration of their common Shews and Sports; for that it was sometimes held here is evident from an ancient — Marm. Oxon. III. p. 70. Inscription making mention of it,) gave a mighty shout, crying out aloud, This is the great Doctor of Asia, and the Father of the Christians; this is the destroyer of our gods, that teaches men not to do sacrifice, or worship the deities. XII. THE cry being a little over, they immediately addressed them∣selves to Philip the Asiarch: these Vid. l. 6. §. 14. ff. de excu∣sat. Tit. 1. & l. 8. §. 1. de Vacat. Tit. 5. ibid. vid. etiam Aristid. Orat. Sacr. IV. Asiarchs were Gentile Priests belong∣ing to the Commonalty of Asia, yearly chosen at the Common-Council or Assembly of Asia, to the number of about ten, (whereof one was Prin∣cipal) out of the names returned by the several Cities. It was an Office of great honour and credit, but withall of great expence and charge, they being obliged to entertain the people with Sights and Sports upon the Festival Solemnities, and therefore it was not conferred but upon the more wealthy and substantial Citizens. In this place was Philip at this time, whom the people clamorously requested, to let out a Lion upon the Malefactor. Which he told them he could not do, having already exhibited the , the hunting of wild Beasts with men, one of the famous Shews of the Amphitheatre. Then they unanimously de∣manded, that he might be burnt alive; a fate, which he himself from the Vision in his Dream had prophetically foretold should be his portion. The thing was no sooner said then done, each one striving to bear a part in this fatal tragoedy, with incredible speed fetching Wood and Faggots from several places, but especially the Jews were peculiarly active in the service, malice to Christians being almost as natural to them, as 'tis for the fire to burn. The fire being prepared, S. Polycarp untied his Girdle, laid aside his Garments, and began to put off his Shoes; mini∣steries which he before was not wont to be put to; the Christians am∣bitiously striving to be admitted to do them for him, and happy he that could first touch his body. So great a reverence even in his younger years had he from all for the admirable strictness and regularity of his holy life. XIII. THE Officers that were imployed in his execution having dis∣posed all other things, came according to custom to nail him to the Stake; which he desired them to omit, assuring them, that he who gave him strength to endure the fire, would enable him without nailing to stand immovable in the hottest flames. So they onely tied him, who standing like a Sheep ready for the slaughter, designed as a grateful sa∣crifice to the Almighty, clasping his hands which were bound behind him, he poured out his soul to Heaven in this following Prayer. O Lord God Almighty, the Father of thy well-beloved and ever-blessed Son Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the knowledge of thee; the God of Angels, Powers, and of every creature, and of the whole race of the righteous, who
live before thee; I bless thee that thou hast graciously condescended to bring me to this day and hour, that I may receive a portion in the number of thy holy Martyrs, and drink of Christs cup, for the resurrection to eternal life both of soul and body in the incorruptibleness of the holy Spirit. Into which number grant I may be received this day, being found in thy sight as a fair and acceptable sacrifice, such a one as thou thy self hast prepared, that so thou mayest accomplish what thou, O true and faithful God, hast foreshewn. Where∣fore I praise thee for all thy mercies, I bless thee, I glorifie thee, through the eternal High-priest, thy beloved Son Jesus Christ; with whom to thy self and the Holy Ghost, be glory both now and for ever. Amen. Which last word he pronounced with a more clear audible voice, and having done his Prayer, the Ministers of Execution blew up the fire, which increasing to a mighty flame, behold a wonder (seen, say my Authors, by us, who were pur∣posely reserved, that we might declare it to others) the flames disposing themselves into the resemblance of an Arch, like the Sails of a Ship swelled with the Wind, gently encircled the bo∣dy of the Martyr, Thicem si quis medio miretur in igne flammas, Emori, & extructo se reparare rogo Chiupeat, POLYCARPE, avi das tibi parcere Non ausas sacrâ te violare face. Mille nitent tedae, rutilant{que} hinc inde favillis, Atque in te Dominum, quem colis ipse, colunt. Praemia nunc majora tibi sed reddit Olympus, Ignea qui pedibus subjicit astra suis. who stood all the while in the midst, not like rosted flesh, but like Gold or Silver purified in the Furnace, his body sending forth a delightful fragrancy, which like fran∣kincense, or some other costly spices, presented it self to our senses. XIV. Inscript. Romae in Ecclesia S. Stephani in Coe∣li, suprascripta haec Siracidae sententia: HOW blind and incorrigibly obstinate is unbelief! The Infidels were so far from being convinced, Ecclesiastic. LI. 6. IN MEDIO IGNIS NON SUM AESTUATUS. that they were rather exasperated by the miracle, commanding a Spearman, one of those who were wont to dispatch wild Beasts when they became outragious, Vid. usser. not. 74. in Act. Polycarp. p. 67. to go near and run him through with a Sword; which he had no sooner done, but such a vast quantity of bloud flowed from the wound, as extinguished and put out the fire; together with which a Dove was seen to fly from the wounds of his Body, which some suppose to have been his soul, clothed in a visible shape at the time of its departure; though true it is, that this circumstance is not mentioned in Eusebius his account, and proba∣bly never was in the original. Nor did the malice of Satan end here, he knew by the innocent and unblamable course of his life, and the glorious constancy of his Martyrdom, that he had certainly attained the Crown of Immortality, and nothing now was left for his spight to work on, but to deprive them even of the honour of his bones. For many were desirous to have given his body decent and honourable burial, and to have assem∣bled there for the celebration of his memory; but were prevented by some who prompted Nicetes the Father of Herod, and Brother to Alce, to advise the Proconsul not to bestow his body upon the Christians, lest leaving their crucified Master, they should henceforth worship Polycarpus. A suggestion however managed by the Heathens, yet first contrived and prompted by the Jews, who narrowly watched the Christians when they would have taken away his body from the place of Execution: Little considering (they are the very words of my Authors) how impossible it is that either we should forsake Christ, who died for the salvation of the whole World, or that we should worship any other. Him we adore as the Son of God, but Martyrs as the Disciples and Followers of our Lord, we deservedly love for their eminent kindness towards their
own Prince and Master, whose Companions and fellow-Disciples we also by all means desire to be. So far were those Primitive and better Ages from that undue and superstitious veneration of the Reliques of Martyrs and departed Saints which after-ages introduced into the Church, Prim. Christ. Part. 1. chap. 5. as elsewhere we have shewed more at large. XV. THE Centurion beholding the perversness and obstinacy of the Jews, commanded the body to be placed in the midst, and in the usual manner to be burnt to ashes; whose bones the Christians gathered up as a choice and inestimable treasure, and decently interred them. In which place they resolved, if possible (and they prayed God nothing might hinder it) to meet and celebrate the Birth-day of his Martyrdom, both to do honour to the memory of the departed, and to prepare and encourage others hereafter to give the like testimony to the Faith. Both which considerations gave birth and original to the Memoriae Martyrum, those solemn Anniversary Commemorations of the Martyrs which we have in another place more fully shewed, Ibid. chap. 7. were generally kept in the Primitive Church. Thus died this Apostolical man Ann. Chr. CLXVII. about the hundredth year of his Age; for those eighty six years, which himself speaks of, wherein he had served Christ, cannot be said to com∣mence from his birth, but from his baptism or new-birth, at which time we cannot well suppose him to have been less then sixteen or twenty years old: besides his converse with the Apostles, and consecration by S. John, reasonably suppose him of some competent years, for we cannot think he would ordain a Youth, or a very young man Bishop, especially of so great and populous a City. The incomparable Annot. in Ep. S. Polycarp, p. 2. Primate from a passage in his Epistle conjectures him to have lived (though not then converted to Christianity) at the time when S. Paul wrote his Epistles; which if so, must argue him to have been of a greater Age: nor is this any more improbable then what Ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 3. p. 116. Quadratus, the Christian Apologist, who lived under Hadrian, and dedicated his Apologetic to that Empe∣rour, reports; that there were some of those whom our Lord had hea∣led, and raised from the dead alive even in his time: and of Simeon suc∣cessor to S. James in the Bishoprick of Jerusalem, Ibid. l. 3. c. 32. p. 104. Hegesippus expresly re∣lates that he was CXX years old, at the time of his Martyrdom. Sure I am, Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. & ap. Eus. l. 4. c. 14. p. 127. Irenaeus particularly notes of our S. Polycarp, that he lived a very long time, and was arrived to an exceeding great age, when he under∣went a most glorious and illustrious Martyrdom for the Faith. XVI. HE suffered on the second of the Moneth Xanthicus, the VII. of the Kalends of May, though whether mistaken for the VII. of the Kalends of April, and so to be referred to March XXVI. as some will have it, or for the VII. of the Kalends of March, and so to be adjudged to February XXIII. as others, is difficult to determine. It shall suffice to note, that his memory is celebrated by the Greek Church, February the XXIII. by the Latine, January the XXVI. The Amphitheatre where he suffered is in a great measure yet remaining (as a late Th. Smith Epist. de VII. Asiae Eccles. p. 164. Eye-witness and diligent searcher into Antiquity informs us) in the two opposite sides whereof are the Dens where the Lions were wont to be kept. His Tomb is in a little Chappel in the side of a Mountain on the South-east part of the City, solemnly visited by the Greeks upon his Festival day; and for the maintenance and reparation whereof, Travellers are wont to throw in a few Aspers into an Earthen Pot that stands there for that purpose. How miserable the state of this City is under the Turkish yoke
at this day, is without the limits of my business to enquire: To look a little higher to the Times we write of, though I love not to make severe and ill-natured interpretations of the actions of Divine Providence, yet I cannot but observe, how heavy the Divine Displeasure not long after Polycarps death fell, as upon other places, so more particularly upon this City, by Plague, Fire, and Earthquakes, mentioned by Niphil. Epit. Dion. in M. Aton. p. 281. others, but more fully described by In Orat. Mo∣nodia dict. vid. Philastr. de vit. Sopht. l. 2. in Aristid. p. m. 659. Aristides their own Orator, who was contemporary with S. Polycarp. By which means their City, before one of the Glo∣ries and Ornaments of Asia, was turned into Rubbish and Ashes, their stately Houses overturned, their Temples ruined; one especially, which as it advanced Asia above other Countries, so gave Smyrna the honour and precedence above other Cities of Asia; their Traffick spoiled, their Marts and Ports laid waste, besides the great numbers of People that lost their lives. Indeed the fate so sad, that the Orator was forced to give over, professing himself unable to describe it. XVII. I cannot better close the Story of Polycarps Martyrdom, then with the Preface which the Church of Smyrna has in the beginning of it, as what eminently represents the illustrious faith and patience of those Primitive Christians. Edit. Usser. p. 14. confer Eu∣seb. l. 4. c. 15. p. 129. Evident it is (say they) that all those Martyr∣doms are great and blessed, which happen by the will of God; for it becomes us Christians, who have a more divine Religion then others, to ascribe to God the soveraign disposure of all events. Who would not stand and admire the generous greatness of their mind, their singu∣lar patience, and admirable love to God? who when their flesh was with scourges so torn off their backs, that the whole frame and con∣texture of their bodies, even to their inmost Veins and Arteries, might be seen, yet patiently endured it. Insomuch that those who were present, pitied and grieved at the sight of it, while they themselves were endued with so invincible a resolution, that none of them gave one sigh or groan: the holy Martyrs of Christ letting us see, that at that time when they were thus tormented, they were strangers to their own bodies; or rather that our Lord stood by them to assist and comfort them. Animated by the grace of Christ, they despised the torments of men, by one short hour delivering themselves from eternal mise∣ries: the fire which their Tormenters put to them seemed cool and little, while they had it in their eye, to avoid the everlasting and un∣extinguishable flames of another World; their thoughts being fixed upon those rewards which are prepared for them that endure to the end, such as neither ear hath heard, nor eye hath seen, nor hath it entered into the heart of man; but which were shewn to them by our Lord, as be∣ing now no longer Mortals, but entering upon the state of Angels. In like manner those who were condemned to be devoured by wild Beasts, for a long time endured the most grievous tortures; shells of Fishes were strewed under their naked bodies, and they forced to lie upon sharp pointed stakes driven into the ground, and several such like Engines of torture devised for them, that (if possible) by the con∣stancy of their torments, the enemy might drive them to renounce the Faith of Christ: Various were the methods of punishments which the Devil did invent, though blessed be God, there were not many, whom they were able to prevail upon.— And at the end of the Epistle they particularly remark concerning Polycarp, p. 28. that he was not onely a famous Doctor, but an eminent Martyr, whose Martyrdom all strove
to imitate, as one who by his patience conquered an unrighteous Judge, and by that means having attained an immortal Crown was triumphing with the Apostles, and all the souls of the righteous, glorifying God the Father, and praising of our Lord, the disposer of our bodies, and the Bi∣shop and Pastor of the Catholic Church throughout the World. Nor were the Christians the onely persons that reverenced his memory, but the very Gentiles (as Loc. supr. cit. p. 135. Eusebius tells us) every where spoke honourably of him XVIII. AS for his Writings, besides that Epist. ad L∣cia. p. 194. Tom. 1. S. Hierom mentions the Vo∣lums of Papias and Polycarp, and the above-mentioned Vit. Polycarp. c. 3. n. 12. p. 697 ubi supr. Pionius his Epi∣stles and Homilies, Epist. ad Flo∣rin. ap. Euseb. ubi supr. Irenaeus evidently intimates that he wrote several Epistles, of all which none are extant at this day, but the Epistle to the Philippians, an Epistle peculiarly celebrated by the Ancients, very useful says De Script. in Polycarp. S. Hierom,  (as Suid. in voc. . Suidas and Sophron. ap. Hieron. ib. Sophronius stile it) a most admirable Epistle. Adv. Hares. l. 3. c. 3. & ap. Eus. l. 4. c. 15. p. 128. Irenaeus gives it this Elogium, that it is a most perfect and absolute Epistle, whence they that are careful of their salvation, may learn the character of his Faith, and the truth which he preached. To which Eusebius adds, that in this Epistle he makes use of some Quotations out of the first Epistle of S. Peter. An observation that holds good with the Epistle, as we have it at this day, there being many places in it cited out of the first, not one out of the second Epistle. Photius passes this just and true judgment of it, that it is full of many admonitions, deli∣vered with clearness and simplicity, according to the Ecclesiastic way way and manner of interpretation. It seems to hold a great affinity both in stile and substance with Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians, often suggesting the same rules, and making use of the same words and phra∣ses, so that it is not to be doubted, but he had that excellent Epistle par∣ticularly in his eye at the writing of it. Indeed it is a pious and truly Christian Epistle, furnished with short and useful Precepts and Rules of Life, and penned with the modesty and simplicity of the Apostolic Times, valued by the Ancients next to the Writings of the Holy Canon; Ubi supr. and S. Hierom tells us that even in his time it was read in Asiae conventu, in the public Assemblies of the Asian Church. It was first published in Greek by P. Halloix the Jesuit, Ann. MDCXXXIII. and not many years after by Bishop Ʋsher: and I presume the pious Reader will think it no unuseful digression, if I here subjoin so venerable a monument of the ancient Church.
THE EPISTLE OF S. POLYCARP, Bishop of Smyrna and Martyr, to the Philippians. Polycarp and the Presbyters that are with him, to the Church of God which is at Philippi: Mercy unto you, and Peace from God Almighty, and Jesus Christ our Saviour, be multiplied. I. I REJOICED with you greatly in our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye entertained the patterns of true love, and (as became you) conducted onwards those who were bound with chains, which are the Ornaments of Saints, and the Crowns of those that are the truly elect of God, and of our Lord: and and that the firm root of your Faith, formerly pub∣lished, does yet remain, and bring forth fruit in our Lord Jesus Christ, who was pleased to offer up himself even unto death for our sins: Act. 2.24. 1 Pet. 1.8. whom God raised up, having loosed the pains of death: in whom, though you see him not, ye believe, and believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory; wherein∣to many desire to enter, Eph. 28. knowing that by Grace ye are saved, not by Works, but by the Will of God through Jesus Christ. II. 1 Pet. 1.13. WHEREFORE girding up your loins, serve God in fear and truth, forsaking empty and vain talking, and the error wherein so many are involved, believing in him who raised up our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.21. and gave him glory, and a throne at his right hand; to whom all things both in Heaven and in Earth are put in subjection, whom every thing that has breath worships, who comes to judge the quick and the dead, whose bloud God will require of them that believe not in him. But he who raised him up from the dead, will raise up us also, if we do his will, and walk in his commandments, and love what he loved, abstaining from all unrighteousness, inordainate desire, 1 Pet. 3.9. covetousness, detraction, false witness; not rendring evil for evil, or railing for railing, or striking for striking, or cursing for cursing, but remembring what the Lord said, Matth .1. Le 6.36, 37. when he taught thus, Judge not, that ye be not judged, forgive and ye shall be forgiven, be merciful, that ye may obtain mercy: with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you again: and that blessed are the poor, Matt. 5.3.1. and they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of God. III. THESE things, Brethren, I write to you concerning righteousness, not of my own humour, but because your selves did provoke me to it. For nei∣ther I, nor any other such as I am, can attain to the wisdom of blessed and glorious S. Paul, who being among you, and conversing personally with those who were then alive, firmly and accurately taught the word of truth; and when absent, wrote Epistles to you, by which, if you look into them, ye may be built in the Faith, delivered unto you, which is the Mother of us all, being followed by Hope, and led on by Love, both towards God, and Christ, and to our neighbour. For whoever is inwardly replenished with these things, has fulfilled the law of righteousness; and he that is furnished with love, stands at a distance from all sin. 1 Tim. 6.7. But the love of Money is the beginning of all evil. Knowing therefore that we brought nothing into the World, and that we shall carry nothing out, let us arm our selves with the armour of righteousness, and in the first place be instructed our selves to walk in the commands of the Lord, and next teach your Wives to live in the Faith deli∣vered to them, in love, and chastity, that they embrace their own husbands with all integrity, and others also with all temperance and continency, and that they educate and discipline their children in the fear of God. The Wi∣dows, that they be sober and modest concerning the Faith of the Lord, that they incessantly intercede for all, and keep themselves from all slandring de∣traction, false witness, covetousness, and every evil work: as knowing that they are the Altars of God, and that he accurately surveys the sacrifice, and that nothing can be concealed from him, neither of our reasonings, nor thoughts, nor the secrets of the heart. Accordingly knowing that God is not mocked, we ought to walk worthy of his command, and of his glory. IV. LIKEWISE let the Deacons be unblamable before his righteous presence, as the Ministers of God in Christ, and not of men; not accusers, not double-tongued, not covetous, but temperate in all things, compassionate, di∣ligent, walking according to the truth of the Lord, who became the Deacon or servant of all: of whom, if we be careful to please him in this World, we shall receive the reward of the other life according as he has promised to raise us from the dead: and if we walk worthy of him, we believe that we shall also reign with him. Let the Young men also be unblamable in all things, studying in the first place to be chaste, and to restrain themselves from all that is evil. For it is a good thing to get above the lusts of the World, seeing every Lust wars against the Spirit; and that neither Fornicators, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. nor ef∣feminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind shall inherit the King∣dom of God, nor whoever commits base things. V. WHEREFORE it's necessary that ye abstain from all these things, being subject to the Presbyters and Deacons, as to God and Christ: that the Virgins also walk with a chast and undefiled conscience. Let the Pres∣byters be tender and merciful, compassionate towards all, reducing those that are in errour, visiting all that are weak, not negligent of the Widow and the Orphan, and him that is poor, but ever providing what is honest in the sight of God and men; abstaining from all wrath, respect of persons, and unrigh∣teous judgment, being far from covetousness, not hastily believing a report against any man, not rigid in judgment, knowing that we are all faulty, and obnoxious to punishment. If therefore we stand in need to pray the Lord that he would forgive us, we our selves ought also to forgive. For we are before the eyes of him, who is Lord and God, Rom. 14.9, 10. and all must stand before the judg∣ment
seat of Christ, and every one give an account of himself. Where∣fore let us serve him with all fear and reverence, as he himself has commanded us, and as the Apostles have preached and taught us, and the Prophets who foreshewed the coming of our Lord. Be zealous of that which is good, ab∣staining from offences and false brethren, and those who bear the name of the Lord in hypocrisie, 1 Joh 4.3. 2 Epist. v. 7. who seduce and deceive vain men. For every one, that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is Anti∣christ; and he who doth not acknowledge the martyrdom of the Cross, is of the Devil, and whoever shall pervert the Oracles of the Lord to his private lusts, and shall say, that there is neither resurrection nor judgment to come, that man is the first-born of Satan. Leaving therefore the vanity of many, and their false doctrines, let us return to that doctrine, that from the beginning was delivered to us: let us be watchful in Prayers, persevering in Fasting, and Supplications, beseeching the All-seeing God that he would not lead us into temptation; Matt. 26.41. as the Lord has said, the Spirit indeed is willing but the Flesh is weak. Let us unweariedly and constantly adhere to Jesus Christ, who is our hope and the pledge of our righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.22, 24. who bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, but endured all things for our sakes, that we might live through him. Let us then imitate his patience, and if we suffer for his Name, we glorifie him; for such a pattern he set us in himself, and this we have believed and entertained. VI. I exhort you therefore all, that ye be obedient to the word of righteous∣ness, and that you exercise all manner of patience, as you have seen it set forth before your eyes, not onely in the blessed Ignatius, and Zosimus, and Rufus, but in others also among you, and in Paul himself, and the rest of the Apostles; being assured that all these have not run in vain, but in faith and righteous∣ness, and are arrived at the place, due and promised to them by the Lord, of whose sufferings they were made partakers. For they loved not this present world, but him who both died, and was raised up again by God for us. Stand fast therefore in these things, and follow the example of the Lord, being firm and immutable in the faith, lovers of the brethren, and kindly affectionate one towards another, united in the truth, carrying your selves meekly to each other, despising no man. When it is in your power to do good, defer it not, for Alms delivereth from death. Be all of you subject one to another, having your conversation honest among the Gentiles; that both you your selves may receive praise by your good works, and that God be not blasphemed through you. For wo unto him, by whom the Name of the Lord is blasphe∣med. Wherefore teach all men sobriety, and be your selves conversant in it. VII. I am exceedingly troubled for Valens, who was sometimes ordained a Presbyter among you, that he so little understands the place wherein he was set. I therefore warn you, that you abstain from covetousness, and that ye be chast and true. Keep your selves from every evil work. But he that in these things cannot govern himself, how shall he preach it to another? If a man re∣frain not from covetousness, he will be defiled with Idolatry, and shall be judged among the Heathen. 1 Cor. 6.2. Who is ignorant of the judgment of the Lord? Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World? as Paul teaches. But I have neither found any such thing in you, nor heard any such thing of you, among whom the blessed Paul laboured, and who are in the beginning of his Epistle. For of you he boasts in all those Churches, which onely knew God at that time, whom as yet we had not known. I am therefore, Brethren, greatly troubled for him, and for his Wife, the Lord give them true repen∣tance.
Be ye also sober as to this matter, and account not such as enemies, but restore them as weak and erring members, that the whole body of you may be saved; for in so doing, ye build up your selves. VIII. I trust that ye are well exercised in the holy Scriptures, and that no∣thing is hid from you; a thing as yet not granted to me. As it is said in these places, be angry and sin not: and, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Blessed is he that is mindful of these things, which I believe you are. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Christ Jesus the eternal High-priest, and Son. of God, build you up in faith and truth, and in all meekness that you may be without anger, in patience, forbearance, long-suffer∣ing, and chastity, and give you a portion and inheritance amongst his Saints, and to us together with you, and to all under Heaven, who shall believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in his Father, who raised him from the dead. Pray for all Saints. Pray also for Kings, Magistrates, and Princes, and even for them that hate and persecute you, and for the Enemies of the Cross, that your fruit may be manifest in all, that you may be compleat in him. IX. YE wrote unto me, both ye and Ignatius, that if any one go into Syria, he might carry your Letters along with him: which I will do so soon as I shall have a convenient opportunity, either my self, or by some other, whom I will send upon your errand. According to your request we have sent you those Epistles of Ignatius, which he wrote to us, and as many others of his as we had by us, which are annexed to this Epistle, by which ye may be greatly profited. For they contain in them faith, and patience, and whatever else is necessary to build you up in our Lord. Send us word what you certainly know both concerning Ignatius himself, and his companions. These things have I written unto you by Crescens, whom I have hitherto commended to you, and do still recommend. For he has unblamably conversed among us, as also I believe amongst you. His sister also ye shall have recommended, when she shall come unto you. Be ye safe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be with you all. Amen. The End of S. POLYCARP'S Life.
THE LIFE OF S. QUADRATUS BISHOP of ATHENS. Michael Burghers Dilineavit et sculpsit. S. QUADRATUS. His Birth-place enquired into. His Learning. His Education under the Apostles. Publius Bishop of Athens. Quadratus his succession in that See. The degenerate state of that Church at his coming to it. His inde∣fatigable
zeal and industry in its reformation. Its purity and flourishing condition noted by Origen. Quadratus his being endowed with a spirit of Prophecy, and a power of miracles. This person proved to be the same with our Athenian Bishop. The troubles raised against the Christians under the reign of Hadrian. Hadrians Character. His disposition to∣wards Religion, and base thoughts of the Christians. His fondness for the Learning and Religion of Greece. His coming to Athens, and kindness to that City. His being initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries. These mysteries what, and the degrees of initiation. Several addresses made to the Emperour in behalf of the Christians. Quadratus his Apologe∣tic. Ser. Granianus his Letter to Hadrian concerning the Christians. The Emperours Rescript. His good opinion afterwards of Christ and his Religion. Quadratus driven from his charge. His Martyrdom and place of Burial. I. WHETHER S. Quadratus was born at Athens, no notices of Church-Anti∣quity enable us to determine: though the thing it self be not improbable, his Education and Residence there, and the Government of that Church seem∣ing to give some colour to it. And as Nature had furnished him with incom∣parable parts, (excellens ingenium, as De Script. in Qarat. S. Hierom says of him) so the place gave him mighty advantages in his education, to be thoroughly trained up in the choicest parts of Learning, and most excellent institutions of Philosophy, upon which account the Men. Graec. . Greeks truly stile him, , a man of great Learning and Knowledge. He became acquainted with the Doctrines and Principles of Christianity, by being brought up under Apostolical instruction, for so . Ad Ann. PKZ. p. 211. Eusebius and Hier. de Scrip. in Quadr. & Epist. ad Magn. Orat. Tom. 2. p. 327. S. Hierom more then once tells us, that he was an Au∣ditor and a Disciple of the Apostles; which must be understood of the longer lived Apostles, and particularly of S. John, whose Scholar in all probability he was, as were also Ignatius, Polycarp, Papias, and others: and therefore H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37. p. 109. Eusebius places him among those that had , that were of the very first rank and order among the Apostles Suc∣cessors. There are that make him, and that too constituted by S. John (though I confess I know not by what Authority, the Ancients being wholly silent in this matter) Bishop of Philadelphia, one of the seven famous Churches of Asia, and at that time, when S. John sent his Epistle to that Church: which I pass by as a groundless and precarious assertion, seeing they might with equal warrant have made him Bishop of any other place. II. UNDER the Reign of Trajan, as is probable, though Baronius places it under Hadrian, Ann. Imp. VI. Euseb. l. 4. c. 23. p. 43. Publius Bishop of Athens suffered Martyrdom, who is thought by some to have been that very Publius whom S. Paul converted in the Island Melita in his voyage to Rome, and who afterwards succeeded Dionysius the Areopagite in the See of Athens. To him succeeded our Quadratus, (as Epist. ad A∣. apud Ea∣. loc. citat. Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who lived not long after that time, informs us) who found the state of that
Church in a bad condition at his coming to it. For upon Publius his Mar∣tyrdom, and the-Persecution that attended it, the people were gene∣rally dispersed and fled, as what wonder, if when the Shepherd is smit∣ten, the Sheep be scattered, and go astray? their public and solemn Assem∣blies were deserted, their Zeal grown cold and languid, their lives and manners corrupted, and there wanted but little of a total apostasie from the Christian Faith. This good man therefore set himself with a migh∣ty zeal to retrive the ancient spirit of Religion, he re-setled Order and Discipline, brought back the People to the public Assemblies, kindled and blew up their faith into an holy flame. Nor did he content him∣self with a bare Reformation of what was amiss, but with infinite di∣ligence preached the Faith, and by daily Converts enlarged the bounds of his Church, so that (as the Men. Graec. ubi supr. Greek Rituals express it) the Sages and Wise men of Greece being convinced by his Doctrines and wise discour∣ses, embraced the Gospel, and acknowledged Christ to be the Creator of the World, and the great Wisdom and Power of God. And in a short time reduced it to such an excellent temper, that Contr. Cels. l. 3. p. 128. Origen (who lived some years after) demonstrating the admirable efficacy of the Christian Faith over the minds of men, and its triumph over all other Religions in the World, instances in this very Church of Athens for its good Order and Constitution, its meekness, quietness, and constancy, and its care to approve it self to God, infinitely beyond the common Assembly at Athens, which was factious and tumultuary, and no way to be compared with the Christian Church in that City; that the Churches of Christ when examined by the Heathen Convocations, shone like Lights in the World, and that every one must confess that the worst parts of the Christian Church were better, then the best of their popu∣lar Assemblies; that the Senators of the Church (as he calls them) were fit to govern in any part of the Church of God, while the Vulgar Se∣nate had nothing worthy of that honourable dignity, nor were raised above the manners of the common people. III. THUS excellently constituted was the Athenian Church; for which it was chiefly beholden to the indefatigable industry, and the prudent care and conduct of its present Bishop, whose success herein was not a little advantaged by those extraordinary supernatural Powers which God had conferred upon him. That he was endued with a Spirit of Prophesie, of speaking suddenly upon great and emergent occasions, in interpreting obscure and difficult Scriptures, but especially of fore-telling future events, we have the express testimonies of H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37. p. 109. Euse∣bius, affirming him to have lived at the same time with Philips Virgin-Daughters, and to have had , the gift of Prophecy, and of another Ap. Euseb. l. 5. c. 17. p. 183. Author much ancienter then he, who confuting the er∣rour of the Cataphryges, reckons him among the Prophets who flourished under the Oeconomy of the Gospel. I know a learned Vales. Annot. ad Euseb. l. 4. c. 23. p. 81. man would fain persuade us, that the Quadratus who had the Prophetic gifts, was a person distinct from our Athenian Bishop. But the grounds he pro∣ceeds upon seem to me very weak and inconcluding. For whereas he says, that that Quadratus is not by Eusebius stiled a Bishop, who knows not that persons are not in every place mentioned under all their capa∣cities? and less need was there for it here, Quadratus when first spoken of by Eusebius, not being then Bishop of Athens, and so not proper to be taken notice of in that capacity. Nor is his other exception of greater
weight, that the prophetic Quadratus did not survive the times of Adrian, whereas ours was in the same time with Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who lived under M. Antoninus, and speaks of him as his contemporary, and lately ordained Bishop of Athens. But whoever looks into that pas∣sage of Ap. Eseb. l. 4. c. 23. p. 143. Dionysius, will find no foundation for such an assertion, but ra∣ther the quite contrary, that he speaks of him as if dead before his time, as I believe any one that impartially considers the place, must needs confess. Not to say, that S. Hierom and all after him without any scru∣ple make them to be the same. So that we may still leave him his gift of prophecy, which procured him so much reverence while he lived, and so much honour to his memory since his death. To which may he added what the Greeks in their Menaeon not improbably say of him, . Men. Graec. loc. supr. cit. that he was furnished with a power of working miracles, and that by his prayers he ruined the idolatrous Temples of the Heathens, whereby he mightily confoun∣ded the Infidels, and brought in great numbers to the Faith. IV. BUT the fair weather and prosperity of the Church was not wont to last long in those days. They had enjoyed a short tranquillity about the latter end of Trajans reign, but now alas under Adrian his Successor the weather changed, and there arose (as Epist. ad Mag. ubi spr. S. Hierom calls it) a most grievous and heavy Persecution, and which Hist. sacr. l. 2. p. 142. Sulpitius Severus ex∣presly says was the fourth Persecution. And indeed, how grievous it was, sufficiently appears from those many thousands of Martyrs that then suffered, mentioned in the ancient Martyrologies of the Church: Yea, even at Vid. Rom. Martyr. ad Sep∣temb. XX. p. 583. Rome it self Eustachius and his Wife Theopistis with their two Sons, are said by the Emperours command to have been thrown to the Lions, and when the mercy of the savage Beasts had spared them, they were ordered to be burnt to death in the belly of a brazen Bull. 'Tis true Ap. c. 6. p. 6. Tertullian says that Adrian published no Laws or Edicts against the Christians; but the Laws enacted by Trajan being yet unrepealed, or not laid aside, there would not want those who would put them in execution. We find Euseb. l. 3. c. 33 p. 105. that though Trajan commanded a stop to be put to the persecution against Christians, yet even then both People and Governours of Provinces went on with their accustomed cruelties, and though there was not a general, there were particular and provin∣cial Persecutions. And no doubt it was much more so after his death, when Adrian came to the Empire, whom they knew too well, to think he would be an enemy to such proceedings. For whatever some have said concerning the clemency and good nature of that Prince, there are Mar. Maxim. ap. Ael. Spart. in vit. Adrian. c. 20. p. 88. vid. Dion. l. 69. non long. ab init. others that plainly affirm, that it was but personated and put on, that he really was in his nature cruel, and that (according to the true genius of superstition) whatever works of piety he did, it was for fear lest the same evil fate should happen to him, that fell upon Domitian; and of his cruelty instances enough may be met with in the Writers of his Life. In short, there was in him a strange mixture and contemperation of Vice and Vertue, it being a true character which the Spartian. ib. c. 14. p. 69. Historian gives of him, that he was severe and chearful, grave and affable, delibe∣rate and yet eagerly wanton, covetous and liberal, cruel and merciful, a great dissembler, and perpetually inconstant in all his actions. V. FOR Religion he was a diligent and superstitious observer Id ib. c. 22. p. . of their own Rites of Worship, but hated and despised all strange and fo∣reign
Religions, and especially the Christian. Indeed how well he thought of the Christians, appears sufficiently from his Extat ap. Fl. Vopisc. in vit. Saturn. p. 959. Letter to Ser∣vianus the Consul, written a little after his return out of Egypt, wherein he gives the Christians there so lewd and base a character; not sticking to affirm that the People, yea their Priests, their Bishops and their very Patriarch himself would worship both Christ and Serapis, and that they were a most turbulent, vain, and injurious generation. From which Epistle it seems plain to me, that at his being there, he had severely per∣secuted the Christians, and compelled some light or false Professors to worship the Deities of the Country, which probably gave ground to his censure, and to charge the imputation upon all. And since he loo∣ked upon the Christians as such a vile sort of men, it's the less to be won∣dred, that he should connive at, or encourage their being persecuted in other parts of the Empire. He principally applied himself to the Stu∣dies of Spart. c. 1. p. 4. Greece, whereof he was so strangely fond, that he was com∣monly stiled Graeculus, the Little Greek: this made him delight much in those parts, and to converse with the Learning and Philosophy of those Countries. About the sixth or seventh year of his reign he came to Athens, where he took upon him the place and honour of an Archon, ce∣lebrated their solemn sports, and gave many particular Laws and Privi∣ledges to that City, but especially was entered into their Eleusinian My∣steries, accounted the most sacred and venerable of the whole Gentile World, and which particularly carried the Title of The Mysteries. They were solemn and Religious Rites performed to Ceres in memory of great benefits received from her, the Candidates whereof were stiled , and to the full participation whereof they were many times not admit∣ted till after a five years preparatory trial, which had many several steps, and each its peculiar rites: first there were , the common purgations, then , those that were more secret, next the , or stations, then the , the initiations, and lastly, (which was the top of all) the , or the inspections. Others rec∣kon them thus; that first there were the , the Purifications and expiations; then followed the , the Lesser Myste∣ries, when they were solemnly initiated and taken in; and lastly, after some time they arrived at the Greater Mysteries, the , which were the most hidden solemnities of all, when they were admitted to a full sight of the whole Mystic Scene, and thenceforth called  or Inspectors, and were obliged under a solemn Oath, not to discover these mysterious Rites to any. We cannot well suppose that the Emperour Adrian was put to observe these tedious methods of Initiation, their my∣stic Laws were no doubt dispensed with for so extraordinary a person, and he at once became both a Candidate and an , a thing which they sometimes granted in some extraordinary cases. And not content to do thus at Athens, De Script. in Quadrat. S. Hierom tells us, he was initiated into almost all the sa∣cred Rites of Greece, whence Loc. supr. cit. Tertullian justly stiles him, The searcher into all curious and hidden Mysteries, and Excerpt. ex Dion. à Vales. edit. p. 714. Dion himself tells us of him, that he was infinitely curious, and strangely addicted to all sorts of Divina∣tion and Magic Arts. VI. AT Athens Adrian staid the whole Winter, where his busie and superstitious Zeal being taken notice of; was warrant enough without further order for active Zealots to pursue and oppress the Christians, the Persecution growing so fierce and hot, that the Christians were forced
to remonstrate and declare their case to the Emperour; among whom besides Euseb. l. 4. c. 3. p. 116. Hieron. ubi supr. & in Epist. ad Magn. Orator. Aristides a Christian Philosopher at this time at Athens, who in an Apology addressed himself to Adrian, our Quadratus presented an Apologetic to the Emperour, defending the Christian Religion from the calumnies and exceptions of its Enemies, and vindicating it from those pretences, upon which ill minded men sought to ruine and undo the in∣nocent Christians, wherein also he particularly took notice of our Sa∣viours miracles, his curing diseases, and raising the dead, some instances whereof, he says, were alive in his time. Besides this Apology (wherein, as Eusebius says, he gave large evidences both of his excellent parts and true Apostolic Doctrine) 'tis probable he left no other Writings behind him, none being mentioned by any of the Ancients: Where I cannot but note the strange heedlessness of the Compilers of the Cent. II. cap. 10. col. 152. Centuries, where they tell us out of Eusebius, that besides the Apology, he composed another excellent Book called Syngramma, when nothing can be more plain, then that by that Writing Eusebius means not a distinct Book, but that very Apologetic Oration, which he there speaks of: and yet a mo∣dern German Bebel. Antiq. Eccles. Secul. 2. Artic. 1. p. 183. Professor (who frequently transcribes their errours as well as their labours) securely swallows it, purely (I suppose upon their Authority;) though strange it is, that he could read that passage in Eu∣sebius himself, which he seems to have done, and not palpably feel the mistake. VII. IT happened about this time that Serenius Granianus the Procon∣sul of Asia wrote J. Mart. Apol. II. p 99. & ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 8. p. 122. Letters to the Emperour, representing to him the in∣justice of the common proceedings against Christians, how unfit it was that without any legal Trial, or crime laid to their charge, they should be put to death meerly to gratifie the unreasonable and tumultuary clamours of the People. With this Letter and the Apologies that had been offered him by the Christians, the keenness of the Emperours fury was taken off, and care was taken that greater moderation should be used towards them. To which purpose he dispatched away Justin. ib. Euseb. c. 9. p. 123 to Fun∣danus, Granianus his successor in the Proconsulship of Asia this following Rescript. ADRIAN Emperour, to MINUCIUS FUNDANUS. I Received the Letters which were sent me by the most excellent Serenius Granianus, your Predecessor. Nor do I look upon it as a matter fit to be passed over without due enquiry, that the men may not be needlesly disquieted, nor Informers have occasion and encouragement of fraudulent accusations mi∣nistred unto them. Wherefore if the Subjects of our Provinces be able openly to appear to their indictments against the Christians, so as to answer to them before the public Tribunal, let them take that course, and not deal by Petition and meer noise and clamour: it being much fitter, if any accusation be brought, that you should have the cognizance of it. If any one shall prefer an indict∣ment, and prove that they have transgressed the Laws, then give you sentence against them according to the quality of the crime. But if it shall appear, that he brought it onely out of spight and malice, take care to punish that man ac∣cording to the hainousness of so mischievous a design. The same Rescripts (as Ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 26. p. 148. Melito Bishop of Sardis, who presented an Apology to M. Antoninus informs us) Adrian sent to several
other Governours of Provinces. Nay was so far wrought into a good mood, that if it be true what their own Lamprid. in vit. Alex. Se∣ver. c.  568. Historian reports of him, he designed to build a Temple to Christ, and to receive him into the num∣ber of their gods, and that he commanded Temples to be built in all Cities without Images, which were for a long time after called Adriani; but was prohibited to go on by some, who having consulted the Oracle, had been told, that if this succeeded according to some mens desires, the Temples would be deserted and all men become Christians. VIII. WHAT became of S. Quadratus after Adrians departure from Athens, we find not more then what the Loc. supra cit. Greeks in their Menaeon relate, that by the violence of Persecuters he was driven from his charge at Athens, and being first set upon by Stones, then tormented by Fire, and several other punishments, he at last under Adrian (probably about the latter end of his reign) re∣ceived the Crown of Martyrdom. . Men. ibid. To what place he fled when he left Athens, and where he suffered martyrdom is uncertain, unless it were at Magnesia, a City of Ionia in Asia Minor, where the same Menaeon tells us, he preached the Gospel, as he did at Athens, and that his body was there entombed, and his remains famous for Miracles done there. A place memorable for the death of Themistocles, that great Commander and Citizen of Athens, banished also by his own Fellow-Citizens, who after his brave and ho∣nourable atchievements, did here by a fatal draught put a period to his own life; where (as I vit. Te∣mist. p. 128. Plutarch tells us) his posterity had certain honours and priviledges conferred upon them by the Magnesians, and which his friend Themistocles the Athenian enjoyed in his time. The End of S. QUADRATUS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JUSTIN THE MARTYR. . Micha Burgh. dili. et sculp. S. IUSTINUS MARTYR. His vicinity to the Apostolic times. His Birth-place and Kindred. His Studies. His Travels into Egypt. To what Sect of Philosophy he ap∣plied himself. The occasion and manner of his strange conversion to Chri∣stianity
related by himself. Christianity the onely safe and satisfactory Philosophy. The great influence which the patience and fortitude of the Christians had upon his conversion. The force of that argument to persuade men. His vindication of himself from the charges of the Gentiles. His continuance in his Philosophic habit. The  what, and by whom worn. . His coming to Rome, and opposing Hereticks. Marcion who, and what his Principles. Justin's first Apo∣logy to the Emperours, and the design of it. Antoninus his Letter to the Common-Council of Asia in favour of the Christians. This shewed not to be the Edict of Marcus Antoninus. Justin's journey into the East, and confe∣rence with Trypho the Jew. Trypho who. The malice of the Jews against the Christians. Justin's return to Rome. His contests with Crescens the Philosopher. Crescens his temper and principles. Justin's second Apology. To whom presented. The occasion of it. M. Antoninus his temper. Justin fore-tells his own fate. The Acts of his Martyrdom. His arraignment before Rusticus Praefect of Rome. Rusticus who: the great honours done him by the Emperour. Justin's discourse with the Praefect. His freedom and courage. His sentence and execution. The time of his death. His great Piety, Charity, Impartiality, &c. His natural parts, and excellent learning. His unskilfulness in the Hebrew Language noted. A late Author censured. His Writings. The Epistle to Diognetus. Diognetus who. His stile and character. The unwar∣rantable opinions he is charged with. His indulgence to Heathens. , what.  in what sense used by the ancient Fathers. How applied to Christ, how to Reason. His opinion concerning Chiliasm. The concurrence of the Ancients with him herein. This by whom first star∣ted; by whom corrupted. Concerning the state of the Soul after this life. The doctrine of the Ancients in this matter. His assertion concerning Angels, maintained by most of the first Fathers. The original of it. Their opinion concerning Free-will shewed not to be opposed by them to the Grace of God. What influence Justin's Philosophic education had upon his opinions. His Writings enumerated. I. JƲSTIN the Martyr was one, as of the most lear∣ned, so of the most early Writers of the Eastern Church, not long after the Apostles, as H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. p. 50. Eusebius says of him, near to them  says Metho∣dius Ap. Phot. Cod. CCXXXIV. col. 921. Bishop of Tyre, both in time and vertue. And near indeed, if we strictly understand what he . Epist. ad Diognet. p. 501. says of himself, that he was a Disciple of the Apostles; which surely is meant either of the Apostles at large, as comprehending their immediate successors, or probably not of the Persons, but Doctrine and Writings of the Apostles, by which he was instructed in the knowledge of Christianity. He was Apol. II. p. 53. born at Neapolis, a noted City of Palestine within the Province of Samaria, anciently cal∣led Sichem, afterwards as De Bell. Jud. l. 5. c. 4. p. 890. Josephus tells us, by the inhabitants Mabartha, (corruptly by H Nat. l. 5. c. 13 p. 79. Pliny Mamortha) by the Romans Neapolis, and from a Colony sent thither by Flavius Vespasian, stiled Flavia Caesarea. His Fa∣ther was Priscus the Son of Bacchius (for so the , as Sylburgius and Valesius observe, must necessarily be understood, implying the one to have been his Father, the other his Grandfather,) a Gentile, and (as Animadv. ad Eus. Chron. n. MMCLVII. p. 219. Scaliger probably thinks) one of
those Greeks which were in that Colony transplanted thither, who took care together with Religion to have him educated in all the Learning and Philosophy of the Gentile World. And indeed how great and exact a Master he was in all their Arts and Learning, how thoroughly he had digested the best and most useful notions, which their Institutions of Philosophy could afford, his Writings at this day are an abundant evidence. II. IN his younger years, and as is probable, before his conversion to Christianity, he travelled into foreign parts for the accomplishment of his Studies, and particularly into Egypt, the Staple-place of all the more mysterious and recondite parts of Learning and Religion, and therefore constantly visited by all the more grave and sage Philosophers among the Heathens. That he was at Paraenes. ad Graec. p. 14. Alexandria himself assures us, where he tells us what account he received from the inhabitants of the Seventy Translators, and was shewed the Cells wherein they performed that fa∣mous and elaborate work, which probably his inquisitive curiosity as a Philosopher, and the reports he had heard of it by living among the Jews had more particularly induced him to enquire after. Among the several Sects of Philosophers, after he had run through and surveyed all the Forms, he pitched his Tent among the Platonists, whose Apol. I. (re∣vera II.) pag. 50. notions were most agreeable to the natural sentiments of his mind, and which no doubt particularly disposed him for the entertainment of Christia∣nity, Ibid. pag. 51. himself telling us, that the principles of that Philosophy, though not in all things alike, were yet not alien or contrary to the Doctrines of the Christian Faith. But alas he found no satisfaction to his mind either in this, or any other, till he arrived at a full persuasion of the truth and divinity of that Religion which was so much despised by the Wise and the Learned, so much opposed and trampled on by the Gran∣dees and Powers of the World. Whereof, and of the manner of his conversion to the ristian Religion, he has given us a very large and punctual accou  his Discourse with Trypho. I know this account is suspected by some to he onely a Prosopopoeïa, to represent the grounds of his becoming a Christian after the Platonic mode by way of Dialogue, a way familiar with the Philosophers of that Sect. But however it may be granted that some few circumstances might be added to make up the decorum of the Conference, yet I see no reason (nor is any thing offered to the contrary besides a bare conjecture) to question the foundation of the Story, whereof the sum is briefly this. III. Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 218. &c. BEING from his Youth acted by an inquisitive Philosophic genius, to make researches and enquiries after truth, he first betook himself to the Stoics, but not satisfied with his Master, he left him, and went to a Peripatetic Tutor, whose sordid covetousness soon made him conclude that truth could not dwell with him, accordingly he turned himself over to a Pythagorean, who requiring the preparatory know∣ledge of Music, Astronomy, and Geometry, him he quickly deserted, and last of all delivered himself over to the Institution of an eminent Plato∣nist, lately come to reside at Neapolis; with whose intellectual notions he was greatly taken, and resolved for some time to give up himself to solitude and contemplation. Walking out therefore into a solitary place by the Sea side, there met him a grave ancient man, of a venerable aspect, who fell into discourse with him. The dispute between them was concerning the excellency of Philosophy in general, and of Plato∣nism
in particular; which Justin asserted to be the onely true way to happiness, and of knowing and seeing God. This the grave person refutes at large, and at last comes to shew him, who were the most likely persons to set him in the right way. He tells him, that there were long before his reputed Philosophers, certain blessed and holy men, lovers of God, and divinely inspired, called Prophets, who foretold things which have since come to pass; who alone understood the truth, and unde∣signedly declared it to the World, whose Books yet extant would in∣struct a man in what most became a Philosopher to know; the accom∣plishment of whose predictions did sufficiently attest their faithfulness and integrity, and the mighty miracles which they wrought, set the truth of what they said beyond all exception; that they magnified God the great Creator of the World, and published his Son Christ to the World: Concluding his discourse with this advice, But as for thy self, above all things pray that the Gates of Light may set open to thee; for these are not things discerned and understood by all, unless God and Christ grant to a man the knowledge of them. Which discourse being ended, he im∣mediately departed from him. IV. Ibid. pag. 225. THE wise discourse of this venerable man made a deep impression upon the Martyrs mind, kindled in his soul a divine flame, and begot in him a sincere love of the Prophets, and those excellent men that were friends to Christ: And now he began seriously to enquire into, and examine the Christian Religion, which he confesses he found , the onely certain and profitable Philosophy, and which he could not but commend as containing a certain majesty and dread in it, and admirably adapted to terrifie and persuade those who were out of the right way, and to beget the sweetest serenity and peace in the minds of those who are conversant in it. Nor was it the least inducement to turn the scale with him, when he beheld the inno∣cency of the Christians lives, and the constancy of their death, with what fearless and undaunted resolutions they courted torments, and en∣countred Death in its blackest Shape. This very account he gives of it to the Roman Emperour. For my own part (says Apol. I. p. 50. he) being yet detained under the Platonic Institutions, when I heard the Christians traduced and reproached, and yet saw them fearlesly rushing upon Death, and venturing upon all those things that are accounted most dreadful and amazing to humane nature, I concluded with my self, 'twas impossi∣ble that those men should wallow in Vice, and be carried away with the love of Lust and Pleasure. For what man that is a Slave to Plea∣sure and Intemperance, that looks upon the eating humane Flesh as a delicacy, can chearfully bid Death welcom, which he knows must put a period to all his pleasures and delights; and would not rather by all means endeavour to prolong his life as much as is possible, and to delude his adversaries, and conceal himself from the notice of the Magistrate, rather then voluntarily betray and offer himself to a present execution? And certainly the Martyrs reasonings were un∣answerable; seeing there could not be a more effectual proof of their innocency, then their laying down their lives to attest it. Zeno was wont to say, he had rather see one Indian burnt alive, then hear a hun∣dred arguments about enduring labour and suffering. Whence Stromat. l. 2. p. 414. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus infers the great advantages of Christianity, where∣in there were daily Fountains of Martyrs springing up, who before
their eyes were roasted, tormented, and beheaded, every day, whom regard to the Law of their Master had taught and obliged, , to demonstrate the truth and excellency of their Religion, by sealing it with their bloud. V. WE cannot exactly fix the date of his conversion, yet may we, I think, make a very near conjecture. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 8. p. 122. Eusebius tells us, that at the time when Hadrian consecrated Antinous, Justin did yet adhere to the Studies and Religion of the Greeks. Now for this we are to know that Hadrian coming into Egypt lost there his beloved Catamit Antinous, whose death he so resented, that he advanced him into the reputa∣tion of a Deity; whence in an ancient inscription at Ap. Casau. not. in Ael. Spart. vit. Adr p. 66. Rome, he is stiled ϹΥΝΘΡΟΝΟΣΤΩΝ ΕΝ ΑΙΓΥΠΤΩ ΘΕΩΝ, the Assessor of the Gods in Egypt. He built a City to him in the place where he died called Antinoe, erected a Temple, and appointed Priests and Pro∣phets to attend it, instituted annual solemnities, and every five years Sacred Games, called , held not in Egypt onely, but in other parts; whence an Marm. Oxon. CXLIII. p. 277, Inscription not long after those times, set up by the Senate of Smyrna, mentions Lerenius Septimius Heliodorus ANTINOEA, who overcame in the Sports at Smyrna. But to return. 'Tis very evi∣dent that Hadrian had not been in Egypt, till about the time of Servia∣nus or Severianus his being Consul (as appears from that Emperours Let∣ters Ext. ap. Vo∣pist. in vt. Sa∣turn. p. 959. to him) whose Consulship fell in with Ann. Chr. CXXXII. Traj. XVI. So that this of Antinous must be done either, that, or at most, the foregoing year; and accordingly about this time (as Eusebius intimates) Justin deserted the Greeks, and came over to the Christians. Whence in his first Apology presented not many years after to Antoni∣nus Pius, Adrians Successor, he speaks Apol. II. (re∣vera I.) p. 72. of Antinous , who very lately lived and was consecrated, and of the Jewish War, headed by Barchachab, as but lately past, which we know was concur∣rent with the death and apotheosis of Antinous. For that Justin's  in both passages, cannot be precisely confined to the time of presenting that Apology, is evident to all, and therefore (as the phrase is sometimes used) must be extended to what was lately done. VI. THE wiser and more considerate part of the Gentiles were not a little troubled at the loss of so useful and eminent a person, and won∣dred what should cause so sudden a change. For whose satisfaction and conversion, as well as his own vindication, he thought good particularly to write a Discourse to them, in the very first words whereof he thus bespeaks them. Orat. ad Graec. p. 37. Think not, O ye Greeks, that I have rashly, and with∣out any judgment or deliberation departed from the Rites of your Religion. For I could find nothing in it really sacred, and worthy of the divine acceptance. The matters among you, as your Poets have ordered them, are monuments of nothing but madness and intempe∣rance: and a man can no sooner apply himself even to the most lear∣ned among you for instruction, but he shall be intangled in a thousand difficulties, and become the most confused man in the World. And then proceeds with a great deal of wit and eloquence to expose the folly and absurdness of the main foundations of the Pagan Creed, conclu∣ding his address with these exhortations; Come hither, O ye Greeks, Ibid. p. 40. and partake of a most incomparable wisdom, and be instructed in a divine Religion, and acquaint your selves with an immortal King.— Become as I am, for I sometimes was as you are. These are the Argu∣ments
that prevailed with me, this the efficacy and divinity of the do∣ctrine, which like a skilful charm expels all corrupt and poisonous af∣fections out of the soul, and banishes that Lust that is the Fountain of all evil, whence Enmities, Strifes, Envy, Aemulations, Anger, and such like mischievous passions do proceed: which being once driven out, the soul presently enjoys a pleasant calmness and tranquillity. And being delivered from that yoke of evils, that before lay upon its neck, it aspires and mounts up to its Creator; it being but suitable that it should return to that place, from whence it borrowed its original. VI. BUT though he laid aside his former Profession, he still retained his ancient Garb, , as Lib. 4. c. 11. p. 125. Euse∣bius, and after him De script. in Justin. S. Hierom reports, preaching and defending the Chri∣stian Religion under his old Philosophic habit, which was the Pallium or Cloak, the usual badge of the Greek Philosophers, (different from that which was worn by the ordinary Greeks,) and which those Christians still kept to, who before their conversion had been professed Philoso∣phers. So De Script. in Aristid. S. Hierom tells us of Aristides the Athenian Philosopher, contemporary with Quadratus, that under his former habit he became Christs Disciple; and Ap. Euseb. l. 6. c. 19. p. 221. Origen of Heraclas, afterwards Bishop of Alexan∣dria, that giving up himself to the more strict study of Philosophy he put on  the Philosophic Habit, which he constantly wore even after he became Presbyter of that Church. This custom continued long in the Christian Church, that those who did , (as H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 37. Socrates speaks) enter upon an Ascetic course of life, and a more severe profession of Religion, always wore the Philosophers Cloak, and he tells us of Silvanus the Rhetorician, that when he became Christian, and professed this Ascetic life, he was the first that laid aside the Cloak, and contrary to custom put on the common Garb. Indeed it was so com∣mon, that  became proverbial among the Heathens, when any Christian  passed by, there goes a Greek Impostor, be∣cause of their being clad after the same manner, . Dion Chrys. Orat. LXXI.  p. 627. and professing a severer life then ordinary, like the Philosophers among the Grecians, many of whom notwithstanding were meer cheats and hypocrites: and Epist. ad Marcel. p. 115. Tom. 1. S. Hierom notes of his time, that if such a Christian were not so fine and spruce in his Garb as others, presently the com∣mon saying was clapt upon him, he is an Impostor and a Greek. This habit it seems was generally black, and sordid enough. Whence the Monks who succeeded in this strict and regular course of life, are severely noted by the Gentile Writers of those Times under this character. Orat. de Templ. p. 10. Epist. ad Marcel. p. 115. Tom. 1. Libanius calls them , black-coat Monks, and says Ibid. p. 28. of them, that the greatest demonstra∣tion of their vertue was , to walk about in mourning garments. Much at the same rate In vit. Aedf. p. 65. Eunapius describes the Monks of Egypt, that they were clad in black, and were ambitious , to go abroad in the most flovenly and sordid Garb. But it is time to return to our S. Justin, who (as . Cod. 125 col. 304. Photius and Haeres. 46. p. 11. Epiphanius note) shewed himself in his words and actions, as well as in his habit to be a true Philosopher. VII. HE came to Rome (upon what occasion is uncertain) probably
about the beginning of Antoninus Pius his reign, where he fixed his ha∣bitation, dwelling, as appears from the acts of his Martyrdom, about the Timothine Baths, which were upon the Viminal Mount. Here he stre∣nously imployed himself to defend and promote the cause of Christia∣nity, and particularly to confute and beat down the Heresies that then mainly infested and disturbed the Church, writing a Book Apol. II. p. 70. against all sorts of Heresies,; but more especially opposed himself to Marcion, who was the son of a Bishop, born in Pontus, and for his deflowering a Vir∣gin had been cast out of the Church, whereupon he fled to Rome, where he broached many damnable errours, and among the rest, that there were two Gods, one the Creator of the World, whom he made to be the God of the Old Testament, and the Author of Evil; the other a more Sovereign and Supreme Being, Creator of more excellent things, the Father of Christ, whom he sent into the World to dissolve the Law and the Prophets, and to destroy the works of the other deity, whom he stiled the God of the Jews. Others, and among them especially Haeres. XLII. p. 135. Epiphanius, and a more ancient Author Dial. contr. Marcion. p. 3, 4, Basil. edit. 1674. 4. of the Dialogues against the Marcionites under the name of Origen (for that it was Origen himself, I much question) make him to have established three differing Principles or Beings; an , or good Principle, the Father of Christ, and this was the God of the Christians; an , or Creating Prin∣ciple, that made the visible frame of things, which presided over the Jews, and an , or evil Principle, which was the Devil, and ruled over the Gentiles. With him Justin encountered both by Word and Writing, particularly publishing a Book which he had composed against him and his pernicious principles. VIII. ABOUT the Year of our Lord CXL. the Christians seem to have been more severely dealt with; for though Antoninus the Em∣perour was a mild and excellent Prince, and who put out no Edicts, that we know of, to the prejudice of Christianity, yet the Christians being generally traduced and defamed as a wicked and barbarous generation, had a hard hand born upon them in all places, and were persecuted by virtue of the particular Edicts of former Emperours, and the general standing Laws of the Roman Empire. To vindicate them from the aspersions cast upon them, and to mitigate the severities used towards them, Justin about this time published his first Apology (for though in all Editions it be set in the second place, it was unquestionably the first, Vid. Euseb. l. 4. c. 18. p. 139.) presenting it (as appears from the Inscription) to Antoninus Pius the Emperour, and to his two sons Verus and Lucius, to the Senate, and by them to the whole People of Rome, wherein with great strength and evidence of reason he defends the Christians from the common obje∣ctions of their enemies, proves the divinity of the Christian Faith, and shews how unjust and unreasonable it was to proceed against them with∣out due conviction and form of Law, acquaints them with the innocent Rites and Usages of the Christian Assemblies, and lastly puts the Empe∣rour in mind of the course which Adrian his predecessor had taken in this matter; who had commanded that Christians should not be need∣lesly and unjustly vexed, but that their cause should be traversed and determined in open Judicatures; annexing to his Apology a Copy of the Rescript which Adrian had sent to Minucius Fundanus to that pur∣pose. IX. HIS address wanted not it seems its desired success Oros. Hist. l. 7. c. 14. fol. 305.. For the
Emperour in his own nature of a merciful and generous disposition, being moved partly by this Apology, partly by the notices he had re∣ceived from other parts of the Empire, gave order that Christians hence∣forward should be treated in more gentle and regular ways, as appears among others by his Ap. J. Mart. ad Calt. Apol. II. p 100. & ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 13. p 126. & Chron. Alex. Ann. 2. Olrp. CCXXXVII. Iad. VII. p. 608. Letter to the Commonalty of Asia, yet extant, which I shall here insert. EMPEROUR Caesar Titus, Aelius Adrian, Antoninus, Augustus, Pius, High-priest, the XV. time Tribune, thrice Consul, Father of the Countrey, to the Common Assembly of Asia, Greeting. I am very well assured, that the Gods themselves will take care, that this kind of men shall not escape, it being much more their concern, then it can be yours, to punish those that refuse to worship them; whom you do but the stronglier con∣firm in their own sentiments and opinions, while you vex and oppress them, accuse them for Atheists, and charge other things upon them, which you are not able to make good: nor can a more acceptable kindness be done them, then that being accused they may seem to chuse to die rather then live, for the sake of that God whom they worship. By which means they get the better, being ready to lay down their lives, rather then be perswaded to comply with your commands. As for the Earth-quakes that have been, or that do yet hap∣pen, it may not be amiss to advertise you, whose minds are ready to despond under any such accidents, to compare your case with theirs. They at such a time are much more secure and confident in their God, whereas you seeming to disown God all the while, neglect both the Rites of other Gods, and the Re∣ligion of that immortal deity, nay banish and persecute to death the Christians that worship him. Concerning these men several Governours of Provinces have heretofore written to my Father of sacred memory: to whom he retur∣ned this answer, That they should be no way molested, unless it appeared that they attempted something against the state of the Roman Empire. Yea, and I my self have received many notices of this nature, to which I an∣swered according to the tenor of my Fathers constitution. After all which if any shall still go on to create them trouble, meerly because they are Chri∣stians, let him that is indicted be discharged, although it appear that he be a Christian, and let the Informer himself undergo the punishment. Published at Ephesus in the place of the Common Assembly of Asia. X. THIS Letter was sent (as appears from the year of his Consul∣ship) Ann. Chr. CXL. Antonini III. If it be objected, that this seems not consistent with the year of his being Tribune, said here to be the XV. I answer that the , or Tribunitian Power did not always commence with the beginning of their reign, but was sometimes gran∣ted, and that more then once, to persons in a private capacity, espe∣cially those who were Candidates for the Empire. Thus (as ap∣pears from the Fasti Consulares Videsis Fast. Con. à Sigon. Edit. ad Ann. V.C. DCCXLI. & DCCLXVI.) M. Agrippa had the Tribunitia potestas seven, as after his death Tiberius had it fifteen times during the life of Augustus. So that Antoninus his fifteenth Tribuneship might well enough consist with the third year of his Empire. Though I confess I am apt to suspect an errour in the number, and the rather because Annot. in Ju∣stin. M.p. 10. c. 2. Sylbur∣gius tells us, that these XV. years were not in the Edict, as it is in Justin Martyr, but were supplied out of Eusebius his Copy, which I have some
reason to think to be corrupted in other parts of this Epistle. I am not ignorant that some learned men would have this Imperial Edict to be the decree of Marcus Aurelius, son of Antoninus. Indeed in the inscri∣ption of it, as it is extant in Eusebius, it is Marcus Aurelius Antoninus: but then nothing can be more evident, then that that part of it is cor∣rupted, as is plain, both because Eusebius himself a few lines before ex∣presly ascribes it to Antoninus Pius, and because in the original inscri∣ption in Justins own Apology (from whence Eusebius transcribed his) it is Titus AElius Antoninus Pius. And besides that nothing else of moment is offered to make good the conjecture, the whole consent of Antiquity, and the tenor of the Epistle it self clearly adjudge it to the elder Antoninus; and Ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 26. p. 148. vid. c. 13. p. 127 Melito Bishop of Sardis, who presented an Apo∣logy to his Son and Successor, tells him of the Letters which his Father at the time when he was his Partner in the Empire, wrote to the Cities that they should not raise any new troubles against the Christians. XI. NOT long after his first Apology, Justin seems to have revisited the Eastern parts: for besides what he says in the Acts of his Martyrdom, that he was twice at Rome, Lib. 4. c. 17. p. 140. Eusebius expresly affirms, that he was at Ephesus, where he had his discourse with Tryphon, which 'tis Vid. Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 349. plain was after the presenting his first Apology to the Emperour. And 'tis no ways improbable but that he went to Ephesus in company with those who carried the Emperours Edict to the Common-Council of Asia, then assembled in that City, where he fell into acquaintance with Tryphon the Jew. This Tryphon was probably that Rabbi Tarphon,  as they commonly call him, the wealthy Priest, the Master or associate of R. Aquiba, of whom mention is often made in the Jewish Writings. A man of great note and eminency, who had fled his Countrey Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 217. in the late War, wherein Barchochab had excited and headed the Jews to a Rebel∣lion against the Romans, since which time he had lived in Greece, and especially at Corinth, and had mightily improved himself by converse with the Philosophers of those Countries. With him Justin enters the lists in a two-days dispute, the account whereof he has given us in his Dialogue with that subtle man, wherein he so admirably defends and makes good the truth of the Christian Religion, cuts the very sinews of the Jewish cause, dissolves all their pleas and pretences against Christia∣nity, and discovers their implacable spight and malice, who not barely content to reject Christianity, sent peculiar persons Ibid. pag. 335. & ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 18. p. 140. up and down the World to spread abroad, that Jesus the Galilaean was a Deceiver and Seducer, and his whole Religion nothing but a Cheat and an Imposture, that in their public Pag. 323. Synagogues they solemnly anathematized all that turned Christians, hated them, as elsewhere Apolog. II. pag. 72. he tells us, with a mortal enmity, oppressed and murdered them when ever they got them in their power; Barchochab their late General making them the onely objects of his greatest severity and revenge, unless they would renounce and bla∣spheme Christ. The issue of the conference was, that the Jew acknow∣ledged himself highly pleased with his discourse, professing he found more in it, then he thought could have been expected from it, wishing he might enjoy it oftner, as what would greatly conduce to the true under∣standing of the Scripture, and begging his friendship in what part of the World soever he was. XII. IN the conclusion of this discourse with Tryphon, he tells us, he was ready to set sail, and depart from Ephesus, but whether in order
to his return to Rome, or some other place, is not known. That he re∣turned thither at last, is unquestionable, the thing being evident, though the time uncertain, whether it was while Antoninus was yet alive, or in the beginning of his successors reign, I will not venture to determine. At his coming he had among others, frequent contests with Crescens the Philosopher, a man of some note at that time in Rome. He was a Vid. Hieron. de Script. in Justin. Cy∣nic, and according to the genius of that Sect, proud and conceited, surly and ill-natured, a Philosopher in appearance, but a notorious Slave to all Vice and Wickedness. Orat. contr. Graec. p. 160. Tatian, Justin's Scholar, (who saw the man at Rome, admired and despised him for his childish and trifling, his wanton and effoeminate manners) gives him this character, that he was the tradu∣cer of all their gods, the Epitome of Superstition, the accuser of gene∣rous and heroic actions, the subtle contriver of Murders, the prompter of Adultery, a pursuer of Wealth even to rage and madness, a Tutor of the vilest sort of Lust, and the great Engine and Instigator of mens be∣ing condemned to execution: he tells us Ibid. p. 157. of him, that when at Rome, he was above all others miserably enslaved to Sodomy and Covetousness; and though he pretended to despise death, yet did he himself abhor it, and to which as the greatest evil he sought to betray Justin and Tatian, for their free reproving the vicious and degenerate lives of those Philo∣sophical Impostors. This was his adversary, , as he calls him Apol. I. (ve∣rius II.) p. 46., a lover of Popular Applause, not of true Wisdom and Philosophy, and who by all the base Arts of insinuation endeavoured to traduce the Christians, and to represent their Religion under the most infamous Character. But in all his disputes the Martyr found him wretchedly ignorant of the affairs of Christians, and strongly biassed by malice and envy, which he offered to make good (if it might be ad∣mitted) in a public disputation with him before the Emperour and the Senate: assuring them, that either he had never considered the Chri∣stian Doctrines, and then he was worse then the meanest Ideots, who are not wont to bear witness and pronounce sentence in matters where∣of they have no knowledge; or if he had taken notice of them, it was plain that either he did not understand them, or if he did, out of a base compliance with his Auditors, dissembled his knowledge and approba∣tion, for fear of being accounted a Christian, and lest freely speaking his mind, he should fall under the sentence and the fate of Socrates; so far was he from the excellent principle of that wise man, that no man was to be regarded before the truth. Which free and impartial censure did but more exasperate the man, the sooner to hasten and promote his ruine. XIII. IN the mean time Justin presented his second Apology to M. Antoninus (his Colleague L. Verus being then, probably, absent from the City) and the Senate; for that it was not addressed to the Senate alone, is evident from several passages in the Apology it self. There are, that will have this as well as the former to have been presented to Antoninus Pius, but certainly without any just ground of evidence, be∣sides that Eusebius and the Ancients expresly ascribe it to Marcus Aure∣lius, his son and successor. And were the inscription and beginning of it, which are now wanting, extant, they would quickly determine and re∣solve the doubt. The occasion of it was this. Apolog. I. p. 43. A Woman at Rome had together with her husband lived in all manner of wantonness and de∣bauchery, but being converted to Christianity, she sought by all Argu∣ments and persuasions to reclaim him from his loose and vicious course.
But the man was obstinate, and deaf to all reason and importunity; how∣ever by the advice of her friends, she still continued with him, hoping in time she might reduce him; till finding him to grow intolerable, she procured a Bill of divorce from him. The man was so far from being cured, that he was more enraged by his Wifes departure, and accused her to the Emperour for being a Christian; she also put in her Petition, to obtain leave to answer for her self. Whereupon he deser∣ted the prosecution of his Wife, and fell upon one Ptolomeus, by whom she had been converted to the Christian Faith, whom he procured to be cast into prison, and there a long time tortured meerly upon his con∣fessing himself a Christian. At last being brought before Ʋrbicius Pre∣fect to the City, he was condemned to death. Whereat Lucius, a Christian that stood by, could not forbear to tell the Judge, it was very hard that an innocent and vertuous man, charged with no crime, should be adjudged to die meerly for bearing the name of a Christian, a thing no way creditable to the Government of such Emperours as they had, and of the August Senate of Rome. Which he had no sooner said, but he was together with a third person sentenced to the same fate. The severity of these proceedings awakened Justin's solicitude and care for the rest of his brethren, who immediately drew up an Apology for them, wherein he lays down a true and naked relation of the case, com∣plains of the injustice and cruelty of such procedures, to punish men meerly for the name of Christians, without ever accusing them of any material crimes, answers the objections usually urged against them, and desires no more favour, then that what determination soever they should make of it, his Apology might be put before it, that so the whole World might judge of them, when they had been once truly acquainted with their case. XIV. THE Martyrs activity and zeal in the cause of Christianity did but set the keener edge upon Crescens his malice and rage against him. The Philosopher could not confute him by force of Argument, and therefore resolved to attaque him by clancular and ignoble Arts, and could think of no surer way to oppress him, then by engaging the secular Powers against him. Marcus Antoninus the Emperour was a great Philosopher, but withall zealous of Pagan Rites to the highest de∣gree of superstition; he had from his youth been educated in the J. Capital. in vit. M. Anton. c. 4. p. 156. Salian Colledge, all the Offices whereof he had gone through in his own person, affecting an imitation of Numa Pompilius, the first Master of Religious Ceremonies among the Romans, from whom he pretended to derive his pedigree and original: nay so very strict in his way of Religion (says Excerpt. Dion. p. 721. Dion) that even upon the Dies Nefasti, the unlucky and inauspicious days, when all public Sacrifices were prohibited, he would then private∣ly offer Sacrifices at home. What apprehensions he had of the Christians is evident from hence, that he ascribes . l. 11. §. 3 p. 10 their ready and resolute under∣going death, not to a judicious and deliberate consideration, but to a , a meer stubborness and obstinacy; which he being so emi∣nent and professed a Stoic, had of all men in the world the least reason to charge them with. With him it was no hard matter for Crescens to insinuate himself, and to procure his particular dis-favour towards Justin, a man so able, and so active to promote the interest of the Christian Reli∣gion. Indeed Apolog. 1 p. 46 Justin himself had publicly told the Emperour what he expected should be his own fate, that he looked that Crescens or some
of their titular Philosophers, should lay snares to undermine, torment, or crucifie him. Nor was he at all mistaken, the envious man procuring him to be cast in Prison, where if the Men. Graec. . Greeks say true, he was exercised with many preparatory tortures in order to his martyrdom. I confess Eusebius gives us no particular account of his death, but the Acts of his Martyrdom are still Apud Sur. ad XII Jun. p. 382 & Baron. ad Ann. 165. n. 2. & seq. extant, and (as there is reason to believe) ge∣nuine and uncorrupt, the shortness of them being not the least Argu∣ment that they are the sincere Transcripts of the Primitive Records, and that they have for the main escaped the interpolations of later Ages, which most others have been obnoxious to. I know 'tis doubted by Sur. loc. citat. one, whether these Acts contain the Martyrdom of ours, or another Justin: but whoever considers the particulars of them, most agreeable to our Justin, and especially their fixing his death under the Prefecture of Ru∣sticus, which Epiphanius expresly affirms of our S. Justin, will see little rea∣son to question, whether they belong to him. In them then we have this following account. XV. JƲSTIN and six of his companions having been apprehended, were brought before Rusticus, Prefect of the City. This Rusticus was J. Capit. ubi ubi supr. c. 9. p. 154. Q. Junius Rusticus, a man famous both for Court and Camp, a wise Statesman, and great Philosopher, peculiarly addicted to the Sect of the Stoics. He was Tutor to the present Emperour M. Aurelius, and what remarkable rules and instructions he had given him, . l. 1. §. 7. p. 1. Antoninus himself sets down at large. Above all his Masters he had a particular reverence and regard to him, communicated to him all his public and private Coun∣sels, shewed him respect before all the great Officers of the Empire, and after his death required of the Senate that he might be honoured with a public Statue. He had been Consul in the second year of Hadrian, and again in the second of the present Emperours, and was now Praefect of Rome: before whom these good men being brought, he persuaded Justin to obey the gods, and comply with the Emperours Edicts. The Martyr told him, that no man could be justly found fault with, or con∣demned, that obeyed the commands of our Saviour Jesus Christ. Then the Governour enquired in what kind of learning and discipline he had been brought up: he told him, that he had endeavoured to understand all kinds of Discipline, and tried all methods of Learning, but had finally taken up his rest in the Christian Discipline, how little soever it was esteemed by those who were led by errour and false opinions. Wretch that thou art (said the Governour) art thou then taken with that Disci∣pline? I am, replied the Martyr, for with right doctrine do I follow the Christians. And when asked what that Doctrine was; he answered, the right Doctrine which we Christians piously profess, is this, We be∣lieve the one onely God to be the Creator of all things visible and invi∣sible, and confess our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, foretold by the Prophets of old, and who shall hereafter come to be the Judge of Mankind, a Saviour, Preacher, and Master to all those, who are duly instructed by him: that as for himself, he thought himself too mean to be able to say any thing becoming his infinite deity; that this was the business of the Prophets, who had many Ages before foretold the com∣ing of this Son of God into the World. XVI. THE Praefect next enquired where the Christians were wont to assemble, and being told, that the God of the Christians was not confined to a particular place, he asked in what place Justin was wont to
instruct his Disciples, who gave him an account of the place where he dwelt, and told him that there he preached the Christian Doctrine to all that resorted to him. Then having severally examined his compa∣nions, he again addressed himself to Justin in this manner. Hear thou that art noted for thy eloquence, and thinkest thou art in the truth; if I cause thee to be scourged from head to foot, thinkest thou thou shalt go to Heaven? He answered, that although he should suffer what the other had threatned, yet he hoped he should enjoy the portion of all true Christians, well knowing that the divine grace and favour was laid up for all such, and should be as long as the World endured. And when again asked, whether he thought he should go to Heaven, and re∣ceive a reward; he replied, that he did not think it onely, but knew, and was so certain of it, that there was no cause to doubt it. The Go∣vernour seeing it was to no purpose to argue, came closer to the matter in hand, and bad them go together, and unanimously sacrifice to the gods. No man (replied the Martyr) that is in his right mind, will desert true Religion to fall into errour and impiety. And when threatned that un∣less they complied, they should be tormented without mercy; There is nothing (said Justin) which we more earnestly desire, then to endure torments for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, and be saved. For this is that which will promote our happiness, and procure us confidence before that dreadful Tribunal of our Lord and Saviour, before which by the divine appointment, the whole World must appear. To which the rest assented, adding, Dispatch quickly what thou hast a mind to, for we are Christians, and cannot sacrifice to Idols. Whereupon the Go∣vernour pronounced this sentence; They who refuse to do sacrifice to the gods, and to obey the Imperial Edict, let them be first scourged, and then be∣headed according to the Laws. The holy Martyrs rejoiced and blessed God for the sentence passed upon them, and being led back to prison, were accordingly whipped, and afterwards be∣headed. The . Greeks in their Rituals, though very briefly, give the same account, onely they differ in the manner of the Martyrs death, Men. Graecor. . which they tell us was by a draught of poyson, while the rest of his companions lost their heads. Though there are that by that fatal potion understand no more then the poysonous malice and envy of Cre∣scens the Philosopher, by which Justin's death was procured. And in∣deed if literally taken, the account of the Greeks in that place will not be very consistent with it self. Their dead bodies the Christians took up and decently interred. This was done, as Baronius conjectures, Ann. Chr. CLXV. with whom seems to concur the Ad ann. 2. Olymp. 236. M. Aurel. & L. Ver. Imp. 6. Indict. 3. p 606. Alexandrine Chronicle, which says, that Justin having presented his second Apology to the Em∣perours, was not long after crowned with Martyrdom. This is all the certainty that can be recovered concerning the time of his death, the date of it not being consigned by any other ancient Writer. 'Tis a vast mistake (or rather errour of Transcribers) of Haeres. XLVI. p. 171. Epiphanius, who makes him suffer under Adrian, when yet he could not be ignorant that he de∣dicated his first Apology to Antoninus Pius his successor, in the close whereof he makes mention of Adrian, his illustrious Parent and prede∣cessor, and annexes the Letter which he had written to Minucius Fun∣danus in favour of the Christians; and no less his mistake (if it was not an errour in the number) concerning his age, making him but thirty
years old at the time of his death, a thing no ways consistent with the course of his life: and for what he adds of , that he died in a firm and consistent age, it may be very well applied to many years after that period of his life. XVII. THUS have we traced the Martyr through the several sta∣ges of his life, and brought him to his last fatal period. And now let us view him a little nearer. He was a man of a pious mind, and a very vertuous life; tenderly sensible of the honour of God, and the great in∣terests of Religion. He was not elated, nor valued himself upon the ac∣count of his great abilities, but upon every occasion intirely resolved the glory of all into the divine grace and goodness. He had a true love to all men, and a mighty concern for the good of souls, whose happi∣ness he continually prayed for and promoted, yea, that of their fier∣cest Enemies. From none did he and his Religion receive more bitter affronts and oppositions then from the Jews, yet he tells Dial. cum Tryph. p. 254. Tryphon that they heartily prayed for them, and all other Persecutors, that they might repent, and ceasing to blaspheme Christ, might believe in him, and be saved from eternal vengeance at his glorious appearing: Ibid. pag. 323 that though they were wont solemnly to curse them in their Synagogues, and to join with any that would persecute them to death, yet they re∣turned no other answer then that, You are our Brethren, we beseech you own and embrace the truth of God. And in his Apolog. I. p. 52 Apology to the Empe∣rour and the Senate, he thus concludes, I have no more to say, but that we shall endeavour what in us lies, and heartily pray, that all men in the World may be blessed with the knowledge and entertainment of the truth. In the pursuit of this noble and generous design he feared no dangers, but delivered himself with the greatest freedom and impar∣tiality; he acquaints the Apol. II. p. 53. Emperours, how much 'twas their duty to honour and esteem the truth, that he came not to smooth and flatter them, but to desire them to pass sentence according to the exactest rules of Justice; Ibid. p. 54. that it was their place and infinitely reasonable when they had heard the cause, to discharge the duty of righteous Judges, which if they did not, they would at length be found inexcusable before God; Ibid. p. 99. nay that if they went on to punish and persecute such innocent per∣sons, he tells them before hand, 'twas impossible they should escape the future judgment of God, while they persisted in this evil and unrigh∣teous course. In this case he regarded not the persons of men, nor was scared with the dangers that attended it, and therefore in his conference with the Jew, tells Dial. cum Pyph. p. 349. him, that he regarded nothing but to speak the truth, not caring whom in this matter he disobliged, yea, though they should presently tear him all in pieces; neither fearing nor favouring his own Countrymen the Samaritans, whom he had accused in his Apo∣logy to the Emperour, for being so much bewitched and seduced with the impostures of Simon Magus, whom they cried up as a supreme deity, above all principality and power. XVIII. FOR his natural endowments, he was a man of acute parts, a smart and pleasant wit, a judgment able to weigh the differences of things, and to adapt and accommodate them to the most useful purposes; all which were mightily improved and accomplished by the advantages of Foreign Studies, being both in the Christian and Ethnic Philosophy, , says Col. CXXV. c. l. 304. Photius, arrived at the very heighth, flowing with abundance of Hi∣story,
and all sorts of Learning. In one thing indeed he seems to have come short, and wherein the first Fathers were generally defective, skill in the Hebrew, and other Eastern Languages, as appears (to omit others) by one instance, his derivation of the word Satanas; Sata (as he tells Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 331. us) in the Hebrew and the Syriac signifying an Apostate, and Nas the same with the Hebrew Sata, out of the composition of both which arises this one word Satanas. A trifling conceit, and the less to be pardoned in one that was born and lived among the Samaritans and the Jews; eve∣ry one that has but conversed with those Languages at a distance, knowing it to spring from  to be an adversary, which being formed according to the mode of the Greeks, (as Contr. Cels. l. 6. p. 36. Origen long since observed in this very instance) who were wont to add as to the termination of words bor∣rowed from a Foreign Language, becomes Satanas, an adversary. And therefore a late Sand. Tet. de Vet. Script. Eccl. Hist. Ecc∣cles. Tom. 1. Prae∣fix. p. 44. Author (who has weeded the Writings of the Ancients, and whose quotations savour of infinitly greater oftentation, then ei∣ther judgment or fidelity) sufficiently betrays his ignorance in those ve∣ty Fathers, with which he pretends so much acquaintance, when to prove the Quaest. & Resp. ad Orthodoxos, not to be the genuin work of our Jus, he urges the odd and ridiculous interpretation of the word Osan∣na, there rendred Vid. Quaest. L. p. 421. by , super-excellent magnifi∣cence: of the true signification whereof (says he) Justin himself being a Samaritan could not be ignorant. When as his unquestionable Tracts afford such evident footsteps of his lamentable unskilfulness in that Language. But the man must be excused, seeing in this (as in many other things) he traded purely upon trust, securely stealing the whole passage word for word out of another Author: Vid. Rivet. Crit. Sacr. l. 2. c. 5. p. 198. so little skill had he to distinguish between true and false, and to know when to follow his Guides, and where to leave them. As for Justin himself his ignorance herein is the less to be wondered at, if we consider that his Religion, as a Gentile born, his early and almost sole converse with the Greeks, his constant study of the Writings of the Gentile Philosophers, might well make him a stranger to that Language, which had not much in it to tempt a meer Philosopher to learn it. In all other parts of Learning how great his abilities were, may be seen in his Writings yet extant, (to say nothing of them that are lost) , as H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 18. p. 139. Eusebius says of them, the Monuments of his singular Parts, and of a mind studiously conver∣sant about divine things, richly fraught with excellent and useful know∣ledge. They are all designed either in defence of the Christian Reli∣gion both against Jews and Gentiles, or in beating down that common Religion, and those prophane and ridiculous Rites of Worship which then governed the World, or in prescribing Rules for the ordinary con∣duct of the Christian Life, all which he has managed with an admirable acuteness and dexterity. Some Books indeed have obtruded them∣selves under his name, as the Expositio Fidei, Quaestiones & Responsa ad Orthodoxos, Quaestiones Graecanicae ad Christianos, Quaestiones V. ad Grae∣cos, &c. all which are undoubtedly of a later Age, composed after Christianity was fully setled in the World, and the Arrian controversies had begun to disturb the Christian Church. Or if any of them were originally his, they have been so miserably interpolated and defaced by after-ages, that it is almost impossible to discern true from false. XIX. AS for the Epistle to Diognetus, though excepted against by
some, yet is it fairly able to maintain its title, without any just cause al∣ledged against it. Nor is it improbable but that this might be that very Diognetus who was Tutour to the Emperour M. Aurelius, who (as him∣self confesses M. Aurel. . l. l. 1. §. 6. p. 1.) persuaded him to the study of Philosophy, and gave him wise counsels and directions to that purpose, and being a person of note and eminency, is accordingly saluted by the Martyr with a , most excellent Diognetus. His temper and course of life had made him infinitely curious (as is evident from the first part of that Epi∣stle) to know particularly what was the Religion, what the Manners and Rites of Christians, what it was that inspired them with so brave and generous a courage, as to contemn the world, and to despise death; upon what grounds they rejected the Religion, and disowned the deities of the Gentiles, and yet separated themselves from the Jewish Discipline and way of worship; what was that admirable love and friendship by which they were so fast knit together, and why this novel Institution came so late into the World. To all which enquiries (suitable enough to a man of a Philosophic genius) Justin (to whom probably he had a ddressed himself as the most noted Champion of the Christian cause) returns a very particular and rational satisfaction in this Epistle, though what ef∣fect it had upon the Philosopher is unknown. That this Epistle is not mentioned by Eusebius, is no just exception, seeing he confesses H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 18. p. 140. there were many other Books of Justins besides those which he there reckons up: that it is a little more then ordinary polite and philosophical, is yet less; for who can wonder if so great a Scholar as Justin writing to a person so eminent for Learning and Philosophy, endeavoured to give it all the advantages of a florid and eloquent discourse. It must be con∣fessed that his ordinary stile does not reach this; for which let us take Photius Loc. supr. citat. his censure, a man able to pass a judgment in this case: he stu∣died not (says he) to set off the native beauty of Philosophy with the paint and varnish of Rhetorical Arts. For which cause his Discourses, though otherwise very weighty and powerful, and observing a composure agreeable enough to Art and Science, have not yet those sweet and luscious insinuations, those attractives and allurements that are wont to prevail upon vulgar Au∣ditors, and to draw them after them. XX. THAT which may seem most to impair the credit of this ancient and venerable man, is that he is commonly said to be guilty of some un∣orthodox sentiments and opinions, disagreeing with the received Do∣ctrines of the Church. True it is, that he has some notions not warran∣ted by general entertainment or the sense of the Church, especially in later Ages, but yet scarce any but what were held by most of the Fa∣thers in those early times, and which for the main are speculative and have no ill influence upon a good life; the most considerable whereof we shall here remark. First he is charged with too much kindness and indulgence to the more eminent sort of Heathens, and particularly to∣ward Socrates, . Apol. II. pag. 83. Heraclitus, and such like: such in∣deed he seems to allow to have been in some sense Christians, and of Socrates particularly Apol. I. p. 48. af∣firms, that Christ was  in part known to him, and the like elsewhere more then once. The ground of all which was this, that such persons did , live according to the  the word, or reason, and that this naturally is in every man, and manifest to
him, if he but govern himself according to it. For the clearer under∣standing whereof it may not be amiss briefly to enquire in what sense the Primitive Fathers, and especially our Justin use this word . And their notion was plainly this, that Christ was the eternal  or Word of the Father, the sum and center of all reason and wisdom, as the Sun is the Fountain of Light, and that from him there was a  or reason naturally derived into every man, as a beam and emanation of Light from that Sun; to which purpose they usually bring that of S. John, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: , &c. Orig. Com. in Joan. p. 25. vid. etiam p. 40. that was the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the World. God (says Justin) Dial. cum Tryph. p. 234. p. 285. D. first and be∣fore the production of any Creatures begot of himself , a certain rational power, sometimes stiled in Scripture the glory of God, the Son, Wis∣dom, an Angel, God, Lord, and Word; by all which names he is de∣scribed both according to the Oeconomy of his Fathers Will, and accor∣ding to his voluntary generation of him. And elsewhere Apol. I. p. 51., We love and worship the Word of the unbegotten and ineffable God, which (Word) for our sakes became Man, that by partaking of our sufferings he might work out our cure. Hence Christ is called Ibid. p. 46. , the universal Word, and with respect to him reason is stiled , the seminal Word that is sown in our natures, Ibid. p. 51., and , the internal semina∣tion of the implanted Word, which he there distinguishes from the , the primary and original seed it self, from which according to the measure of grace given by it, all participation and imitation does proceed. This is that which he means by the , the seeds of truth, which he Apol. l. 2. p. 82. tells us seem to be in all men in the World; they are a derivation from Christ, who is the root, a kind of participa∣tion of a divine nature from him. Clemens of Alexandria thus deduces the pedigree. The image of God (says Admonit. ad Gent. p. 62. he) is his Word (for the divine Word is the genuine off-spring of the mind, the Archetypal light of light) and the image of the Word is Man. The true mind that is in man (said therefore to be made after the image and likeness of God) as to the frame of the heart is conformed to the divine Word, and by that means partakes of the Word or Reason. XXI. ORIGEN, Clemens his Scholar treads exactly in his Masters steps. He tells us, that as God the Father is , the Fountain of Deity to the Son, . Tom. 1. Com∣ment. in Joan. p. 47. Edit Huet. Tom. 2. . Ibid. p. 46. so God the Son, , the Word, or the supreme and eter∣nal Reason, is the Fountain and Original that communicates reason to all rational Beings, who as such are , the image of the image, that is, some kind of shadow of the Word, who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his person. And he further adds, that  with an article is meant of Christ, but without it of that Word or Reason that is derived from him. The case then in short is this, every man naturally is endued with prin∣ciples of Reason, and lively notices of good and evil, as a light kindled
from him, who is the Word and Wisdom of the Father, and may so far be said to partake of Christ, the primitive and original Word, and that more or less according to their improvement of them; so that whatever wise and excellent things either Philosophers or Poets have spoken, says Justin the Martyr Apo. I. p. 46.  48. C., it was , from that seed of the , the Word, or Reason that implanted in all mankind: thus he says that Socrates Ibid. p. 48. exhorted the Greeks to the knowledge of the Ʋnknown God by the inquisition of the Word. To conclude this, he no where affirms, that Gentiles might be saved without the entertainment of Christianity, nor that their knowledge was of it self sufficient to that end (no man more strongly proves Reason and Natural Philosophy to be of themselves insufficient to salvation) but that so far as they improved their Reason and internal Word to the great and excellent purposes of Religion, so far they were Christians, and akin to the eternal and original Word, . Just. Apol. II. p. 56. and that whatever was rightly dictated or reformed by this inward Word, either by Socrates among the Greeks, or by others among the Barbarians, was in effect done by Christ himself, the Word made Flesh. XXII. ANOTHER opinion with which he was charged is Chiliasm, or the reign of a thousand years. This indeed he expresly asserts Dialog. cm Tryph. p. 306, 307. vid p. 369., that after the Resurrection of the dead is over, Jerusalem should be rebuilt, beautified and enlarged, where our Saviour with all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, the Saints and Martyrs should visibly reign a thousand years. He confesses indeed that there are many sincere and devout Christians that would not subscribe to this opinion; but withall affirms that there were abundance of the same mind with him. As indeed there were, Apd Iren. l. 5. c. 33. p. 498. vid. Euseb. l. 3. c. ult. p. 112. Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, Loc. cit. & ap. Euseb. ubi . Irenaeus Bi∣shop of Lions, Ap. Euseb. l. 7. c. 24. p. 270. Nepos, Ap. Hi.  in Ech. c. 36. Tom. 5. p. 507. Apollinaris, l. 3. c. 23 p. 411. de Resur. Carn. c. 25 p. 542. Tertullian, Apud Hieron. loc. supr. cit. Victorinus, 7. c. 24. p. 722. c. 26. p. 727. & seq. Lactantius, vid. etiam de script. Eccles. in Papia. Severus Gallus, and ma∣ny more. The first that started this notion among the Orthodox Christians of those early Times seems to have been the fore-mentioned Papias, who (as Lib. 3. c. 39. p. 112. Eusebius tells us) pretended it to be an Apostolical Tradition, misunderstanding the Apostles discourses, and too lightly running away with what they meant in a mystical and hidden sense. For he was, though a good man, yet of no great depth of understanding, and so easily mistaken; and yet as he observes, his mistake imposed upon several Ecclesiastical persons, the venerable antiquity of the man recommending the errour to them with great advantage. Among which especially were our S. Justin and Irenaeus, who held it in an innocent and harmless sense. 'Tis true Caius ap. En∣rest. l. 3. c. 28. p. 20. Dioms. Cointh. ibid. & l. 7. c. 25. p. 273. Cerin∣thus and his followers, mixing it with Jewish Dreams and Fables, and pretending divine Revelations to patronize and countenance it, impro∣ved it to brutish and sensual purposes, placing it in a state of eating and drinking, and all manner of bodily pleasures and delights. And what use Heretics of later times have made of it, and how much they have improved and enlarged it, is not my present business to enquire. XXIII. CONCERNING the state of the soul after this life, he affirms Dial. cum Tph p. 333. that the souls even of the Prophets and righteous men fell under the power of Daemons, though how far that power should extend, he tells us not, grounding his assertion upon no other basis then the single
instance of Samuels being summoned up by the inchantments of the Py∣thoness. Nor does he assert it to be necessarily so, seeing he grants that by our hearty endeavours and prayers to God, our souls at the hour of their departure may escape the seizure of those evil powers. To this we may add, what he seems Ibid. p. 223. to maintain, That the souls of good men are not received into Heaven till the Resurrection; that when they depart the body, they remain , Ib. p. 222. C. in a better state, where being gathered within it self, the soul perpetually enjoys what it loved; but that the souls of the unrighteous and the wicked are thrust into a worse condition, where they expect the judgment of the great day: and he reckons Ibid. p. 327. it among the errours of some pretended Christians, who denied the Resurrection, and affirmed that their souls immediately after death were taken into Heaven. Nor herein did he stand alone, but had the almost unanimous suffrage of primitive Writers voting with him, Adv. Haeres. l. 5. c. 31. p. 491. Irenaeus, Apol. c. 47. p. 37. Tertullian, . l. 2. c. 12. ful. 136. l. 4. c. 2. fol. 154. confer. Philoc. c. 1. p. 18. & Homil. r. in Levit. fol. 71. Origen, Enarrat. in Psal. CXX p. 532. Hilary, Cathemer. Hymn. X. p. 485. Pruden∣tius, Ambros. de Cain & Ab. lib. 2. pag. 131. T. 4. bon. Mort. c. 10. p. 240. Ambrose, Enckirid. c. 109. cl. 190. Tom. 3. in Psalm. 36. Conc. 1. col. 281. T. 8. Augustin, Quaest. XCI. Anastasius Sinaita, and indeed who not, there being a general concur∣rence in this matter, that the souls of the righ∣teous were not upon the dissolution presently translated into Heaven, that is, not admitted to a full and perfect fruition of the divine presence, but determined to certain secret and unknown Repositories, where they enjoyed a state of imperfect blessedness, wait∣ing for the accomplishment of it at the general Resurrection, which in∣termediate state they will have described under the notion of Paradise and Abrahams Bosom, and which some of them make to be a subterranean Region within the bowels of the Earth. XXIV. THE like concurrence, though not altogether so uncontro∣lably entertained of the Ancients with our Justin, we may observe in his opinion concerning the Apol. I. p. 44. Angels, that God having committed to them the care and superintendency of this sublunary World, they abused the power intrusted with them, mixing themselves with Women in wanton and sensual embraces, of whom they begat a race and posterity of Dae∣mons. An assertion not onely intimated by De Gigant. l. 1. p. 221. Phi∣lo and Antiq. l. 1. c. 4. p. 8. Josephus, but expresly owned by Apud Andr. Caesar. Comment. in Ap. Serm. 12. Pa∣pias, Legat. pro Christ. pag. 27. Athenagoras, Sromat. l. 5. p. 550. Clemens Alexandrinus, De Hab. mul. sen de Cu. foemin. l. 1. c. 2. p. 150. Ter∣tullian, De Disipl. & ha. Virg. p. 166. Cyprian, De Orig. error. l. 2. c. 14. p. 216. Lactantius, Sacr. Hist. lib. 1. pag. 8. Sulpitius Severus, De No & Arc. c. 4. p. 144. T. 4. S. Ambrose, and many more. That which first gave birth to this opinion (easily embraced by those who held Angels to be corporeal) was a misunderstanding that place, the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them to wife, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men, men of renown. And it more particularly fur∣thered the mistake, that many ancient Copies of the Septuagint (as is evi∣dent from Philo and S. Augustin, and the Kings ancient Alexandrian Ma∣nuscript at this day) in stead of the Sons read the Angels of God, which the Fathers who generally understood no Hebrew, were not able to cor∣rect. And I doubt not what gave further patronage to this errour, was the Authority of the Book of Enoch (highly valued by many in those days) wherein this Story was related, as appears from the frag∣ments of it still extant. XXV. I might here also insist upon, what some find so much fault
with in our Martyr, his magnifying the power of mans will, which is notoriously known to have been the current doctrin of the Fathers through all the first Ages till the rise of the Pelagian Controversies, though still they generally own , a mighty assistance of di∣vine grace to raise up and enable the soul for divine and spiritual things. Diaing. cum Tryph. p. 319. Justin tells his adversary that 'tis in vain for a man to think rightly to understand the mind of the ancient Prophets, unless he be assisted , by a mighty grace derived from God. As well may the dry ground (says Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 19. p. 280. Irenaeus) produce fruit without rain to moisten it, as we who at first are like dried sticks, be fruitful unto a good life, without voluntary showrs from above, that is, (as he adds) the laver of the Spirit. Clemens of Alexandria affirms expresly, . Clem. Alexand. Stromat. l. 5. p. 588. . Id. ibid. p. 547. that as there is a free choice in us, so all is not placed in our own power, but that by grace we are saved, though not without good works; and that to the doing of what is good , we espe∣cially need the grace of God, a right institution, an honest temper of mind, and that the Father draws us to him: and that the , the powers of the will are never able to wing the soul for a due flight for Heaven, without a mighty portion of grace to assist it. The myste∣ries of Christianity (as Lib. 4. p. 181. vid. etiam ib. p. 227. Origen discourses against Celsus) cannot be duly contemplated without a better afflatus and a more divine power; for as no man knows the things of a man save the spi∣rit of a man that is in him, so no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God: it being all to no purpose (as he elsewhere observes) unless God by his grace does , enlighten the understanding. Haec erit vis divinae gratiae, potentior utique natura, habens in nobis subjacentem sibi liberam arbitrii potestatem, quod  dicitur. Tertul. de Anim. c. 21. p. 279. I add no more but that of Tertullian, who asserts, that there is a power of divine grace, stronger then nature, which has in subjection the power of our Free Will. So evi∣dent it is, that when the Fathers talk highest of the , and the powers of nature, they never intended to exclude and banish the grace of God. Some other disputable or disallowed opinions may be pro∣bably met with in this good mans Writings, but which are mostly nice and philosophical. And indeed having been brought up under so many several Institutions of Philosophy, and coming (as most of the first Fathers did) fresh out of the Schools of Plato, 'tis the less to be wondred at, if the notions which he had there imbibed stuck to him, and he endea∣voured, as much as might be, to reconcile the Platonic principles with the dictates of Christianity.
His Writings. Genuine. Paraenesis ad Graecos. Elenchus, seu Oratio ad Graecos. Apologia pro Christianis prima. Apologia pro Christianis secunda. Liber de Monarchia Dei, forsan in fine mutilus. Dialogus cum Tryphone Judaeo. Epistola ad Diognetum. Not extant. Liber de Anima. Liber Psaltes dictus. Contra omnes Haereses. Contra Marcionem. Commentarius in Hexameron (cujus meminit Anastasius Sinaita.) De Resurrectione Carnis teste Dama∣sceno. Doubtful. Aristotelicorum quorundam Dogma∣tum eversio. Epistola ad Zenam & Serenum. Supposititious. Quaestiones & Respons. ad Graecos. Quaestiones Graecanicae, de incorpo∣reo, &c. & ad easdem Christianae Responsiones. Quaestionum CXLVI. Responsio ad Orthodoxos. Vid. an hic liber sit idem (sed in∣terpolatus) de quo Photius hoc titulo. Dubitationum adversus Religionem summariae solutiones. Expositio Fidei de S. Trinitate. The End of S. JUSTIN Martyrs Life.
THE LIFE OF S. IRENAEUS BISHOP of LYONS. Michael Burghers. delineavit et sculpsit. S. IRENAEUS. His Countrey enquired into. His Philosophical Studies His institution by Papias. Papias who. His education under S. Polycarp. His coming into France, and being made Presbyter of Lyons. Pothinus who; how
and by whom sent into France. The grievous Persecution there under M. Aurelius. The Letters of the Martyrs to the Bishop of Rome. Pope Eleutherius guilty of Montanism. Irenaeus sent to Rome. His writing against Florinus and Blastus. The martyrdom of Pothinus Bishop of Lyons, and the cruelty exercised towards him. Irenaeus succeeds. His great diligence in his charge. His opposition of Heretics. The Synods said to have been held under him to that purpose. The Gnostic Heresies spread in France. Their monstrous Villanies. His confutation of them by word and writing. Variety of Sects and Divisions objected by the Hea∣thens against Christianity. This largely answered by Clemens of Alexan∣dria. Pope Victor's reviving the controversie about Easter. The contests between him and the Asiatics. Several Synods to determine this matter. Irenaeus his moderate interposal. His Synodical Epistle to Victor. The Persecution under Severus. Its rage about Lyons. Irenaeus his Mar∣tyrdom, and place of Burial. His Vertues. His industrious and elabo∣rate confutation of the Gnostics. His stile and phrase. Photius his censure of his Works. His errour concerning Christs Age. Miraculous gifts and powers common in his time. His Writings. I S. IRENAEƲS may justly challenge to go next the Martyr, , as De Spirit. S. c. 29. p. 358. Tom. 2. S. Basil stiles him, one near to the Apostles, which Epist. ad Theo∣do. p. 196. T. 1. S. Hie∣rom expresses by being a man of the Apostolic times. His Originals are so obscure, that some dispute has been to what part of the World he belonged, whether East or West, though that he was a Greek, there can be no just cause to doubt. The Ancients having not particularly fixed the place of his Nativity, he is generally supposed to have been born at Smyrna, or thereabouts. In his youth he wanted not an ingenuous education in the Studies of Philosophy and Humane Learning, whereby he was prepared to be af∣terwards an useful Instrument in the Church. His first institution in the Doctrine of Christianity was laid under some of the most eminent persons that then were in the Christian Church. S. Hierom Lic. citat. makes him Scholar to Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, who had himself conversed with the Apostles and their Followers. This Papias (as Adv. Haeres. l. 5. c. 33. p. 498. & ap. Euseb. l. 3. c. 39. p. 110. Irenaeus and others inform us) was one of S. Johns Disciples; by whom though Eusebius understands not the Apostle, but one sirnamed the Elder, which he seems to collect from a passage of Euseb. loc. cit. Papias himself, yet evident it is, that though Papias in that place affirms, that he diligently picked up what Memoirs he could meet with concerning the Apostles from those that had atten∣ded and followed them, yet he no where denies that he himself conver∣sed with them. He was (as Ibid. c. 36. p. 106. Eusebius characters him) a man very lear∣ned and eloquent, and knowing in the Scriptures; though as Ibid. c. 39. p. 113. else∣where he adds, , of a very weak and undiscer∣ning judgment, especially in the more abstruse and mysterious parts of the Christian Doctrine, which easily betrayed him, and others that fol∣lowed him into great errours and mistakes. He wrote five Books enti∣tuled, , the explanation of our Lords Discourses, and, as he in Steph Gob. ap. bot. Cod. CCXXXII col. 901. Photius intimates, and the Au. III Ovnp. 235. Ind. I. M. Ael. Alexandrine Chronicon expresly affirms, died a Martyr, being put to death at Pergamus in the Persecution under M. Aurelius. He is said to have trained up many Scholars in
the Christian Institution, and among the rest our Irenaeus. Which though not improbable, yet we are sure not onely from the testimonies of H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 5. p. 170. Eusebius and Adv. Haeres. dial. 1. Theodoret, but what is more, from his Epist. ad Flor. apd Eu∣seb. lb. c. 20. p. 188 & Hiero. de Script. i Iren. own, that he was trained up under the tutorage and instructions of S. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, and S. Johns Disciple, from whom he received the seeds of the true Apostolic Doctrine, and for whom he had so great a reverence and regard, that he took a most exact and particular notice of whatever was memorable in him, even to the minutest circumstances of his con∣versation, the memory whereof he preserved fresh and lively to his dy∣ing day. II. BY whose hands he was consecrated to the Ministeries of Reli∣gion, as also when, and upon what occasion he came into France is not known. Probable it is that he accompanied S. Polycarp in his journey to Rome about the Paschal controversie, where by his and Anicetus his persuasions he might be prevailed with to go for France, (in some parts whereof, and especially about Marseilles, great numbers of Greeks did reside) then beginning to be over-run with those pernicious Heresies which at that time invaded and disturbed the Church, that so he might be helpful and assisting to Pothinus the aged Bishop of Lyons in quelling and subduing of them. Hist. Franc. lib. 1. 29. This Pothinus (if we may believe Gregory Bi∣shop of Tours, who resided some time in this City with his Uncle Ni∣cetius Bishop of it) came out of the East, and had been dispatched hither also by S. Polycarp to govern and superintend this Church. If it seem strange to any how S. Polycarps care came to extend so far, as to send a Bishop into so remote and distant parts of the World; it seems not im∣probable to suppose, that Lyons being a City famous for Commerce and Traffique, some of its Merchants might trade to Smyrna, where being converted by Polycarp, they might desire of him to send some grave and able person along with them to plant and propagate the Christian Faith in their own Country, which accordingly fell to Pothinus his share. But then that this must needs be done by the Authority, and ratified by the Decree of the Bishop of Rome, P. de Marc. dis∣sert. de Primat. n. 111. p. 227. a learned man will never be able to con∣vince us, though he offers at three Arguments to make it good: weak I must needs say, and inconcluding, and which rather shew that he de∣signed thereby to reconcile himself to the Court of Rome (whose favour at the time of his writing that Tract, he stood in need of, in order to his admission to the Bishoprick of S. Leiger de Conserans, to which he was nominated, and wherein he was delayed by that Court, offended with his late Book De Concordia Sacerdotii & Imperii) then argue the truth of what he asserts, so unsuitable are they to the learning and judg∣ment of that great man. But I return to Irenaeus. He came to Lyons, the Metropolis of Gallia Celtica, situate upon the confluence of the two famous Rivers the Roan and La Saona, or the ancient Arar, famous among other things for its Temple and Altars, erected to the honour of Augustus at the common charge of all France, where they held an an∣nual solemnity from all parts of the Countrey upon the first of August: and upon Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1 p. 162. this day it was that most of the Martyrs suffered in the fol∣lowing Persecution. These Festival solemnities were usually celebrated not onely with great contentions for Learning and Eloquence, but with Sports and Shews, and especially with the bloody conflicts of Gladia∣tors, with barbarous usages, and throwing Malefactors to wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre; wherein the Martyrs mentioned by Eusebius bore a
sad and miserable part. Irenaeus being arrived at Lyons, continued se∣veral years in the station of a Presbyter, under the care and Govern∣ment of Pothinus, till a heavy storm arose upon them. For in the reign of M. Aurelius Antoninus, Ann. Chr. CLXXVII. began a violent Perse∣cution Euseb. l. 5. Praef. p. 153. against the Christians, which broke out in all places, but more peculiarly raged in France, whereof the Churches of Lyons and Vien in a Apud Euseb. ibid. p. 154, 155, &c. Letter to them of Asia and Phrygia, give them an account; where they tell them, 'twas impossible for them exactly to describe the brutish fierceness and cruelty of their Enemies, and the severity of those tor∣ments which the Martyrs suffered, banished from their houses, and for∣bid so much as to shew their heads, reproached, beaten, hurried from place to place, plundered, stoned, imprisoned, and there treated with all the expressions of an ungovernable rage and fury, as they particu∣larly relate at large. The occasion Euseb. ibid. c. 3. p. 168. of writing this account, was a con∣troversie lately raised in the Asian Churches by Montanus and his fol∣lowers, concerning the Prophetic Spirit, to which they pretended: for the composing whereof these Churches thought good to send their judg∣ment and opinion in the case, adjoyning the Epistles which several of the Martyrs (while in Prison) had written to those Churches about that very matter, all which they annexed to their Commentary about the Martyrs sufferings, penned, no doubt, by the hand of Irenaeus. III. NOR did the Martyrs write onely to the Asian Churches, but to Eleutherus Bishop of Rome about these controversies. And just occa∣sion there was for it, if (which is most probable) this very Eleutherus was infected with the errours of Montanus: for Adv. Prax. c. 1. p. 501. Tertullian tells us, that the Bishop of Rome did then own and embrace the Prophesies of Mon∣tanus and his two Prophetesses, and upon that account had given Let∣ters of Peace to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, though by the per∣suasions of one Praxeas he was afterwards prevailed with to revoke them. Where by the way may be observed, that the infallibility of the Pope was then from home, or so fast asleep, that the envious man could sowe Tares in the very Pontifical Chair it self. This Bishop Ad Ann. 173. n. IV. Ba∣ronius will have to be Anicetus, but in all likelihood was our Eleutherius, who in his after-commendation of the Montanists followed the exam∣ple of his Tertull. ibid. Predecessors, (no doubt Soter and Anicetus) who had disowned and rejected Montanus his Prophesie; nor can it well be otherwise conceived why the Martyrs should so particularly write to him about it. And whereas Ad. Ann. 201. n. IX. Baronius would have Pope Eleutherius dead long be∣fore Tertullian became a Montanist, because in his Book against Heresies he stiles De Praescript. Haeret. c. 30. p. 212. him the blessed Eleutherius, as if it were tantamount with cujus memoria est in benedictione, nothing was more common then to give that title to eminent persons while alive, as Alexander of Jerusalem calls Euseb. l. 6. c. 11 p. 113. Clemens Alexandrinus who carried the Letter, the blessed Clemens, in his Epistle to the Church of Antioch, and the Clergy of the Church of Rome stiles Ad Cler. Car∣thag. Epist. II. p. 8. S. Cyprian (then in his retirement) the Blessed Pope Cyprian, in their Letter to them of Carthage. To this Eleutherius then these Martyrs dire∣cted their Epistle: For the Martyrs in those times had a mighty honour and reverence paid to them, and their sentence in any weighty case was always entertained with a just esteem and veneration. These Letters they sent to Rome by Euseb. ib. c. 4. Irenaeus, whom they persuaded to undertake the journey, and whom they particularly recommended to Eleutherius by a very honourable testimony, desiring him to receive him not onely as
their Brother and Companion, but as a zealous professor and defender of that Religion which Christ had ratified with his blood. I know Annot. in u∣seb. p. 91, & 92. Mons. Valois will not allow that Irenaeus actually went this journey, that the Martyrs indeed had desired him, and he had promised to un∣dertake it, but that the heat of the Persecution coming on, and he being fixed in the Government and Presidency over that Church, could not be spared personally to undergo it. But since Eusebius clearly intimates and De Script. in Iren. S. Hierom expresly affirms, that the Martyrs sent him upon this er∣rand, 'tis safest to grant his journey thither, though it must be while he was yet Presbyter, for so they particularly say he was in their Epistle to the Bishop of Rome. And there probably it was that he took more particular notice of Florinus and Blastus Euseb. ibid. c. 15. p. 178., who being Presbyters of the Church of Rome, were about this time fallen into the Valentinian Here∣sie, the first of whom he had formerly known Id. ibid. c. 20. with S. Polycarp in Asia, and noted him for his soft and delicate manners, and to whom after his return home, as also to Blastus, he wrote Epistles to convince them of those novel and dangerous sentiments which they had espoused. IV. AND now the Persecution at Lyons was daily carried on with a fiercer violence. Vast numbers had already gone to Heaven through infinite and inexpressible racks and torments, and to crown all, Epist. Eccles. Lugd. & Vien. ap. Euseb. ubi supr. c. 1. p. 159. Pothi∣nus their reverend and aged Bishop, above ninety years old, was seized in order to his being sent the same way. Age and sickness had rendred him so infirm and weak, that he was hardly able to crawl to his execu∣tion. But he had a vigorous and sprightly soul in a decaied and ruinous body, and his great desire to give the highest testimony to his Religion, and that Christ might triumph in his Martyrdom, added new life and spirit to him. Being apprehended by the Officers, he was brought be∣fore the Public Tribunal, the Magistrates of the City following after, and the common People giving such loud and joyful acclamations, as if our Lord himself had been leading to execution. The Governour presently asked him, Who the God of the Christians was? Which he knowing to be a captious and sarcastic question, returned no other answer then Wert thou worthy, thou shouldst know. Instruction takes hold onely of the humble and obedient ear. Truth is usually lost by being exposed to the vitious and the scornful: 'tis in vain to hold a Candle either to the Blind that cannot, or to them that shut their eyes, and will not see: . Origen, de Martyr. p. 169. there is a reverence due to the Principles of Religion that obliges us not to cast Pearls before Swine. lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend us. Here∣upon without any reverence to his age, or so much as respect to huma∣nity it self, he was rudely dragged away, and unmercifully beaten, they that were near, kicking him with their feet, and striking him with their fists; they that were farther off, throwing at him what they could meet with, making whatsoever came next to hand the instruments of their fury: every man looking upon it as impious and piacular, not to do something that might testifie his petulant scorn and rage against him. For by this means they thought to revenge the quarrel of their gods. But their savage cruelty thought it too much kindness to dispatch him at once, it is like they intended him a second Tragoedy, which if so, Heaven disappointed their designs. For being taken up with scarce so much breath as would entitle him to live, he was thrown
into the Prison, where two days after he resigned up his soul to God. V. THE Church of Lyons being thus deprived of its venerable Guide, none could stand fairer for the Chair then Irenaeus, a person ho∣noured and admired by all, who succeeded accordingly about the year CLXXIX. in a troublesom and tempestuous time. But he was a wise and skilful Pilot, and steered the Ship with a prudent Conduct. And need enough there was both of his courage and his conduct; for the Church at this time was not onely assaulted by Enemies from without, but undermined and betrayed by Heresies within. The attempts of the one he endured with meekness and patience, while he endeavoured to prevent the infection and poison of the other by a diligent and vigi∣lant circumspection, discovering their persons, laying open their designs, confuting and condemning their errours, so that their folly was made manifest unto all. The Author of the ancient Edit. Argent. 1601. 4. pag. 2. Synodicon published by Pappus, tells us of a Provincial Synod held at Lyons by Irenaeus, where with the assistance and suffrage of twelve other Bishops he condemned the Heresies of Valentinus, Marcion, Basilides, and the rest of that Anti∣christian crew. Whence he derived this intelligence, I know not, it not being mentioned by any other of the Ancients. However the thing it self is not improbable, Irenaeus his zeal against that sort of men engaging him to oppose them both by word and writing, and especially when 'tis remembred what himself informs us of, that they had invaded his own Province, and were come home to his very door. For having gi∣ven us an account of Marcus, one of those Gnostic Heresiarchs, and his followers, their beastly and licentious practices, and by what ludicrous and sensless Arts, what Magic and hellish Rites they were wont to ensnare and initiate their seduced Proselytes, he tells us Adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 9. p. 72. vid. Hieron Epist. ad Theo∣dor. p. 196., they were come into the Countries round him, all along the Roan, where they generally prevailed (which seems to have been observed as a Maxim and first principle by all Authors of Sects) upon the weaker Sex, cor∣rupting their minds, and debauching their bodies, whose cauterized consciences being afterwards awakened, some of them made public con∣fession of their crimes, others though deserting their Party, were asha∣med to return to the Church, while others made a desperate and total Apostasie from any pretences to the Faith. With some of these Ring∣leaders Praef. ad lib. 1. p. 2. Irenaeus had personally encountred, and read the Books of others, which gave him occasion (what the desires of many had importuned him to undertake) to set upon that elaborate Work against Heresies, wherein he has fully displayed their wild and phantastic principles, their brutish and abominable practises, and with such infinite pains endea∣voured to refute them: though indeed so prodigiously extravagant, so utterly irreconcileable were they to any principles of sober reason, that as he himself Lib. 1. c. ult. p. 139. observes, it was Victory enough over them, onely to dis∣cover and detect them. This Work he composed in the time of Eleu∣therus Bishop of Rome, as is evident from his Catalogue Lib. 3. c. 3. p. 233. & ap. Eus. l. 5. c. 6. p. 171. of the Bishops of that See, ending in Eleutherus, the twelfth successive Bishop, who did then possess the place. VI. AND indeed it was but time for Irenaeus and the rest of the wise and holy Bishops of those days to bestir themselves, grievous Wolves ha∣ving entered in, and made havock of the flock. The field of the Church was miserably over-run with taes, which did not onely endanger the
choaking of Religion within the Church, but obstruct the planting and propagating the Faith among them that were without. Nothing being more commonly objected against the truth and divinity of the Christian Religion, then that they were rent and torn into so many Schisms and Heresies. Stromat. l. p. 753. S. Clemens of Alexandria particularly encoun∣ters this exception, some of whose excellent reasonings are to this effect. The first thing (says he) they charge upon us, and pretend why they cannot embrace the Faith, is the diversity of Sects that are among us, truth being delayed and neglected, while some assert one thing and some another. To which he answers, that there were various Sects and Par∣ties both among the Jews, and the Philosophers of the Gentiles, and yet no man thought this a sufficient reason why they should cease to study Philosophy, or adhere to the Jewish Rites and Discipline: that our Lord had foretold, that Errours would spring up with Truth, like Tares growing up with the Wheat, and that therefore 'twas no wonder if it accordingly came to pass, and that we ought not to be wanting to our duty, because others cast off theirs, but rather stick closer to them who continue constant in the profession of the Truth: that a mind diseased and distempered with Errour and Idolatry, ought no more to be dis∣couraged from complying with an Institution that will cure it, by reason of some differences and divisions that are in it, then a sick man would refuse to take any Medicines, because of the different opinions that are among Physitians, and that they do not all use the same Prescriptions: that the Apostle hath told us, that there must be heresies, that they that are approved may be made manifest, that they heartily entertain the Christian Doctrin, improve and persevere in Faith and a holy Life: that if Truth be difficult to be discerned, yet the finding it out will abundantly recom∣pence the trouble and the labour: that a wise man would not refuse to eat of fruit, because he must take a little pains to discover what is ripe and real, from that which is only painted and counterfeit: Shall the Tra∣veller resolve not to go his journey because there are a great many ways that cross and thwart the common Road, and not rather enquire which is the plain and Kings High-way? or the Husbandman refuse to till his ground, because Weeds grow up together with the Plants? We ought rather to make these differences an argument and incentive the more accurately to examine Truth from Falshood, and Realities from Preten∣ces, that escaping the snares that are plausibly laid, we may attain , to the knowledge of that which is really truth indeed, and which is not hard to find, of them that sincerely seek it. But to return back to Irenaeus. VII. HAVING passed over the times of the Emperour Commodus (the onely honour of whose Reign was, that he created no great disturbance to the Christians, being otherwise a most debauched and dissolute Prince, in whom the Vices of all his Predecessors seemed to meet as in one Com∣mon-Sewer) Eleutherus died, and Victor succeeded in the See of Rome. A man furious and intemperate, impatient of contradiction, and who let loose the Reins to an impotent and ungovernable Passion. He re∣vived the Controversie about the celebration of Easter, and endea∣voured imperiously to impose the Roman Custom, of keeping it on the next Lords day after the Jewish Passover, upon the Churches of the Lesser Asia, and those who observed the contrary usage; and because they would not yield, rashly thundred out an Excommunication against
them, not onely endeavouring, but as Lib. 5. c. 24. p. 192. Eusebius explains it in the fol∣lowing words, actually proscribing and pronouncing them cut off from the Communion of the Church. The Asiatics little regarding the fierce threatnings from Rome, under the conduct of Polycrates Bishop of Ephe∣sus stood their ground, justifying their observing it upon the fourteenth day after the appearance of the Moon, let it fall upon what day of the Week it would, after the rule of the Jewish Passover, and this by con∣stant Tradition, and uninterrupted usage derived from S. John and S. Philip the Apostles, S. Polycarp and several others to that very day. All which he told Pope Victor, but prevailed nothing (as what will satisfie a wilful and passionate mind?) to prevent his rending the Church in sunder. For the composure of this unhappy Schism Euseb. ibid. c. 23. p. 190. Synods were called in se∣veral places, as besides one at Rome, one in Palestine under Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea Palestina, and Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, another in Pontus under Palmas, and many more in other places, who were willing to lend their hands toward the quenching of the common Flame, Ibid. c. 24. p. 192. who all wrote to Victor sharply reproving him, and advising him rather to mind what concerned the Peace of the Church, and the love and unity of Christians among one another. And among the rest our Irenaeus (who as Eusebius observes, truly answered his name in his peaceable and peace-making temper) convened a Ibid. c. 23. p. 191. Synod of the Churches of France under his jurisdiction, where with thirteen Bishops besides himself (says the fore-mentioned Ubi supr. p. 7. Synodicon) he considered and determined of this matter. In whose name he wrote a Synodical Epistle to Pope Ibid. c. 24. p. 192. Victor, wherein he told him that they agreed with him in the main of the Controversie, but withall duly and gravely advised him to take heed how he excommunica∣ted whole Churches for observing the ancient Customs derived down to them from their Ancestors: that there was as little agreement in the manner of the Preparatory Fast before Easter, as in the day it self, some thinking that they were to fast but one day, (probably he means of the great or solemn week) others two, others more, and some mea∣suring the time by a continued fast of forty hours (whether in memory of Christs lying so long in the Grave, or in imitation of his forty days Fast in the Wilderness, I know not) and that this variety was of long standing, and had crept into several places, while the Governours of the Church took less care about these different Customs, who yet main∣tained a sincere and mutual love and peace towards one another, a thing practised by all his own pious Predecessors, putting him in mind of Ani∣cetus and Polycarp, who though they could not so far convince each other as to lay aside their different usages, did yet mutually embrace, orderly receive the Communion together and peaceably part from one another. And Letters to the same effect he wrote to several other Bishops for allaying the difference thus unhappily started in the Church. VIII. THE calm and quiet days which the Church had for some years of late enjoyed, now expired, and the wind changed into a more stormy quarter, Severus the Emperour hitherto favourable, began a bitter and bloody Persecution against the Christians, prosecuted with great severity in all parts of the Empire. Himself had heretofore go∣verned Ael. Spartian. in vit. Sever. c. 3. p. 335. this very Province of Lyons, and probably had taken peculiar notice of Irenaeus, and the flourishing state of the Church in that City, and might therefore give more particular Orders for the proceeding
against them in this place. The Persecution, that in other parts picked out some few to make them exemplary here served all alike, and went through with the Work. For so Hist. Franc. l. 1. c. 29. Gregory of Tours, and the ancient Martyr. Rom. ad Jan. XXVIII. A∣don. Martyr. IV. Kalend. Jul. Martyrologies inform us, that Irenaeus having been prepared by several torments, was at length put to death (beheaded say the Greeks Men. Grc. ., likely enough) and together with him almost all the Christians of that vast populous City, whose numbers could not be reckoned up, so that the Streets of the City flowed with the bloud of Christians. His Body was taken up by Zacharias his Presbyter, and buried in a Vault, laid between Epipodius and Alexander, who had suffered in the Persecution under Antoninus. It is not easie to assign the certain date of his Martyrdom, which may with almost equal probability be referred to a double pe∣riod, either to the time of that bloudy Edict which Severus published against the Christians about the tenth year of his reign, Ann. Chr. CCII. or to his expedition into Britain, Ann. Chr. CCVIII. when he took Lyons in his way, and might see execution done with his own eyes. And indeed the vast numbers that are there said to have suffered, agree well enough with the temper of that fierce and cruel Prince, who had conceived before a particular displeasure against the Citizens of Lyons, and a worse against the Christians there. IX. HE was a true lover of God, and of the souls of men, for the promoting whose happiness he thought no dangers or difficulties to be great; he scrupled not to leave his own Countrey, to take so trouble∣som and tedious a journey, and in stead of the smooth and polite man∣ners of the Eastern Nations to fix his dwelling among a People of a wild and savage temper, and whom he must convert to civility, before he gained them to Religion. Nor was it the least part of his trouble (as himself Praef. ad l. 2. p. 4. plainly intimates) that he was forced to learn the Language of the Countrey, a rugged and (as he calls it) barbarous Dialect before he could do any good upon them. All which and a great deal more, he chearfully underwent, that he might be serviceable to the great interests of men. And because he knew that nothing usually more hinders the progress of Piety, then to have mens minds vitiated and depraved with false and corrupt Notions and Principles, and that nothing could more expose the Christian Religion to the scorn and contempt of wise and discerning men, then the wild Schemes of those absurd and ridiculous opinions that were then set on foot, therefore he set himself with all imaginable industry to oppose them, reading over all their Writings, considering and unravelling all their principles with incomparable pa∣tience as well as diligence, whence he is deservedly stiled by Adv. Valent. c. 5. p. 252. Tertullian, Omnium doctrinarum curiosissimus explorator, the most curious searcher into all kinds of Doctrines. In the successful managery whereof he was greatly advantaged by the natural acumen and subtlety of his parts, and those Studies of Philosophy and Humane Literature, of which he had made himself Master in his younger days, sufficient foot-steps whereof appear in the Writings which he left behind him. For besides his Epi∣stles, he wrote many Volums, (though he Volaterr. Com∣ment. urban. l. 16. col. 590. that tells us that he compo∣sed an Ecclesiastical History, which Eusebius made use of, reckons up one more then ever he wrote, and doubtless mistook it for his Work Adversus Haereses) which are all lost, except his five Books against Here∣sies, intituled anciently , The Confutation and Subversion of Knowledge falsly so called, i.e. of Gnosti∣cism,
those abstruse and mystical Heretics pretending that all sublime and excellent knowledge dwelt with them. What his proper stile and phrase was in these Books is not easily guessed, the far greatest part of the Original Greek being wanting (the conjecture of those who will have them originally penned in Latine is not worth the mentioning) probably it was simple and unaffected, vulgar and ordinary, embased, it is like and he seems to confess as much, Loc. titat. with the natural Language of the Countrey where he lived, nor had he studied the Arts of Rhetoric, the ornaments of Speech, or had any skill in the elaborate methods and artifices of persuasion, as he modestly Praefat. ut supr. apologizes for himself. How∣ever his Discourses are grave and well digested, and (as far as the Argu∣ment he manages would admit) clear and perspicuous, in all which he betrays a mighty zeal, and a spirit prepared for Martyrdom. For the Martyrs (as Praef. in Iraen. Erasmus truly notes) have a certain serious, strenuous, and masculine way of writing beyond other men. X. AS for his Works themselves Cod CXX. col. 301. Photius thus censures them, that in some of them the accuracy of truth in Ecclesiastic Doctrines is sophi∣sticated , with false and spurious reasonings, which ought to be taken notice of. In the Books yet extant there are some assertions, that will not bear a strict rigorous examination, the principal whereof are such as we have already remarked in the life of Justin Martyr, the rest are of an inferiour and more inconsiderable notice. As for his affirm∣ing that our Lord was near Adv. Haeres. l. 2 c. 39. p. 192. &c. 40. ibid. fifty years of age at the time of his public Ministry, it was an errour into which he was betrayed partly from a false supposition, that our Lord must be of a more mature and elderly Age, that so he might deliver his doctrine with the greater authority; partly from a mistaken report (which he had somewhere picked up, and it may be from his Master Papias) that S. John and the rest of the Apostles had so affirmed and taught it; and partly out of opposition to his ad∣versaries, who maintained that our Saviour staid no longer upon earth then till the thirty first year of his age; against whom the eagerness of disputation tempted him to make good his assertion from any plausible pretence, and to take the hint (though his impetus, and the desire of prosecuting his Argument would not give his thoughts leave to cool, and take the place into sober consideration) from that question of the Jews to Christ, thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? whence in transitu he took it for granted that the Jews had some ground for what they said, and that he must be near that age. XI. HIS care to have his Writings derived pure and uncorrupted to posterity was great and admirable, adding to his Book , this solemn and religious obtestation; Ap. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 5. c 20. p. 187. I adjure thee, whoever thou art that shalt transcribe this Book, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his glo∣rious coming, wherein he shall judge the quick and the dead, that thou com∣pare what thou transcribest, and diligently correct it by the Copy from whence thou transcribest it, and that thou likewise transcribe this adjuration, and annex it to thy Copy. And well had it been with the ancient Writers of the Church, had their Books been treated with this care and reve∣rence: more of them had been conveyed down to us; at least those few that are, had arrived more sound and unpolluted. I note no more (and it is what Eusebius long since thought worth taking notice of) then that in his time miraculous gifts and powers were very common in the Church. For so he Adv. Haeres. l. 2. c. 57. p. 218. & ap. Eusch. l. 5. c. 7. p. 171. tells us, that some expelled and cast out Devils,
the persons often embracing Christianity upon it; others had Visions and Revelations, and foretold things to come; some spake all manner of Languages, and as occasion was, discovered mens thoughts and secret purposes, and expounded the mysteries and deep things of God; others miraculously healed the sick, and by laying their hands upon them resto∣red their health, and many who raised the dead, the persons so raised living among them many years after. The Gifts (as he speaks) which God in the name of our crucified Lord then bestowed upon the Church being innumerable, all which they sincerely and freely improved to the great advantage and benefit of the World. Whence with just reason he urges the truth of our Religion in general, and how much advantage true Christians had to triumph over all those Impostors and Seducers, who sheltered themselves under the venerable Title of being Christians. His Writings. Extant. Adversus Haereses, seu De refutatione & eversione falsae scientiae, Libri V. Not extant. Libellus de Scientia adversus Gentes. Demonstratio Apostolicae praedicatio∣nis, ad Marcianum fratrem. Liber de Ogdoade. Epistola ad Blastum de Schismate. Ad Florinum de Monarchia, seu, Quod Deus non sit conditor mali, Epistola. Ad Victorem Episcopum Romanum de Paschate, Epistola. Ad varios Episcopos de eadem re, Epistolae plures. Variorum Tractatuum Liber. The End of S. IRENAEUS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. THEOPHILUS BISHOP of ANTIOCH. Micha: Burg: Dili: et sculpsit S. THEOPHILUS ANTIOCHENUS. The great obscurity of his Originals. His learned and ingenuous Education, and natural parts. An account of his Conversion to Christianity, and the reasons inducing him thereunto, collected out of his own Writings. His
scrupling the Doctrine of the Resurrection. The great difficulty of enter∣taining that Principle. Synesius his case. Theophilus his conquering this objection. His great satisfaction in the Christian Religion. His ele∣ction to the Bishoprick of Antioch. His desire to convert Autolycus. Autolycus who. His mighty prejudice against Christianity. Theophi∣lus his undertaking him, and his free and impartial debating the case with him. His excellent merage of the controversie. His vigorous op∣posing the Heresies of those times. His Books against Marcion and Her∣mogenes. His death, and the time of it. S. Hieroms Character of his Works. His Writings. I. THOUGH the Ancients furnish us with very few notices concerning this venerable Bishop, yet perhaps it may not be unacceptable to the Reader to pick up that little which may be found. The mistake is not worth confuting and scarce deserves mentioning, that makes him the same with that Theophilus of Antioch, to whom S. Luke dedicates his Evangelical Writings, so great the distance of time (if there were nothing more) between them. Whether he was born at Antioch is uncertain: but where-ever he was born, his Parents were Gentiles, by whom he was brought up in the common Rites of that Religion that then governed the World. They gave him all the accomplishments of a learned and liberal Education, and vast improvements he made in the progress of his Studies, so that he was throughly versed in the Writings of all the great Masters of Learning and Philosophy in the Heathen World: which being set off with a quick and a pleasant wit (as appears from his Disputes against the Gentiles) rendred him a man of no inconsi∣derable note and account among them. II. WHEN or by what means converted to Christianity, is impossi∣ble particularly to determine: thus much onely may be gathered from the Discourses which he left behind him. Being a man of an inquisitive temper, and doubtless of a very honest mind, he gave up himself to a more free and impartial search into the nature and state of things. He found that the account of things which that Religion gave, wherein he was then engaged, was altogether unsatisfactory, that the stories of their gods were absurd and frivolous, and some of them prophane and impious, that their Rites of Worship were trifling and ridiculous; he considered the several parts of the Creation, and that excellent provi∣dence that governed the World, wherein he easily discerned the plain notices of a wise and omnipotent Being, and that God had purposely disposed things thus, that his Grandeur and Majesty might appear to all. Accordingly he directs his friend to this method of conviction, as that which doubtless he had found most successful and satisfactory to himself. He bids Ad Autolyc. l. 1. p. 72. him survey and consider the Works of God, the vi∣cissitude and alteration of times according to their proper seasons, the revolutions of the heavenly bodies, the wisely established course of the Elements, the beautiful order and disposition of Nights and Days, and Months and Years, the pleasant and admirable variety of Seeds, Plants, and Fruits, the manifold generations of Beasts, Birds, Creeping things, Fishes, and the Inhabitants of the Watery Regions; the prudent instinct
by which all these Creatures are excited to preserve their kind, and nou∣rish their young, and that not for their own advantage, but for the ne∣cessity and pleasure of mankind, God by a wise and secret Providence having so ordained, that all things should be in subjection unto man. And indeed so strangely was he ravished with the consideration of this Argument, that he professes Ibid. l. 2. p. 91., that no man is able duly to describe the singular Order and Oeconomy of the Creation, no though he had a thousand mouths, and as many tongues, and were to live in the World a thousand years, , so incomprehensibly great and unfathomable is that Divine Wisdom that shines in the Works of the Creation. Thus prepared he seems to have betaken himself (and to this also he advises Autolycus Ibid. p. 110, 111.) to the conside∣ration of other Volums, the Books that contained the Religion of the Christians, especially the writings of the Prophets, and to have weighed the importance of their Revelations, the variety of the persons, the meanness and obscurity of their education, their exact harmony and agreement, the certainty of their predictions, and how accurately the prophecy and the event met together; so that (as he adds Ibid. p. 11.) whoever would but seriously apply himself to the study of them, had a way ready open to come to the exact knowledge of the truth. III. ONE thing there was, which he himself Lib. 1. p. 78. seems to intimate, did more especially obstruct his full compliance with the Christian Doctrin, the belief of the Resurrection. He had been brought up in the Schools of Philosophy, where he had been taught that from a privation of life there can be no return to the possession of it; it is like he could not con∣ceive how mens scattered dust after so many Ages could be recollected, and built up again into the same bodies. Indeed there is scarce any Principle of the Christian Faith, that generally met with more opposi∣tion from the wise and the learned, and which was more difficultly ad∣mitted into their Creed. When S. Paul preached to the Philosophers at Athens, while he told them of a judgment to come, they made no scruple to give it entertainment, it being a principle evident by natural light, till he discoursed of a future Resurrection; and this they rejected with contempt and scorn, Acts 17.32. and when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; and the most grave and sober took time to consider of it; others said, we will hear thee again of this matter. And Synesius himself, that great Philosopher, after his being baptized into the Chri∣stian Religion, when courted by Theophilus of Alexandria to take upon him the Bishoprick of Ptolemais, would not yield Synes. Epist. CV. p. 249. vid, Euagr. H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 15. p. 273. till he had publicly entered his dissent to the doctrine of the Resurrection, at least as to the common explication of the Article: he looked upon it as , as containing a kind of sacred and ineffable mystery in it, but could not comply with the vulgar and received opinions; being willing probably to admit it, if he might explain it according to the principles of Philosophy, and after the Platonic mode. Though why the credibility of this Article should stick with any, that own a Being of Infinite Power, I see not: it being equally easie to Omnipotence (as De Refurr. mort. p. 43. Athenagoras and others discourse upon this Argument) to restore our scattered parts, and combine them again into the same Mass, as it was at first to create them out of nothing. But to return to our Theo∣philus. By a frequent reflection Loc. supr. . upon those many shadows of a Resur∣rection which God hath impressed upon the course of Nature, and the
standing Phaenomena of Divine Providence, he conquered this objection, especially after he had conversed with, and embraced the holy Volums, wherein these things were so positively declared and published. And thus he became a Christian, being baffled and disappointed in all other refuges, he took sanctuary in the Church, which (as himself expresses it Lib. 2. p. 93, 94.) God has set in the World, like an Island in the midst of the Sea, into whose safe and convenient Harbours the lovers of truth might fly, and all those who desired to be saved, and to escape the judgment and the wrath to come. And glad he was that he Vid. l. 1. p. 69. was got thither, rejoycing that he bore the name of a Christian, , that name that was so dear to God, how much soever otherwise despised and scorned by an ignorant and evil Age. IV. ABOUT the year useb. Chron. cod. anno. CLXIX. ( Annal. p. 359. Eutychius refers it to the six∣teenth year of Antoninus his reign) or rather the year before, his Pre∣decessor Eros being dead, he was made Bishop of Antioch, accounted by some the sixth, by the others the seventh Bishop of that See. And nei∣ther of them mistaken, both being true according to different computa∣tions, some reckoning S. Peter the first, while others beholding him as an Apostle, and as acting in a larger and more Oecumenical sphere then a private Bishop, begin the account from Euodius as the first Bishop of it. S. Theophilus thus fixed in his charge, set himself to promote the true interest and happiness of men, and as goodness always delights to communicate and diffuse it self, he studied to bring over others to that Faith, which he had entertained himself. Among the rest he attempted a person of note, his great friend Autolycus. Who this Autolycus was we have no account, more then what is given us by Theophilus himself Theoph. l. 3. p. 119.. He was a person learned and eloquent, curious in all Arts and Sciences, the acquist whereof he pursued with so indefatigable a diligence, that he would bury himself among Books, and steal hours for study from his necessary rest, spending whole nights in Libraries, and in conversing with the monuments of the dead. But withall a Gentile Ibid. l. 2. p. 80., infinitely zealous for his Religion, and unreasonably prejudiced against Christia∣nity, which he cried out of as the highest folly and madness, and loa∣ded with all the common charges and calumnies which either the wit or malice of those times had invented to make it odious, and for the defence and vindication whereof he had bitterly quarrelled with Theophilus. This notwithstanding, he is not affrighted from underta∣king him, but treats him with all the freedom and ingenuity that became a Friend and a Philosopher, tells Ib. l. 1. p. 70. him that the cause was in himself, why he did not discern and embrace the truth, that his wickedness and im∣pieties had depraved his mind, and darkned his understanding, and that men were not to blame the Sun for want of light, when themselves were blind and wanted eyes to see it; that the rust and soil must be wiped off from the Glass before 'twould make a true and clear representation of the object; and that God would not discover himself, but to purged and prepared minds, and such who by innocency and a divine life were become fit and disposed to receive and entertain him. Then he explains to him the nature of God, and gives him an account of the Origin of the World according to the Christian doctrin, disproves and derides the ridiculous deities of the Heathens, and particularly answers those black imputations usually laid upon the Christians; and because Autolycus had mainly urged the lateness and novelty of the Christian Faith, he shews
shews at large how much superiour it was in many parts of it in point of Seniority, and that by many Ages, to any thing which the Heathen Religion could pretend to: pressing him at every turn to comply with so excellent a Religion, and assuring him the Lib. 3. p. 127. People whom he invited him to, were so far from being such as he represented them, that they lived under the Conduct of Modesty and Sobriety, Temperance and Chastity, banished Injustice, and rooted up all Vice and Wickedness, loved Righteousness, lived under Law and Rule, exercised a Divine Re∣ligion, acknowledged God, served the Truth, were under the preserva∣tion of Grace and Peace, directed by a sacred Word, taught by Wis∣dom, rewarded by a life immortal, and governed by God himself. What the issue of his Discourses was, we cannot tell, but may probably hope they had a desired success, especially since we find Lib. 2. p. 80. Autolycus after the first conference a little more favourable to the cause, abating of his con∣ceived displeasure against Theophilus, and desiring of him a further ac∣count of his Religion. And certainly if Wisdom and Eloquence, if strength of Reason, and a prudent managing the Controversie were able to do it, he could not well fail of reclaiming the man from his Errour and Idolatry. V. NOR was he more sollicitous to gain others to the Faith, then he was to keep those who already had embraced it from being infected and depraved with Errour. For which cause he continually stood upon his guard, faithfully gave warning of the approach of Heresie, and vi∣gorously set himself against it. For notwithstanding the care and vi∣gilance of the good and pious men of those days (as H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 24. p. 146. Eusebius observes) envious men crept in, and sowed Tares among the sincere Apostolic Doctrine: so that the Pastors of the Church were forced to rise up in every place, and to set themselves to drive away these wild Beasts from Christs Sheep-fold, partly by exhorting and warning the Brethren, partly by entering the lists with the Heretics themselves, some perso∣nally disputing with, and confuting them, others accurately convincing and refuting their Opinions by the Books which they wrote against them. Among whom he tells us was our Theophilus, who conflicted with these Heretics, and particularly wrote against Marcion, who asserted two Deities, and that the Soul onely, as being the divine and better part, and not the Body, was capable of the happiness of the other World, and this too granted to none but his Followers, with many such impious and fond Opinions. Another Book he wrote against Hermoge∣nes, one better skilled in Painting, then drawing Schemes of new Divi∣nity, he forsook the Church, and fled to the Stoies, and being tinctured with their Principles maintained matter to be eternal, out of which God created all things, and that all evils proceeded out of Matter, asserting moreover (as Clemens of Alexandria In excerpt. Graec. Theod. ap. Cl. Alex. p. 808. D. informs us) that our Lords Body was lodged in the Sun, ridiculously interpreting that place, in them hath he set a Tabernacle for the Sun. Nor did our Theophilus neglect the weak and younger part of the charge, he had not onely Physic for the Sick, and strong meat for them of full age, but milk for Babes, and such as were yet unskilful in the word of righteousness, composing many Catechetic Discourses, that contained the first rudiments of the Faith. VI. HE sate thirteen years Niceph. C. P. Chronograph. ap. Scalig. p. 311. in his Bishoprick, (XXI. says the Pa∣triarch of Alexandria Eutych. An∣nal. p. 359.) and died about the second or third year of the Emperour Commodus, for that he out-lived M. Antoninus, is evident from
his mentioning Ad Autol. l. 3. p. 138. his death and the time of his reign in his Discourses with Autolycus, after which he composed those Discourses, but what kind of death it was, whether natural or violent, is to me unknown. From the calmness and tranquillity of Commodus his reign, as to any Persecu∣tion against the Christians, we may probably guess it to have been a peaceable and quiet death. Books he wrote many, whereof Hieron.  de Script. in Theoph. S. Hie∣rom gives this Character, that they were elegant Tracts, and greatly conducive to the edification of the Church. And further adds, that he had met with Commentaries upon the Gospel and the Proverbs of Solomon, bearing his name, but which seemed not to answer his other Writings in the elegancy and politeness of the stile. His Writings. Extant. Ad Autolycum Libri III. Not Extant. Contra Haeresin Hermogenis. Adversus Marcionem. Libri aliquot Catechetici. Doubtful. Commentarii in Evangelium. Commentarii in Proverbia Solomonis. The End of S. THEOPHILUS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MELITO BISHOP of SARDIS. M. Burg. sculp. S. MELITO. His Countrey and Birth-place. His excellent Parts and Learning. His being made Bishop of Sardis. His coelibacy. His Prophetic gifts. The Persecution under Marcus Aurelius. Melito his Apology for the Chri∣stians.
A fragment of it cited out of Eusebius. The great advantages of Christianity to the Empire. His endeavour to compose the Paschal Con∣troversie. His Book concerning that Subject. His journey to Jerusa∣lem to search what Books of the Old Testament were received by that Church. The Copy of his Letter to his Brother Onesimus concerning the Canon of the Old Testament. What Books admitted by the ancient Church. Solomons Proverbs stiled by the Ancients the Book of Wisdom. His death and burial. The great variety of his works. Ʋnjustly suspected of dangerous notions. An account given of the titles of two of his Books most liable to suspicion. His Writings enumerated. I. S MELITO was born in Asia, and probably at Sardis, the Metropolis of Lydia, a great and ancient City, the Seat of the Lydian Kings; it was one of the Seven Churches to which S. John wrote Epistles, and wherein he takes notice of some that durst own and stand up for God and Religion in that great degeneracy that was come upon it. He was a man of admirable parts, en∣riched with the furniture of all useful Learn∣ing, acute and eloquent, but especially conversant in the paths of Divine Knowledge, having made deep enquiries into all the more uncommon parts and speculations of the Christian Doctrine. He was for his singu∣lar eminency and usefulness chosen Bishop of Sardis, though we cannot exactly define the time, which were I to conjecture, I should guess it about the latter end of Antoninus Pius his reign, or the begining of his Successors. He filled up all the parts of a very excellent Governour and Guide of Souls, whose good he was careful to advance both by Word and Writing. Which that he might attend with less solicitude and distraction, he not onely kept himself within the compass of a single life, but was more then ordinarily exemplary for his Chastity and So∣briety, his self-denial and contempt of the World; upon which ac∣count he is by Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus Ap. Euseb. l. 5. c. 24. p. 191. stiled an Eunuch, that is, in our Saviours explication, one of those, who make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake; who for the service of Religion, and the hopes of a better life, are content to deny themselves the comforts of a married state, and to renounce even the lawful pleasures of this World. And God who delights to multiply his Grace upon pious and holy souls, crowned his other Vertues with the gift of Prophesie, for so Ap. Hieron. de Script. in Melit. Tertullian tells us, that he was accounted by the Orthodox Christians as a Pro∣phet, and Polycrates says Loc. supr. citat. of him, that he did , was in all things governed and directed by the afflatus and suggestion of the Holy Ghost. Accordingly in the Catalogue Ap Eseb. l. 4. c. 26. p. 147. of his Writings we find one , of the right way of living, and concerning Prophets, and another concerning Prophesie. II. IT was about the year CLXX. and the tenth Esb. Chron. ad Ann. CLXXI. of M. Antoninus, (his Brother L. Verus, having died the year before of an Apoplexy, as he sate in his Chariot) when the Persecution grew high against the Chri∣stians, greedy and malicious men taking occasion from the Imperial Edicts lately published by all the methods of cruelty and rapine to op∣press and spoil innocent Christians. Whereupon as others, so especially Eseb. H. Eccl. loc. supr. citat. S. Melito presents an Apology and humble Supplication in their behalf
to the Emperour, wherein among other things he thus bespeaks him. If these things, Sir, be done by your Order, let them be thought well done. For a righteous Prince will not at any time command what is unjust; and we shall not think much to undergo the award of such a death. This onely request we beg, that your self would please first to examine the case of these resolute persons, and then impartially de∣termine, whether they deserve punishment and death, or safety and protection. But if this new Edict and Decree, which ought not to have been proclaimed against the most barbarous Enemies, did not come out with your cognizance and consent, we humbly pray, and that with the greater importunity, that you would not suffer us to be any longer exposed to this public rapine. III. AFTER this he put him in mind how much the Empire had prospered since the rise of Christianity, and that none but the worst of his Predecessors had entertained an implacable spight against the Chri∣stians. This new Sect of Philosophy (says he) which we profess, here∣tofore flourished among the Barbarians (by which probably he means the Jews.) Afterwards under the reign of Augustus your Predecessor, it spread it self over the Provinces of your Empire, commencing with a happy omen to it: since which time the Majesty and Greatness of the Roman Empire hath mightily increased, whereof you are the wished-for Heir and Successor, and together with your Son shall so continue, especially while you protect that Religion, which begun with Augustus, and grew up together with the Empire, and for which your Predecessors had together with other Rites of Worship, some kind of reverence and regard. And that our Religion, which was bred up with the prosperity of the Empire, was born for public good, there is this great Argument to convince you, that since the reign of Augustus there has no considerable mischief happened; but on the contrary all things according to every ones desire have fallen out glorious and successful. None but Nero and Domitian instigated by cruel and ill∣minded men, have attempted to reproach and calumniate our Religion; whence sprang the common slanders concerning us, the injudicious Vul∣gar greedily entertaining such reports without any strict examination. But your Parents of Religious Memory gave a check to this Ignorance and injustice, by frequent Rescripts reproving those who made any new attempts in this matter. Among whom was your Grandfather Adrian, who wrote, as to several others, so to Fundanus the Procon∣sul of Asia; and your Father, at what time your self was Colleague with him in the Empire, wrote to several Cities (particularly to La∣rissaea, Thessalonica, Athens, and all the Cities of Greece) that they should not create any new disturbance about this affair. And for your self, who have the same opinion of us which they had, and a great deal better, more becoming a good man and a Philosopher, we promise our selves that you will grant all our Petitions and Requests. An Address managed with great prudence and ingenuous freedom, and which striking in with other Apologies presented about the same time, did not a little contribute to the general quiet and prosperity of Chri∣stians. IV. NOR was he so wholly swallowed up with care for the general Peace of Christians, as to neglect the particular good of his own, or neighbour Churches. During the Government of Servilius Paulus
Proconsul of Asia, Sagaris Bishop of Laodicea had suffered Martyrdom in the late persecution; Ipse Milet. ap. Euseb. l. 4. c. 26. p. 147. at what time the controversie about the Pas∣chal solemnity was hotly ventilated in that Church, some, strangers pro∣bably, urging the observation of the Festival according to the Roman usage celebrating it upon the Lords-day, contrary to the custom of those Churches, who had ever kept it upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, according to the manner of the Jews. For the quieting of which contention Melito presently wrote two Books , concerning the Passover, wherein no doubt he treated at large of the celebration of Easter according to the observation of the Asian Churches, and there∣fore Polycrates in his Letter to Pope Victor particularly reckons Ap. Euseb. l. 5. c. 24. p. 191. Sagaris and Melito, among the chief Champions of the Cause. This Paschal Book of S. Melito was mentioned also by Ap. Euseb. ubi spr p. 147. Clemens of Alexandria in a Tract concerning the same subject, wherein he confesses that he was moved to that undertaking by the discourse which Melito had published upon that subject. V. HOW unwearied is true goodness and a love to souls! how willing to digest any difficulties, by which anothers happiness may be advanced! his brother Onesimus had desired of him to remark such passages of the Old Testament as principally made for the confirmation of the Christian Religion, and to let him know how many of those Books were admitted into the holy Canon. Wherein that he might at once throughly satisfie both his brother and himself, he took a journey on purpose into the East, that is, I suppose, to Jerusalem, where he was likeliest to receive full satisfaction in this matter, and where having in∣formed himself, he gave his Brother at his return an account of it. The Letter it self, because but short, and containing so authentic an evidence what Books of the Old Testament were received by the ancient Church, we shall here subjoin. Melito to his Brother Onesimus, greeting. FOR AS MƲCH as out of your great love to and delight in the Holy Scriptures, you have oft desired me to collect such passages out of the Law and the Prophets as relate to our Saviour and the several parts of our Chri∣stian Faith, and to be certainly informed of the Books of the Old Testament, how many in number, and in what order they were written, I have endea∣voured to comply with your desires in this affair. For I know your great zeal and care concerning the Faith, and how much you desire to be instructed in matters of Religion, and especially out of your love to God how infinitely you prefer these above all other things, and are solicitous about your eternal sal∣vation. In order hereunto I travelled into the East, and being arrived at the place where these things were done and published, and having accurately informed myself of the Books of the Old Testament, I have sent you the follow∣ing account. The five Books of Moses, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Jesus or Joshua the son of Nun; Judges, Ruth; the four Books of Kings. Two Books of Chronicles. The Psalms of David. The Proverbs of Solomon, which is Wisdom; Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, Job. The Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, the twelve [minor] Prophets in one Book. Daniel, Ezekiel: Esdras or Ezra. Out of all which I have made Collections, which I have digested into six Books.
VI. IN which Catalogue we may observe the Book of Esther is omitted, as it is also by Synops. S. Script. p. 471. S. Athanasius, Carm. XXXIII p. 98. To. 2. Gregory Natianzen, and Sect. Act. II. p. 408. Lcon∣tius, in their enumeration of the Books of the holy Canon: though for what reason is uncertain, unless (as Biblioth. S. l. 1. p. 5. Sixtus Senensis, not improbably conjectures) because it was not in those times looked upon as of such unquestionable credit and authority as the rest; the spurious additions at the end of it causing the whole Book to be called in question. Nor is here any particular mention made of Nehemiah, probably because it was anciently comprehended under that of Esdras. And by that of Wisdom we see is not meant the Apocryphal Book, called the Wisdom of Solomon (as De Script. Eccl. in Melit. ad Ann. 150. Bellarmine and most Writers of that Church confidently enough assert) but his Proverbs, of which Lib. 4. c. 22. p. 143. Eusebius expresly tells us, that not onely Hegesippus but Irenaeus, and all the Ancients were wont to call the Proverbs of Solomon by the name of Wisdo, , a wisdom containing a System of all kind of vertues. And indeed that Melito in this place could mean no other, the words of his Letter as re∣stored by Valesius () according to Nice∣phorus his quotation, and the faith of all the best and most ancient Ma∣nuscrips, puts the case beyond all peradventure. VII. AT last this good man broken with infinite pains and labours, and wearied with the inquietudes of a troublesome World, retreated to the place of rest. The time and manner of his death is unknown; this onely we find Polyrat. Fp. ap. Euseb. ubi p. 191. that he died, and lies buried at Sardis, waiting , the Episcopal Visitation from Heaven, when our Lord shall come and raise him up from the dead. He was a man, besides the piety of his mind, and the strictness and innocency of his life, of great parts and learning, he had elegans & declamatorium ingenium, as Apud Hieron. de Script. in Melit. Tertullian said of him, a smart elegant Wit, able to represent things with their most proper aggravations. He wrote Books almost in all kinds of Sub∣jects, Divine, Moral, and Philosophical, the Monuments of no less Indu∣stry then Learning, which are all long since lost, some very few frag∣ments onely excepted. I know there are that suspected him to have had notions less Orthodox about some of the great principles of Reli∣gion: which I confess seems to me a most uncharitable and unjust re∣flection upon so holy and so good a man, especially seeing the conjecture is founded upon the meer titles of some of his Books, none of the Books themselves being extant, and of those titles a fair account might be given to satisfie any sober and impartial man; there being but two that can be liable to exception, the one , de Deo, not Corporeo, (however . Theod. Quest. XX. in Genes. Tom. 1. pag. 21. Theodoret, and as it seems from Origen, understands it) but Corporato (as Tertullian would express it) de Deo cor∣pore induto, as Rufinus of old translated it, concerning God clothed with a body, or the Word made flesh; the other  (most Copies read ) , of the Creation and Generation of Christ. Where admit it to have been , Creation, he alluded I doubt not to that of Solomon, the Lord possessed, , created me in the beginning of his way. And evident it is, that before the rise of the Arrian Controversies the . Constit. Apost. l. 5. c. 19. col 370. Caterum ne tune quidem solus; habebat enim secum, quem habebat in semetips, ratio∣nem suam scilicet: han Graeci .—It aque Sophiam quo{que} exaudi, ut secundam pesonam conditam. Primo, Domi∣nus creavit me initium viarum in opera sua, &c. nam ut primum Deus voluit ea qae cum Sophiae ratlone & sermone disposuerat intrase, ipsum primum protulit sermonem.—Haec est nativitas perfecta sermonis, dum ex deo procedit: conditus ab eo primum ad cogitatum in nomin: Sophiae, Dominus condidit me initium viarm. Tertul adv. Prax. c. 5, 6, . p. 503. ubi plura. Fathers
used the word for any manner of production, and usually under∣stand that place of Solomon of the ineffable Generation of the Son of God. His Writings. None whereof are now extant. De Paschate, Libri II. De recta vivendi ratione, & de Prophetis, liber unus. De Ecclesia. De die Dominica. De Natura Hominis. De Creatione. De obedientia sensuum fidei. De Anima, & corpore, & mente. De Lavacro. De Veritate. De fide [Creatione] & Genera∣tione Christi. De Prophetia. De Hospitalitate. Liber Clavis dictus. De Diabolo. De Joannis Apocalypsi. De Incarnatione Dei. Apologia ad Imp. Antoninum. Excerptorum ex libris Veteris Te∣stamenti, Libri VI. The End of S. MELITO's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. PANTAENUS CATECHIST OF ALEXANDRIA. Michael Burghers. Delineavit et sculpsit. S. PANTAENUS. The various conjectures concerning his Original. The probabilities of his Jewish descent, what. Whether born in Sicily or at Alexandria. His first institution. The famous Platonic School erected by Ammonius at
Alexandria. The renown of that place for other parts of Learning. Pantaenus addicted to the Sect of the Stoics. The Principles of that Sect shewed to agree best with the dictates of Christianity. His great improve∣ments in the Christian Doctrine. The Catechetic School at Alexandria, with its antiquity. Pantaenus made Regent of it. When he first entered upon this Office. An Embassy from India to the Bishop of Alexandria for some to preach the Christian Faith. Pantaenus sent upon this errand. This Countrey where situate. His arrival in India, and converse with the Brach∣mans. Their temper, principles, and way of life. Their agreement with the Stoics. Foot-steps of Christianity formerly planted there. S. Matthews Hebrew Gospel found among them and brought by Pantaenus to Alexan∣dria. How far and by whom Christianity was propagated in India after∣wards. Pantaenus his return to Alexandria, and resuming his Cateche∣tic Office. His Death. His great Piety and Learning. I. THE silence of Antiquity as to the Countrey and Kindred of this excellent person has administred to variety of conjectures concerning his origi∣nal. Some conceive him to have been born of Jewish Parents, and they of note and quality. For Stromat. l. 1. p. 274. Clemens Alexandrinus reckoning up his Tutors, tells us that one, (whom he names last) was of Palestine, an Hebrew of very long descent; and then adds, that having found the last, (mean∣ing, say some, the last of those whom he had reckoned up) though he justly deserved to be placed first, after he had with infinite diligence and curiosity hunted him out in Egypt, where he lay obscure, he sate down under his Discipline and Institution. This person H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 11. p. 175, 176. Eusebius plainly supposes to have been our Pantaenus; and that he intended him in the latter clause there is no cause to doubt, the former onely is ambi∣guous, it not being clear, whether the latter sentence be necessarily connected and joined to the former, or that he designed any more, then to intimate the last Master he addressed to, as distinct from those he had named before. And this I am the rather inclined to think, because whoever considerately weighs Clemens his period, will find that by his Hebrew or Palestine Master, he means one of the two whom he heard in the East, whereas Pantaenus was his Master in Egypt, whom he both found and heard there. Vales. Annot. in Euseb. p. 96. Others make him born in Sicily, because Cle∣mens in the following words stiles him, a truly Sicilian Bee: but whether there may not be something proverbial in that expression even as it relates to Sicily, I shall not now enquire. However it is certain that the Inhabitants of that Island were generally Greeks, that many eminent Philosophers were born, or resided there, and particularly the famous Porphyry, who had retired hither for some years, and here wrote his vi∣rulent Books against the Christians. Let this then stand for his Coun∣trey, till something more probable offer it self, unless we will say, that being descended of Sicilian ancestors, he was born at Alexandria, the place of his education. II. HIS younger years were seasoned with all learned and philosophi∣cal studies, under the best Masters which Alexandria (for there I pre∣sume to place his education) afforded, at that time a noted staple place of Learning. As Egypt had in all Ages been famous for the choicest
parts of literature, and the more uncommon speculations of Theology, so more especially Alexandria, where there were Professors in all Arts and Sciences, and public Schools of institution, not a little advantaged by that noble Library, placed here by Ptolomy Philadelphus, and so much celebrated by the Ancients. In after-times here was a fixed and setled suc∣cession of Philosophers in the Platonic School, begun by Ammonius Saccas, and carried on by Photinus and Origen, and their successors for several Ages. Lib. 22. non longe à sin. p. 1638. Ammianus Marcellinus tells us that in his time, though not so famous as formerly, yet in some good degree it still maintained its reputation, and that all ingenuous Arts and Methods of recondite Learning, and cele∣brated Professors of all sorts flourished here, and that it was enough to re∣commend a Physician to public notice, if he had studied at Alexandria. Nay many Ages after him, Benjamin the Jew Itiner p. 121. at his being there, found near twenty several Schools of Aristotelians (the onely men that then ruled the Chair) whither men flocked from all parts of the World to learn the Peripatetic Philosophy. III. AMONG all the Sects of Philosophy he principally applied himself Euseb. l. 5. c. 10. p. 175. to the Stoics, with whose notions and rules of life he was most enamoured; and no wonder, Com. in Esa. c. 11. p. 49. Tom. 5. seeing (as S. Hierom observes) their dog∣mata in many things come nearest to the doctrines of Christianity. As indeed they do, especially as to the moral and practic part of their Prin∣ciples. They held that nothing was good but what was just and pious, nothing evil but what was vicious and dishonest; that a bad man could never be happy, nor a good man miserable, who was always free, generous, and dear to Heaven; that the deity was perpetually concer∣ned for humane affairs, and that there was a wise and powerful provi∣dence that particularly superintended the happiness of mankind, and was ready to assist men in all lawful and vertuous undertakings; that therefore this God was above all things to be admired, adored, and worshipped, prayed to, acknowledged, obeyed, praised, and that it is the most comely and reasonable thing in the World, that we should uni∣versally submit to his will, and , chearfully embrace with all our souls all the issues and determi∣nations of his providence; that we ought not to think it enough to be happy alone, but that 'tis our duty , to love men from the very heart, to relieve and help them, advise and assist them, and con∣tribute what is in our power to their welfare and safety, and this not once or twice, but throughout the whole life, and that unbiassedly, without any little designs of applause, or advantage to our selves; that nothing should be equally dear to a man as honesty and vertue, and that this is the first thing he should look at, whether the thing he is going about be good or bad, and the part of a good or a wicked man, and if excellent and vertuous, that he ought not to let any loss or da∣mage, torment, or death it self deter him from it. And whoever runs over the Writings of Seneca, Antoninus, Epictetus, Arrian, &c. will find these, and a great many more claiming a very near kindred with the main rules of life prescribed in the Christian Faith. And what wonder if Pan∣taenus was in love with such generous and manly principles, which he liked so well, that as he always retained the title of the Stoic Philosopher, so for the main he owned the profession of that Sect, even after his being admitted to eminent Offices and Imployments in the Christian Church.
IV. BY whom he was instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion, I find not; Cod. CXVIII. col. 297. Photius tells us that he was Scholar to those who had seen the Apostles, though I cannot allow of what he adds, that he had been an Auditor of some of the Apostles themselves, his great di∣stance from their times rendring it next door to impossible. But who∣ever were his Tutors, he made such vast proficiences in his Learning, that his singular eminency quickly recommended him to a place of great trust and honour in the Church, to be Master of the Catechetic School at Alexandria. For there were not onely Academies and Schools of Hu∣mane Literature, but an Ecclesiastical School for the training persons up in divine knowledge and the first principles of Christianity: and this , says Loc. supr. citat. Eusebius, of very ancient custom, from the very times of S. Mark (says Descript. in Pantaen. S. Hierom) the first Planter of Christianity and Bishop of that place. From whose time there had been a constant succession of Catechists in that School, which Eusebius tells us, continued in his time, and was managed by men famous for eloquence and the study of divine things. The fame and glory of Pantaenus did above all others at that time design him for this place, in which he accordingly succeeded, and that (as Cap. 9, & 10. ut supr. Eusebius intimates) about the beginning of Commodus his reign, when Julian entered upon the See of Alexandria, for about that time (says he) he became Governour of the School of the Faithful there. And whereas others before him had discharged the place in a more pri∣vate way, he made the School more open and public, freely teaching all that addressed themselves to him. In this imployment he continued without intermission the whole time of Julian (who sate ten years) till under his Successor he was dispatched upon a long and dangerous jour∣ney, whereof this the occasion. V. ALEXANDRIA was  (as the Orator Dion. Chrysost. Orat. XXXII. p. 375. vid. p. 373. stiles it) one of the most populous and frequented Cities in the World, whither there was a constant resort not onely of neighbour Nations, but of the most remote and distant Countries, Aethiopians, Ara∣bians, Bactrians, Scythians, Persians, and even Indians themselves. It happened that some Indian Embassadors (whether sent for this particu∣lar purpose is not certain) intreated Hieron. de Script. ubi supr. Demetrius then Bishop of Alexan∣dria to send some worthy and excellent person along with them to preach the Faith in those Countries. None appeared qualified for this errand like Pantaenus, a grave man, and a great Philosopher, incomparably fur∣nished both with divine and secular Learning. Him Demetrius per∣suades to undertake the Embassy; and though he could not but be suffi∣ciently apprehensive, that he quitted a pleasant and delightful Country, a place where he was beloved and honoured by all with a just esteem and reverence, and that he ventured upon a journey where he must expect to encounter with dangers and hardships, and the greatest diffi∣culties and oppositions, yet were all these easily conquered by his insa∣tiable desire to propagate the Christian Religion, even to the remotest corners of the World. For there were many Evangelical Preachers even at that time (as Loc. citat. Eusebius adds upon this occasion) who inflamed with a divine and holy zeal, in imitation of the Apostles were willing to travel up and down the World for enlarging the bounds of Christianity, and building men up on the most holy Faith. What India this was to which Pantaenus, and after him Frumentius (for that they both went to the same Countrey, is highly probable) was dispatched, is not easie
to determine. There are, and they men of no inconsiderable note, that conceive it was not the Oriental, but African India, conterminous to Aethiopia, or rather a part of it. These Indians were a Colony and Plantation derived at first out of the East. For so Chron. ad An. Abrah CCCCIV. Eusebius tells us, that in the more early Ages the Aethiopians quitting the parts about the River Indus, sate down near Egypt. Whence Vit. Apolion. l. 6. c. 8. p. 287. Philostratus expresly stiles the Aethiopians a Colony of Indians, as Ibid. l. 3. c. 6. p. 125. elsewhere he calls them , an Indian generation. The Metropolis of this Countrey was Axumis, of which Frumentius is afterwards said to be ordained Bi∣shop by Athanasius. An opinion, which I confess my self very inclina∣ble to embrace, and should without any scruple comply with, did not Hist. Eccl. ubi supr. Eusebius expresly say, that Pantaenus preached the Gospel to the Eastern Nations, and came as far as to India it self. A passage, which how it can suit with the African India, and the Countries that lie so directly South of Egypt, I am not able to imagine. For which reason we have elsewhere fixed it in the East. Nor is there any need to send them as far as India intra Gangem, there are places in Asia nearer hand, and parti∣cularly some parts of Arabia that anciently passed under that name, whence the Persian Gulf is sometimes called the Indian Sea. But let the judicious Reader determine as he please in this matter. VI. BEING arrived in India, he set himself to plant the Christian Faith in those parts, especially conversing with the Hieron. Epis. ad Magn. Orat. p. 327. Tom. 2. Brachmans, the Sages and Philosophers of those Countries, whose Principles and way of life seemed more immediately to dispose them for the entertainment of Christianity. De Brachman. morib. & instit. vid. inter alios A. exand. Polyh. de reb. Indie. ap. Clem. Alex. Stri∣mat. l. 3. p. 451. Strab. Geogr. l. 15 p. 712. Barde∣sar. Syr. l. de fat. ap. Euseb. Praep. Evang. l. 6. c. 10. p 275. Plutarch de vit. Alexand. p. 701. Porphyr. , l. 4. § 17, 18. p. 167. &c. Pallad. de Bragman. p. 8, 9, 15, 16, 17. Tract. de Orig. & Mrib. Brachman. inter Ambrosii oper. ad Clc. Tom 5. Suid. in voc. , p. 578. Their children as soon as born they committed to Nurses, and then to Guar∣dians according to their different ages, who in∣structed them in principles according to their ca∣pacities and improvements: they were educated with all imaginable severity of Discipline, not suffered so much as to speak or spit, or cough, while their Masters were discoursing to them, and this till they were seven and thirty years of Age. They were infinitely strict and abstemious in their diet, eat no flesh, drunk no wine or strong drink, feeding onely upon wild Acorns, and such Roots as nature fur∣nished them withall, and quenching their thirst at the next Spring or River, and as sparing of all other lawful pleasures and delights. They adored no Images, but sincerely worshiped God, to whom they continually prayed, and in stead of the custom of those Eastern Nations of turning to the East, they devoutly lift up their eyes to Heaven, and while they drew near to God, took a peculiar care to keep themselves from being defiled with any vice or wickedness, spending a great part both of night and day in Hymns and Prayers to God. They accounted themselves the most free and victorious people, having hardned their bodies against all external accidents, and subdued in their minds all irregular passions and desires. Gold and Silver they despised, as that which could neither quench their thirst nor allay their hunger, nor heal their wounds, nor cure their distempers, nor serve any real and necessary ends of nature, but onely minister to Vice and Luxury, to trouble and inquietude, and set the mind upon Racks and Tenters. They looked upon none of the little accidents of this World to be either good or evil, frequently dis∣coursed concerning Death, which they maintained to be ,
a being born into a real and happy life, and in order where∣unto they made use of the present time onely as a state of preparation for a better life. In short, they seemed in most things to conspire and agree with the Stoics, whom therefore of all other Sects they esteemed to be Pallad. de Brachman. p. 52., the most excellent Philosophers: and upon that account could not but be somewhat the more acceptable to Pan∣taenus, who had so thoroughly imbibed all the wise and rational princi∣ples of that Institution. VII. WHAT success he had in these parts, we are not particularly told. Certainly his preaching could not want some considerable effect, especially where persons were by the rules of their order, and the course of their life so well qualified to receive it, and that too where Christianity had been heretofore planted, though now overgrown with Weeds and Rubbish for want of due care and culture. For he met with several Easeb. l. 5. c. 10. p. 175. Hier. de Script. in Pantaen. that retained the knowledge of Christ, preached here long since by S. Bartholomew the Apostle (as we have elsewhere shewed in his life) whereof not the least evidence was his finding S. Matthews Gospel written in Hebrew, which S. Bartholomew had left at his being there, and which Pantaenus (as S. Hierom informs us, though I question whether it be any more then his own conjecture) brought back with him to Ale∣xandria, and there no doubt laid it up as an inestimable treasure. And as our Philosopher succeeded in the labours of S. Bartholomew in these Indian Plantations, so another afterwards succeeded in his, an account whereof, to make the story more intire, the Reader I presume, will not think it impertinent, if I here insert. Socrat. H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 19. p. 50. Sozom. lib. 2. c. 24. p. 477. Theod. H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 23. p. 54. Aedesius and Frumentius, two Youths of Tyre, accompanied Meropius the Philosopher into India, where being taken by the Natives, they were presented to the King of the Countrey, who pleased with their persons and their parts, made one of them his Butler, the other (Frumentius) the Keeper of his Records, or as Sozomen will have it, his Treasurer and Major-domo, committing to his care the Government of his house. For their great diligence and fidelity the King at his death gave them their liberty, who there∣upon determined to return to their own Countrey, but were prevailed with by the Queen to stay, and superintend affairs during the Minority of her Son. Which they did, the main of the Government being in the hands of Frumentius, who assisted by some Christian Merchants that traffiqued there, built an Oratory, where they assembled to worship God according to the Rites of Christianity, and instructed several of the Natives, who joined themselves to their Assembly. The young King now of age, Frumentius resigned his trust, and begged leave to return; which being with some difficulty obtained, they presently de∣parted, Aedesius going for Tyre, while Frumentius went to Alexandria, where he gave Athanasius, then Bishop of that place, an account of the whole affair, shewing him what hopes there were that the Indians would come over to the Faith of Christ, withall begging of him, to send a Bishop and some Clergy-men among them, and not to neglect so fair an opportunity of advancing their salvation. Athanasius having advi∣sed with his Clergy, persuaded Frumentius to accept the office, assuring him he had none fitter for it then himself. Which was done accor∣dingly, and Frumentius being made Bishop, returned back into India, where he preached the Christian Faith, erected many Churches, and be∣ing assisted by the Divine Grace wrought innumerable miracles, healing
both the souls and bodies of many at the same time. An account of all which Rufinus professes to have received from Aedesius his own mouth, then Presbyter of the Church of Tyre. But it's time to look back to Pantaenus. VIII. BEING returned to Alexandria, he resumed his Catechetic of∣fice, which I gather partly from Ubi supra. Eusebius, who again mentions it just after his Indian expedition, and adds , that after all, or when he drew near to his latter end, he governed the School of Alexan∣dria; partly from S. Hierom Loc. citat., who says expresly, that he taught in the reigns of Severus and Caracalla, his first regency being under Commodus. He died in the time of Antoninus Caracalla, who began his reign Ann. CCXI. though the exact date and manner of his death be lost; his memory is preserved in the Roman Calendar on the seventh of July. And certainly a just tribute of honour is due to his memory for his admirable zeal and piety, his indefatigable pains and industry, his exquisit abilities, , as Eusebius truly characters him, a man singu∣larly eminent in all kinds of Learning; and Apud Euseb. l. 6. c. 19. p. 221. Origen, who lived nearer to him, and was one of his Successors, commends him for his great usefulness and ability both in Philosophical speculations, and Theological Studies, in the one able to deal with Philosophers, in the other to refute Heretics and Seducers. In his School he displayed (as Eusebius tells us) both by word and writing the Treasures of the Sacred Doctrines; though he taught (says S. Hierom) rather viva voce, then by Books, who mentions onely his Commentaries upon the holy Scripture, and of them not the least fragment is remaining at this day. The End of S. PANTAENUS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. CLEMENS OF ALEXANDRIA. Mic. Burghers sculpsit. S. CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS. His Countrey. The progress of his Studies. His instruction in the Chri∣stian doctrin. His several Masters. His impartial enquiry after truth. The elective Sect, what. Its excellent genius. Clemens of this Sect.
His succeeding Pantaenus in the Catechetic School. He is made Pres∣byter of Alexandria. His Stromata published, when. Lawfulness of flying in time of persecution. His journey into the East. What Tracts he wrote there. His going from Jerusalem to Antioch, and return to Ale∣xandria. His death. The Elogia given of him by the Ancients. His admirable learning. His Writings. His Hypotyposes: Photius his account of them; corrupted by the Arrians. His Books yet extant, and the orderly gradation of them. His Stromata, what the design of it. His stile, what in this, what in his other Books. A short Apology for some unwary assertions in his Writings. His Writings enumerated. I. TITƲS Flavius Clemens was, probably, born at Athens. For when Haeres. XXXII. p. 96. Epiphanius tells us, that some affirmed him to be an Alexandrian, others an Athenian, he might well be both; the one being the place of his nativity, as the other was of his constant residence and imployment. Nor can I imagine any other account, upon which the title of Athenian should be given to him. And the conjecture is further countenan∣ced from the course and progress of his Studies, the foundations where∣of were laid in Greece, improved in the East, and perfected in Egypt. And indeed his incomparable abilities in all parts of Science render it a little more probable, that his early years commenced in that great School of Arts and Learning. But he staid not here, his insatiable thirst after Knowledge made him traverse almost all parts of the World, and converse with the Learned of all Nations, that he might furnish himself with the knowledge of whatever was useful and excellent, espe∣cially a thorough acquaintance with the mysteries of the Christian Do∣ctrine. He tells us Stromat. l. 1. p. 274. & ap. Euseb. l. 5. c. 11. p. 176. of those lively and powerful Discourses, which he had the happiness to hear from blessed and truly worthy and memora∣ble persons, who preserving that sincere and excellent doctrine, which like children from the hands of their Parents, they had immediately re∣ceived from Peter, James, John, and Paul, the holy Apostles, were by Gods blessing come down to his time, sowing those ancient and Aposto∣lic seeds of Truth. A passage, which I doubt not Lib. 6. c. 13. p. 215. Eusebius intended, when he says, that Clemens speaking concerning himself in the first Book of his Stromata, affirms himself to have been of the next succession to the Apostles. II. OF these venerable men to whose tuition he committed himself, he himself has given Loc. citat. us some, though but obscure account. The first was Ionicus, a Coelo-Syrian, whom he heard in Greece, and whom Ad Ann. 185. n. IV. Baro∣nius conjectures to have been Caius, or Dionysius Bishop of Corinth; a second an Egyptian, under whose Discipline he was, in that part of Italy called Magna Graecia, and since Calabria. Hence he travelled into the East, where the first of his Masters was an Assyrian, supposed by some to have been Bardesanes, by others Tatian, the Scholar of Justin Mar∣tyr: the next originally a Jew, of a very ancient stock, whom he heard in Palestine, whom Baronius will have to have been Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea (though for his Hebrew descent there be no evidence among the Ancients) others Vales. Annot. in Euseb. p. 95. more probably Theodotus, whence the excerpta out of his Hypotyposes still extant, are stiled, ,
the Epitome of Theodotus his Oriental Doctrin, that is, the Doctrin which he learnt from Theodotus in the East. The last of the Masters whom he met with, , as he says of him, but the first and chief in power and vertue, was one whom he inquisitively sought out, and found in Egypt, and in whose institution he fully ac∣quiesced, and sought no further. This person is generally supposed to have been Pantaenus, whom Clemens elsewhere In lib. Hypot. ap. Euseb. l. 5. c. 11. p. 175. expresly affirms to have been his Master, and whom in the forementioned Epitome he stiles Ad Calc. Clem. p. 808. our Pantaenus. III. BUT though he put himself under the discipline of so many se∣veral Masters, yet was it not out of any vain desultory lightness, or phantastic curiosity, but to make researches after truth with an honest and inquisitive mind. He loved what was manly and generous, where∣ever he met it: and therefore tells us Stromat. l. 1. p. 315., he did not simply approve all Philosophy, but that of which Socrates in Plato speaks concerning their mysterious Rites, —; intimating as he expresses it in the stile of the Scripture, that many are called, but few elect, or who make the right choice. And such (adds So∣crates) and such onely, in my opinion, are those who embrace the true Philosophy. Of which sort (says Clemens) through my whole life I have to my power approved my self, desiring and endeavouring by all means to become one of that number. For this purpose he never tied himself to any particular institution of Philosophy, but took up in the , the Elective Sect, who obliged not themselves to the dictates and sentiments of any one Philosopher, but freely made choice of the most excellent principles out of all. This Sect (as the Philoso∣phic Historian D. Laert. prooem. ad vit. Philos. p. 14. informs us) was begun by Potamon, an Alexandrian too, who out of every Sect of Philosophy selected what he judged best. He gave himself liberty impartially to enquire into the natures of things, and what was the true standard and measure of truth; he considered, that no man knows every thing, that some things are obvious to one, that are overseen or neglected by another, that there are wholsom herbs and flowers in every Field, and that if the thing be well said, 'tis no mat∣ter who 'tis that says it; that reason is to be submitted to, before authori∣ty, and though a fair regard be due to the opinions and principles of our Friends, yet that it is , (as Ethic. l. 1. c. 4. p. 3. Tom. 2. Aristotle himself confesses) more pious and reasonable to honour and esteem the truth. And thus he picked up a System of noble principles, like so many Flowers out of several Gardens, professing Laert. loc. it. this to be the great end of all his dis∣quisitions, , a life perfected according to all the rules of Vertue. Of this incomparable Order was our divine Phi∣losopher: I espoused not (says he Strom. l. 2. p. 288.) this or that Philosophy, not the Stoic, nor the Platonic, not the Epicurean, or that of Aristotle, but whatever any of these Sects had said, that was fit and just, that taught righteousness with a divine and religious knowledge, , all that being selected, I call Philosophy. Though it cannot be denied, but that of any Sect, he came nearest to the Stoics, as appears from his discoursing by way of Paradoxes, and his affected novelty of words, two things pecu∣liar to the men of that way, as a very learned and ingenious person H. Dodwel. Prol. Apol. ad  de . 115. has
observed. And I doubt not but he was more peculiarly disposed to∣wards this Sect by the instructions of his Master Pantaenus, so great and professed an admirer of the Stoical Philosophy. IV. PANTAENƲS being dead, he succeeded him in the Schola , the Catechetic School at Alexandria, though questionless he taught in it long before that, and probably during Pantaenus his absence in India, supplying his place till his return, and succeeding in it after his death, for that he was Pantaenus his Successor, the Ancients Euseb. l. 6. c. 6. p. 208. Hieron. de Script in Cle∣ment. Phot. Cod. CXVIII. col. 297. are all agreed. Here he taught with great industry and fidelity, and with no less success, some of the most eminent men of those times, Origen, Alexan∣der Bishop of Hicrusalem, and others being bred under him. And now (as Strom. l. 1. p. 278. himself confesses) he found his Philosophy and Gentile-Learning very useful to him: for as the Husbandman first waters the soil, and then casts in the Seed, so the notions he derived out of the Writings of the Gentiles, served first to water and soften , the gross and terrestrial parts of the soul, that the spiritual seed might be the better cast in, and take vital root in the minds of men. Besides the Office of a Catechist, he was made Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, and that at least about the beginning of Severus his reign, for under that ca∣pacity Eusebius takes notice of him, Ann. CXCV. About which time prompted by his own zeal, and obliged by the iniquity of the times, he set himself to vindicate the cause of Christianity both against Heathens and Heretics, which he has done at large with singular learning and dexterity in his Book called Stromata, published about this time; for drawing down a Chronological Strom. l. 1. p. 336. account of things, he ends his computa∣tion in the death of the Emperour Commodus. Whence 'tis evident, as Lib. 6. c. 6. p. 208. Eusebius observes, that he compiled that Volume in the reign of Severus that succeeded him. V. THE Persecution under Severus raged in all Provinces of the Empire, and particularly at Alexandria, which made many of the Chri∣stians for the present willing to retire, and Clemens probably among the rest, whom we therefore find particularly discoursing Stromat. l. 4. p. 504. the lawfulness of withdrawing in a time of Persecution: that though we may not cowardly decline a danger or death, when 'tis necessary for the sake of Religion, yet in other cases we are to follow the direction of our Sa∣viour, when they persecute you in one City, flee ye into another; and not to obey in such a case, is to be bold and rash, and unwarrantably to preci∣pitate our selves into danger, that if it be a great sin against God to de∣stroy a man, who is his image, that man makes himself guilty of the crime, who offers himself to the public tribunal; and little better does he, that when he may, declines not the Persecution, but rashly exposes himself to be apprehended, thereby to his power conspiring with the wickedness of his Persecutors. And if further, he irritate and provoke them, he is unquestionably the cause of his own ruine, like a man that needlesly rouzes and enrages a wild Beast to fall upon him. And this opportunity I doubt not he took to visit the Eastern parts, where he had studied in his younger days. We find him about this time at Je∣rusalem with Alexander shortly after Bishop of that place, between whom there seems to have been a peculiar intimacy, insomuch that S. Clemens dedicated Euseb. l. 6. c. 14. pag. 214. Hieron. in Cle∣ment. his Book to him, called The Ecclesiastical Canon, , or against them that Judaize. During his stay here he preached constantly, and declined no pains even in that evil time, and
with what success, we may see by a piece of a Letter written by Alexander, then in prison, and sent by our S. Clemens to Antioch, which we here in∣sert. Apud. Euseb. ib. c. 11. p. 212. Alexander, a Servant of God, and a prisoner of Jesus Christ, to the blessed Church at Antioch, in the Lord greeting. Our Lord has made my bonds in this time of my imprisonment light and easie to me, while I under∣stood that Asclepiades, a person admirably qualified by his eminency in the faith, was by the divine Providence become Bishop of your holy Church of Antioch. Concluding, these Letters, worthy Brethren, I have sent you by Clemens, the blessed Presbyter, a man virtuous and approved, whom ye both do, and shall yet further know: who having been here with us according to the good will and providence of God, has greatly established and encreased the Church of Christ. By which Epistle we may by the way remarque the errour of In Chron. ad Ann. CCXII. Eusebius, who places Asclepiades his coming to the See of Antioch in the first year of Caracalla, Ann. CCXII. whereas we see it was while Alexander was yet in prison under Severus, which he himself makes to be Ann. CCV. From Jerusalem then Clemens went to Antioch, where we cannot question but he took the same pains, and laboured with the same zeal and industry. After which he returned to Alexan∣dria, and the discharge of his Office, where how long he continued, or by what death he died, Antiquity is silent. Certain it is, that for some considerable time he out-lived Pantaenus, who died in the time of Cara∣calla; and when he wrote his Stromata, he tells us that he did it that he might lay up things in store against old Age: a plain intimation that he was then pretty far from it. I add no more but what Alexander of Hierusalem Ap. Euseb. l. 6. c. 14. p. 216. says in a Letter to Origen, where having told him that their friendship which had commenced under their Predecessors should con∣tinue sacred and inviolable, yea grow more firm and fervent, he adds, For we acknowledge for our Fathers those blessed Saints, who are gone before us, and to whom we shall go after a little time; Pantaenus I mean, the truly happy, and my Master; and the holy Clemens, my Master, and one that was greatly useful and helpful to me. VI. TO commend this excellent man after the great things spoken of him by the Ancients, were to hold a Candle to the Sun. Let us hear the character which some of them give of him. The holy and the blessed Clemens, a man very virtuous and approved, as we have seen Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, who knew him best, testifying of him. Indeed his zeal and piety, modesty, and humility, could not but endear him unto all. For his learning, he was in Epist. ad Magn. Orat. p. 327. S. Hieroms judgment the most learned of all the Ancients. A man admirably learned and skilful, and that searched to the very bottom of all the learning of the Greeks with that exactness that perhaps few before him ever attained to, says Contr. Julian. l. 7. p. 221. Tom. 6. vid. l. 6. p 205 S. Cyril of Alexandria. An holy man (says Haeret. Fabul. l. 1. c. 6. p. 197. Theodoret) , and one that for his vast and diffusive learning incomparably surpassed all other men. Nor was he less accurate in matters of Theology, then humane learning, an incomparable Master in the Christian Philosophy, as Eusebius stiles him. Witness his many Books, crowded, as H. Eccl. l 6. c. 13. p. 215. Eusebius tells us, with va∣riety and plenty of useful knowledge, derived (as De Script. in Clem. & ad Magn. Or. loc. cit. S. Hierom adds) both from the holy Scriptures and secular learning, wherein there is nothing unlearned, nothing that it is not fetched out of the very center and bowels of Philosophy. The titles of them those two Authors have preserved, the far greatest part of the Books themselves having pe∣rished, among which the most memorable was the Hypotyposes or Books
of Institution, so often cited by Eusebius, which contained short and strict explications of many passages of holy Scriptures, wherein Cod. CIX. col. 285. Pho∣tius tells us there were many wild and impious opinions, as, That Matter was eternal, and that Idaeas were introduced by certain Decrees, that there is a transmigration of Souls, and were many Worlds before Adam, that the Son is among the number of created Beings, and that the Word was not really made flesh, but onely appeared so, and many more , monstrous blasphemies: But withall insinuates, that probably these things were inserted by another hand, as Apol. pro Orig. inter Oper. Hier. Tom. 4. p. 195. Rufinus, ex∣presly assures us, that Heretics had corrupted Clemens his Writings. Certainly had these Books been infected with these prophane and poy∣sonous dogmata in Eusebius his time, we can hardly think, but that he would have given us at least some obscure intimations of it. And con∣siderable it is what Photius observes, that these things are not counte∣nanced by his other Books, nay many of them plainly contradicted by them. VII. THE Books yet extant (besides the little Tract, entituled, , lately published) are chiefly three, which seem to have been written in a very wise and excellent order, the , or Exhortation to the Gentiles, the Paedagogus, or Christian In∣structor, and the Stromata, or Various Discourses; in the first he very rationally refutes the follies and impieties of the Gentile Religion, and strongly persuades men to embrace Christianity: in the second he tu∣tors and instructs new Converts, and by the most admirable rules, and pathetical insinuations prepares and forms them to an holy and truly Christian life: in the third he administers strong meat to them that are of a more full age, a clearer explication of the Christian Doctrine, and a more particular confutation both of Gentile and Heretical opinions, ad∣mitting the Disciple after his first purgation and initiation into a more immediate acquaintance, with the sacred Mysteries of Religion. His Stromata Vid. Euseb. l. 6. c. 13. p. 214. are nothing but Miscellaneous Discourses composed out of the holy Writings, and the Books of the Gentiles, explaining and (as occa∣sion is) confuting the opinions of the Greeks and Barbarians, the Senti∣ments of Philosophers, the notions of Heretics, inserting variety of Sto∣ries, and Treasures out of all sorts of Learning; which as himself tells us Strom. l. 1. p. 278. l. 4. p. 476., he therefore stiled Stromata, that is, a variegated contexture of Discourses, and which Lib. 7. p. 766. he compares not to a curious Garden, wherein the Trees and Plants are disposed according to the exactest rules of Method and Order, but to a thick shady Mountain, whereon trees of all sorts, the Cypress and the Plantane, the Laurel and the Ivy, the Apple, the Olive, and the Figtree, promiscuously grow together. In the two former of his Books (as Loc. supr. cit. col. 288. Photius observes) his stile is florid, but set off with a well proportioned gravity, and a becoming variety of Learning: In the latter he neither designed the ornaments of Eloquence, nor would the nature of his design well admit it, as he truly Ubi supr. p. 767. apologizes for him∣self; his main care Ib. l. 1. p. 293. was so to express things that he might be under∣stood, and further eloquence then this, he neither studied nor desired. If in these Books of his there be what Ubi supr. Photius affirms, some few things here and there , not soundly or warily expressed, yet not, as he adds, like those of the Hypotyposes, but capable of a candid and benign interpretation, not considerably prejudicial either to the doctrine and practice of Religion, and such as are generally to be met with in the
Writers of those early Ages. And it is no wonder, if the good and pious men of those times, who were continually engaged in fierce dis∣putes with Heathens on the one side, and Jews and Heretics on the other, did not always , divide the truth aright, in some nicer lines and strokes of it. The best is, their great piety and serviceableness in their generations, while they lived, and the singular usefulness of their Writings to posterity since they are dead, are abundantly enough to weigh down any little failures or mistakes that dropt from them. His Writings. Extant. Protrepticon ad Gentes. Paedagogi, Libri III. Stromatewv, Libri VIII. Orat. Quisnam dives ille sit, qui sal∣vetur. Epitome doctrinae Orientalis Theo∣doti, &c. Not Extant. Hypotyposcwv, seu Institutionum, Li∣bri VIII. Canon Ecclesiasticus. seu Adversus Judaizantes. De Paschate. De obtrectatione. Disputationes de jejunio. Exhortatio ad Patientiam ad Neo∣phytos. Supposititious. Commentariola in Prim. Canonicam S. Petri, in Epistolam Judae, & tres Epistolas S. Joannis Apostoli. The End of S. CLEMENS Alexandrinus his Life.
THE LIFE OF TERTULLIAN PRESBYTER OF CARTHAGE. Michael Burghers. Delineavit et sculpsit. TERTULLIANUS. His names, whence. His Father, who. His education in all kinds of Lear∣ning. His skill in the Roman Laws. Different from Tertylian the Lawyer. His way of life before his conversion, enquired into. His mar∣ried
condition. His Conversion to Christianity, when. The great cruelty used towards the Christians. Severus his kindness to them. Tertullians excellent Apology in their behalf. His address to Scapula, and the ten∣dency of that discourse. Severus his violent persecuting the Christians. His prohibition of the Heteriae. Tertullians Book to the Martyrs, and concerning Patience. His zeal against Heresies, and Writings that way. His Book De Pallio, when written, and upon what occasion. His be∣coming Presbyter, when. His Book De Corona, and what the occasion of it. His declining from the Catholic Party. Montanus who and whence. His principles and practices. Tertullians owning them, and upon what occasion. His morose and stubborn temper. How far he com∣plied with the Montanists, and acknowledged the Paraclete. How he was imposed upon. His writings against the Catholics. The severity of the ancient Discipline. Episcopus Episcoporum, in what sense meant by Tertullian concerning the Bishop of Rome. His separate meetings at Carthage. His death. His Character. His singular parts and learning. His Books. His phrase and stile. What contributed to its perplexed∣ness and obscurity. His un-orthodox opinions. A brief plea for him. I. QƲINTƲS Septimius Florens Tertullianus, was (as the Ancients Hieron. de script. in Tertul. Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 34. p 334. affirm, and himself De Pall. c. 1. p. 112. & Apo∣log. c. 9. p. 9. implies when he calls it his Countrey) born at Carthage, the Metropolis of Afric, famous above all others for Antiquity, Soveraignty, and Power, inso∣much that for some Ages it contended for glory and superiority even with Rome it self. He was called Septimius, because descended of the Gens Septimia, a Tribe of great account among the Romans, being first Regal, afterwards Plebeian, and last of all Consular and Patrician. Florens from some particular Family of that House, so called, and Quintus (a title common among the Romans) probably be∣cause the fifth child which his Parents had; and Tertullian, a derivative from Tertullus, it is like from his immediate Parent. His Father was a Souldier, a Centurion under the Proconsul of Afric (called therefore by S. Hierom and others Centurio Proconsularis) not a man of Proconsular dignity, as some make him; he was a Gentile, in which Religion Tertul∣lian also was brought up, as himself Apol. c. 18. p. 17. confesses. He was educated in all the accomplishments which the learning either of the Greeks or Ro∣mans could add to him, he seems to have left no paths untraced, to have intimately conversed with Poets, Historians, Orators, not to have looked onely, but to have entered into the secrets of Philosophy and the Mathematics, not unseen in Physic, and the curiosities of nature, and as Eusebius H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2. p. 41. notes, a man famous for other things, but especially admira∣bly skilled in the Roman Laws; though they who would hence infer him to have been a professed Lawyer, and the same with him whose Excerpta are yet extant in the Pandects, are guilty of a notorious mi∣stake, the name of that Lawyer being Tertylianus; besides that disso∣nancy that is in their stile and language. Or suppose with others that this Tertylian was one of Papinians Scholars in the reign of Alexander Severus, he must by this account be at least thirty years after the others Conversion to Christianity. The original of the Errour doubtless arose from the nearness and similitude of the names, and the character of his
skill in the Roman Laws given by Eusebius, which indeed is evident from his Works, and especially his Apology for the Christians. II. WHAT was his particular course of life before he came over to the Christian Religion, is uncertain. They that conceive him to have been an Advocate, and publicly to have pleaded Causes, because after his Conversion he De Pall. c. 9 p. 118. says of himself, that he owed nothing to the Fo∣rum, took up no place among the Rostra, made no noise among the Benches, did not toss about the Laws, nor clamour out Causes, as if he had done all this before, mighty by the same reason conclude him to have been a Souldier, because he adds in the same place, that he owed nothing to the Camp, with some other Offices there mentioned by him. That he was married is evident, though whether before or after his embracing the Christian Faith, I cannot positively determine, probably before. However according to the severity of his principles, he lived with his wife a great partof his life in a state of Continency, conversing with her as his sister, exhorting her to perpetual coelibacy, and the utmost strictnesses of a single life, as appears by his two Books written to her upon that Subject. III. HIS conversion to Christianity we may conceive to have hapned not long after the beginning of Severus his reign, and a little before the conclusion of the second Century. Being a man of an inquisitive and sagacious mind, he had observed the powerful and triumphant efficacy of the Christian Faith over the minds and lives of men, its great Anti∣quity, the admirable consent and truth of the Predictions recorded in the Books of the Christians, the frequent Testimonies which the Hea∣then deities themselves gave to its truth and divinity, the ordinary con∣fessions of their Daemons when forced to abandon the persons they had possessed, at the command of a Christian, all which he shews Vid. Apol. c. 19, 20. p. 18. c. 23. p. 22, 23. & alibi passion. at large (at least as we may probably guess) to have been the main inducements of his Conversion. In the very entrance of the following Seculum, Se∣verus being gone to make War upon the Parthians, the Magistrates at Rome, and proportionably the Governours of Provinces, began to bear hard upon the Christians, beholding them as infamous persons, and espe∣cially Traitors to the Empire. Among whom the most principal per∣son, I doubt not, was Plautianus, a man in great favour with the Empe∣rour, whose daughter was married to Antoninus the Emperours eldest Son, and whom Severus at his going into the East, had made Praefect of Rome; of him we read Dio. Cass. H. Rom. l. 75. & Xiphil. in Vit. Sever. p 328., that in the Emperours absence he put to death an infinite number both of the Nobility and Common People. Among whom we cannot question but the Christians had theirs, and it's like the far greatest share. And so notorious was the cruelty, that Spartian in vit. Sever. c. 15. p. 350. Severus at his return was forced to apologize for himself, that he had no hand in it. And indeed Severus in the first part of his reign (was as Tertullian in∣forms Ad Scapul. c. 4. p. 71. us) very benign and favourable to the Christians; for having been cured of a dangerous distemper by one Proculus a Christian, who anointed him with oyl, he kept him at Court with him ever after. Nor did his kindness terminate here, for when he knew that several both men and Women of the Senatorian Order were Christians, he was so far from persecuting them upon that account, that he gave them an honourable testimony, and restrained the people, when they were ra∣ging against the Christians. This I suppose to have been done at his return from the Parthian Expedition, when he found both Governours and People engaged in so hot and severe a Persecution of the Christians.
IV. THE barbarous and cruel usage which the Christians generally met with, engaged Tertullian to vindicate and plead their cause both against the malice and cruelty of their enemies. For which purpose he published and sent abroad his Apology, dedicating it to the Magistrates of the Roman Empire, and especially the Senate at Rome (for that he went to Rome himself, and personally presented it to the Senate, I confess, I see no convincing evidence) wherein with incomparable learning and eloquence, with all possible evidence and strength of reason he pleads their Cause, complains of the iniquity and injustice of their enemies, and the methods of their proceedings, particularly demonstrates the va∣nity and falshood of those crimes that were commonly charged upon the Christians, arguing their meekness and innocency, their temperance and sobriety, their piety to God, and obedience to their Prince, the rea∣sonableness of their principles, and the holiness of their lives, beyond all just exception. An Apology which undoubtedly contributed towards the cooling and qualifying of the present Calentures, especially at Se∣verus his return. And indeed it appears not by the whole series of that Discourse, that the Emperour had given any particular countenance to those severities; nay on the contrary, he expresly stiles Apol. c. 4. p. 5. him the most constant Prince. Not long after this, Tertullian found work nearer home, Scapula the President, and Proconsul of Afric, (the same probably with Scapula Tertyllus, a Provincial President, to whom there is a Re∣script of Marcus and Commodus L. 14. ff. de Offic. Praesid. lib. 1. Tit. 18.) treating the Christians much at the same rate that Plautianus had done at Rome. To him therefore he addresses himself in a neat and pathetical Discourse, representing the honesty and simplicity of Christians, and their hearty prayers and endeavours for the prosperity of the Empire, and those particular instances of severity which the Divine Providence had lately inflicted upon it, which could not be reasonably supposed to have been sent upon any other errand, so much as to revenge the innocent bloud that had been shed; laying be∣fore him the clemency and indulgence of former Princes and Presi∣dents, yea and of the present Emperour himself, so great a friend to Christians. A plain evidence that this Book was written at this time, before Severus broke out into open violence against them. V. THE Christians now enjoyed a little respite: but alas it was but like the intermitting fits of a Fever, which being over, the paroxysm re∣turns with a fiercer violence, Ann. Chr. CCII. Severi X. Euseb. Chron. ad eundem An. the Persecu∣tion revived, and was now carried on by the command of the Emperour. For Severus in his journey through Palestin forbad Ael. Spartian. in vit. Sever. c. 17. p. 352. any under the hea∣viest penalties to become Jews; and the same Orders he issued out con∣cerning Christians. The general pretence it's like was the prohibiting the Heteriae, or unlawful Societies, (which we have elsewhere described) for such a Rescript L. 1. ff. de Of∣fic. Praefect. urb. § 14. Tit. 12. lib. 1. Ʋlpian mentions, whereby Severus forbad the illegal Colledges, commanding the persons frequenting them to be accused be∣fore the Praefect of the City, in which number they usually beheld the Christians; though I doubt not but there were (as Spartianus plainly affirms) particular Edicts issued out against them. The People, who could hardly be held in before, having now the reins thrown upon their necks, and spurred on by the Imperial Orders, ran apace upon the execution, so that the Churches in all places Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 1. p. 201. were filled with Martyr∣doms and the bloud of the Saints, and it grew so hot, that Ibid. c. 6. p. .8. Jude a Writer of those Times drawing down his Chronology of Daniels LXX
Weeks, to this Year, broke off his computation, supposing that the so much celebrated coming of Antichrist was now at hand. So excee∣dingly (says the Historian) were the minds of many shaken and distur∣bed with the present Persecution. Tertullian, that he might speak a word in season, took hold of the present opportunity, and wrote to the Martyrs in prison, to comfort them under their sufferings, and exhort them to constancy and final perseverance; as also for the same reason and about the same time he published his Discourse concerning Patience, wherein he very elegantly describes the advantages and commendations of that Vertue, and especially urges it from the example of God, our blessed Saviour, and speaks therein more favourably then he did after∣wards of retiring in a time of Persecution. Nor was he less watchful to defend and preserve the Church from Errour and Heresie, writing his Praescription against Heretics, (for that it was written about this time is evident from several passages, especially where he mentions the time of Persecution, the place of the Tribunal, the person of the Judge, the bringing forth of Lions, and the like,) wherein he enumerates and in∣sists upon the several Heresies which had infested the Church till that time; censuring and confuting their absurd opinions, and promising De Praescrip. Haeret. c. 45. p. 219. a more distinct and particular confutation of them afterwards. Which accordingly he performed in his Discourses against the Jews, against Hermogenes, the Valentinians, Marcion, Praxeas, and some others of their Proselytes and Disciples, and some of the Montanists themselves, wri∣ting a particular Tract concerning Baptism, and the use of Water in it, and its necessity to salvation, against Quintilla a woman of great note and eminency among the followers of Montanus, what value soever he afterwards seemed to put upon that Sect. VI. ABOUT the XV. of Severus, Ann. Chr. CCVII. he published his Book De Pallio upon this occasion. He had lately left off the Gown, the Garment ordinarily worn in all parts of the Roman Empire, and had put on the Cloak, the usual habit of Philosophers, and of all those Christians that entered upon a severer state of life, as we have shewn in the life of Justin Martyr. Hereupon he was derided by them of Carthage for his lightness and vanity, in so wantonly skipping à Toga ad Pallium, from the Gown to the Cloak, satyrically taxing his inconstancy in turning from one course of life to another. To vindicate himself he writes this Discourse, wherein he puts forth the keeness of a Sarcastic Wit, and spreads all the sails of his African eloquence, retorts the case upon his accusers, shews the antiquity, simplicity, easiness, and gra∣vity of this habit, and smartly upbraids that luxury and prodigality that had over-run all orders and ranks of men. And that this was done about this time, and not at his first taking upon him the profession of Christianity, is judiciously observed and urged by Baronius Ad Ann. 197. n. 3. & seq., and more fully proved by the learned Salmasius in his notes upon that Book. Indeed the circumstances mentioned by De Pall. cap. 2. p. 114. Tertullian do not well suit with any other time, as the praesentis Imperii triplex virtus, which cannot rea∣sonably be meant of any, but Severus and his two Sons, Antoninus and Geta, whence in several ancient inscriptions they are put together un∣der the title of AƲGƲSTI, and Emperours; the present happiness, security, enlargement, and tranquillity of the Roman State, which these three powers of the Empire had made like a well-cultivated Field, era∣dicato omni aconito hostilitatis, every poysonous weed of hostility and se∣dition
being rooted up, with a great deal more to the same purpose. Which evidently refers both to his Conquest of Pescennius Niger, who usurped the Empire, and whom he overthrew and killed at Cyzicum in the East, and to his last years Victory (as Euseb. Chron. ad eand. Ann. Eusebius places it) over Clodius Albinus and to his Party, whom he subdued and slew at Lyons in France, for at∣tempting to make himself Emperour, as afterwards he came into Bri∣tain, (maximum ejus Imperii Decus, as the Spart. in vit. Sever. c. 18. p. 354. Historian stiles it, the greatest honour and ornament of his Empire) where he conquered the Na∣tives, and secured his Conquests by the famous Picts Wall which he built: by which means he rendred the State of the Roman Empire pa∣cate and quiet. At the same time we may suppose it was that Tertullian was made Presbyter of Carthage, and that that was the particular occa∣sion of altering his habit, and assuming the Philosophic Pallium, the Clergy of those times being generally those who took upon them an Ascetic course of life, and for which reason doubtless the Cloak is called by Tertullian in his Dialect Ibid. c. 4. p. 118., Sacerdos Suggestus, the Priestly habit. Accordingly Chron. ad An. CCVIII. Eusebius takes notice of him this very year as becoming famous in the account and esteem of all Christian Churches. VII. BEFORE Severus left Rome in order to his Britanic expedition, were solemnized the Decennalia of Antoninus Caracalla, when besides many magnificent Sports and Shews, and a Largess bestowed upon the People, the Emperour gave a Donative to the Souldiers, which every one that received, was to come up to the Tribune with a Laurel Crown upon his head. Among the rest there was one a De Coron. Mi. lit. c. 1. p. 100. Christian, who brought his Crown along with him in his hand, and being asked the reason why like others he wore it not upon his head? answered, he could not for that he was a Christian. A Council of War was presently called, and the man accused before the General, stripped of his Military ornaments, his Cloak, Shoes, and Sword, unmercifully beaten, till he was died in his own bloud, and then cast into prison, there expecting Mar∣tyrdom, and a better donative and reward from Christ. The rest of the Christians, who were Fellow-Souldiers in the same Army, took of∣fence at his over-nice scrupulosity. What was this but needlesly to betray their liberty, and to sacrifice the general quiet and peace of Christians to one mans private humour? to give the common Enemy too just a provocation to fall upon them? where did the Laws of their Religion forbid such an innocent compliance, nay rather not onely give leave, but command us prudently to decline a danger, by withdrawing from it? what was this but a sturdy and an affected singularity, as if he had been the onely Christian? Tertullian, whose mighty zeal engaged him to be a Patron to whatever had but the shadow of strictness and se∣verity, presently set himself to defend the fact, and wrote his Book De Corona Militis, wherein he cries up the Act as an heroic piece of Zeal and Christian Magnanimity, not onely warrantable, but honoura∣ble, not onely lawful, but just and necessary, fortifying his assertion with several arguments, and endeavouring to disable the most specious objections that were made against it. This Military Act, and Tertullians vindication of it, hapned (as we have here placed it) Ann. Chr. CCVIII. Sever. XVI. while others refer it to the year CXCIX. Sever. VII. when the Emperour by the decree of the Senate created his elder Son Anto∣ninus Emperour, and his younger Geta, Caesar, in testimony whereof he entertained the People with various Shews and Solemnities, and be∣stowed
a Donative upon the Souldiers. If the Reader like this period of time better, I will not contend with him, it being what I my self upon second thoughts do not think improbable. VIII. BUT let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. Ter∣tullian, who had hitherto stood firm and right in the Communion of the Catholic Church, began now, about the middle of his Age, says De Script. in Tertull. S. Hie∣rom (which I am inclinable rather to understand of his Age as a Chri∣stian, then the current of his life) to incline towards the errours of the Montanists. Of which before we give an account, it may not be amiss a little to enquire into the Author and Principles of that Sect. Vet. Script. ap. Euseb. l. 5. c. 16. p. 180 &c. Apollon. ibid. c. 18. p. 184. Epiph. Haeres. XLVIII. p. 175. Tertull. de Praescript. Hae∣retic. c. 52. p. 223. Monta∣nus was born at Ardaba, a little Village in Mysia in the confines of Phry∣gia, where about the latter times of Antoninus Pius, but especially in the reign of his Successor, he began to shew himself. Pride and an im∣moderate ambition betrayed the man into the snare and condemnation of the Devil. At which breach Satan having entered, took possession of the man, who acted by the influence of an evil Spirit, was wont on a sud∣dain to fall into Enthusiastic fits and Ecstatic raptures, and while he was in them, in a furious and a frantic manner he poured out wild and un∣heard of things, prophecying of what was to come in a way and strain that had not been used hitherto in the Church. Proselytes he wanted not, that came over to his Party. At first onely some few of his Country∣men, the Phrygians (whence his Sect derived the title of Cataphryges) were drawn into the snare, whom he instructed in the Arts of Evil speaking, teaching them to reproach the whole Christian Church for refusing to en∣tertain and honor his Pseudo-prophetic Spirit, the same Spirit on the con∣trary pronouncing them blessed that joyned themselves to this new Pro∣phet, and swelling them with the mighty hopes and promises of what should happen to them, sometimes also gently reproving and condemning them. Among the rest of his Disciples two women were especially remar∣kable, Prisca, and Maximilla, whom having first corrupted, he imparted his Daemon to them, whereby they were presently enabled to utter the most frantic, incoherent and extravagant Discourses. The truth is he seemed to lay his Scene with all imaginable craft and subtlety; in the great and foundation-principles of Religion he agreed with the Catho∣lics, embraced entirely the holy Scriptures, and pretended that he must receive the gifts of Divine Grace extrarordinarily conferred upon him, which he gave out were more immediately the Holy Ghost: he made a singular shew of some uncommon rigours and severities in Religion, gave Laws for more strict and solemn Fasts, and more frequently to be observed, then were among the Orthodox, taught Divorces to be law∣ful, and forbad all second marriages, called Pepuza and Tymium, two little Towns of Phrygia, Jerusalem, that so he might the more plausibly invite simple and unwary Proselytes to flock thither. And because he knew no surer way to oblige such persons as would be serviceable to him, then by Proposals of gain and advantage, he used all methods of extorting money from his deluded followers, especially under the notion of Gifts and Offerings, for which purpose he appointed Colle∣ctors to receive the Oblations that were brought in, with which he maintained under-Officers, and paid Salaries to those that propagated his Doctrines up and down the World. Such were the Arts, such the Principles of the Sect first strated by Montanus; what additions were made by his followers in after-Ages, I am not now concerned to enquire.
IX. ALLURED with the smooth and specious pretences of this Sect, Tertullian began to look that way, though the particular occasion of his starting aside Ubi supra vid. Niceph. l. 4. c. 12. p. 298. S. Hierom tells us, was the envy and reproaches which he met with from the Clergy of the Church of Rome. They that conceive him to have sued for the See of Carthage, vacant by the death of Agrippinus, and that he was opposed and repulsed in it by the Clergy of Rome, and so highly resented the affront, as thereupon to quit the Communion of the Catholic Church, talk at random, and little consider the mortified temper of the man, and his known contempt of the World. Probable it is, that being generally noted for the excessive and over-rigorous strictness of his manners, he had been charged by some of the Roman Clergy for compliance with Montanus, and it may be admonished to recant, or disown those Principles. Which his stubborn and reso∣lute temper not admitting, he was together with Proclus and the rest of the Cataphrygian Party cut off by the Bishop of Rome from all Com∣munion with that Church. For there had been lately a disputation held at Rome between Caius, an ancient Orthodox Divine, and Proclus, one of the Heads of the Montanist Party (as Lib. 6. c. 20. p. 222. l. 2. c. 25. p. 67. Hieron. de Script. in Caio. Eusebius who read the account of it published by Caius, informs us) wherein Proclus being worsted, was together with all the followers of that Sect excommuni∣cated, and Tertullian himself among the rest, as he sufficiently D jejun. c. 1. p. 544. intimates. This, a man of a morose and unyielding disposition, and who could brook no moderation that seemed to intrench upon the Discipline and Practice of Religion, could not bear, and therefore making light of the judgment and censures of that Church, flew off, and joined himself to Montanus his Party, whose pretended austerities seemed of all others most agreeable to his humour and genius, and most exactly to conspire with the course and method of his life. But as it cannot be doubted that he looked no further then to the appearances and pretensions of that Sect (not seeing the corrupt Springs by which the Engine was ma∣naged within) so it is most reasonable and charitable to conceive, that he never understood their principles in the utmost latitude and extent of them. If he seems sometimes to acknowledge Montanus to be the Paraclete that was to come into the World, probably he meant not something distinct from the Holy Spirit bestowed upon the Apostles, but a mighty power and extraordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost shed upon Montanus, whom God had sent into the World, more fully and perfectly to explain the Doctrines of the Gospel, and to urge the rules and institutions of the Christian life, which our Lord had delivered when he was upon earth, but did not with the greatest accuracy the things were capable of, the minds of men not being then duly qualified to receive them. That for this end he thought Montanus invested with miraculous powers and a spirit of Prophesie (a thing not unusual even in those times) and might believe his two Prophetesses to be acted with the same spirit. All which might consist with an honest mind, imposed upon by crafty and plausible pretences. And plain it is that for some considerable time Montanus maintained the reputation of great piety, zeal, sanctity, and extraordinary gifts, before he was discovered to the World. And Tertullian in all likelihood had his accounts concerning him, not from himself, but from Proclus, or some others of the Party, who might easily delude him, especially in matters of fact, with false in∣formations. However nothing can be more evident, then that he
looked De Jejun. loc. citat. upon these new Prophets as innovating nothing in the princi∣ples of Christianity, that Montanus preached no other God, nor asser∣ted any thing to the prejudice of our blessed Saviour, nor subverted any rule of Faith or Hope, but onely introduced greater severities then other men: that he was not the Author, but the restorer of Discipline, and onely reduced things to that ancient strictness, from which he sup∣posed they had degenerated, especially in the cases of coelibacy, single marriages, and such like, as he Vid. l. de Me∣nogam. c. 1. p. 525. &c. 3. & 4. & passim de Jejun. c. 12. p. 550, 551. more then once particularly tells us. Not to say, that Montanus his followers (as is usual with the after-brood of every Sect) asserted many things, which their Master himself never dreamt of, which yet without distinction are laid at his door, and Ter∣tullian too because a favourer of the Party, drawn into the guilt, and made liable to many improvements, to the Hay and Stubble which the successors of that Sect built upon it. X. BUT however it was, he stomached his excommunication, and was highly offended at the looseness and remissness of the Discipline among the Catholics, whom with great smartness he persecutes under the name of Psychici, or Animal persons, as those that took too much liberty in their manners and practices of devotion, stiling his own party Spiritales, as whom he thought more immediately guided by the Spirit, more plentifully endowed with the gifts of it, and conversant in a more divine and spiritual life. Against these Psychici he presently published a Tract De Jejuniis, wherein he defends the Montanists in the observa∣tion of their Fasts, their abstinence from Flesh, and feeding onely upon dried meats, their Stationary days, and the keeping them till the very evening, while the Orthodox broke up theirs about three of the Clock in the afternoon; in all which respects he makes many tart and severe reflections upon them. Indeed the devotions of those times were brisk and fervent, their usages strict and punctual, their Ecclesia∣stic Discipline generally very rigid and extreme, seldom admitting per∣sons that had lapsed after Baptism to Penance and the Communion of the Church. But this was looked upon by moderate and sober men as making the gate too strait, and that which could not but discourage Coverts from entering in. Accordingly it began to be relaxed in se∣veral places, and particularly the Bishop of Rome Tert. de Pudic cit. c. 1. p. 555. had lately published a constitution, wherein he admitted persons guilty of Adultery and For∣nication (and probably other crimes) to a place among the Penitents. Against this Tertullian storms, cries up the severity of the antient Disci∣pline, writes his Book De Pudicitia, wherein he considers and disputes the case, and aggravates the greatness of those offences, and undertakes the Arguments that pleaded for remission and indulgence. And if in the mentioning this Decree the Bishop of Rome be stiled Episcopus Epi∣scoporum, the Champions of that Church before they make such advan∣tage of it, should do well to prove it to have been a part of the Decree, or, if it was, that it was mentioned by Tertullian as his just right and pri∣viledge, and not rather (which is infinitely more probable) Tertullians Sarcasm, intended by him as an Ironical reflection, and a tart upbraiding the pride and ambition of the Bishops of that Church, who took too much upon them, and began (as appears from Pope Victors carriage to∣wards the Asian Churches in the case of Easter) to domineer over their Brethren, and usurp an insolent authority over the whole Christian Church. And that this was his meaning, I am abundantly satisfied from
Apud Cyprian. p. 282. Cyprians using the phrase in this very sense in the famous Synod at Car∣thage, where reflecting upon the rash and violent proceedings of the Bi∣shops of Rome (whom though he particularly names not, yet all who are acquainted with the Story know whom he means) against those who were engaged in the cause of rebaptizing Heretics, he adds, that as for themselves (the Bishops then in the Synod) none of them made himself Bishop of Bishops, or by a tyrannical threatning forced his Col∣leagues into a necessity of Compliance: since every Bishop according to the power and liberty granted to him, had his proper jurisdiction, and could no more be judged by another, then he himself could judge others. XI. WHETHER ever he was reconciled to the Catholic Commu∣nion, appears not; 'tis certain that for the main he forsook the August. de Haeres. c. 86. Tom. 6. col. 31. Cataphry∣gians, and kept his separate meetings at Carthage, and his Church was yet remaining till S. Augustins time, by whose labours the very reliques of his followers, called Tertullianists, were dispersed, and quite disap∣peared. How long he continued after his departure from the Church, is not known; S. Hierom De Script. in Tertull. says that he lived to a very decrepit age, but whether he died under the reign of Alexander Severus, or before, the Ancients tell us not, as neither whether he died a natural or violent death. He seems indeed to have been possessed with a passionate desire of laying down his life for the Faith; though had he been a Martyr, some mention would without peradventure have been made of it in the Writings of the Church. XII. HE was a man of a smart and acute wit, though a little too much edged with Keeness and Satyrism, acris & vehementis ingenii, as Loc. citat. S. Hie∣rom characters him, one that knew not how to treat an adversary with∣out salt and sharpness. He was of a stiff and rugged disposition, a rigid Censor, inclined to choler, and impatient of opposition, a strict obser∣ver of Rites and Discipline, and a zealous asserter of the highest rigors and most nice severities of Religion. His learning was admirable, wherein though many excelled, he had no superiours, and few equals in the Age he lived in: Tertulliano quid eruditius, quid acutius? says Epist. ad Mag. Grator. p. 328. T. 2. S. Hie∣rom, who adds that his Apology, and Book against the Gentiles took in all the treasures of Humane Learning. Commonit. adv. Haeres. cap. 24 p. 59, 60. Vincentius of Lire gives him this notable Elogium. He is justly (says he) to be esteemed the Prince among the Writers of the Latin Church. For what more learned? who more conversant both in divine and humane Studies? who by a strange largeness and capacity of mind had drawn all Philosophy, and its several Sects, the Authors and Abettors of Heresies with all their Rites and Principles, and the whole circumference of History and all kind of Study within the compass of his own breast. A man of such quick and weighty parts, that there was scarce any thing which he set himself against, which he did not either pierce through with the acumen of his Wit, or batter down with the strength and solidity of his Arguments. Who can sufficiently commend his Discourses, so thick set with Troops of Reasons, that whom they cannot persuade, they are ready to force to an assent? who hath almost as many sentences as words, and not more periods, then victories over those whom he hath to deal with. XIII. FOR his Books, though time has devoured many, yet a great number still remain, and some of them written after his withdrawment
from the Church. His stile is for the most part abrupt and haughty, and its face full of ancient wrinkles, of which Lib. 5. cap. 1. p. 459. Lactantius long since gave this censure, that though he himself was skilled in all points of Learning, yet his stile was rugged and uneasie, and very obscure; as indeed it requires a very attentive and diligent, a sharp and sagacious un∣derstanding, yet is it lofty and masculine, and carries a kind of maje∣stic eloquence along with it, that gives a pleasant relish to the judicious and inquisitive Reader. It is deeply tinctured with the African dialect, and owes not a little of its perplexedness and obscurity to his conversing so much in the Writings of the Greeks, whose forms and idioms he had so made his own, that they naturally flowed into his pen; and how great a Master he was of that Tongue is plain, in that himself De Baptism. c. 15. p. 230. de Coron. c. 6. p. 104 tells us, he wrote a Book concerning Baptism, and some others, in Greek; which could not but exceedingly vitiate and infect his native stile, and render it less smooth, elegant, and delightful, as we see in Ammianus Marcellinus, who being a Greek born wrote his Roman History in Latin, in a stile rough and unpleasant, and next door to barbarous. Besides what was in it self obscure and uneven, became infinitely worse by the ignorance of succeeeding Ages, who changed, what they did not under∣stand, and crowded in spurious words in the room of those which were proper and natural, till they had made it look like quite another thing then what it was when it first came from under the hand of its Author. XIV. HIS errours and unsound opinions are frequently noted by S. Augustin and the Ancients, (not to mention later Censors) and Pame∣lius has reduced his Paradoxes to thirty one, which together with their Explications and Antidotes he has prefixed before the Editions of his Works. That of Montanus his being the Paraclete, we noted before, and for other things relating to that Sect, they are rather matters con∣cerning Order and Discipline, then Articles and Points of Faith. It cannot be denied but that he has some unwarrantable notions, common with other Writers of those Times, and some more peculiar to himself. But he lived in an Age, when the Faith was yet green and tender, when the Church had not publicly and solemnly defined things by explicit Articles and nice Propositions, when the Philosophy of the Schools was mainly predominant, and men ran immediately from the Stoa and the Academy to the Church, when a greater latitude of opining was in∣dulged, and good men were infinitely more solicitous about piety and a good life, then about modes of Speech, and how to express every thing so critically and exactly, that it should not be liable to a severe scrutiny and examination.
His Writings. Genuine. Apologeticus. Ad Nationes, Libri II. De Testimonio Animae. Ad Scapulam. De Spectaculis. De Idololatria. De Corona. De Pallio. De Poenitentia. De Oratione. Ad Martyras. De Patientia. De cultu foeminarum Lib. II. Ad Ʋxorem, Lib. II. De Virginibus Velandis. Adversus Judaeos. De Praescriptione Haeretico∣rum. De Baptismo. Adversus Hermogenem. Adversus Valentinianos. De Anima. De Carne Christi. De Resurrectione Carnis. Adversus Marcionem, Lib. V. Scorpiace. Adversus Praxeam. Libri post Lapsum in Mon∣tanismum scripti. De Exhortatione Castitatis. De Monogamia. De fuga in Persecutione. De Jejuniis. De Pudicitia. Supposititious. Poemata. Adversus Marcionem, Lib. V. De judicio Domini. Genesis. Sodoma. Not extant. De Paradiso. De Spe Fidelium. De Ecstasi. Adversus Apollonium. Adversus Apellecianos. De Vestibus Aaron. De Censu Animae. Graece. De Corona. De Virginibus Velandis. De Baptismo. The End of TERTULLIAN's Life.
THE LIFE OF ORIGEN Presbyter, Catechist of ALEXANDRIA. Michael Burghers sculpsit. ORIGEN. Origen, where and when born. Several conjectures about the original of his name. His Father who. His juvenile education, and great towardliness in the knowledge of the Scriptures. His Philosophical Studies under Cle∣mens
Alexandrinus. His Institution under Ammonius. Ammonius, who. His fame and excellency confessed by the Gentile Philosophers. Another Origen his contemporary: These two heedlesly confounded. His Fathers martyrdom, and the confiscation of his Estate. Origen's re∣solute encouragement of his Father. His own passionate desire of Martyr∣dom. His maintenance by an honourable Matron of Alexandria. His zeal against Heretics. His setting up a private School. His succeding Clemens in the Catechetic Shool at eighteen years of Age. The frequency of his Auditors. Many of them Martyrs for the Faith. Origen's reso∣lution in attending upon the Martyrs. His danger. His couragious act at the Temple of Serapis. His emasculating himself, and the reasons of it. The eminent chastity of those Primitive times. Origen's journey to Rome, and return to Alexandria. His taking in a Colleague into the Catechetic Office. His learning the Hebrew Tongue. The prudent method of his Teaching. Ambrosius converted. Who he was. His great intmay with Origen. Origen sent for by the Governour of Ara∣bia. His journey into Palestin, and teaching at Caesarea. Remanded by the Bishop of Alexandria. Alexander Severus his excellent Vertues, and kindness for the Christian Religion. Origen sent for by the Empress Mammaea to Antioch. He begins to write his Commentaries. How many Notaries, and Transcribers imployed, and by whom maintained. Nota∣ries, their Original and Office: Their use and institution in the Primi∣tive Church. His journey into Greece. His passage through Palestin, and being ordained Presbyter at Caesarea. Demetrius of Alexandria his envy and rage against him. Origen condemned in two Synods at Alexandria, and one at Rome. The resignation of his Catechetic School to Heraclas. Heraclas who. The story of his offering sacrifice. The credit of this story questioned, and why. His departure from Alexandria, and fixing at Caesarea. The eminency of his School there. Gregorius Thaumaturgus his Scholar. His friendship with Firmilian: Firmilian who. The Persecution under Maximinus. Origen's Book written to the Martyrs. His retirement whither. His comparing the Versions of the Bible. His Tetrapla, Hexapla, and Octapla, what, and how managed: A Speimen given of them. His second journey to Athens. His going to Nicomedia, and letter to Africanus about the History of Susanna. His confutation of Beryllus in Arabia. His answer to Celsus. Celsus who. Origens Letters to Philip the Emperour. The vanity of making him a Christian. Origen's journey into Arabia to refute Heresies. The Helce∣saitae who: What their Principles. Alexander's miraculous election to the See of Jerusalem; his Coadjutor-ship, Government, Sufferings, and Martyrdom. Origen's grievous sufferings at Tyre under the Decian Persecution. His deliverance out of Prison; Age, and Death. His Character. His strict life. His mighty zeal, abstinence, contempt of the World, indefatigable diligence, and patience noted. His natural parts: incomparable learning. His Books, and their several Classes. His stile, what. His unsound opinions. The great Out-cry against him in all Ages. The Apologies written in his behalf. Several things noted out of the Ancients to extenuate the charge. His assertions not Dogmatical. Not intended for public view. Generally such as were not determined by the Church. His Books corrupted, and by whom. His own complaints to that purpose. The testimonies of Athanasius, and Theo∣timus, and Haymo in his vindication. Great errours and mistakes ac∣knowledged.
What things contributed to them: His great kindness for the Platonic Principles. S. Hierom's moderate censure of him. His repenting of his rash Propositions. His Writings enumerated, and what now extant. I. ORIGEN, called also Adamantius (either from the unwearied temper of his mind, and that strength of reason wherewith he compacted his Discourses, or his firmness and constancy in Religion, notwith∣standing all the assaults made against it) was born at Alexandria, the known Metropolis of Egypt; unless we will suppose, that upon some particular Tumult or Persecution raised against the Chri∣stians in that City, his Parents fled for refuge to the Mountainous parts thereabouts, where his Mother was delivered of him, and that thence he was called Origenes, . Suid. in voc. . p. 330. T. 2. quasi  (which most conceive to be the Etymology of his name) one born in the Mountains. But whether that be the proper derivation of the Word, or the other the particular occasion of its imposition, let the Reader determine as he please. How∣ever I believe the Reader will think it a much more probable and rea∣sonable conjecture, then what one Halloix not. ad Orig. de∣fens. c. 1. p. 1. supposes, that he was so called be∣cause born of holy Parents; the Saints in Scripture being (as he tells us) sometimes metaphorically stiled Mountains. The first and the last I dare say that ever made that conjecture. A learned man Voss. de Idol. l. 2. c. 10. p. 182. supposes him rather (and thinks no doubt can be made of it) so called from Orus, an Egyptian word, and with them the title of Apollo or the Sun (from  no question, which signifies light or fire) one of their principal Dei∣ties. Hence Orus, the name of one of the Egyptian Kings, as it has been also of many others. And thus as  comes Diogenes, one born of Jupiter, so  is derived Origenes, one descended of Or or Orus, a Deity solemnly worshipped at Alexandria. A conjecture that might have commanded its own entertainment, did not one prejudice lie against it, that we can hardly conceive so good a man, and so severe a Christian as Origens Father would impose a name upon his Child, for which he must be beholden to an Heathen Deity, and whom he might see every day worshipped with the most sottish Idolatry, that he should let him perpetually carry about that remembrance of Pagan Idolatry in his name, which they so particularly, and so solemnly renounced in their Baptism. But to return. II. HE was born about the year of our Lord CLXXXVI. being se∣venteen Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 2. p. 202. years of age at his Fathers death, who suffered Ann. Chr. CCII. Severi X. His Father was Leonides, whom Suidas In voc. , p. 389. Tom. 2. and some others (without any authority, that I know of, from the Ancients) make a Bishop: to be sure he was a good man, and a Martyr for the Faith. In his younger years he was brought up under the tutorage of his own Euseb. ibid. p. 202. Father, who instructed him in all the grounds of humane literature, and together with them took especial care to instill the principles of Religion, seasoning his early age with the notices of divine things, so that like another Timothy, from a child he knew the holy Scriptures, and was tho∣roughly exercised and instructed in them. Nor was his Father more diligent to insinuate his instructions, then the subject he managed was capable to receive them. Part of his daily task was to learn and repeat
some parts of the holy Scriptures, which he readily discharged. But not satisfied with the bare reading or recital of them, he began to enquire more narrowly into the more profound sense of them, often importuning his Father with questions, what such or such a passage of Scripture meant. The good man though seemingly reproving his busie forwardness, and admonishing him to be content with the plain obvious sense, and not to ask questions above his age, did yet inwardly rejoice in his own mind, and heartily bless God that he had made him the Father of such a child. Much ado had the prudent man to keep the exuberance of his love and joy from running over before others, but in private he gave it vent, frequently going into the Chamber where the Youth lay asleep, and reverently kissing his naked brest, the treasury of an early piety and a divine spirit, reflected upon himself how happy he was in so excellent a Son. So great a comfort, so invaluable a blessing is it to pious parents to see their children setting out betimes in the way of righteousness, and sucking in Religion almost with their Mothers milk. III. HAVING passed over his paternal education, he was put to perfect his Studies under the Institution of Clemens Alexandrinus, then Regent of the Catechist School at Alexandria, where according to the acuteness of his parts, and the greatness of his industry he made vast improvements in all sorts of learning. From him he betook himself to Ammonius, who had then newly set up a Platonic School at Alexandria, and had reconciled Hierocl. l. 1. de provid. & Fat. ap. Phot. Cod. CCXIV. col. 549. & Cod. CCLI. col. 1381. those inveterate feuds and differences that had been between the Schools of Plato and Aristotle, and which had reigned among their Disciples till his time, which he did (says my Author) , out of a divine transport for the truth of Philosophy, despising the little opinions, and wrangling con∣tentions of peevish men, and propounding a more free and generous kind of Philosophy to his Auditors. Among whom was our Origen, as Porphyry Apud Euseb. iid. c. 19. p. 220 vid. Theod. Serm. VI. de Provid. p. 96. besides others witnesses, who saw Origen when himself but a Youth. This Ammonius was called Saccas, (from his carrying Vid. Theod. loco citat. sacks of Corn upon his back, being a Porter by imployment, before he betook himself to the Study of Philosophy) one of the most learned and eloquent men of those times, a great Philosopher, and the chief of the Platonic Sect, and which was above all, a Christian, born and brought up among them, as Loc. citat. Porphyry himself is forced to confess; though when he tells us, that afterwards upon maturer consideration, and his entering upon Philosophy, he renounced Christianity, and em∣braced Paganism and the Religion of the Empire, he is as little to be credited, and guilty of as notorious a falshood (as Eusebius observes) as when he affirms that Origen was born and bred up a Gentile, and then tur∣ned off to Christianity, when as nothing was more evident, then that Origen was born of Christian Parents, and that Ammonius retained his Christian and divine Philosophy to the very last minute of his life, whereof the Books which he left behind him were a standing evidence. Indeed Annal. p. 332. Edit. Poock. vid.  Sel∣den. retan Eu∣ty. Sect. 23. p. 147. Euty∣chius Patriarch of Alexandria (if he means the same) seems to give some countenance to Porphyries report, and further adds, that Ammonius was one of the twenty Bishops, which Heraclas then Bishop of Alexandria, con∣stituted over the Egyptian Churches, but that he deserted his Religion. Which Heraclas no sooner heard of, but he convened a Synod of Bishops and went to the City, where Ammonius was Bishop, where having throughly scanned and discussed the matter, he reduced him back again
to the truth. Whether he found this among the Records of that Church, or took it from the mouth of Tradition and Report, is uncer∣tain, the thing not being mentioned by any other Writer. But however it was, 'tis plain that Ammonius was a man of incomparable parts and learning, Lib. de Pro∣vid. & fat. ubi supr. Hierocles himself stiles him , one taught of God, and when Plotinus the great Platonist had found him out, he Porphyr. in vit. Plotin. p.  Plot. n. Op. Praf. Porphyr. ap. E seb. ubi supr. told his friend in a kind of triumph, that this was the man whom he had sought after. Under him Origen made himself perfect Master of the Platonic Notions, being daily conversant in the Writings of Plato, Numenius, Cronius, Apollophanes, Longinus, Moderatus, Nicomachus, and the most principal among the Pythagoreans, as also of Chaeremon and Cornatus, Stoics; from whom (as Porphyry truly enough observes) he learned that allegorical and mystical way of interpretation, which he introduced in∣to the Christian Doctrin. IV. BESIDES our Adamantius, there was another Origen his Con∣temporary, a Gentile Philosopher, honourably mentioned by Lib.  apd Por∣phyr. in vit. Plotin. Longinus, Ibid. Porphyry, Lib. de Fat. ubi supr. Hierocles, In vit. Por∣phyr. p. 19. Eunapius, In Plat. Teol. l. 2. c. 4. p. 90. Proclus, and others; a person of that learning and accurate judgment, that coming Ap. Porphyr. loc. cit. one day into Plotinus his School, the grave Philosopher was ashamed, and would have given place: and when intreated by Origen to go on with his Lecture, he answered with a complement, that a man could have but little mind to speak there, where he was to discourse to them, who understood things as well as himself, and so after a very short discourse, broke up the meeting. I am not ignorant that most learned men have carelesly confounded this person with our Origen: Whence De Vit. & Script. Porphyr. c. 2. p. 11. Holstenius wonders why Eunapius should make him School-fellow with Porphyry, who was much his junior, whom Porphyry says indeed he knew, being himself then very young, and this probably not at Alexandria but at Tyre, where he was born, and where Origen a long time resided. So that his won∣der would have ceased, had he considered what is plain enough, that Eunapius meant it of this other Origen, Porphyries fellow-Pupil, not un∣der Ammonius at Alexandria, but under Plotinus at Rome. Indeed were there nothing else, this were enough to distinguish them, that the ac∣count given of Origen and what he wrote by Longinus, by Porphyry in the life of Plotinus, and others, does no ways agree to our Christian Writer. V. THE Persecution under Severus in the tenth year of his reign was now grown hot at Alexandria, Laetus the Governour daily adding fewel to the flames, where among the great numbers of Martyrs Euseb. ib. c. 1. p 201. Leoni∣des, Origens Father, was first imprisoned, then beheaded, and his estate confiscate and reduced into the public Exchequer. During his impri∣sonment Id. c. 2 p. 2 Origen began to discover a most impatient desire of Martyr∣dom, from which scarce any intreaties or considerations could restrain him. He knew the deplorable estate wherein he was like to leave his wife and children, could not but have a sad influence upon his Fathers mind, whom therefore by Letters he passionately exhorted to persevere unto Martyrdom, adding this clause among the rest, Take heed, Sir, that for our sakes you do not change your mind. And himself had gone not onely to prison, but to the very block with his Father, if the divine Provi∣dence had not interposed. His Mother perceiving his resolutions, treated him with all the charms and endearments of so affectionate a relation, attempted him with prayers and tears, intreating him if not for his own, that at least for her sake, and his nearest relatives, he would spare himself.
All which not prevailing, especially after his Fathers apprehension, she was forced to betake her self to little Arts, hiding all his cloths, that meer shame might confine him to the house. A mighty instance, as the Historian notes, of a juvenile forwardness and maturity, and a most hear∣ty affection for the true Religion. VI. HIS Father being dead, and the Eseb. ibid. p. 203. Estate seized for the Empe∣rours use, he and the Family were reduced to great streights. When behold the providence of God (who peculiarly takes care of Widows and Orphans, and especially the relicts of those that suffer for him) made way for their relief. A rich and honourable Matron of Alexandria pi∣tying his miserable case, liberally contributed to his necessities, as she did to others, and among them maintained one Paul of Antioch, a ring∣leader of all the Heretics at Alexandria, who by subtle artifices had so far insinuated himself into her, that she had adopted him to be her Son. Origen though he held his livelihood purely at her bounty, would not yet comply with this Favourite, not so much as to join in prayer with him, no not when an innumerable multitude not onely of Heretics, but of Orthodox daily flocked to him, taken with the eloquence of his dis∣courses. For from his childhood he had religiously observed the Rule and Canon of the Church, and abominated (as himself expresses it) all heretical Doctrines. Whether this noble Lady upon this occasion withdrew her charity, or whether he thought it more agreeable to the Christian Rule to live by his own labour, then to depend wholly upon anothers bounty, I know not: but having perfected those Studies of Foreign Learning, the foundations whereof he had laid under the Dis∣cipline of his Father, he now began to set up for himself, opening a School for the profession of the learned Arts, where besides the good he did to others, he raised a considerable maintenance to himself. And though then but a very Youth, yet did not the Grave and the Learned, the Philosophers, and greatest Masters of Heresie disdain to be present at his Lectures, whose opinions he impartially weighed and examined, as himself Epist. ap. Eu∣seb. ib. c. 19. p. 221. informs us: many of whom of Auditors Ibid. c. 30. p. 204. became his Con∣verts, yea and Martyrs for the Faith, as we shall see by and by. VII. BY this time his fame had recommended him to public notice, and he was thought fit, though but eighteen years of age, to be made Master of the Catechetic School at Alexandria, whether as Colleague with his Master Clemens, or upon resignation, his Successor, is uncer∣tain: the latter seems most probable, because Ibid. p. 205. Eusebius reports that Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria committed the instruction of the Cate∣chumens to him onely, unless we will understand it of some private and particular School, distinct from the ordinary Catechetic School, till Cle∣mens his death, whose Successor the Ancients generally make him. Scho∣lars in very great numbers daily crowded in upon him, so that finding he had enough to do, and that his different imployments did not well consist together, he left off teaching the Arts and Sciences, and gave up himself intirely to the instructing his Disciples in the rudiments of Chri∣stianity. Being setled in this Office, he followed it with infinite dili∣gence, and no less success. For he not onely built up those who were already Christians, but Id. ibid. c. 4. p 206. gained over a great number of Gentile Philo∣sophers to the Faith, who embraced Christianity with so hearty and sin∣cere a mind, as readily to seal it with their bloud. Among which of most note were Plutarch, whom Origen attending to his Martyrdom,
was like to have been killed by the people for being the Author of his Conversion; Serenus, who was burnt for his Religion, Heraclides and Heron, both beheaded, the one while but a Catechumen, the other a No∣vice; next came a second Serenus, who after he had endured infinite torments, lost his Head, and gained a Crown. Nay the weaker Sex al∣so put in for a share, one Herais a Catechumen, and Origens Scholar, being as himself expresses it, , baptized by fire, left this World, and in those flames mounted up to Heaven. Nor was Origen so wholly swallowed up with the care of his School, as not to perform Ibid. p. 204. duties of Piety and humanity towards others, especially Mar∣tyrs, and those that were condemned to die. For Aquila, Laetus his Successor in the Government of Alexandria, that he might do something singular in the entrance upon his place, renewed the Persecution, which was so severe, that every one consulted his own safety, and kept close; so that when the Martyrs were in Prison, or led to Trial, or Execution, there was none to comfort them, or minister unto them. This Office Origen boldly took upon him, attending the Martyrs to the very place of Execution, embracing and saluting them as they were led along, till the enraged multitude pelted him with showers of stones, and an hun∣dred times was he in danger of his life, had not the divine Providence immediately interposed to rescue him. At last they resolved to find him out, great multitudes besetting his house, and because he had vast numbers of Scholars, they brought a Guard of Souldiers along with them, who hunted him from house to house, so that no place could afford him a quiet refuge. And to this period of time I find some learned men (and I think very probably) ascribing that passage which Haeres. LXIV. p. 227. Epiphanius reports concerning him, that he was haled up and down the City, revi∣led and reproached, and treated with insolent scorn and fury. Once having shaved his head after the manner of the Egyptian Priests, they set him upon the steps of Serapis's Temple, commanding him to give branches of Palm-trees, as the Priests used to do, to them that went up to perform their holy Rites. He taking the branches with a ready and unterrified mind, cried out aloud, Come hither, and take the branch, not of an Idol-Temple, but of Christ. A piece of courage which I suppose did not contribute to mitigate their rage against him. VIII. ABOUT this time he made that famous attempt upon himself, so much commended by some, but condemned by others, his making himself an Eunuch, which (as appears from Ubi supr. p. 228. Epiphanius) some of the An∣cients conceived to have been done by Medicinal applications, which enervated the powers and tendencies of Nature that way, though others, and Ad Pamach. de Error. Orig. Tom. 2. p. 192. S. Hierom expresly, say it was done with the Knife. But however it was, he did it partly out of a perverse interpretation Euseb. ibid. c. 8. p. 209. of our Saviours meaning, when he says, there be some which make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, which he would needs literally under∣stand; partly out of a desire to take away all suspicion of wantonness and incontinency, which the Gentiles might be apt enough to cast upon him, when they saw him admit not men onely, but women into his Dis∣cipline; besides that hereby he himself was secured from any tempta∣tions to immodest and irregular embraces. How strict and severe was the chastity of those Primitive times, we have shewed at large in ano∣ther place; so great, that Apolog. H. p 71. Justin the Martyr tells us of a young man of Alexandria, who to convince the Gentiles of the falshood of that ma∣licious
charge of incontinency and promiscuous mixtures, which they usually laid upon the Christians, presented a Petition to Faelix the Pre∣sident of Alexandria, desiring his leave that the Physitians might make him an Eunuch, which the President refused, as prohibited by the Laws of the Roman Empire; as it was afterwards by several Proviso's and Canons of the Church. This fact though Origen endeavoured to con∣ceal from some of his friends, yet did it quickly break out, and Deme∣trius the Bishop who now admired it as an heroic act of temperance, and an instance of a great and a daring mind, did afterwards load it with all its aggravations, and bring it in as an inexcusable charge against him. I add no more concerning this then that whatever Origen might do now in the vigour of his youth, and through the sprightliness of his devout Zeal, yet in his more considerate and reduced age he was of another mind, condemning Vid. Comment. in Matt. p. 368. & p 370, 371. Edit. Het. such kind of attempts, soberly enough expounding that passage of our Saviour, which before he had so fatally misunder∣stood. IX. SEVERƲS the Emperour, that violent enemy of Christians, being dead Ann. Chr. CCXI. Origen Euseb. ib. c. 14. p. 216. had a great desire to see the Church of Rome, so venerable for its antiquity and renown, and accordingly came thither, while Pope Zephyrin sate Bishop of that See, where he staid not long, but returned back to Alexandria, and to his accustomed Catechetic office, Demetrius earnestly importuning him to resume it. But finding the imployment Ibid. c. 15. p. 217. grow upon him, and so wholly to engross his time, as not to allow him the least leisure for retirement and contem∣plation, and the study of the Scriptures, so fast did auditors press in upon him from morning to night, he took in Heraclas, who had been his Scholar, a man versed both in divine and humane Studies, to be his Partner, dividing the work between them, the younger and more un∣tutored Catechumens he committed to him; the maturer, and those who had been of a longer standing he reserved to be instructed by himself. And now he gave up himself to a closer and more accurate Study of the holy Scriptures, which that he might manage with the better suc∣cess, he set himself to learn the Hebrew Tongue, the true Key to unlock the Door, (wherein as Apolog. adv. Ruffin. Tom. 2. p. 201. S. Hierom probably intimates, he was assisted by the help of Huillus the Jewish Patriarch at that time, at least in the Rab∣binic Exposition of the Scripture,) a thing little understood in those times, and the place he lived in, and to him who was now in the prime of his age, and the Flower of more pleasing and delightful Studies, no doubt very difficult and uneasie. But nothing is hard to an industrious dili∣gence, and a willing mind. X. NOR did his pains in this interrupt his activity in his other im∣ployments; where he perceived Eus. ib. c. 18. p. 218. any of his Scholars of more smart and acute understandings, he first instructed them in Geometry, Arithmetic, and other preparatory Institutions, and then brought them through a course of Philosophy, discovering the Principles of each Sect, and ex∣plaining the Books of the Ancients, and sometimes himself writing Comments upon them, so that the very Gentiles cried him up for an eminent Philosopher. The ruder and more unpolished part of his au∣ditory he would often exhort to the Study of humane Arts, assuring them that they would not a little conduce to the right understanding of the holy Scriptures. Many flocked to him to make trial of his famed Skill and Learning; others to be instructed in the Precepts both of Phi∣losophy
and Christianity. Great numbers of Heretics were his Audi∣tors, some of whom he converted from the errour of their way: and among the rest Euseb. ib. Hieron. de Scrip. in Am∣bros. Suid. in Voc. . Epiph ubi supr. p. 228. Ambrosius, a man of Nobility and Estate at Alexandria, having been seduced into the Errours of Marcion and Valentinus, being convinced by Origen's Discourses, renounced his former Heresies, and returned to the Catholic Doctrin of the Church, and ever after became his intimate Friend, his great Patron and Benefactor. He was a man of neat elegant parts, and was continually prompting Origen to explain and interpret some part of the Scripture; as oft as they were together, (as Epist. ap. Suid. ubi supr. p. 390 vid. Hieron. Ep. ad Marcell. p. 129. Tom. 1. Origen himself informs us) he suffered not a Supper time to pass with∣out discourses to this purpose, nor their very walks and recreations to be without them; a great part of the night, besides their morning stu∣dies, were spent upon these pious exercises; their meals and their rest were ushered in with continual Lectures, and both night and day where Prayer ended, Reading began, as after reading they again betook them∣selves to Prayer. Indeed this Ambrose was a pious and good man, and though so great a person, did not disdain to take upon him the Office of a Deacon in the Church, nay to undergo great hardships and sufferings, becoming an eminent Confessor for the Faith. And there is onely this blot Hieron. de Script. in Am∣brof. that I know of, that sticks upon his memory, that when he died rich, he remembred not his dear and ancient Friend, whose low and mean condition might well have admitted, as his pains and intimacy might deservedly have challenged, a bountiful legacy to have been be∣queathed to him. XI. ABOUT this time came a Euseb. ibid. c. 19. p. 221. Messenger from the Governour of Arabia with Letters to Demetrius the Bishop, and to the Praefect of Egypt, desiring that with all speed Origen might be sent to impart the Christian Doctrin to him: so considerable had the fame of this great man rendred him abroad in foreign Nations. Accordingly he went into Arabia, where having dispatched his errand, he came back to Alex∣andria. Not long after whose return, the Emperour Caracalla drew his Army into those parts, intending to fall severely upon that City. To avoid whose rage and cruelty Origen thought good to withdraw himself, and not knowing any place in Egypt that could afford him shelter, he re∣tired into Palestin, and fixed his residence at Caesarea. Where his excel∣lent abilities being soon taken notice of, he was requested by the Bi∣shops of those parts, though but then in the capacity of a Laic, publicly in the Church, and before themselves to expound the Scriptures to the People. The news hereof was presently carried to Alexandria, and highly resented by Demetrius, who by Letters expostulated the case with Theoctistus, Bishop of Caesarea, and Alexander of Jerusalem, as a thing never heard of before in the Christian Church; who in their answer put him in mind, that this had been no such unusual thing, whereof they give him particular instances. All which satisfied not Demetrius, who by Letters commanded Origen to return, and sent Deacons on purpose to urge him to it, whereupon he came back and applied himself to his wonted charge. XII. ALEXANDER SEVERƲS the present Emperour in or∣der to his expedition against the Persians, was come to Antioch, attended with his mother Mammaea, a wise and prudent, and (says Ibid. c. 21. p. 223. vid. ex∣cerpt. ex Jo. Antioch. p. 830. Eusebius) a most pious and religious Princess; a great influence she had upon her Son, whom she engaged in a most strict and constant administration of
Justice, and the affairs of the Empire, that he might have no leisure to be debauched by Vice and Luxury. Indeed he was a Prince of incom∣parable Vertues, Historians representing him as mild and gentle, com∣passionate and charitable, sober and temperate, just and impartial, de∣vout and pious, one advanced to the Empire for the recovery and hap∣piness of mankind. He was no enemy to Christians, whom he did not onely not persecute, but favour at every turn; and in his private Ora∣tory he had among other Heroes the Images of Abraham and of Christ, and was once minded to have built a Temple to him, and publicly ad∣mitted him into the number of their gods. He highly admired some precepts of the Christian Religion, and from their Discipline learned some Rites which he made use of in the Government of the Empire. But to return to Mammaea: Being a Syrian born, she could not be un∣acquainted with the affairs both of Jews and Christians, and having heard of the great fame of Euseb. loc. cit. Origen was very desirous to see him, and hear him discourse concerning Religion, that she might know what it was, for which the whole World had him in such veneration. And for this purpose she sent for him, ordering a military guard to conduct him to Antioch, where he staid some considerable time, and having fully opened the Doctrines of our Religion, and given her many demonstra∣tions of the Faith of Christians, to the great honour of God and of Re∣ligion, he was dismissed, and permitted to return to his old charge at Alexandria. XIII. HENCEFORWARD he set upon writing Ibid. c. 23. p. 224. Commenta∣ries on the Holy Scripture, at the instigation of his dear friend Ambrosius, who did not onely earnestly importune him to it, but furnish him with all conveniences necessary for it; allowing him besides his maintenance, seven (and as occasion was more) Notaries to attend upon him, who by turns might take from his mouth what he dictated to them; and as ma∣ny Transcribers, besides Virgins imployed for that purpose, who copied out fair, what the others had hastily taken from his mouth. These No∣taries were very common both among the Greeks and Romans, making use of certain peculiar notes and signs, either by way of occult or short∣writing, being able by the dexterity of their Art to take not words onely but entire sentences. The original of it is by some ascribed to Tyro Cicero's servant, by others to Aquila servant to Mecaenas, by others to Ennius, and that it was polished and enlarged afterwards, first by Tyro, then by Aquila and some others. It may be in its first rudeness it was much more ancient, and improved and perfected by degrees, every new addition entitling it self to the first invention, till it arrived to that accuracy and perfection, that (as appears from what Lib. 14. Epigr. 208. Martial says in the case, and Ausonius Epigram. 36. reports of his Amanuensis) they were able not onely to keep pace with, but many times to out-run the speaker. That they were of frequent use in the Primitive Church, is without all doubt, be∣ing chiefly imployed to write the Acts of the Martyrs; for which end they were wont to frequent the Prisons, to be present at all Trials and Exa∣minations; and if the thing was done intra Velum, within the Secretarium, they used by bribes to procure Copies of the Examinations and Answers from the Proconsul's Register; thence they followed the Martyrs to the place of Execution, there to remarque their sayings and their sufferings. This was done in the most early Ages, as is evident from De Coron. c. 13. p. 109. Tertullians mentioning the Fasti Ecclesiae, and from what Epist. XXXVII. p. 51 S. Cyprian says in his Epi∣stle
to the Clergy of his Church, and In vit. Cypr non long. ab init. Pontius the Deacon in his life; where he tells us, that their Fore-fathers were wont to register what∣ever concerned the Martyrdom of the meanest Christian, the Acts where∣of descended down to his time. Thus H. Eccl. l. 5. c. c. 21. p. 189. Eusebius speaking of the Mar∣tyrdom of Apollonius in the reign of Commodus, tells us, that all his An∣swers and Discourses before the President's Tribunal, and his brave Apo∣logy before the Senate, were contained in the Acts of his Martyrdom, which together with others, he had collected into one Volume. So that the Original of the Institution is not without probability referred to the times of S. Clemens Bishop of Rome. All which I the rather note be∣cause it gives us a reasonable account how the Answers and Speeches of the Martyrs, the Arguments and Discourses of Synods and Councils, and the Extempore Homilies of the Fathers came to be transmitted so intire and perfect to us. But I return to Origen, whom we left dictating to his Notaries, and they delivering it to those many Transcribers that were allowed him; all which were maintained at Ambrosius's sole expence. Cod. CXXI. col. 301. Photius indeed makes this charge to have been allowed by Hippolytus, deriving his mistake it's plain, from the Greek Interpreter of Vid. Hieron. de Script. in Hippol. S. Hieroms Catalogue, who did not rightly apprehend S. Hieroms meaning, and who himself speaking of Hippolytus, inserts this passage concerning Am∣brose I know not how, and for no other reason that I can imagin, but be∣cause in Eusebius his History he found it immediately following the ac∣count that was given of Hippolytus his Works. Haeres. LXIV. p. 228. Epiphanius will have these Commentaries written, and the expences allowed to that purpose by Ambrosius at Tyre, and that for that end he resided there XXVIII. years together. An intolerable mistake, not onely disagreeing with Eusebius his account, but plainly inconsistent with the course of Origen's life. And indeed Epiphanius alledges no better an Author then , having picked up the Story from some vulgar tradition and report. His industry and diligence in these Studies was incredible, few parts of the Bible escaping his narrow and critical researches: wherein he attained to so admirable an accuracy and per∣fection, that Hoc unum dico, quod vellem cum invidia nominis ejus habere etiam scientiam Scriptura∣rum, floccipendens imagines umbrasque larva∣rum: quarum natura esse dicitur, terrere par∣vulos, & in angulis garrire tenebrosis. Hieron. Praef. in Quaest. in Genes. Tom. 3. p. 201. S. Hierom himself (not always over∣civil to him) professes he could be content to bear that load of envy that was cast upon his name, so that he had but withall his skill and knowledge in the Scriptures. A passage which In∣vectiv. II. in Hieron. inter oper. Hier. Tom. 4. p. 225. Ruffinus after∣wards smartly enough returns upon him. XIV. BUT a stop for the present was put to this work by some affairs of the Church, which called him into Achaia, then disturbed with divers Heresies that over-ran those Churches. And at this time doubt∣less it was that he staid a while at Athens, where (as Ubi supr. p. 227. Epiphanius tells us) he frequented the Schools of the Philosophers, and conversed with the Sages of that place. In his journey to Achaia he went through Euseb. loc. cit. Hier. de Script. in Alex. Palestin, and took Caesarea in his way, where producing his Letters of recommen∣dation from Demetrius, he was ordained Presbyter by Alexander of Je∣rusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea. Not that this was done by any sinister Arts, or the ambitious procurement of Origen himself, but was intirely the act of those two excellent persons, who designed by this means to furnish him with a greater authority for the management of his Embassie, and to render him more serviceable to the affairs of the Church. However the thing was infinitely resented by Demetrius, as
an affront against his jurisdiction, and a contempt of his authority, and now the wind is turned into a blustring quarter, and nothing but ana∣thema's are thundred out against him from Alexandria. Demetrius had for some time born him a secret grudge, and he takes this occasion to fall upon him. The truth is, he Euseb. ib. c. 8. p. 109. envied the honour and reputation which Origen's Learning and Vertue had raised him in the thoughts and mouths of all men, and wanting hitherto an opportunity to vent his emulation, he had now one put into his hand, and accordingly charges him with all that spight and spleen can invent, publicly accusing him (what before he admired in him) for making himself an Eunuch, and severely reflecting upon the Bishops that ordained him. Nay so high did he raise the storm, that he procured Origen, to be condemned Paphil. A∣polog. ap. Phot. Cod. CXVIII. col. 297. in two several Synods, one of Bishops and Presbyters, who decreed that he should be banished Ale∣xandria, and not permitted either to live, or teach there: the other un∣der Demetrius, who with some Bishops of Egypt pronounced him to be de∣graded from his Priesthood, his greatest favourers subscribing the Decree. Apud Ruffin. Invect. II. in Hieron. inter oper. Hier. T. 4. p. 225. S. Hierom adds, that the greatest part of the Christian World consen∣ted to this condemnation, and that Rome it self convened a Synod against him, not for Heresie or Innovations in Doctrin; but meerly out of envy, as not able to bear the glory and renown of his Learning and Elo∣quence; seeing while he taught they were looked upon as mute and dumb, as the Stars disappear at the presence of the Sun. And yet all this combustion vanished into smoke, Origen still retaining his Priest∣hood, publicly preaching in the Church, and being honourably enter∣tained where-ever he came by the wiser and more moderate party of the Church. XV. WEARIED out with the vexatious assaults of his enemies, he re∣solved to quit Alexandria, where the sentence of the Synods would not suffer him long to abide, having first resigned the Government of his Catechetic School intirely to his Colleague Heraclas Euseb. ib. c. 26. p. 228.. This Heraclas was a Gentile born, brother to Plutarch, who (as before we noted) suffered Martyrdom for the Faith, together with whom he became Origen's Scho∣lar, by whom he was converted, and built up in the Faith, then taken in as his Ʋsher or Partner in the Catechetic Office, afterwards his successor, and last of all Bishop of Alexandria. A man of unwearied diligence and a strict life; learned and eloquent, a great Master in Philosophy and all humane, but especially versed in divine Studies. He retained his Philo∣sophic habit even after he was made Presbyter of Alexandria, and ceased not with a mighty industry still to read over and converse with the Wri∣tings of the Gentiles; indeed arrived to that singular fame and reputa∣tion, that Julius Africanus, one of the most learned men of those times came Ibid. c. 31. p. 230. on purpose to Alexandria to see and hear him. No wonder there∣fore, if Origen committed this great care and trust to him, whose perso∣nal merit, and particular obligation as his Scholar, might seem to chal∣lenge it. Before his departure (for they that refer it to the time of Decius, speak at random, Origen not being then at Alexandria) an acci∣dent fell out, which (if true) hastned his flight with more shame and sor∣row then all the malice of his bitterest enemies could create him. Thus then we are told; . bi sp. p. 22. Lnt. de Sect. Act. X. p. some Gentiles that were his mortal enemies, seized upon him, and reduced him to this strait, that either he should abuse his body with a Blackmoor, or do sacrifice to an Idol. Of the two he chose to sacrifice, though it was rather their act then his, for putting Frankin∣cense
into his hand, they led him up to the Altar, and forced him to throw it into the fire. Which yet drew so great a blot upon his name, and derived so much guilt upon his conscience, that not able to bear the public reproach, he immediately left the City. The credit of this Story is not a little shaken by the universal silence of the more ancient Writers in this matter, not so much as intimated by Eusebius, Pamphilus, or Ori∣gen's own contemporary, Dionysius of Alexandria; not objected by his greatest adversaries, as is plain from the Apologies written in his behalf; not mentioned by Porphyry who lived in those times, and whom we can∣not suppose either to have been ignorant of it, or willing to conceal it, when we find him falsly reporting of Ammonius, that he apostatized from Christianity, and of Origen himself, that he was born and bred an Heathen. In short not mentioned by any before Epiphanius, and besides him, not by any else of that time, not S. Hierom, Rufinus, Vincentius Le∣rinensis, or Theophilus of Alexandria, some of whom were enemies enough to Origen. So that it was not without some plausibility of reason that Ad Ann. 253. n. CXXIII. Baronius suspected this passage to have been foisted into Epiphanius, and not to have been the genuine issue of his Pen. Though in my mind Epiphanius himself says enough to make any wise man ready to suspend his belief; for he tells Ibid. p 229. us, that many strange things were reported con∣cerning Origen, which he himself gave no credit to, though he thought good to set down the reports; and how often he catches up any com∣mon rumours and builds upon them, none need to be told, that are ac∣quainted with his Writings. Nor is it likely he would balk any Story that tended to Origen's disgrace, who had himself so bitter a zeal and spleen against him. I might further argue the improbability of this Story from hence, that this being a long time after his famous emascu∣lating of himself, which by this time was known all abroad, it is not rea∣sonable to suppose, that the Heathens should make the prostituting himself in committing adultery one part of his choice, which his self-contracted impotency and Eunuchism had long since made impossible to him. However supposing the matter of fact to be true, it sounds not more (especially considering how much there was of force and compul∣sion in it) to his disparagement, then his solemn repentance afterwards made for his honour, and when the desire to preserve his chastity invio∣lable is laid in the Scale with his offering Sacrifice. XVI. ANN. CCXXXIII. Euseb. ib. c. 26. p. 228. Origen left Alexandria, and directing his course for Palestin, went to his good Friend and Patron Theoctistus Bi∣shop of Caesarea, and from thence to Jerusalem to salute Alexander Bi∣shop of it, and to visit the venerable Antiquities of that place. And here Epiphanius in pursuance of the foregoing Story tells us, that being mightily importuned to preach, he stood up in the Congregation, and having pronounced those words of penitent David, But unto the wicked God saith, what hast thou to do to declare my statutes, and that thou shouldst take my covenant in thy mouth? he could go on no further, but shut the Book, and laid it down, and sitting down burst out into sighs and tears, the whole Congregation bearing part with him in that mournful Scene. And to carry on the humour, and make the Story more compleat, after-Ages present us with a Extat Inter Oper. Orig. Tom. 1. p. 752. Eait Erasm. Discourse under his name, called Origen's Com∣plaint, wherein he passionately resents and laments his fall, as a desperate wound to himself, a grief to good men, and an unconceivable dishonour to God, and to Religion. And pitty it is, if the Story be true, that
this Lamentation were not genuine; but as it is, the best ground it has to support it self, is, that it is calculated to gratifie a pious fansie and a melting passion, there being nothing in it otherwise worthy of this great man, and I fear was first designed by him that made it, as a reflection upon him, and to give countenance to the report that was raised concerning him. From Jerusalem he not long after returned back to Caesarea, where (as before he had done at Alexandria) he set up a Id. ibid. c. 30. p. 229. School both for divine and humane learning, and his great name quickly procured him Scholars from all parts, not onely of the Country thereabouts, but from the remotest Provinces. Among which of most remarque were Gregory called afterwards Thaumaturgus, and his Brother Athenodorus, who leaving the study of the Law, as being more delighted with Philosophy and humane Arts, committed themselves to his con∣duct and tutorage, who first instructed them in Philosophy, and then trained them up to a more accurate knowledge of the Christian Faith. Five years they remained under his Discipline, when being sufficiently enriched with the knowledge of Religion, they returned into Pontus, their own Countrey, where they both became Bishops, and proved emi∣nent Lights and Governours of the Church. During his residence at Caesarea, there was a firm intimacy and league Ibid. c. 27. p. 228. of friendship contracted between Origen and Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, who had so great a kindness for him that sometimes he would prevail with him to come over into that Province for the edification of the Churches in those parts, sometimes he himself would go into Judaea to visit him, and stay a considerable while with him to perfect himself by his society and converse. This Firmilian was a Gentleman of Cappadocia, after∣wards made Bishop of Caesarea in that Countrey. A person of great name and note, and who held correspondence with most of the eminent men of those times. Few considerable affairs of the Church, wherein he was not concerned either by his presence or advice. Great contests were between him and Stephen Bishop of Rome concerning the Baptism of heretical persons, wherein he took part with Cyprian. He was twice at Antioch to examine the case of Paul of Samosata Bishop of that Church, and coming a third time to a Synod convened there for that purpose, died at Tarsus by the way. Nor was Origen admired and courted onely by foreigners and young men who had been his Scholars, but by the grave and the wise at home: both Alexander and Theoctistus, though ancient Bishops, did not disdain in a manner to become his Disci∣ples, committing to his single care the power of interpreting the holy Scriptures, and whatever concerned the Ecclesiastical Doctrin. XVII. IT was now about the year CCXXXV. when Maximinus the Thracian succeeded in the Empire: a man fierce and ill-natured, and according to his education brutish and cruel. He hated whatever had relation to his Predecessor, and because the Id. ibid. c. 28. Christians had found some favourable entertainment in his Family, he bega first with them, and especially the Bishops, as the chief Pillars and promoters of their Religion, whom he every where commanded to be put to death. To contribute toward the consolation of Christians in this evil time, . Orig. Exhort. ad Martyr. pag. 200. Origen wrote his Book concerning Martyrdom, which he jointly dedicated to
his dear Ambrosius, and to Protoctetus Presbyter of Caesarea, as who had undergone a joint share of imprisonment and sufferings under the pre∣sent Persecution, and had made a glorious and illustrious confession of the Christian Faith. As for Origen himself, he is said to have taken san∣ctuary in the house of Juliana, a wealthy and charitable Lady, who courteously entertained him, and furnished him with Books useful for him, particularly with Symmachus Euseb. ib. c. 17. p. 218. his Version of the Old Testament, and his Commentaries in defence of the Ebionites, particularly levelled against S. Matthews Gospel: Books which Juliana enjoyed as by right of inheritance devolved upon her. XVIII. WHILE he enjoyed the happy opportunity of this retire∣ment, he more directly applied himself to what he had long since de∣signed, the collecting and collating the several Editions and Versions of the Old Testament with the Original Text, which he finished by three several parts Id. ibid. c. 16. p. 217. Epiph. loc. supr. citat. de ponder. & mensur. p. m. 534, 539. Hier. de Script. in Orig. & Suid. in voc. Orig., the Tetrapla, the Hexapla, and the Octapla. In the first (which considered as a distinct part, was made last) were four Transla∣tions, set one over against another, that of Aquila, Symmachus, the Septua∣gint, and Theodotion; these made up the Tetrapla. In the second were these four Versions disposed in the same order, and two other columns set before them, thus; first the Hebrew Text in its own Letters, then in a column next adjoining the same Hebrew Text in Greek characters, that they who were strangers to the one, might be able to read the other: next followed the several Versions of Aquila, Symmachus, the Septuagint, and Theodotion. And these constituted the Hexapla. Where the Se∣ptuagint being placed after that of Aquila and Symmachus, gave some ig∣norant undiscerning persons occasion to think, that it had been made after the two former: whereas it was placed in the middle (as Epipha∣nius Ibid. p. 539. informs us) onely as a Standard, by which the goodness and since∣rity of the rest were to be tried and judged. In the third, which made the Octapla, were all that were in the former, and in the same manner, and two more Versions added at the end of them, one called the Fifth Edition, found by a Student at Jerusalem in a Hogshead at Jericho in the time of the Emperour Caracalla; and another stiled the Sixth Edition, found by one of Origen's Scholars at Nicopolis near Actium, in the reign of Alexander Severus. All which in the Octapla were disposed in seve∣ral columns in this order: in the first column was the Original Hebrew, in its native characters, in the next the Hebrew in Greek Letters, in the third the translation of Aquila, then that of Symmachus, next the Septuagint, in the sixth that of Theodotion, and in the two last that of Jericho, and the other of Nicopolis. Indeed plain it is from what Comment. in Tit. c. 3. p. 256. T. 9. S. Hierom tells us, that these two last were not compleat and intire Translations, but contained only some parts of the Old Testament, especially the Prophetical Books. But whether from hence we may conclude the Hexapla and the Octapla to have been but one and the same Work, onely receiving its different title according to those Parts that had these two last Versions annexed to them, I will not say. Besides these there was a Seventh Edition; but this belonging onely to the Book of Psalms, made no alteration in the title of the whole. The frame and order of this excellent contrivance, the Reader will better apprehend by this following Scheme, formed accord∣ing to a Specimen of the Hexapla extant in Cardinal Barberines very an∣cient Manuscript of the Minor Prophets, upon these words, Hos. XI. 1. When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt.
Octapla. Hexapla. Tetrapla. Text. Hebr. lit. Hebr.  ut supra. Heb. lit. Heb. Aquila. . Hebr. lit. Graec. , &c. Hebr. lit. Gr. . Symmachus. . Aquila. , &c. Aquila. . LXX. . Symmachus. , &c. Symmachus. . Theodotion. . LXX. , &c. LXX. .   Theodotion. , &c. Theodotion. .   Edit. V. Hierich. Desideratur.     Edit. VI. Nicopol. Desideratur.     And to make the Work more compleat and useful, he distinguished the additions and deficiences by several marks Vid. praeter script. citat. Orig. Comment in in Matth. Edit. Haet. gr. l. p. 381. & Resp. ad. Epist. Afric. p. 226, 227. Edit. Basil. vid. Ruffin. Invect. II. in Hieron. inter oper. Hier. T. 4. p. 230., where any thing had been added by the LXX. besides the faith of the Original Text, he pre∣fixed an Obelus before it; where any thing was wanting, which yet was in the Hebrew, he in serted the words with an Asteric, to distinguish them from the rest of the Septuagint Translation.
Where various Lections were confirmed by the greater number of Translations, he added a note called Lemniscus, where two of them onely concurred, an Hypolemniscus. By which means he did right to truth, without doing wrong to any. A work of infinite labour and admirable use, and which was therefore peculiarly stiled by the Ancients Opus Ecclesiae, the Work of the Church, upon the account whereof S. Hie∣rom In Tit. loc. supr. cit. calls him Immortale illud ingenium, as indeed had there been no∣thing else, this alone had been sufficient to have eternized his name, and to have rendred him memorable to posterity: and how happy had it been, had it been preserved, the loss whereof I can attribute to nothing more then the pains and charge, the trouble and difficulty of transcribing it. Though some part of it, viz. the Septuagint was taken out, and published more exact and correct from the faults which had crept into it by tran∣scribing by Eusebius and Pamphilus afterwards. It was a Work of time, and not finished by Origen all at once, begun by him at Caesarea, and perfected at Tyre, as Epiphanius plainly intimates. XIX. FROM Caesarea Origen, upon what occasion I know not, seems to have taken a second journey to Athens. For during his stay there, we find him finishing his Commentaries Euseb. ib. c. 32. p. 231. upon Ezechiel, and beginning his Exposition upon the Canticles, five Books whereof he there perfe∣cted, making an end of the rest at his return to Caesarea. The oppor∣tunity of this journy, it's conceived by some, he took to go to Nicomedia, to visit his friend Ambrosius, who with his wife and children at that time resided there. While he continued here (which was not long) he returned an answer to the Letter which he had lately received from Julius Africanus concerning the History of Susanna, which Africanus by short but very forcible arguments maintained to be a fictitious and spu∣rious relation. Origen undertakes the case, and justifies the Story to be sincere and genuine, but by arguments, which rather manifest the acute∣ness of his parts, then the goodness of his cause, and clearly shew how much men of the greatest learning and abilities are put to it, when en∣gaged to uphold a weak side, and which has no truth of its own to support it self. It happened about this time that Beryllus Ibid. c. 33. Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, fell into absurd and dangerous errours, asserting, that our Lord before his incarnation had no proper subsistence, no personal Deity, but onely a derivative divinity from his Father. The Bishops of those parts met about it, but could not reclaim the man, whereupon Origen's assistance was requested, who went thither, and treated with him both in private conferences and in public Synods. His greatest dif∣ficulty was to know what the man meant, which when he had once found out, he plied him so hard with cogent reasonings and demon∣strations, that he was forced to let go his hold, recant his errours, and return back into the way of truth. Which done, Origen took his leave, and came back for Palestin. And Beryllus Hieron. de Script. in Beryll., as became a true Convert, in several Letters gave thanks to Origen for his kind pains in his convi∣ction, kissing the hand that brought him back. XX. ORIGEN was now advanced Eus. Ibid. c. 36. p. 232. above the age of threescore, and yet remitted nothing of his incredible industry either in preaching or writing. At Ambrosius his intreaty he took to task Celsus his Book against the Christians. This Celsus was an Epicurean Philosopher, con∣temporary with Lucian, the witty Atheist, who dedicated his Pseudoman∣tis to him, as indeed there seems to have been a more then ordinary
sympathy of humour and genius between these two persons. Celsus was a man of Wit and Parts, and had all the advantages which Learning, Philosophy, and Eloquence could add to him; but a severe and incurable enemy to the Christian Religion, against which he wrote a Book enti∣tuled , or the true Discourse, wherein he attempted Chri∣stianity with all the Arts of insinuation, all the witty reflections, viru∣lent aspersions, plausible reasonings, wherewith a man of parts and ma∣lice was capable to assault it. To this Origen returns a full and solid answer in eight Books, wherein as he had the better cause, so he mana∣ged it with that strength of Reason, clearness of Argument, and convi∣ctive evidence of truth, that were there nothing else to testifie the abi∣lities of this great man, this Book alone were enough to do it. It was written probably about the beginning of the reign of Philip the Em∣perour, with whom Origen seems to have had some acquaintance, who Id. ibid. p. 233 wrote one Letter to him, and another to the Empress. From whence, and some other little probabilities, Eusebius first, and after him the ge∣nerality of Ecclesiastic Writers, have made that Emperour to have been a Christian, and the first of the Imperial line that was so. The va∣nity of which mistake, and the original from whence it sprung, we have shewed elsewhere. Nor is the matter mended by those, who say that Philip was privately baptized by Fabian Bishop of Rome, and so his Christian Profession was known onely to the Christians, but concealed from the Gentiles; which being but a conjecture, and a gratis dictum, without any authority to confirm it, may with the same ease and as much justice be rejected, as it is obtruded and imposed upon us. Nor has the late learned publisher Rod. Wet∣steinius Praefat. in Orig. Dial. contr. Marc. &c. à se Edit. Basil. 1674. 4 of some Tracts of Origen (who in order to the securing the Dialogue against the Marcionites to belong to Origen, has newly enforced this argument) said any thing that may persuade a wise man to believe a Story, so improbable in all its circumstances, and which must have made a louder noise in the World, and have had more and better witnesses to attest it, then an obscure and uncertain report, the onely authority which Eusebius, who gave the first hint of it, pre∣tends in this matter. XXI. THE good success which Origen lately had in Arabia in the cause of Beryllus made him famous in all those parts, and his help was now again Ibid. c. 37. desired upon a like occasion. For a sort of Hereties were start up, who affirmed, that at death both body and soul did expire together, and were resolved into the same state of corruption, and that at the re∣surrection they should revive and rise together to eternal life. For this purpose a general Synod of those parts was called, and Origen desired to be present at it, who managed the cause with such weighty Arguments, such unanswerable and clear convictions, that the adverse party threw down their weapons, and relinquished the sentiments which they main∣tained before. Another heretical crew appeared at this time in the East, the impious and abominable Sect of the Helcesaitae, against whom also Origen seems to have been engaged, concerning whom himself Homil. in Psal. 82. ap. Euseb. ibid. c. 38. p. 233. gives us this account. They rejected a great part both of the Old and New Canon, making use onely of some few parts of Scripture, and such with∣out question as they could make look most favourably upon their cause. S. Paul they wholly rejected, and held that it was lawful and indiffe∣rent to deny the faith; and that he was the wise man, that in his words would renounce Christianity in a time of danger and Persecution, but
maintain the truth in his heart. They carried a Book about with them which they affirmed to have been immediately dropt down from Heaven, which whoever received and gave credit to, should receive remission of sins, though different from that pardon which our Lord Jesus bestowed upon his followers. But how far Origen was concerned against this ab∣surd and sensless generation, is to me unknown. The best on't is, this Sect like a blazing Comet, though its influence was malignant and pesti∣lential, suddenly arose, and as suddenly disappeared. XXII. PHILIP the Emperour being slain by the Souldiers, Decius made a shift by the help of the Army to step into the Throne; a mortal enemy to the Ibid. . 3. p. 234. Church, in whose short reign more Martyrs, especially men of note and eminency came to the Stake, then in those who gover∣ned that Empire ten times his reign. In Palaestin Alexander the aged and venerable Bishop of Jerusalem was thrown into prison, where after long and hard usage, and an illustrious confession of the Christian Faith before the public Tribunal, he died. This Alexander (whom we have often mentioned) had been first Bishop in Cappadocia Ibid. c. 11. p. 212., where out of a religious curiosity he had resolved upon a pilgrimage to Jerusalem to vi∣sit the holy and venerable Antiquities of that place, whereto he was particularly excited by a divine revelation intimating to him that it was the will of God that he should be assistant to the Bishop of that place. It happened at this time that Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem being some years since returned to his See (which he had deserted many years before) was become incapable through his great age and infirmity (be∣ing CXVI. years old) duly to manage his charge. Alexander approach∣ing near Jerusalem, they were warned by a Vision and a Voice from Heaven, to go out of the City, and there receive him whom Heaven had designed to be their Bishop. They did so, and finding Alexander, entertained and introduced him with all possible kindness and respect, where by the importunity of the People, and the consent of all the neighbour-Bishops, he was constrained to become Colleague with Nar∣cissus in the government of that Church. This I suppose is the first ex∣press instance that we meet with in Church-antiquity of two Bishops sitting at once (and that by consent) in one See. But the case was war∣ranted by an extraordinary authority; besides that, Narcissus seems ra∣ther to have resigned and quitted the place, retaining nothing but the title, nor intermedling any further, then by joining in prayers and devo∣tions for the good of the Church, surviving not above three or four years at most. Alexander succeeding in the sole Presidency, governed his Church with singular prudence and fidelity, and among other me∣morable acts, erected a Library at Jerusalem Ibid. c. 20. p. 222., which he especially stored with Ecclesiastical Epistles and Records, from whence Eusebius confesses he furnished himself with many considerable Memoirs and materials for the composing of his History. He sate Bishop XXXIX. years, and after several arraignments and various imprisonments and sufferings, died now in prison at Caesarea, to the unconceivable loss and resentment of the whole Church, and especially of Origen, who had been ordained by him, and whom he had ever found a fast Friend and Patron. Nor did Origen himself, who was at this time at Tyre, escape without his share. Eusebius does but briefly intimate his sufferings, having given a larger account of them in another Book, long since lost, he tells Ubi supr. p. 234. us that the Devil mustered up all his Forces against him, and assaulted him
with all his Arts and Engins, singling him out above all others of that time to make him the object of his utmost rage and fury. He was cast into the bottom of a loathsom and uncomfortable dungeon, loaded with irons, a chain about his neck, his feet set in the Stocks, with his legs stretched four holes distant from each other many days together; he was threat∣ned with fire, and tried with all the torments that a merciless enemy could inflict. Which meeting with a person of his age, and a body broken with such and so many cares and labours, must needs render it a very heavy burden. And yet he bore all with a generous patience, and was ready to submit to the last fatal stroke, but that the Judge to give all possible accents to his misery, ordered them so to torment him, that they should not kill him. XXIII. HUMANE Councils and resolutions, when most active and violent, yet he that is higher then the highest can over-rule them, and there be that are higher then they. His enemies had hitherto exercised him onely with preparatory cruelties, reserving him for a more solemn exe∣cution. But God, to whom belongs the issues from death, prevented their malice, and made way for him to escape, which in all probability was effected by the death of Decius, who was cut off, when he had reigned two years and an half. Being delivered out of prison, Euseb. ibid. p. 235. he improved his time to pious purposes, comforting the weak and the disconsolate, and writing Letters to that end up and down the World. Some few years he out-lived the Decian Persecution, and died at Tyre about the first year of Valerian. Indeed Eusebius intimates that he departed this life about the beginning of Gallus his reign. But I cannot see how that can stand: for seeing elsewhere he positively affirms that he was seven∣teen years old at the time of his Fathers Martyrdom, Ann. CCII. his death must happen the first of Valerian, Ann. Chr. CCLIV. which falls in with the sixty nineth year of his age, in which Eusebius tells us he left this World. Otherwise he could not be more then LXVII, years old, whereas none make him less then LXIX. Pamphilus Apud. Phot. Cod. CXVIII. col. 297. the Martyr, and some others, from the relation of those that had seen him, report that an honourable Martyrdom put a period to his life, when Decius raised the Persecution at Caesarea. But besides that De pond. & mensur. p. 539. Epiphanius expresly denies that he died a Martyr, others (as Photius adds, and among them Euse∣bius Lib. 7. c. 1. p. 250. and S. Hierom De script. in Origen.) tell us, that he continued till the time of Gallus and Volusian, and being sixty nine years old died, and was buried at Tyre. Which, as he observes, must needs be so, seeing he wrote many Epistles after the Decian Persecution. And probable it is, that Pamphi∣lus meant it, or at least his mistake thence arose, of that great and glo∣rious confession, a preparatory Martyrdom, which he made under the reign of Decius, which he survived two or three years, peaceably end∣ing his days at Tyre, where his body found a place of rest, and where in a great Church dedicated to the memory of our Saviours Sepulchre, behind the high Altar his Remains were laid up, as the tradition Cotovic. iti∣ner. l. 1. c. 19. p. 121. of the last Age informs us. Nay long before that Brocard Descript. Terr. S. c. 2. the Monk tells us that when he was there, he saw his Tomb, and read his Epitaph; and before both Guiliel. Tyr. H sacr. l. 13. non longe ab init. vid etiam. A i∣com. eatr. Terr. S. in Trib. Aser. n. 84. in  William, who was himself Archbishop of Tyre, reckons Origen's Tomb among the Monuments and venerable Antiquities of that City, his marble Monument being adorned with Gold and precious Stones. XXIV. HAVING thus brought this great man to his Grave, let us a
little look back upon him, and we shall find him a more then ordinary person. His life was truly strict and philosophical Euseb. l. 6. c. 3. p. 205., and an ad∣mirable instance of discipline and vertue; such as his discourses were, such were his manners, and his life the image of his mind: that wise and good man, whom he was wont to describe in his Lectures to his Scholars (as one Greg. Naeo∣caesar. Orat. Pa∣negyr. in Orig p. 205. of the most eminent of them assure us) he himself had first formd, and drawn in the example of his own life. He had a mighty regard to the glory of God, and the good of souls, whose happiness he studied by all ways to promote, and thought nothing hard, nothing mean or servile that might advance it. He was modest and humble, chast and temperate; so exemplary his abstinence and sobriety, that he li∣ved upon what was next door to nothing, for many years Euseb. ib. p. 206. abstaining from Wine, and every thing but what was absolutely necessary for the sup∣port of life, till by too much abstinence he had almost ruined his health, and endangered the weakning of Nature past recovery. Singular his contempt of the World, literally making good that precept of our Lord to his Disciples, not to have two Cloaks, to provide no Shoes, nor to be anxiously careful for to morrow. When many out of consideration of his unwearied diligence would have communicated part of what they had towards his necessities, he would not, but rather then be needlesly burdensom to any, sold his Library, agreeing with the buyer to allow him four oboli, or five pence, for his daily maintenance. His diligence in study, in preaching, writing, travelling, confuting Heathens and He∣retics, composing schisms and differences in the Church was indefatiga∣ble, upon which account the titles of Adamantius and Chalcenterus are supposed by the Ancients to have been given to him, nothing but an industry of Brass and Iron being able to hold out under such infinite la∣bours. The day he spent part in fasting, part in other religious exer∣cises and imployments; the night he bestowed upon the study of the Scripture, reserving some little portion for sleep and rest, which he usually took not in bed, but upon the bare ground. This admirably exercised and advanced his patience, which he improved by further au∣sterities, fasting, and enduring cold and nakedness, studying standing, and for many years together going barefoot, remitting nothing of his rigours and hardships, notwithstanding all the counsels and persuasions of his friends, who were troubled at the excessive severities of his life. Whereby notwithstanding he gained upon men, and converted many of the Gentile Philosophers, famous for learning and Philosophy, not onely to the admiration but imitation of himself. XXV. VIEW him in his natural parts and acquired abilities, and he had a quick piercing apprehension, a strong and faithful memory, an acute judgment, a ready utterance. All which were adorned and ac∣complished with a prodigious furniture of learning, and all the im∣provements which Rome or Greece could afford; being incomparably skilled (as De script. in Orig. S. Hierom and In Orig. p. 387. Suidas observes) both in Gentile and Chri∣stian learning, Logic, Geometry, Arithmetic, Music, Philosophy, Rhetoric, and the several sentiments and opinions of all the Sects of Philosophy, and who always entertained his Auditors with something above com∣mon observation. So great the force and acuteness of his parts (says Vincentius Lerinensis Contr. Haeres. c. 23. p. 55.) so profound, quick and elegant, that none could come near him: so vast his stock of all sorts of Learning, that there were few corners of divine, and perhaps none of humane Philosophy,
which he had not accurately, searched into; and when the Greeks could lead him no further, with an unparallel'd industry he conquered the language and learning of the Jews. But no other character need be given him then what Porphyry Ap. Euseb. l. 6. c. 19. p. 220., who knew him, (though a learned man L. Holsten. de vit. & script. Porphyr. c. 6. p. 27., who from that passage in Eusebius makes him to have been his Scholar, proceeds doubtless upon a great mistake) and was an enemy, bestows upon him, that he was held in very great esteem in those times, and had purchased a more then ordinary glory and renown from the greatest Masters which Christianity then had in the World, and that under the discipline of Ammonius he attained to an admirable skill in Learning and Philosophy. The monuments and evidences whereof (as he there observes) were the Books and Writings which he left be∣hind him, considerable not for their Subjects onely, but their multitude, arising to that vast number, that Epiphanius Ubi supr. p. 256. vid. Ruffin. Apol. pro Orig. inter Oper. Hier. T. 4. p. 197. tells us, it was commonly reported that he wrote six thousand Volumes: The greatest part of which being understood of Epistles, and single Homilies, the account will not be above belief, nor give any just foundation for Rufinus and S. Hierom to wrangle so much about it, the latter of whom point-blank denies, that ever himself read, or that Origen himself wrote so many. Loc. citat. Vincentius affirms, that no man ever wrote so much as he, and that all his Books could not onely not be read, but not so much as be found out by any. So that it was not without reason that antiquity fastned the title of Syntacticus, or the Composer upon him, his innumerable Discourses upon all sorts of Subjects justly appropriating that title to him. His Books were of old enumerated by many, and digested into their proper Classes, whether Scholia, short strictures upon obscure difficult places, Homilies and Tomes, as the Ancients divided them; or Exegetica and Syntagmata, un∣der which rank some Modern Writers comprehend them, the greatest part whereof though they have long since perished through the care∣lessness and ill will of succeeding Times, yet does a very large portion of them still remain. His phrase and way of writing is clear and unaffe∣cted, fluent and copious. Censur. de Oper. Orig. Erasmus gives a high encomium of it, prefer∣ring it before most other Writers of the Church, that it is neither turgid and lofty, like that of S. Hilary, flying above the reach of ordi∣nary Readers; nor set off with gaudy and far-fetcht ornaments, like that of S. Hierom; nor abounding with flowers of Rhetoric, and smart witty sentences, like that of S. Ambrose; nor over-seasoned with tart and sa∣tyrical reflections, and obscured with obsolete and antiquated terms, as that of Tertullian; not superstitious in the curious and accurate stru∣cture of its several parts, like that of S. Gregory; nor running out into large digressions, nor affecting a chiming cadency of words, like that of St. Augustin: but always brisk and lively, easie and natural. But when he commends it for its conciseness and brevity, he certainly forgot him∣self, or mistook (and what wonder he should, when tis like he took his measures not so much from the Original as Translations.) For his stile though it be generally plain and perspicuous, yet is it diffusive and luxu∣riant, flowing with plenty of words, which might be often spared, and therefore charged by some of his critical adversaries that he did infinita verba multiplicare Epiph. Ep. ad Joan. Hierosol. ap. Hieron. T. 2. p 158., Eustath. An∣tioch. dissot. de Engastrym. adv. Orig. inter. Crit. S. Tom. 8. col. 441, 453. multiply an infinite crowd of words: and that , he filled the World with a company of needless and idle words, which he unmeasurably poured out, and that he did , exceedingly trifle with
vain tautologies and repetitions. A censure wherein envy and emula∣tion must be supposed to have had the predominant and over-ruling stroke. For though abounding with words, he was always allowed to be eloquent, for which Vincentius highly commends him, Ubi supr. affirming his phrase to be so sweet, pleasant, and delightful, that there seemed to him to have dropt not words so much as honey from his mouth. XXVI. BUT that alas, which has cast clouds and darkness upon all his glory, and buried so much of his fame in ignominy and reproach, is the dangerous and unsound doctrines and principles which are scat∣tered up and down his writings, for which almost all Ages without any reverence to his parts, learning, piety, and the judgment of the wisest and best of the times he lived in, have without any mercy pronounced him Heretic, and his sentiments and speculations rash, absurd, pernicious, blasphemous, and indeed what not. The alarm began of old, and was pursued with a mighty clamour and fierceness, especially by Methodius Bishop of Olympus, Eustathius of Antioch, Apollinaris, Theophilus of Ale∣xandria, and Epiphanius; and the cry carried on with a loud noise in after-ages, insomuch that the very mention of his name is in the Greek Church abominable at this day. I had once resolved to have considered the chief of those notions and principles for which Origen is so heavily charged by the Ancients, but superseded that labor, when I found that the industry of the learned Monsieur Huet in his Origeniana had left no room for any to come after him, so fully, so clearly, so impartially, with such infi∣nite variety of reading has he discussed and canvassed this matter, and thi∣ther I remit the learned and capable Reader. And for those that cannot or will not be at the pains to read his large and excellent Discourses, they may consult nearer hand the ingenious Author of the Letter of Re∣solution concerning Origen, and the chief of his opinions; Edit. Lond. 1661. 4. where they will find the most obnoxious of his dogmata reckoned up, and the Apolo∣gies and Defences which a sincere lover of Origen might be supposed to make in his behalf, and these pleas represented with all the advantages with which Wit, Reason, and Eloquence could set them off. XXVII. NOR wanted there of old those who stood up to plead and defend his cause, especially Pamphilus the Martyr, and Eusebius who published an Apology in six Books in his behalf; the first five whereof were written by Pamphilus with Eusebius his assistance, while they were in prison, the last finished and added by Eusebius after the others Mar∣tyrdom. Besides which, Cod. CXVIII. col. 297. Photius tells us there were many other famous men in those times, who wrote Apologies for him, he gives us a particu∣lar account Cod. CXVII. col. 293. of one, though without a name, where in five Books the Author endeavours to justifie Origen as sound and Orthodox, and cites Dionysius, Demetrius, and Clemens, all of Alexandria, and several others to give in evidence for him. The main of these Apologies are perished long ago, otherwise probably Origen's cause might appear with a better face, seeing we have now nothing but his notions dressed up and glossed by his professed enemies, and many things ascribed to him which he never owned, but were coined by his pretended followers. For my own part, I shall onely note from the Ancients some general remarques, which may be pleaded in abatement of the rigour and severity of the sentence usually passed upon him. And first, many things were said and written by him, not positively and dogmatically, but , says the Ibid. col. 296. Author of his Apology in Photius, by way of exercita∣tion;
and this he himself was wont to plead at every turn, and to beg the Readers pardon, and profess that he propounded these things not as Doctrins, but as disputable Problems, and with a design to search and find out the truth, as Apolog. ap. Hieron. Tom. 4. p. 172. Pamphilus assures us, and S. Hierom himself Ad Avit. p. 151. Tom. 2. cannot but confess: and if we had the testimony of neither, there is enough to this purpose in his Books still extant, to put it be∣yond all just exception. Thus discoursing concerning the union of the two natures in the person of our blessed Saviour, he affirms . l. 2. c. 6. p. 698. it to be a mystery which no created understanding can sufficiently explain; con∣cerning which (says he) not from any rashness of ours, but onely as the order of Discourse requires, we shall briefly speak rather what our Faith contains, then what humane Reason is wont to assert, producing rather our own conjectures, then any plain and peremptory affirmations. And to the same purpose he expresses himself at every turn. Not to say that he wrote many things in the heat of disputation, which it may be his cooler and more considering thoughts would have set right. So the Apologist in Photius Cod. CXVII. col. 296. pleads, that whatever he said amiss in the do∣ctrin of the Trinity, proceeded meerly from a vehement opposition of Sabellius, who confounded the number and difference of persons, and whose Sect was one of the most prevailing Heresies of that time. The confutation whereof made him attempt a greater difference and distin∣ction in the persons, then the rules of Faith did strictly allow. Second∣ly, those Books of his Pamph. Apol. ubi supr. p. 174, 177., wherein he betrays the most unsound and un∣warrantable notions, were written privately, and with no intention of being made public, but as secrets communicable among friends, and not as doctrines to disturb the Church. And this he freely acknowledged in his Letter to Fabian Ap. Hieron. in Epist. ad Pam∣mach. de err. Orig. p. 193. . Bishop of Rome, and cast the blame upon his friend Ambrosius, quod secretò edita in publicum protulerit, that he had published those things which he meant should go no further then the brests or hands of his dearest friends. And there is always allowed a greater freedom and latitude in debating things among friends, the se∣crets whereof ought not to be divulged, nor the Public made Judges of that innocent liberty which is taken within mens private walls. Thirdly, the disallowed opinions that he maintains are many of them such as were not the Catholic and determined Doctrins of the Church, not defined by Synods, nor disputed by Divines, but either Philoso∣phical, or Speculations which had not been thought on before, and which he himself at every turn cautiously distinguishes from those proposi∣tions which were entertained by the common and current consent and approbation of the Christian Church. Sure I am he lays it down as a fundamental maxim, in the very entrance upon that Praef. ad lib. . p. 665. Book, wherein his most dangerous assertions are contained, that those Ecclesiastic Doctrins are to be preserved, which had been successively delivered from the Apostles, and were then received, and that nothing was to be embraced for truth that any ways differed from the tradition of the Church. XXVIII. FOURTHLY, Divers of Origen's works have been cor∣rupted and interpolated by evil hands, and Heretics to add a lustre and authority to their opinions by the veneration of so great a name, have inserted their own assertions, or altered his, and made him speak their language. An argument which however laughed at by S. Hierom Ad ammath. ubi supr., is yet stifly maintained by Rufinus Apol. pro Orig. apud Hier. Tom. 4. p. 194, 195. &c. & Praef. ad lib. . ib. Tom. 2. p. 188., who shews this to have been an old and common art of Heretics, and that they dealt thus with the writings
of Clemens Romanus, of Clemens, and Dionysius of Alexandria, of Atha∣nasius, Hilary, Cyprian, and many more. Dionysius Ap. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23. p. 145. the famous Bishop of Corinth, who lived many years before Origen, assures us he was served at this rate; that at the request of the brethren he had written several Epistles, but that the Apostles and Emissaries of the Devil had filled them with weeds and tares, expunging some things, and adding others. The Apologist in Photius Ubi supr. tells us Origen himself complained of this in his life time; and so indeed he does in his Ap. Ruffin. i Tom. 4. p. 195. Letter to them of Alexandria, where he smartly resents that charge of blasphemy had been ascribed to him and his doctrine, of which he was never guilty, and that it was less won∣der if his doctrine was adulterated, when the great S. Paul could not escape their hands; he tells them of an eminent Heretic, that having ta∣ken a Copy of a dispute which he had had with him, did afterwards cut off, and add what he pleas'd, and change it into another thing, carry∣ing it about with him, and glorying in it. And when some friends in Palestin sent it to him then at Athens, he returned them a true and au∣thentic Copy of it. And the same foul play he lets them know he had met with in other places, as at Ephesus and at Antioch, as he there par∣ticularly relates. And if they durst do this while he was yet alive, and able (as he did) to right himself, what may we think they would do af∣ter his death, when there were none to controul them? And upon this account most of those assertions must especially be discharged, wherein Origen is made to contradict himself, it being highly improbable (as Rufinus Loc. cit. p. 194. well urges) that so prudent and learned a person, one far enough from being either fool or mad man, should write things so contrary and repugnant to one another. And that not only in divers, but in one and the same Book. XXIX. I might further observe his constant zeal against Heretics, his opposing and refuting of them wherever he came both by word and writing, his being sent for into foreign Countries to convince gainsayers, his professing to abominate all heretical doctrines, and his refusing so much as to communicate in prayer with Paul the Heretic of Antioch, though his whole maintenance did depend upon it. And methinks it deserves to be considered, that Athanasius in all the heat of the Arrian controversies (then whom certainly none was ever more diligent to search out heretical persons and opinions, or more accurate in examining and refuting the chief of those doctrines, that are laid at Origen's door) should never charge him upon that account. Nay he particularly quotes him Decret. Synod Nic. contr. Hae∣res Arrian. p. 277. T. 1. vid. de Blasph. in S. S. p. 971. & Socr. H E. l. 6. c. 13. p. 320. to to prove our Lords coeternity and coessentiality with the Father exactly according to the decisions of the Nicene Synod, dis∣missing him with the honourable character of , the most admirable, and infinitely industrious person. Nor is there any heterodox opinion of his, that I know of, once taken notice of in all his works, but only that concerning the duration of future torments, and that too but De Com. essent. Patr. F. & S. p. 236. T. 1. obliquely mentioned. Whence I am apt to conclude, ei∣ther that Origen's writings were not then so notoriously guilty, or that this great man, and zealous defender of the Churches doctrin (who be∣ing Bishop of Alexandria could not be ignorant of what Origen had taught or written, nay assures us, he had read his Books) did not look upon those dangerous things that were in them, as his sense. And in∣deed so he says expresly; that what things he wrote by way of contro∣versie and disputation, are not to be looked upon as his own words and
sentiments, but as those of his contentious adversaries whom he had to deal with, which accordingly in the passages he cites he carefully distin∣guishes from Origen's own words and sense. To all which I may add, that when the controversie about the condemnation of his Books was driven Socrat. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 12. p. 319. on most furiously by Theophilus and Epiphanius, Theotimus the good Scythian Bishop plainly told Epiphanius, that for his part he would never so much dishonour a person so venerable for his piety and anti∣quity, nor durst he condemn what their Ancestors never rejected, espe∣cially when there were no ill and mischievous Doctrins in Origen's Works; therewithall pulling out a Book of Origen's, which he read before the whole Convention, and shewed it to contain Exposi∣tions agreeable to the Articles of the Church. With these two excel∣lent persons let me join the judgment of a Writer of the middle Ages of the Church, Breviar. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 3. p. 108, 109. Haymo Bishop of Halberstad, who speaking of the things laid to Origen's charge: For my part (says he) saving the faith of the Ancients, I affirm of him, either that he never wrote these things, but that they were wickedly forged by Heretics, and fathered upon his name; or if he did write them, he wrote them not as his own judg∣ment, but as the opinion of others. And if, as some would have it, they were his own sentiments, we ought rather to deal compassionately with so learned a man, who has conveyed so vast a treasury of Learn∣ing to us. What faults there are in his Writings, those orthodox and useful things which they contain, are abundantly sufficient to over∣ballance. XXX. THIS and a great deal more is, and may be pleaded in Ori∣gen's defence. And yet after all it must be confessed, that he was guilty of great mistakes, and rash propositions, which the largest charity can∣not excuse. He had a natural warmth and fervor of mind, a compre∣hensive wit, an insatiable thirst after knowledge, and a desire to under∣stand the most abstruse and mysterious speculations of Theology, which made him give himself an unbounded liberty in inquiring into, and dis∣coursing of the nature of things, he wrote much, and dictated apace, and was ingaged in infinite variety of business, which seldom gave him lei∣sure to review and correct his writings, and to let them pass the censure of second and maturer thoughts; he traded greatly in the writings of the Hea∣thens, and was infinitely solicitous to make the doctrines of Christia∣nity look as little unlike as might be to their best and beloved notions. And certainly what Marcellus Ap. Euseb. contr. Marcel. l. 1. p. 23. Bishop of Ancyra long since objected a∣gainst him, is unquestionably true (notwithstanding what Eusebius has said to salve it) that coming fresh out of the philosophic Schools, and ha∣ving been a long time accurately trained up in the principles and books of Plato, he applied himself to divine things, before he was sufficiently disposed to receive them, and fell upon writing concerning them, while secular learning had yet the predominancy in his mind, and so unwarily mingled philosophic notions with Christian principles, further than the analogy of the Christian faith would allow. And I doubt not but who∣ever would paralell his and and the Platonic principles, would find that most of the  he is charged with, his master-notions were brought out of the School of Plato, as the above mentioned Huetius has in many things particularly observed. S. Hierom himself (whom the torrent of that time made a severe enemy to Origen) could but have so much tenderness for him, even in that very Tract Ad Pammach. de error. Orig. p. 192. Tom. 2. wherein he passes
the deepest censures upon him, after he had commended him for his parts, zeal, and strictness of life; Which of us (says he) is able to read so much as he has written? who would not admire the ardent and sprightly temper of his mind towards the holy Scriptures? But if any envious Zealot shall object his errours to us, let him freely hear what was said of old: — Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Horat. de Art. Poet. v. 359. p. 815. Verum opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum. In a long Work each slip the Censors Rod Does not deserve. Homer does sometimes nod. Let us not imitate his Faults, whose Vertues we cannot reach. Others both Greeks and Latines have erred in the faith as well as he, whom it's not necessary to name, lest we might seem to defend him, not by his own merit, but by the mistakes of other men. To all that has been hitherto said, I may add this, that suppose him guilty of as pesti∣lent and dangerous errours as the worst of his enemies lay to his charge, yet he afterwards repented of what he had rashly and unadvisedly written, as appears by his Epistle to Fabian Ap. Hier. ubi supr. p. 193. vid. Ruff. Invect. I. in Hieron. inter oper. Hier. T. 4. p. 219. Primus faelicitatis gra∣dus est, non delinquere: Secundus, delicta cognoscere. Illic currit innocentia integra & illibata quae servet, hîc succedit medela quae sanet. Cypr. ad Cornel. Epist. 55. p. 83. Bishop of Rome. And is it not intolerable reudeness and incivility at least, perpetually to up∣braid and reproach a man with the faults of his past life, and which he himself has disowned? Sorrow for what is past in some measure re∣pairs the breach, and Repentance must be allowed next door to Inno∣cence. His Writings mentioned by the Ancients, and which of them extant at this day. Homiliarum mysticarum in Genes. Lib. II. Commentar. in Genes. Lib. XIII. Extant Latine Homiliae XVII. Commentar. Tomi in Exodum. Ext. Latine Homiliae XII. Scholia in Leviticum Ext. Homiliae XVI. In Numeros extant Lat. Homiliae XXVIII. In Deuteronomium Homiliae. In Libr. Jesu Nave ext. Homil. XXVI Lat. In Libr. Judicum ext. Hom. IX. Lat. In I. Lib. Regum Homil. IV. In Lib. II. extat Homilia una. In Lib. Paralipom. Homil. I. In duos Esdrae Libros Homiliae. In Libr. Job Tractatus. In Psalmos Commentarii. In Psalmos Homiliae. In Psalmos Scholia. Ext. Lat. in Psalm. 36. Hom. V. in Psal. 37. Hom. II. in Psal. 38. Hom. II. In Proverbia Salom. Commentar. Explicatio Ecclesiastis. In Canticum Cantic. Commentarii. Ext. Lat. Homiliae II. In Esaiam Commentar. Libri XXX. In Esaiam Homiliae XXV. In Esaiam Scholia. Ext. Lat. Homiliae IX. In Jeremiam Homiliae XLV. Extant Gr. Lat. Homil. XVII. In Threnos Tomi IX. In Ezechielem Tomi XXV. Ext. Lat. Homil. XIV.
In Danielem Expositio. In XII. Prophetas Tomi XXV. In Matthaeum Comment. Lib. XXV. In Matthaeum Homiliae XXV. In Matthaeum Scholia. Ext. Gr. Lat. Tomi VII. In Lucam Commentar. Tomi V. Ext. Lat. Homiliae XXXIX. In Joannem Commentar. Tom. XXXII. Ext. Gr. Lat. Tom. IX. In Acta Apostolorum Homil. aliquot. In Epistolam ad Romanos Explana∣tionum Lib. XX. Ext. Lat. Libri X. In I. ad Corinthios Commentarii. In Epist. ad Galatas Commentarii. In Epist. ad Galatas Homiliae. In Epist. ad Galatas Scholia. In Epist. ad Ephes. Comment. Lib. III. In Epist. ad Coloss. Commentarii. In I. ad Thess. Vol. (ut minimum) III. In Epist. ad Titum. In Epist. ad Hebraeos Commentarii In Epist. ad Hebraeos Homiliae. Tetrapla. Hexapla. Octapla. Commentarii in Veteres Philosophos. De Resurrectione Libri II. De Resurrectione Dialogi. Stromaτεων Libri X. Disputationes cum Beryllo. , seu de Principiis Lib. IV. Ext. Lat. Contra Celsum Lib. VIII. Ext. Gr. L. De Martyrio. Ext. Gr. L. Homil. de Engastrimytho. Ext. Gr. L. De Oratione. Ext. Gr. Ms. Philocalia de aliquot praecipuis Theo∣logiae locis & quaestionibus ex Ori∣genis scriptis à S. Basilio & Gregor. Naz. excerptis, cap. XXVII. ext. Gr. L. Epistolae fere infinitae, ex his hodie ext. Epistola ad Jul. Africanum de Histor. Susannae, Gr. L. Epistola ad Gregorium Thaumatur∣gum. Ext. Gr. L. in Philocalia. Doubtful. Dialogus contra Marcionitas, de recta in Deum fide. Ext. Gr. L. Supposititious. In Libri Job Tract. III. & Comment. in eundem. Commentarius in Evangel. S. Marci. Homiliae in diversos. De Philosophorum Sectis & dogma∣tibus. Lamentum Origenis. Scholia in Orationem Dominicam, & in Cantica B. Virginis, Zachariae, & Simeonis. The End of ORIGEN's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. BABYLAS BISHOP OF ANTIOCH. Micha. Burgh. sculp. S. BABYLAS ANTIOCHENUS. His Originals obscure. His education and accomplishments enquired into. Made Bishop of Antioch, when. Antioch taken by the King of Persia. Recovered by the Roman Emperour. Babylas his fidelity in his charge.
The Decian Persecution, and the grounds of it: severely urged by the Emperours Edicts. Decius his coming to Antioch. His attempt to break into the Christian Congregation. Babylas his bold resistance. This applied to Numerianus, and the ground of the mistake. The like reported of Philip the Emperour. Decius his bloudy act related by S. Chrysostom. His rage against Babylas, and his examination of him. The Martyrs resolute answer. His imprisonment and hard usage. The different ac∣counts concerning his death. Three Youths his fellow-sufferers, in vain attempted by the Emperour. Their Martyrdom first, and why. Babylas beheaded. His command that his chains should be buried with him. The translation of his body under Constantius. The great sweetness and plea∣santness of the Daphne. Apollo's Temple there. S. Babylas his bones translated thither by Gallus Caesar. The Oracle immediately rendered dumb. In vain consulted by Julian. The confession of the Daemon. Julian's command for removing Babylas his bones. The Martyrs Re∣mains triumphantly carried into the City. The credit of this Story suffi∣ciently attested. The thing owned by Libanius and Julian. Why such honour suffered to be done to the Martyr. Julian afraid of an immediate vengeance. His Persecution against the Christians at Antioch. The suf∣ferings of Theodorus. The Temple of Apollo fired from Heaven. I. SO great and general is the silence of Church-An∣tiquity in the Acts of this holy Martyr, espe∣cially the former part of his life, that I should wholly pass him over, did not his latter times furnish us with some few memorable passages concerning him. His Countrey, Parents, Edu∣cation, and way of life, are all unknown, as al∣so whether he was born and bred a Gentile, or a Christian. No doubt he was trained up un∣der the advantages of a liberal and ingenuous education, living in pla∣ces that opportunely ministred unto it, and in times when none but men of known parts and eminency both for Learning and Piety were ad∣vanced to the Government of the Church: and when great measures of Arts and Learning were not onely commendable, but necessary, both to feed and preserve the Flock of God, to resist and convince gain∣sayers, and to defend Christianity against the attempts both of secret and open Enemies. For as the Christian Church never wanted profes∣sed Adversaries from without, who endeavoured both by Sword and Pen to stifle and suppress its growth, nor pretended Friends from with∣in, who by Schisms and Heresies disturbed its Peace, and tore out its very Bowels; so never were these more predominant then in those Times, and parts of the World wherein this good man lived. II. ANN. Chr. CCXXXIX. Gordian Imper. I. died Fseb. H. Eccl. l 16. c. 29. p. 229. Zebinus Bishop of Antioch, in whose room Babylas succeeded. He was a stout and pru∣dent Pilot, who (as S. Chrysostom Homil. de S. Bbyl. p. 641. Tem. 1. says of him) guided the holy Vessel of that Church in the midst of Storms and Tempests, and the many Waves that beat upon it. Indeed in the beginning of his Presidency over that Church he met not with much trouble from the Roman Powers, the old Enemies of Christianity, but a fierce storm blew from another quarter. For Sapor King of Capitol. in Gdia. III.  26. p. . Persia had lately invaded the Roman Empire, and having over-run all Syria, had besieged and taken Antioch, and so great a
dread did his Conquests strike into all parts, that the terrour of them flew into Italy, and startled them even at Rome it self. He grievously oppressed the People of Antioch, and what treatment the Christians there must needs find under so merciless and insolent an Enemy (at no time favourable to Christians) is no hard matter to imagine. But it was not long before God broke this yoke from off their necks. For Gor∣dian the Emperour raising a mighty Army, marched into the East, and having cleared the Countries as he went along, came into Syria, and went directly for Antioch, where he totally routed the Persian Army, recovered Antioch and the conquered Cities, and gained some conside∣rable places belonging to Sapor, whom he forced to retire back into his own Countrey: of all which he gives an account in a Ibid. c. 27. p. 670. Letter to the Senate, who joyfully received the news, and decreed him a triumph at his return to Rome. III. THE Church of Antioch being thus restored to its former tran∣quillity, Babylas attended his charge with all diligence and fidelity, in∣structing, feeding, and governing his Flock, preparing both young and old to undergo the hardest things, which their Religion might expose them to, as if he had particularly foreseen that black and dismal Perse∣cution that was shortly to overtake them. Having quietly passed through the reign of Philip (who was so far from creating any distur∣bance to the Christians, that he is generally, though groundlesly, suppo∣sed to have been a Christian himself) he fell into the troublesome and stormy times of Decius, who was unexpectedly advanced, and in a man∣ner forced upon the Empire. One, whose character might have passed among none of the worst of Princes, if he had not so indelebly stained his memory with his outragious violence against the Christians. The main cause whereof the generality of Writers, taking the hint from Eu∣sebius H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 39. p. 234., make to have been hatred to his Predecessor Philip, a Christian, as they account him, and whom he resolved to punish in his spleen and malice against them. But methinks much more probable is the account which Gregory Nyssen De vit. Greg. Thaum. p. 999. Tom. 2. gives of this matter, viz. the large spread and triumphant prevalency of the Christian Faith, which had diffused it self over all parts, and planted every corner, and filled not Cities onely, but Countrey Villages; the Temples were forsaken, and Churches fre∣quented, Altars overthrown, and Sacrifices turned out of doors. This vast increase of Christianity, and great declension of Paganism, awakened Decius to look about him: he was vexed to see the Religion of the Em∣pire trodden under foot, and the worship of the gods every where slighted and neglected, opposed and undermined by a novel and upstart Sect of Christians, which daily multiplied into greater numbers. This made him resolve with all possible force to check and control this grow∣ing Sect, and to try by methods of cruelty to weary Christians out of their Profession, and to reduce the People to the Religion of their An∣cestors. Whereupon he issued out Edicts to the Governours of Pro∣vinces, strictly commanding them to proceed with all severity against Christians, and to spare no manner of torments, unless they returned to the obedience and worship of the gods. Though I doubt not but this was the main Spring that set the rage and malice of their enemies on work, yet Cyprian Epist. VII. p. 16. like a man of great piety and modesty, seeks a cause nearer home, ingenuously confessing, that their own sins had set open the Flood-gates for the divine displeasure to break in upon them, while
Pride, and Self-seeking, Schism and Faction reigned so much among them, the very Martyrs themselves, who should have been a good example unto others, casting off the order and discipline of the Church; and being swelled with so vain and immoderate a tumor, it was time God should send them a thorn in the flesh to cure it. IV. THE Provincial Governours forward enough to run of them∣selves upon such an errand, made much more haste, when they were not onely encouraged, but threatned into it by the Imperial Edicts, so that the Persecution was carried on in all parts with a quick and a high hand, concerning the severity whereof we shall speak more elsewhere. At present it may suffice to remarque that it swept away many of the most eminent Bishops of the Church, Fabian Bishop of Rome, Alexan∣der Bishop of Hierusalem, and several others. Nor was it long before it came to S. Babylas his door. For Decius probably about the middle of his reign, or some time before his Thracian expedition, wherein he lost his life, came into Syria, and so to Antioch, to take order about his affairs that concerned the Persian War. I confess his coming into these parts is not mentioned in the Roman Histories, and no wonder, the accounts of his life either not having been written by the Historiae Augustae Scri∣ptores, or if they were, having long since perished, and few of his Acts are taken notice of in those Historians that yet remain. However the thing is plainly enough owned by Ecclesiastical Writers. While Chrysost. lib. de S. Babyl. Tom. 6. pag. 658. & passim. Phi∣lost. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 8. p. 94. Suid. in voc. , Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 10. c. 28. p. 63. he conti∣nued here, either out of curiosity, or a design to take some more plau∣sible advantage to fall upon them, he would needs go into the Christian Congregation, when the public Assembly was met together. This Ba∣bylas would by no means give way to, but standing in the Church Porch, with an undanted courage and resolution opposed him, telling him, that as much as lay in his power, he would never endure that a Wolf should break in upon Christs Sheepfold. The Emperour urged it no further at present, either being unwilling to exasperate the rage and fury of the People, or designing to effect it some other way. This passage there are, and Nicephorus among the rest, (with whom accord exactly the Me∣naea and Menologies of the Greek Church) that ascribe not to Decius, but Numerianus (whom Suidas his Translator corruptly stiles Marianus) who reigned at least thirty years after. A mistake without any pillar or ground of truth to support it, there being at that time no Babylas Bi∣shop of Antioch, whom all agree to have suffered under the Decian Per∣secution. And it is not improbable what Baronius Ad Ann. 253. n. CXXVI. vid. S. Metaphr. in Martyr. S. Isi∣dor. apud. Sur. Feb. V. p. 48. conjectures, but the mistake might at first arise from this, that there was under Decius one Numerius, one of the Generals of the Army, a violent persecutor of the Christians, whom 'tis not to be doubted the first mistakers of the report confounded with Numerianus, and applied to him what belonged to the Emperour, under whom he served. V. EƲSEBIƲS relates a like passage to this, but attributes it to the Emperour Philip, H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 34. p. 232. Decius his Predecessor, telling us, that when on the Vigils of Easter he would have gone with the rest of the Christians into the Church, to be present at their Prayers, the Bishop of the place would by no means suffer him, unless he would make public confession of his sins, and pass through the Order of the Penitents, for that he had been guilty of many hainous and enormous crimes, which he readily submit∣ted to. But besides that, this is laid as the main foundation of Philip's falsly supposed Christianity, Eusebius justifies it by no better authority
then Fame and meer Report. And indeed stands alone in this matter. For though some of the Ancients referred it to Numerian, yet none but he entitled Philip to it. S. Chrysostom in a large Ubi supr. p. 655. Encomiastic (where∣in he describes this Act of Babylas in all the colours wherein Wit and Eloquence could represent it, particularly equalling it with the spirit and freedom of Elias and John the Baptist) tells us, that when the Em∣perour made this attempt, he had newly washed his hands in innocent bloud, having barbarously, and against the faith of his most solemn Oath, and the Laws of Nations, put to death the little Son of a certain King, whom his Father had given in hostage to secure a Peace made between them. This probably was either the son of some petty Prince in those parts, who entered into a League with him while he was at Antioch, or some young Prince of Persia, pawned as a pledge to en∣sure the Peace between those two Crowns, and whom he had no sooner received, but either to gratifie his cruelty, or else pretending some fraud in the Articles, he inhumanely butchered. The Author of the Olymp. CCLVII. 4. Decii 1. Indict. XIV. p. 630. vid. ibid. p. 628. Alexan∣drin Chronicon, tells us, and vouches Leontius Bishop of Antioch for the relation, that Philip (in the Greek is added , probably for , the firname of that Emperour, and not Junior, the Younger, as the Translator renders it, and elsewhere corrects it by , the Elder) being Governour of a Province in the reign of Gordianus, Gor∣dian had committed the care of his young son to him, whom after his Fathers death he slew, and usurped the Empire: that being thus guilty of murther, though he was a Christian, yet S. Babylas would not ad∣mit him or his Wife into the Church; for which affront offered to so great persons, and not meerly because he was a Christian himself, Decius afterwards put S. Babylas to death. A strange medley of true and false, as indeed 'tis the custom of that Author to confound times, things, and persons. However most evident it is from Chrysostom, that it was the same Emperour by whom this young Prince was murdered, and S. Ba∣bylas put to death, which could be no other then Decius; who with hands thus reeking in the bloud of the innocent, would have irreve∣rently rushed into the holy place of the Christian Sanctuary, where none but pure hands were lift up to Heaven. VI. DECIƲS, though for the present he dissembled Philost. & Suid. ubi supr. his anger and went away, yet inwardly resented the affront, and being returned to the Palace, sent for Babylas, and having sharply expostulated with him for the boldness and insolency of the Fact, commanded him to do Sacrifice to the gods, assuring him that this was the onely expedient to expiate his crime, divert his punishment, and to purchase him honour and renown. The Martyr answered to all his enquiries with a generous confidence, despised his profers, and defied his threats, told him, that as to the offence wherewith he charged him, he was obliged as a Pastor readily to do whatever was conducive to the benefit of his Flock; and for his command, he was resolved never to apostatize from the service of the true God and sacrifice to Devils, and those who falsly usurped the na and honour of Deities. The Emperour finding his resolutions firm and inflexible, gave order that chains and fetters should be clapt upon him, with which he was sent to prison, where he endured Chrysost. loc. cit. p. 667, 668. martyr. Rom. ad Januar. XXIV. many severe hardships and sufferings, but yet rejoiced in his bonds, and was more troubled at the misery that attended him that sent him thither, then at the weight of his own chains, or the sharpness of those torments
that were heaped upon him. So naturally does Christianity teach us to bless them that curse us, to pray for them that despightfully use and persecute us, and to overcome evil with good. VII. THERE is some little difference in the accounts of the An∣cients, concerning the manner of his Martyrdom. Lib. 6. c. 39. p 234. Eusebius and some others make him after a famous confession to die in Prison; while Loc. cit. p. 669. Chry∣sostom (whom I rather incline to believe in this matter, as more capable to know the Traditions and examine the Records of that Church) and Suidas affirm, that being bound he was led forth out of Prison to under∣go his Martyrdom, the one plainly intimating, the other positively ex∣pressing it, that he was beheaded. The fatal sentence being passed, as he was led to execution, he began his Song of triumph, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with me. Together with him were led along three Youths, Brothers, (whose names the Ro∣man Martyrology Loc. citat. tells us, were Ʋrbanus, Prilidianus, and Epolonius) whom he had carefully instructed in the Faith, and had trained up for so severe a trial. The Emperour not doubting to prevail upon their ten∣der years, had taken them from their Tutor, and treated them with all kinds of hardship and cruelty, as methods most apt to make impression upon weak and timorous minds. But perceiving them immovably de∣termined not to sacrifice, he commanded them also to be beheaded. Being arrived at the place of execution, Babylas placed the Children first, giving them the precedency of Martyrdom, lest the spectacle of his blou∣dy fate should relax their constancy, and make them desert their station. As the Officer was taking off their heads, he cried aloud, Behold, I and the children which the Lord hath given me; and after that laid down his own neck upon the Block, having first Chrysost. Suid. Martyr. Rom. ubi supra. given order to his friends, to whom he had committed the care of his body, that his Chains and Fet∣ters should be buried in the same grave with him, that they might there remain as Ensigns of honour, and the badges of his sufferings, and as evidences how much he accounted those things which seem most ig∣nominious among men, to be for Christs sake most splendid and honou∣rable: imitating therein the great S. Paul, who took pleasure in bonds, chains, imprisonments, reproaches, professing to rejoice and glory in no∣thing so much as in his sufferings, and in the Cross of Christ. According∣ly his chains were laid up with him in the Grave, where Chrysostom as∣sures us they remained in his time. VIII. WHERE his body was first buried, we are not told; but where∣ever it was, there it rested till the reign of Constantius, when it had a more magnificent interment, which proved the occasion of one of the most remarkable occurrences that Church-antiquity has conveyed to us. There was a Chrysost. ibid. p. 671. Sozom. l. 6. c. 19. p. 625. Niceph. l. 10. c. 28. p. 61. place in the Suburbs of Antioch called Daphne, a place that seemed to be contrived by nature on purpose as the highest Scene of pleasure and delight. It was a delicate Grove thick set with Cypress, and other Trees which according to the season afforded all manner of fruits and flowers. Furnished it was with infinite variety of shady Walks, the Trees joining their bushy heads forbad the approa∣ches of the Sun to annoy and scorch them; watered with plenty of Chrystal Fountains and pleasant Rivulets, the air cool and temperate, and the wind playing within the boughs of the Trees, added a natural harmony and delightful murmur. It was the usual Scene of the Poets amorous and wanton fancies, and indeed so great a temptation to in∣temperance
and riot, that it was accounted scandalous for a good man to be seen there. But that which was the greatest glory of the place was a stately and magnificent Temple, said to be erected there by Seleu∣cus Father to Antiochus, who built Antioch, and by him dedicated to Apollo Daphnaeus, who also had a very costly and ancient Image placed within the Temple, where Oracles were given forth, which gave not the least addition to the renown and honour of it. And in this condi∣tion it remained, till Gallus, Julian's elder Brother, being lately created Caesar by his Cousin Constantius, was sent to reside at Antioch, to secure those frontier parts of the Empire against the incursions of the Enemy. He having a singular veneration for the memories of Christian Martyrs, resolved to purge this place from its lewd Customs and Pagan Supersti∣tions. Which he thought he could not more effectually compass then by building a Church over against Apollo's Temple; which was no sooner finished and beautified, but he caused S. Babylas his Coffin to be transla∣ted thither. IX. THE Devil it seems liked him not for so near a neighbour, his presence striking him dumb, so that henceforth not one syllable of an Oracle was given out. This silence was at first Chrysost. p. 674 & scriptores su∣pra citat. looked upon as the effect onely of neglect, that the sullen Daemon would not answer, be∣cause he had not his usual tribute of Sacrifices, Incense, and other Ritual honours paid to him; but was found afterwards to arise from the neigh∣bourhood of S. Babylas his ashes, which caused their second removal upon this occasion. Julian having succeeded Constantius in the Empire, came to Antioch in order to his expedition into Persia, and being intole∣rably overgrown with superstition, presently went up to Apollo's Tem∣ple, to consult Chrys. Homil. de S. Babyl p. 644. & l. de S. Babyl. p. 671, 677, 679. Soz. & Niceph. ubi supr. Socrat. l. 3. c. 18. p. 101. Theodor. H. E. l. 3. c. 10. p. 132. Conf. Philost. loc. supr. citat. the Oracle about the success of the War, and some other important affairs of the Empire, offering the choicest Sacrifices, and ma∣king very rich and costly Presents. But alas all in vain, his Prayers, and Gifts, and Sacrifices availed nothing, the Daemon giving him to under∣stand that the dead kept him from speaking, and that till the place was cleared from the Corps that lay hard by, he could return no answers by the Oracle. Julian quickly perceived his meaning, and though many dead bodies had been buried there, he suspected 'twas Babylas his Re∣mains that were particularly aimed at, and therefore commanded the Christians to remove them thence. Who thereupon assembled in infi∣nite numbers, persons of all Ages and Sexes, and laying the Coffin upon an open Chariot, brought it into the City with the most solemn triumph, singing Psalms of joy all the way they went; and at the end of every period, adding this tart stinging Versicle, Confounded be all they that wor∣ship carved Images. X. THE Reader 'tis like may be apt to scruple this story, as savour∣ing a little of superstition, and giving too much honour to the Reliques of Saints. To which I shall say no more, then that the credit of it seems unquestionable, it being reported not onely by Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret (who all lived very near that time) but by Chrysostom, who was born at Antioch, and was a long time Presbyter of that Church, and was Scholar there to Libanius the Sophister at that very time when the thing was done, and an Vid. lib. citat. p. 654. & Hom. de Bab. p. 641. eye-witness of it, and who not onely preached the thing, but wrote a Discourse against the Gentiles upon this very Subject, wherein he appeals Ibid. p. 676. to the knowledge both of young and old then alive, who had seen it, and challenges them to stand up, and con∣tradict,
if they could, the truth of what he related. Nay, which fur∣ther puts the case past all peradventure, Monod. sup. Apoll. fanum igni exust. p. 185. Libanius the Orator evidently confesses it, when he tells us, that Apollo Daphnaeus, though before negle∣cted and forgotten, yet when Julian came with Sacrifices and Oblations to kiss his foot, he appeared again in his Rites of Worship, after that he had been freed from the unwelcom neighborhood of a certain dead man, who lay hard by, to his great trouble and disturbance. And Julian him∣self Misapog. p. 96. tells the Christians that he had sent back , their dead man that had been buried in Daphne. Nor is it improbable that God should suffer such an extraordinary passage to happen, especially at this time, to demonstrate the vanity of the Gentile Religion, to correct the infidelity of the Emperour, and to give testimony to that Religion, which he scorned with so much insolence and sarcasm, and pursued with so much vigour and opposition. If any enquire why Julian should so far gratifie the Christians, as to bestow the Martyrs bones upon them, and suffer them to convey them with so much pomp and honour into the City, and not rather scatter the ashes into the air, throw them into the fire, or drown the Coffin in the River? Ibid. p. 681. Chrysostom answers, that he durst not, he was afraid lest the divine vengeance should overtake him, lest a thunderbolt from heaven should strike him, or an incurable disease arrest him, as such kind of miserable fates had overtaken some of his predecessors in the height of their activity against the Christians, and he had lately seen sad instances of it that came very near him; his Uncle Julian Praefect of the East, a petulant scorner and apostate derider of Christians, who having broken into the great Church at Antioch, had treated their Communion Plate with the greatest irreverence and con∣tempt, throwing it upon the ground, spurning, and sitting upon it, and after all carrying it away into the Emperours Exchequer, was imme∣diately seized with a loathsom disease, which I am not willing to men∣tion, which within a few days, in spight of all the Arts of Physic, put an end to his miserable life. And Faelix the Treasurer, a man of the same spirit and temper, and engaged with him in the same design, com∣ing up to the Palace, on a sudden fell down upon the top of the steps and burst asunder. Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. 23. p. 1641. himself confessing that he died of a sudden Flux of bloud. Others there were, who about that time came to wretched and untimely ends, but these two onely are par∣ticularly noted by Chrysostom. Examples, which 'tis probable had put an awe and restraint upon him. XI. BUT evil men wax worse and worse. Julian, however awed at present, yet his rage quickly found a vent, which all his Philosophy could not stop. Vexed Socr. c. 19. p. 191. Sozom. & Theod. ibid. to see the Christians pay so solemn a veneration to the Martyr, and especially stung with the hymns which the Christians sung, the very next day he gave order against the advice of his Privy Council, to Salust the Praefect, to persecute the Christians, many of whom were accordingly apprehended, and cast into Prison. And among the rest one Theodorus a Youth, was caught up in the streets, and put upon the Rack, his flesh torn off with iron Pincers, scourged and beaten, and when no tortures could shake his constancy, or so much as move his patience, he was at length dismissed. Rufinus afterwards met with this Theodorus, and asking him whether in the midst of his torments he felt any pain, he told him, at first he was a little sensible, but that one in the shape of a young man stood by him, who gently wiped off the sweat
from his face, refreshed him with cold water, and supported his spirit with present consolations, so that his Rack was rather a pleasure then a torment to him. But to return. XII. HEAVEN shewed it self not well pleased with the proceed∣ings of the Emperour. For immediately the Temple of Apollo in the Daphne took fire, which in a few hours burnt the famed image of the god, and reduced the Temple, excepting onely the Walls and Pillars, into ashes. This the Christians ascribed to the divine vengeance, the Gentiles imputed it to the malice of the Christians; and though the Priests and Warders of the Temple were racked to make them say so, yet could they not be brought to affirm any more, then that it was fired by a light from Heaven. This conflagration is mentioned not onely by Christian Writers, but by Lib. 22. p. 1629. Ammianus Marcellinus, and by Loc. supr. cit. Julian him∣self, but especially by Libanius the Orator, who in an Oration on pur∣pose made to the People, elegantly bewails its unhappy fate; whose Discourse S. Chrysostom takes to task, and makes witty and eloquent re∣marques upon it. If the Reader ask what became of Babylas his Remains after all this noise and bustle, they were entombed within the City in a Church dedicated to his name and memory, and in after-Ages are Vid. Bolland. ad Jan. XXIV. p. 580. said to have been translated (by some Christian Princes, probably, during their Wars in the holy Land) to Cremona in Italy, where how oft they have been honourably reposed, and with how much pomp and ceremo∣nious veneration they are still entertained, they who are curious after such things may enquire. The End of S. BABYLAS's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. CYPRIAN BISHOP OF CARTHAGE. Micha. Burgh. deli. et sculp. S. CYPRIANUS CARTHAGINIENSIS His Birth-place. The Nobility of his Family exploded. The confounding him with another Cyprian Bishop of Antioch. These two vastly distinct. S. Cyprian's education. His professing Rhetoric. His conversion to Chri∣stianity
by the persuasions of Caecilius. Their mutual endearment. His great charity to the Poor. His Baptism. Made Presbyter, and Bishop of Carthage. His modest declining the honour. His proscription, recess, and care of his Church during that retirement. The case of the Lapsed. A brief account of the rise of the Novatian Sect. The fierceness of the Per∣secution at Carthage under Decius. The courage and patience of the Christians. Cyprian's return. A Synod at Carthage about the case of the Lapsed, and the cause of Novatian. Their determination of these matters. Ratified by a Synod at Rome: and another at Antioch. A second Synod about the same affair. Moderation in the Ecclesiastic Disci∣pline used in the time of Persecution. The great Pestilence at Carthage. The miserable state of that City. The mighty charity of S. Cyprian and the Christians at that time. These evils charged upon the Christians. S. Cyprians vindication of them. The time of baptizing Infants determi∣ned in a Synod. Another Synod to decide the case of the Spanish Bishops that had lapsed in the time of Persecution. The Controversie concerning the Rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Hereties. This resolved upon in a Synod of LXXXVII. African Bishops. The immoderate heats between Cyprian, Firmilian, and Stephen Bishop of Rome about this mat∣ter. Cyprian arraigned before the Proconsul. His resolute carriage. His banishment to Curubis. His Martyrdom foretold him by a Vision. His Letters during his exile. The severe usage of the Christians. His withdrawment, and why. His apprehension and examination before the Proconsul. The sentence passed upon him. His Martyrdom, and place of burial. His piety, fidelity, chastity, humility, modesty, charity, &c. His natural parts. His learning wherein it mainly consisted. The polite∣ness and elegancy of his stile. His quick proficiency in Christian studies. His frequent converse with Tertullian's Writings. His Books. The ex∣cellency of those ascribed to him. The great honours done to his me∣mory. I. THASCIƲS Caecilius Cyprian was born at Car∣thage, in the declining part of the foregoing Sae∣culum, though the particular year cannot be as∣certained. Who or what his Parents were is unknown. Ad Ann. 250. n. V. vid. not. ad Martyrol Rom. Sept. XXVI. p. 600. Cardinal Baronius (not to mention others) makes him descended of a rich honoura∣ble Family, and himself to have been one of the chief of the Senatorian Order; and this up∣on the authority of Nazianzen, Orat. in laud. S. Cypr. p. 275. who indeed af∣firms it; but then certainly forgot that in very few lines before he had exploded as a fabulous mistake, the confounding our Cyprian with ano∣ther of the same name, of whom Nazianzen unquestionably meant it. For besides our Carthaginian Cyprian, there was another born at Antioch, a person of great learning and eminency, who travelled through Greece, Phrygia, Egypt, India, Chaldaea, and where not? famous for the Study and the Arts of Magic, by which he sought to compass the affections of Justina, a noble Christian Virgin at Antioch, by whose prayers and en∣deavours he was converted, baptized, made first Sexton, then Deacon of that Church, was indued with miraculous powers, and afterwards consecrated Bishop of that Church, (though I confess I find not his name in the Catalogue of the Bishops of that See, drawn up by Nicephorus of
Constantinople) and at last having been miserably tormented at Antioch, was sent to Dioclesian himself then at Nicomedia, by whose command to∣gether with Justina, sent thither also at the same time from Damascus, he was beheaded. The History of all which was largely described in three Books in Verse, written by the noble Empress Eudocia, the excerpta whereof are still extant in Cod. CLXXXIV col. 416. Photius. This account Simeon the Meta∣phrast, Nicephorus and the later Greeks without any scruple attribute to S. Cyprian of Carthage, nay some of them make him to suffer Martyrdom under the Decian Persecution. Though in the whole mistake the more to be pardoned, in that not onely Prudentius, but Nazianzen had long before manifestly confounded these two eminent persons, who finding several passages of the Antiochian Cyprian very near a kin to the other, carried all the rest along with them, as two persons very like are oft mis∣taken the one for the other. To prove that our Cyprian was not him described by Nazianzen, were a vain and needless attempt, the accounts concerning them being so vastly different, both as to their Countrey, Education, manner of Life, Episcopal charge, the time, place, and com∣panions of their death, that it is plainly impossible to reconcile them. But of this enough. II. S. CYPRIAN's education was ingenuous Pont. Diac. in vit. Cypr. non longe ab init., polished by Study and the Liberal Arts, though he principally addicted himself to the Stu∣dy of Oratory and Eloquence, wherein he made such vast improve∣ments, that publicly and with great applause he taught Rhetoric at Hier. de script. in Cypriano. Car∣thage. All which time he lived in great pomp and plenty, in honour and power, his garb splendid, his retinue stately; never going abroad (as himself tells us Ad Donat. Epist. 1. p. 2.) but he was thronged with a crowd of Clients and Followers. The far greatest part of his life he passed among the errours of the Gentile Religion, and was at least upon the borders of old Age when he was rescued from the Vassalage of inveterate Customs, the darkness of Idolatry, and the errours and vices of his past life, as Ubi supra. himself intimates in his Epistle to Donatus. He was converted to Christianity by the arguments and importunities of Caecilius Pont. ibid. p. 12. a Presbyter of Carthage, a person whom ever after he loved as a friend, and reverenced as a fa∣ther. And so mutual an endearment was there between them, that Cy∣prian in honour to him assumed the title of Caecilius; and the other at his death made him his Executor, and committed his Wife and Children to his sole care and tutelage. Being yet a Catechumen Id. ibid. p. 11., he gave early instances of a great and generous piety: professed a strict and severe temperance and sobriety, accounting it one of the best preparations for the entertainment of the truth, to subdue and tread down all irregular appetites and inclinations. His estate, at least the greatest part of it, he sold, and distributed it among the necessities of the Poor, at once trium∣phing over the love of the World, and exercising that great duty of Mercy and Charity, which God values above all the Ritual Devotions in the World. So that by the speedy progress of his piety (says Pontius his Friend and Deacon) he became almost a perfect Christian, before he had learnt the rules of Christianity. III. BEING fully instructed in the rudiments of the Christian Faith, he was baptized Epist. 1. p. 2, 3, when the mighty assistances which he received from above, perfectly dispelled all doubts, enlightned all obscurities, and en∣abled him with ease to do things, which before he looked upon as im∣possible to be discharged. Not long after, he was called to the inferiour
Ecclesiastic Offices, and then advanced to the degree of Presbyter, wherein he so admirably behaved himself, that he was quickly sum∣moned to the highest order and honour in the Church. Donatus his immediate predecessor in the See of Carthage (as his own words Epist. 55. p. 82 seem to imply) being dead, the general vogue both of Clergy and People (Fe∣licissimus the Presbyter and some very few of his party onely dissent∣ing Epist. 40. p. 53.) was for Cyprian to succeed him. But the great modesty and hu∣mility of the man made him flie P. Diac. p. 12. from the first approaches of the news, he thought himself unfit for so weighty and honourable an imployment, and therefore desired that a more worthy person, and some of his Seniors in the Faith might possess the place. His declining it did but set so much the keener an edge upon the desires and expectations of the Peo∣ple; his doors were immediately crowded, and all passages of escape blocked up; he would indeed have fled out at the window, but find∣ing it in vain, he unwillingly yielded, the People in the mean while impatiently waiting, divided between hope and fear, till seeing him come forth, they received him with an universal joy and satisfaction. This charge he entered upon Ann. CCXLVIII. as himself Epist. 55. p. 80 plainly inti∣mates, when in his Letter to Cornelius he tells him he had been four years Bishop of Carthage: which Epistle was written not long after the begin∣ning of Cornelius his Pontificat, Ann. CCLI. It was the third Consul∣ship of Philip the Emperour; a memorable time, it being the thousandth year ab Ʋrbe Condita, when the Ludi Saeculares were celebrated at Rome with all imaginable magnificence and solemnity. Though indeed it was then but the declining part of the Annus Millesimus, which began with the Palilia, about April XXI. of the foregoing year, and ended with the Palilia of this: whence in the ancient coins of this Emperour these Secular Sports are sometimes ascribed to his second, sometimes to his third Consulship, as commencing in the one, and being compleated in the other. IV. THE entrance upon his Care and Government was calm and peaceable, but he had not been long in it before a storm overtook him, and upon what occasion I know not, he was publicly Epist. 69. p. 117. Ep. 55. p. 80. vid. Pont. de vit. Cypr. p. 12. proscribed by the name of Caecilius Cyprian Bishop of the Christians, and every man comman∣ded not to hide or conceal his goods. And not satisfied with this, they frequently called out, that he might be thrown to the Lions. So that being warned by a divine admonition and command from God (as he pleads for himself Epist. 9. p. 22.) and least by his resolute defiance of the public sentence he should provoke his adversaries Epist. 14. p. 27 to fall more severely upon the whole Church, he thought good at present to withdraw himself, hoping that malice would cool and die, and the fire go out when the fewel that kindled it was taken away. Loc. citat. During this recess, though ab∣sent in body, yet was he present in spirit, supplying the want of his presence by Letters, (whereof he wrote no less then XXXVIII) by pious counsels, grave admonitions, frequent reproofs, earnest exhortations, and especially by hearty prayers to Heaven for the welfare and prospe∣rity of the Church. That which created him the greatest trouble, was the case of the lapsed, whom some Presbyters without the knowledge and consent of the Bishop, rashly admitted to the communion of the Church upon very easie terms. Cyprian, a stiff asserter of Ecclesiastic Discipline, and the rights of his place, would not brook this, but by se∣veral Letters not onely complained of it, but endeavoured to reform it,
not sparing the Martyrs themselves, who presuming upon their great merits in the cause of Religion, took upon them to give Libels of Peace to the lapsed, whereby they were again taken into communion, sooner then the Rules of the Church did allow. V. THIS remissness of Disciplin, and easie admission of Penitents, gave occasion to Novatus, one of the Presbyters of Carthage to start aside, and draw a Faction after him, denying any place to the lapsed, though penitent, in the peace and communion of the Church; not that they absolutely excluded them the mercy and pardon of God (for they left them to the sentence of the divine Tribunal) but maintained that the Church had no power to absolve them that once lapsed after Ba∣ptism, and to receive them again into communion. Having sufficiently imbroiled the Church at home (where he was in danger to be excom∣municated by Cyprian for his scandalous, irregular, and unpeaceable pra∣ctices) over he goes with some of his party to Rome, where by a pretence of uncommon sanctity and severity, besides some Consessors lately de∣livered out of Prison, he seduced Novatianus (who by the Greek Fathers is almost perpetually confounded with Novatus) a Presbyter of the Ro∣man Church, a man of an insolent and ambitious temper, and who had attempted to thrust himself into that Chair. Him the Party procures by clancular Arts and uncanonical means to be consecrated Bishop, and then set him up against Cornelius, lately ordained Bishop of that See, whom they peculiarly charged Vid. Epist. 55. ad Antonian, p. 66. with holding a communion with Tro∣phimus and some others of the Thurificati, who had done sacrifice in the late Persecution. Which though plausibly pretended, was yet a false alle∣gation; Trophimus and his Party not being taken in, till by great humility Ibid. p. 69. and a public penance they had given satisfaction to the Church, nor he then suffered to communicate any otherwise then in a Lay-capacity. Being disappointed in their designs, they now openly shew themselves in their own colours, separate from the Church, which they charge with loosness and licentiousness in admitting scandalous offenders, and by way of distinction, stiling themselves Cathari, the pure undefiled Party, those who kept themselves from all society with the lapsed, or them that communicated with them. Hereupon they were on all hands opposed by private persons, and condemned by public Synods, and cried down by the common Vote of the Church, probably not so much upon the account of their different sentiments and opinions in point of pardon of sin, and Ecclesiastical penance (wherein they stood not at so wide a distance from the doctrin and practice of the early Ages of the Church) as for their insolent and domineering temper, their proud and surly carriage, their rigorous and imperious imposing their way upon other Churches, their taking upon them by their own private authority to judge, cen∣sure and condemn those that joined not with them, or opposed them, their bold devesting the Governours of the Church of that great power lodged in them, of remitting crimes upon repentance, which seem to have been the very soul and spirit of the Novatian Sect. VI. IN the mean while the Persecution under Decius raged with an uncontrolled fury over the African Provinces, and especially at Car∣thage, concerning which Cyprian every where Epist. 53. p. 75 Epist. 7. p. 16. Epist. 8. p. 19. lib. ad Demetr. p. 200. gives large and sad ac∣counts, whereof this the sum. They were scourged, and beaten, and racked, and roasted, and their flesh pulled off with burning pincers, beheaded with swords, and run through with spears, more instruments
of torment being many times imployed about the man at once, then there were limbs and members of his body: they were spoiled and plundred, chained and imprisoned, thrown to wild Beasts, and burnt at the stake. And when they had run over all their old methods of execution, they studied for more, excogitat novas poenas ingeniosa crudelitas, as he com∣plains. Nor did they onely vary, but repeat the torments, and where one ended another began; they tortured them without hopes of dy∣ing, and added this cruelty to all the rest, to stop them in their journey to heaven; many who were importunately desirous of death, were so tortured, that they might not die, they were purposely kept upon the Rack, that they might die by piece-meals, that their pains might be lin∣gring, and their sense of them without intermission, they gave them no intervals, or times of respite, unless any of them chanced to give them the slip and expire in the midst of torments. All which did but render their faith and patience more illustrious, and make them more earnestly long for Heaven. They tired out their tormentors, and overcame the sharpest engins of execution, and smiled at the busie Officers that were raking in their wounds, and when their flesh was wearied, their faith was unconquerable. The multitude beheld with admiration these hea∣venly conflicts, and stood astonished to hear the servants of Christ in the midst of all this with an unshaken mind making a free and bold con∣fession of him, destitute of any external succour, but armed with a divine power, and defending themselves with the shield of Faith. VII. TWO full years S. Cyprian had remained in his retirement, when the Persecution being somewhat abated by the death of Decius, he retur∣ned to Carthage, An. CCLI. where he set himself to reform disorders, and to compose the differences that disturbed his Church. For which purpose he conven'd a Synod of his neighbor-Bishops to consult about the cause of the lapsed. Who were no sooner met, Ad Cornel. Epist. 41. p. 55. but there arrived Messengers with Letters from Novatian, signifying his Ordination to the See of Rome, and bringing an accusation and charge against Cornelius. But the men no sooner appeared, but were disowned, and rejected from Communion, especially after that Pompeius and Stephanus were arrived from Rome, and had brought a true account and relation of the case. The Synod therefore advised and charged them to desist from their turbulent and schismatical proceedings, not to rend the Church by propagating a per∣nicious Faction, that it was their best way and the safest counsel they could take to shew themselves true Christians, by returning back to the Peace of the Church. As for the lapsed, having discussed their case Ad Anton. Epist. 52. p. 67. accor∣ding to the Rules of the holy Scripture, they concluded upon this wise and moderate expedient, that neither all hopes of Peace and communion should be denied them, lest looking upon themselves as in a desperate case, they should start back into a total apostacy from the Faith, nor yet the censures of the Church be so far relaxed, as rashly to admit them to Communion: but that the causes being examined, and regard being had to the will of the Delinquents, and the aggravations of particular cases, their time of penance should be accordingly prolonged, and the divine clemency be obtained by acts of a great sorrow and repentance. Their meaning is, that the lapsed being of several sorts, should be trea∣ted according to the nature of their crimes; the Libellatici, who had onely purchased libels of security and dismission from the Heathen Magistrate to excuse them from doing sacrifice in time of Persecution,
should have a shorter time of penance assigned them, the Sacrificati, who had actually sacrificed to Idols, should not be taken in till they had expiated their offence by a very long penance, and (as they sometimes call it) satisfaction. This Synodical determination Id. ibid. Euseb. l. 6. c. 43. p. 242. was presently sent to Rome, and ratified by Cornelius and a Council of sixty Bishops, and above as many Presbyters and Deacons, concluding (and the Decree examined, assented to, and published by the Bishops in their several Provinces) that Novatus and his insolent Party, and all that adhered to his inhumane and merciless opinion, should be excluded the Commu∣nion of the Church; but that the Brethren who had fallen into that ca∣lamity, should be gently dealt with, and restored by methods of repen∣tance. About the same time there was a Synod also held at Antioch by the Eastern Bishops about the same affair. For so Dionysius Ap. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 46. p. 247. Bishop of Alexandria in his Letter to Cornelius of Rome, tells him, that he had been summoned by Helenus Bishop of Tarsus, Firmilian of Cappadocia, and Theoctistus of Caesarea in Palestin, to meet in Council at Antioch, to sup∣press the endeavours of some, who sought there to establish the Nova∣tian Schism. VIII. THE next Year May XV. Ann. CCLII began another Epist. Synod. ad Cornel. Ep. 54 p. 76. & Ep. 55. p. 82. Coun∣cil at Carthage about this matter, and wherein they steered the same course they had done before, being rather swayed to moderate coun∣sels herein, because frequently admonished by divine revelations of an approaching Persecution, and therefore did not think it prudent and reasonable, that men should be left naked and unarmed in the day of battel, but that they might be able to defend themselves with the shield of Christs body and bloud. For how should they ever hope to per∣suade them to shed their own bloud in the cause of Christ, if they denied them the benefit of his bloud? how could it be expected they should be ready to drink of the cup of Martyrdom, whom the Church de∣barred the priviledge to drink of the cup of Christ? While peace and tranquillity smiled upon the Church, they protracted the time of pe∣nance, and allowed not the Sacrificati to be readmitted, but at the hour of death. But that now the enemy was breaking in upon them, and Chri∣stians were to be prepared and heartned on for suffering, and encourage∣ment to be given to those who by the sincerity of their repentance had shewed themselves ready to resist unto bloud, and to contend earnestly for the Faith. This they did not to patronize the Lazy, but excite the Diligent, the Churches Peace being granted not in order to ease and softness, but to conflict and contention. And if any improved the in∣dulgence to worser purposes, they did but cheat themselves, and such they remitted to the divine Tribunal. At this Synod appeared one Ibid. p. 8 Privatus, who having some years since been condemned for Heresie and other crimes by a Council of XC. Bishops, desired that his cause might be heard over again, but was rejected by the Synod, whereupon gathering a Party of the lapsed, or the Schismatics, he ordained at Car∣thage one Fortunatus Bishop, giving out that no less then five and twen∣ty Bishops were present at the consecration. But the notorious fals∣hood and vanity of their pretences being discovered, they left the place and fled over to Rome. IX. ABOUT this time happened that miserable Plague, that so much afflicted the Roman World, wherein Carthage had a very deep share. Pont. Diac. in vit. Cypr. p. 13. Vast multitudes were swept away every day, the fatal Messen∣ger
knocking as he went along at every door. The streets were sil∣led with the carcasses of the dead, which seemed to implore the assi∣stance of the living, and to challenge it as a right by the Laws of Na∣ture and Humanity, as that which shortly themselves might stand in need of. But alas all in vain, every one trembled, and fled, and shifted for himself, deserted their dearest friends and nearest relations; none considered what might be his own case, nor how reasonable it was that he should do for another, what he would another should do for him, and if any staid behind, it was onely to make a prey. In this calamitous and tragic Scene, S. Cyprian calls the Christians together, instructs them in the duties of Mercy and Charity, and from the Precepts and Examples of the holy Scripture shews them what a mighty influence they have to oblige God to us; that it was no wonder if their charity extended onely to their own Party, the way to be perfect, and to be Christians indeed, was to od something more then Heathens and Publicans, to over∣come evil with good, and in imitation of the divine benignity to love our enemies, and according to our Lords advice, to pray for the happiness of them that persecute us; that God constantly makes his Sun to rise, and his rain to fall upon the Seeds and Plants, not onely for the advan∣tage of his own children, but of all other men; that therefore they should act as became the nobility of their new birth, and imitate the example of such a Father, who professed themselves to be his children. Persuaded by this and much more that he discoursed to the same effect, enough to convince the very Gentiles themselves, they presently divi∣ded their help according to each ones rank and quality. Those who by reason of poverty could contribute nothing to the charge, did what was infinitely more, personally laboured in the common calamity, an assi∣stance infinitely beyond all other Contributions. Indeed every one was ambitious to engage under the conduct of such a Commander, and in a service wherein they might so eminently approve themselves to God the Father, and Christ the Judge of all, and in the mean time to so pious and good a Bishop. And by this large and abundant charity great ad∣vantage redounded not to themselves onely, who were of the houshold of Faith, but universally to all. And that he might not be wanting to any, he penned at this time his excellent Discourse concerning Mortality, wherein he so eloquently teaches a Christian to triumph over the fears of death, and shews how little reason there is excessively to mourn for those friends and relations, that are taken from us. X. THIS horrible pestilence, together with the Wars which of late had, and even then did, over-run the Empire, the Gentiles generally charged up∣on the Christian Religion, as that for which the gods were implacably an∣gry with the World. To vindicate it from this common objection, Cyprian addresses himself in a Discourse to Demetrian the Proconsul, wherein he proves that these evils that came upon the World, could not be laid at the door of Christianity, assigning other reasons of them, Exoritur ultio violati nominis Christiani, &  ad profligandas Ecclesias edicta Decii , eatenus incredibilium morborum pe∣st extenaitur. Nalla fere provincia Romana, nulla Civitas, calla domus fuit, quae non illa generaii  a atque vastata sit. P. Orosius . l. 7. c. 21. fol. 310. p. 2. and among the rest their wild and bru∣tish rage against the Christians, which had provo∣ked the deity to bring these calamities upon them, as a just punishment of their folly and mad∣ness in persecuting a Religion, so innocent and dear to heaven. The Persecution being over, a controversie arose concerning the time of baptizing Infants, started
especially by Fidus Vid. Epist. Synod. ad Fld. Ep. 59. p. 94. an African Bishop, who asserted that Baptism was not to be administred on the third or fourth, but as Circumcision under the Jewish state to be deferred till the eighth day. S. Cyprian in a Sy∣nod of sixty six Bishops determined this question, that it was not neces∣sary to be deferred so long, nor the grace and mercy of God to be de∣nied to any as soon as born into the World; that it was their universal sentence and resolution, that none ought to be prohibited baptism and the grace of God; which as it was to be observed and retained towards all, so much more towards Infants and new born children. Not long af∣ter which, another Council was held by Epist. 68. p. 112. & seq. Cyprian, (importuned thereun∣to by the Bishops of Spain) to consult concerning the case of Basilides Bi∣shop of Asturica, and Martial of Emerita in Spain, who had lapsed into the most horrible idolatry in the late Persecution, and yet still retained their places in the Church. The Synod resolved, that they were fallen from their Episcopal Order, and the very lowest degree of the Ministry, and that upon their repentance they were to be restored to no more then the capacity of Laics in the Communion of the Church. XI. IN this Synod, or another called not long after, the famous con∣test about rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Heretics, recei∣ved its first approbation. It had been sometime since by occasion of the Montanists and Novatians canvassed in the Eastern parts, thence it flew over to Numidia, by the Bishops whereof it had been brought be∣fore Cyprian, and the Council at Carthage, who determined that the thing was necessary to be observed, and that this was no novel sentence, but had been so decreed by his Predecessors, and the thing constantly practised and observed among them, as he assures them in the Synodi∣cal Epist. 69. p. 117. Epistle about this matter. Among others to whom they sent their Decrees, the Synod Epist. 72. p. 121. especially wrote to Stephen Bishop of Rome (who had so far espoused the contrary opinion, as to excommunicate the Synod at Iconium for making the like determination) him they ac∣quaint with the sentence they had passed, and the reasons of it, which they hoped he also would assent to, however did not magisterially im∣pose it upon him, every Bishop having a proper authority within the jurisdiction of his own Church, whereof he is to render an account to God. Pope Stephen (with whom stood a great part of the Church) liked not their proceedings; whereupon a more general Council was summoned, where no less then LXXXVII. Bishops from all parts of the African Churches met together, who unanimously ratified the former sentence, whose names and particular votes are extant in the Apud Cypr. p. 282. & Concil. Tom. 1. col. 786. Edit. noviss. Acts of that Council. But numbers made the cause never the better resented at Rome, and indeed the controversie arose to that height between these two good men, that Stephen gave Cyprian very rude and unchristian lan∣guage Firmil. Epist. ad Cypr. p. 150., stiling him false Christ, false Apostle, deceitful worker, and such like: while on the other hand Cyprian treated him with more then ordi∣nary sharpness and severity, charging Ad Pompi. Epist. 74. p. 129. him with pride and impertinence, and self-contradiction, with ignorance and indiscretion, with childish∣ness and obstinacy, and other expressions, far enough from that reve∣rence and regard, which S. Stephen's successors claim at this day. And no better usage did he find from Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in Cappado∣cia, as may be seen in his Letter to Cyprian Apud. Cyp. p. 143., charging Stephen with sa∣crificing the Churches Peace to a petulant humour, where inhumanity, audaciousness, insolence, wickedness, are some of the characters bestowed
upon him. A great instance how far passion and prejudice may trans∣port wise and good men beyond the merits of the cause, and what the Laws of Kindness and Charity do allow. I note no more concerning this, then that Cyprian and his Party Ad Quint. Epist. 71. p. 119. expresly disowned Anabaptism, or rebaptization, they freely confessed that there was but one Baptism, and that those who came over from Heretical Churches, where they had had their baptism, were not rebatpized, but baptized, their former baptism being ipso facto null and invalid, and they did then receive, what (lawfully) they had not before. XII. IT was now the Year CCLVII. when Aspasius Paternus the Proconsul of Asric sent Act. Pass. S. Cypriani. ap. Cypr. p. 16, 17, 24. for Cyprian to appear before him, telling him, that he had lately received orders from the Emperours (Valerian and Gallienus) commanding that all that were of a Foreign Religion, should worship the gods according to the Roman Rites, desiring to know what was his resolution? Cyprian answered, I am a Christian and a Bishop, I acknowledge no other gods, but one onely true God, who made Heaven and Earth, and all that therein is. This is he whom we Christians serve, to whom we pray day and night, for our selves and for all men, and for the happiness and prosperity of the Emperours. And is this then thy resolution? said the Proconsul. That resolution, replied the Martyr, which is founded in God, cannot be altered. Then he told him, that he was to search out the Presbyters as well as Bishops, requiring him to discover them. To which Cyprian gave no other answer, then that according to their own Laws, they were not bound to be Informers. The Proconsul then acquainted him, that he was commanded to prohibit all private Assem∣blies, and to proceed with capital severity against them that frequen∣ted them. Whereat the good man told him, that his best way was to do as he was commanded. The Proconsul finding 'twas in vain to treat with him, commanded him to be banished, and accordingly he was transported to Curubis, a little City standing in a Peninsula within the Lybian Sea, not far from Pentapolis; a P Diac. in vit. Cypr. p. 14. place pleasant and delightful enough, and where he met with a kind and a courteous usage, was fre∣quently visited by the brethren, and furnished with all conveniences ne∣cessary for him. XIII. BUT the greatest entertainment in this retirement, were those divine and heavenly Visions with which God was pleased to honour him, by one whereof the very first day of his coming thither he was par∣ticularly forewarned of his approaching Martyrdom, Locaeitat. whereof Pontius the Deacon, who accompanied him in his banishment, gives us this ac∣count from the Martyrs own mouth. There appeared to him as he was going to rest, a young man of a prodigious stature, who seemed to lead him to the Praetorium and to present him to the Proconsul then sit∣ting upon the Bench: who looking upon him, began to write something in a Book, which the young man who looked over his shoulder, read, but not daring to speak, intimated by signs what it was: for extending one of his hands at length, he made a cross stroke over it with the other, by which Cyprian presently guessed the manner of his death. Whereupon he importunately begged of the Proconsul but one days respit to dispose his affairs, and partly by the pleasingness of the Judges countenance, part∣ly by the signs which the young man made of what the Proconsul was noting in his Book, he immediately gathered that his request was gran∣ted. And just so it accordingly came to pass, both as to the time and
manner of his Martyrdom, that very day twelve-moneth, whereon he had this vision, proving the period of his life. XIV. HOW active and diligent he was to improve his opportunities to the best advantage, appears from the several Letters he wrote during his confinement, especially to the Martyrs in prison, whose spirit he re∣freshed by proper consolations, and pressed them to persevere unto the Crown. While he was here he had news brought Ad Success. Epist. 82. p. 100. him of the daily increase of the Persecution, the Emperor Valerian having sent a Rescript to the Senate, that Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons should be put to death without delay; that Senators, and persons of rank and quality should lose their honours and preferments, forfeit their estates, and if still they con∣tinued Christians, lose their heads; and that Matrons having had their goods confiscated, should be banished: that Xystus and Quartus had al∣ready suffered in the Coemetery, where their solemn assemblies were held; and that the Governours of the City carried on the Persecution with might and main, spoiling and putting to death all that they could meet with. This sad and uncomfortable news P.  supr. p. 15. gave the good man just rea∣son to expect and provide for his own fate, which he waited and wi∣shed for every day. Indeed some persons of the highest rank and qua∣lity his ancient friends came to him, and persuaded him for the present to withdraw, offering to provide a secure place for his retreat. But the desire of that Crown which he had in his eye, had set him above the World, and made him deaf to their kind offers and intreaties. True it is that when news was brought that the Officers were coming for him, to carry him to Ʋtica to suffer there, by the advice of his friends he stept aside, being unwilling to suffer any where but at Carthage, in the eye of the people, where he had so long, and so successfully prea∣ched the Christian Faith, the truth whereof he was desirous to seal with his bloud; it being very fit and congruous, that a Bishop should suffer for our Lord in that place where he had governed his Church, and by that eminent confession edifie and encourage the Flock commit∣ted to him, as he tells Epist. 82. p. 161. the People of his charge in the last Letter that ever he wrote. As for themselves, he advised them to peace and unity, not to create trouble to one another, not to offer themselves to the Gen∣tiles, but if any was apprehended, to stand to it, and freely confess, as God should enable him to declare himself. XV. GALERIƲS Maximus the new Proconsul being returned to Carthage Pont. ib. p. 15. Act. Passion. ib. p. 16, 18, 19, 24., Cyprian (who resolved but till then to conceal himfelf) came home, and took up his residence in his own Gardens. Where Officers were presently sent to apprehend him, who putting him into a Chariot, carried him to the place where the Proconsul was retired for his health, who commanded him to be kept till the next day, which was done in the house of one of the Officers that secured him, the People alarm'd with the news of his return and apprehension, flocking to the doors, and watching there all night. The next morning being Septemb. XIV. Ann. Chr. CCLVIII. he was led to the Proconsuls Palace, who not being yet come forth, he was carried aside into a by-place, where he rested him∣self upon a seat, which by chance was covered with a linnen cloth, that so (says my Author) even in the hour of his Passion he might enjoy some part of Episcopal honour. The length and hurry of his walk, had put the infirm and aged man into a violent sweat, which being observed by a Military Messenger, who had formerly been a Christian, he came to
him and offered to accommodate him with dry linnen in stead of that wet and moist that was about him: this he did in a pretended civility, but really with design to have secured some monument of the Martyrs last agony and labour, who returned no other answer, then, We seek to cure complaints and sorrows, which perhaps to day shall be no more for ever. By this time the Proconsul was come out, who looking upon him, said, Art thou Thascius Cyprian, who hast been Bishop and Father to men of an impious mind? the sacred Emperours command thee to do sacrifice. Be well advised, and do not throw away thy life. The holy Martyr replied, I am Cyprian, I am a Christian, and I cannot sacrifice to the gods; do as thou art commanded; as for me, in so just a cause there needs no consultation. The Proconsul was angry at his resolute constancy, and told him, that he had been a long time of this sacrilegious humour, had seduced abundance into the same wicked conspiracy with himself, and shewn himself an enemy to the gods and religion of the Roman Empire, one whom the pious and religious Emperours could never reduce to the observance of their holy Rites: that therefore being found to be the Author and Ring∣leader of so hainous a crime, he should be made an example to those whom he had seduced into so great a wickedness, and that disciplin and severity should be established in his bloud. Whereupon he read his sentence out of a Table-book, I will that Thascius Cyprian be beheaded. To which the Martyr onely answered, I heartily thank Almighty God, who is pleased to set me free from the chains of the body. XVI. SENTENCE being passed, he was led away from the Tri∣bunal with a strong guard of Souldiers, infinite numbers of people crou∣ding after, the Christians weeping and mourning, and crying out, let us also be beheaded with him. The place of Execution was Sextus his Field, a large Circuit of ground, where the Trees (whereof the place was full) were loaded with persons to behold the Spectacle. The Martyr pre∣sently began to strip himself, first putting off his cloak, which he folded up, and laid at his feet, and falling down upon his knees, recommended his soul to God in prayer; after which he put off his Dalmatic, or un∣der-coat which he delivered to the Deacons, and so standing in nothing but a linnen vestment, expected the headsman, to whom he commanded the sum of about VI. Cum venisset Spiculator, jussit suis, ut eidem Spiculatori XXV. (alia Acta habent XX.) aureos darent. Act. Cypr. p. 18. Aureus sub imperatoribus Romanis valuit de nostro 15 s. sed sub Alexandro Severo primo cusi sunt Se∣missis Aurei (de nostro 7 s. 6 d.) & Tremissis Aurei, qui valuit de nostro 5 s. vid. Brierw. de Num. cap. 14. de ultimo hunc ex Actis Cypriani locum intelligindum puto. pounds to be given, the Brethren spreading linnen cloths about him to preserve his bloud from being spread upon the ground. His shirt sleeves being tied by Julian (or as one of the Acts calls him, Tullian) the Presbyter, and Julian the Sub-deacon, he covered his eyes with his own hand, and the Executioner did his Office. His body was by the Christians deposited not far off, but at night for fear of the Gentiles, removed, and with abundance of lights and torches solemnly interred in the Coe∣metery of Macrobius Candidus a Procurator, near the Fish-ponds in the Mappalian way. This was done Ann. CCLVIII. Valeriani & Gallien. V. so extravagantly wide is the account of the Ann. 4. Olym∣plad. CCLIII. Indict. XIII. p. 626. Alexandrin Chronicle (if it means the same person) when it tells us, that S. Cyprian suffered Mar∣tyrdom Ann. Alexandri Imp. XIII. that is Ann. Chr. CCXXXIV. though the Consuls under which he places it (and this agrees better with his other accounts, both of the Olympiads, and of Christs Ascension) assign it to the last year of Maximinus, Ann. Chr. CCXXXVII. for so he says,
that it was CCV. years after our Lords ascension into Heaven. Which was however far enough from truth. Indeed elsewhere An. I. Olymp. 259. Ind. IV. Valer. II. he places S. Cyprian's Martyrdom Valeriani II. which (as appears by the Consuls) should be V. that is, Ann. Chr. CCLVIII. But it is no new thing with that Author to confound times and persons, and assign the same events to different years. Thus died this good man, the first Bishop of his See that suffered Martyrdom, as Ibid. pag. 16. Pontius his Deacon informs us, who was a true lover of him, and followed him to the last, and professes himself not to rejoice so much at the glory and triumph of his Master, as to mourn that he himself was left behind. XVII. S. CYPRIAN though starting late, ran apace in the Chri∣stian race. He had a soul inflamed with a mighty love and zeal for God, whose honour he studied by all ways to promote. A wise and prudent Governour, a great asserter of the Churches Rights, a resolute Patron and defender of the Truth, a faithful and vigilant Overseer of his flock, powerful and diligent in preaching, prudent in his determinations, moderate in his counsels, Quaecunque bona in multis libris tuis intulis nescius ipsum te nobis designasti: es enim omni∣bus in tractatu major, in sermone sacundior, in consili sapientior, in patientia simplicior, in operibus largior, in abstinentia sanctior, in ob∣sequio hamilior, & in actu bono innocentio. Nemes. &c. Martyr. Epist. ad Cypr. p. 157. grave and severe in his admonitions, pathetical and af∣fectionate in his persuasives, indulgent to the Pe∣nitent, but inflexible to the obstinate and contu∣macious. Infinite pains he took to reclaim the lapsed, and to restore them to the Church by methods of penance Vid. ad Cor∣nel. Epist. 55. p. 85. and due humiliation: he invited them kindly, treated them tenderly; if their minds were honest, and their desires sincere, he would not rigorously examine their crimes by over-nice weights and measures; so prone to pity and compassion, that he was afraid lest he himself offended in remitting other mens offences. He va∣lued the good of souls above the love of his own life, constant in the profession of Religion, from which neither by hopes nor fears could he be drawn aside. How strictly chast and continent he was, even in his first entrance upon Christianity, we have noted in the beginning of his life. His humility eminently appeared in his declining the honour of the Episcopal Order, and desire that it might be conferred upon a more deserving person; and when some factious and schismatical per∣sons traduced him as taking too much upon him, because he controlled their wild and licentious courses, he vindicates his humility at large in a Letter to Pupianus Epist. 69. p. 116., who had made himself Head of the Party that appeared against him. So modest, that in all great transactions concern∣ing the Church, he always consulted both his Colleagues and his Flock, himself assuring us Ad Presb. & Diac. Epist. 5. p. 14., that from the very entrance upon his Bishoprick he determined, not to adjudge any thing by his own private Order, without the counsel of the Clergy, and the consent of the People. His behaviour was composed and sober P. Diac. i vit. Cypr. p. 12., his countenance grave, yet chearful, neither guilty of a frowning severity, nor an over-pleasant mirth, but an equal decorum and temperament of both, it being hard to say, whether he more deserved to be loved or feared, but that he equally deserved both. And the very same he was in his garb, sober and moderate, observing a just distance both from slovenliness and su∣perfluity, such as neither argued him to be swelled with pride and va∣nity, nor infected with a sordid and penurious mind. But that which set the Crown upon the head of all his other Vertues, was his admira∣ble and exemplary Charity, he was of a kind and compassionate tem∣per,
and he gave it vent. Upon his first embracing the Christian Reli∣gion he sold his estate (which was not mean and inconsiderable) and gave almost all of it to the Poor, from which he suffered no considera∣tions to restrain him. His hand, and tongue, and heart, were open upon all occasions; we find him at one time not onely earnestly Ad Episc. Neid. Epist. 6. p. 97. pressing others to contribute towards the redemption of Christians taken captive by the Barbarians, but himself sending a collection of a great many thousand Crowns. Nor was this a single act done once in his life, but his ordinary practice; his doors Pontbi supr. were open to all that came, the Wi∣dow never returned empty from him; to any that were blind, he would be their guide to direct them; those that were lame, he was ready to lend his assistance to support them; if any were oppressed by might, he was at hand to rescue and protect them. Which things, he was wont to say, they ought to do, who desired to render themselves truly ac∣ceptable and dear to God. XVIII. HIS natural parts seem to have been ready and acute enough, which how far he improved by secular and Gentile Learning, is unknown. He seems to have laid no deep foundations in the Study of Philoso∣phy, whereof few or no footsteps are to be seen in any of his Writings: his main excellency was eloquence, Rhetoric being his proper profession before his conversion to Christianity; wherein he attained to so great a pitch, that Erasmus, a competent judge of these matters, sticks not to affirm Cypr.  Erasm. Ep. l. 28. Epst. 6. , that among all the Ecclesiastics he is the onely African Writer, that attained the native purity of the Latin Tongue. Tertullian is dif∣ficult and obscure, S. Augustin strangely perplexed and dry; but Cyprian (as S. Hierom . Tom. 1 long since truly censured) like a pure Fountain is smooth and sweet. And Lactantius 5 . 1. p. 459. long before him passed this judgment, that Cyprian alone was the chief and famous Writer, eminent for his teaching Oratory, and writing Books admirable in their kind: that he had a fa∣cile, copious, pleasant, and (which is the greatest grace of Speech) clear and perspicuous wit, Lybia sanguis, sed ubique lingua pollet: agit de corpore, sola obire nescit. genus esse hominum Christus sinet & vigere . Dirn liber llus erit, dum scrinia sacra literarum, eget omnis amans Christum, tua, Cypriane, difet. Spiritus ille Dei, qui fluxerat autor in Prophetas, Fontibus eloquii te coelitus actus irrigavit. O nive candidius linguae genus. O novum saporem. Ut liquor ambrosius, cor mitigat. imbuit palatum, Sedem animae penetrat, mentem fovet, & perer∣rat arts: Si Deus interius sentitur, & inditur medullis. Prudent.  Hynn. XII. in Passion. Cypr. Martyris, & Episc. Carthag. that a man can hardly discern, whether he be more eloquent in his ex∣pressions, easie in his explications, or potent in his persuasives. Indeed his stile is very natural and easie, nothing elaborate or affected in it, or which savours of craft and ostentation, but such every where the tenor of his language (I speak . Erasmus his sense as well as my own) that you will think you hear a truly Christian Bishop, and one designed for Martyrdom speaking to you. His mind was inflamed with piety, and his speech was answerable to his mind: he spake elegantly, and yet things more powerful then elegant, nor did he speak powerful things so much as live them. After his coming over to the Church, he made such quick and vast proficiencies in Christian Theology, that . Baronius thinks it not im∣probable to suppose either that before his conversion he had been conver∣sant in the Books of Christians, or that he was miraculously instructed from above. 'Tis certain that afterwards he kept close to Tertullians Wri∣tings, without which he scarce ever passed one day, often saying to his Notary, Reach hither my Master, meaning Tertullian. A passage which S. Hierom . tells us he received from Paulus of Concordia in Italy, who
had it from the mouth of Cyprian's own Amanuensis at Rome. And certainly it sounds not a little to the commendation of his judgment, that he could drink so freely at that great mans Fountain, and suck in none of his odd and uncouth opinions, that he could pick the Flowers, and pass by the useless or noxious weeds; as a wise man many times is so far from being corrupted, that he is the more warned and confirmed in the right by another mans errours and mistakes. As for his Writings, S. Hie∣rom Ibid. in Cypr. passes them over with this character, that it was superfluous to reckon them up, being clearer and more obvious then the Sun. Many of them are undoubtedly lost, the greatest part of what remain, are Epistles, and all of them such, as admirably tend to promote the peace and order of the Church, and advance piety and a good life. A great number of Tracts, either dubious or evidently suppositious, are laid at his door, some of them very ancient, and most of them useful, it being his happiness above all other Writers of the Church (says Ubi supr. Erasmus) that nothing is fathered upon him but what is learned, and what was the issue of some considerable Pen. XIX. HE was highly honoured while he lived, not onely by men, consulted and appealed to in all weighty cases by foreign Churches, but by frequent visions and divine condescensions (as he was wont to call them) whereby he was immediately warned and directed in all impor∣tant affairs and exigences of the Church. After his death his memory was had in great veneration, the people of Carthage Vict. de Per∣sec. Vandal. l. 1. inter Oothod. PP. p. 801. Tom. 2. erecting two emi∣nent Churches to it, one in the place of his Martyrdom, the other in the Mappalian way, where he was buried. The former was stiled Mensa Cypriani, Cyprian's Table, because there he had been offered up a Sacrifice acceptable unto God. And here they had their anniversary commemorations of him. Whether this was the Church mentioned by Procopius De Bell. Van∣dal. l. 1. vid. Ni∣ceph. l. 17. c. 12. p. 751., I cannot tell, who informs us, that the Carthaginians above all people in the World honoured S. Cyprian, building a magnificent Church to his memory without the City Walls near the Sea side, and besides other expressions of honour done to him, they kept a yearly fe∣stival, which they called Cypriana. This Church Honoricus King of the Vandals afterwards took from the Catholics, casting out the Orthodox Clergy with disgrace and contempt, and bestowed it upon the Arrians, which XCV. years after was recovered by the Emperour Justinian un∣der the conduct of Belisarius, who besieged and took Carthage, and drove the Vandals out of all those parts. His Writings. Genuine. Epistola ad Donatum statim à Ba∣ptismo conscripta. Epistolae in Secessu toto biennio con∣scriptae XXXVIII. Epistolae sub Pontificatu Cornelii & Lucii XVIII. Epistolae Miscellaneae in pace variis temporibus conscriptae VIII. Epistolae sub Pontificatu Stephani, & de rebaptizandis Haereticis X. Epistolae in exilio scriptae sub finem vitae VII. De disciplina & habitu Virginum. De Lapsis. De Ʋnitate Ecclesiae Catholicae. De Oratione Dominica. Ad Demetrianum. De Idolorum vanitate. De Mortalitate. De Opere & Eleemosynis. De Bono Patientia.
De Zelo & Livore. De exhortatione Martyrii ad For∣tunatum. Testimoniorum Adversus Judaeos Lib. III. Concilium Carthaginense, de bapti∣zandis Haereticis. Supposititious. De Spectaculis. De Disciplina & bono pudicitiae. De Laude Martyrii ad Mosen, &c. Ad Novatianum, quod Lapsis spes ve∣niae non sit deneganda. De Cardinalibus Christi operibus. De Nativitate Christi. De ratione Circumcisionis. De Stella & Magis, ac innocentium nece. De baptismo Christi, & manifestatione Trinitatis. De jejunio & tentationibus Christi. De Coena Domini. De Ablutione pedum. De unctione Chrismatis, & aliis Sa∣cramentis. De Passione Christi. De Resurrectione Christi. De Ascensione Christi. De Spiritu Sancto. De Aleatoribus. De montibus Sina & Sion contr. Ju∣daeos. Carmen, Genesis. Carmen, Sodoma. Carmen, ad Senatorem Apostatam. Hymnus de Pascha Domini. Oratio pro Martyribus. Oratio in die Passionis suae. De singularitate Clericorum. In Symbolum Apostolorum Expositio. De Judaica incredulitate, Adv. Judaeos, qui Christum insecuti sunt. De revelatione Capitis B. Joan. Ba∣ptistae. De duplici Martyrio, ad Fortunatum. De XII. Abusionibus Saeculi. Dispositio Coenae. The End of S. CYPRIAN's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. GREGORY BISHOP OF NEOCAESAREA. Micha. Burgh. deli. et sculp. S. GREGORIUS THAUMATURGUS S. Gregory where born. His Kindred and Relations. The rank and quality of his Parents. His youthful studies. His study of the Laws. His travels to Alexandria. The calumny there fixed upon him, and his
miraculous vindication. His return through Greece. His studying the Law at Berytus, and upon what occasion. His fixing at Caesarea, and putting himself under the tutorage of Origen. The course of his studies. His Panegyric to Origen at his departure. Origen's Letter to him, and the importance of it. His refusal to stay at Neocaesarea, and retirement into the Wilderness. His shunning to be made Bishop of Neocaesarea. Consecrated Bishop of that City during his absence. His acceptance of the charge, and the state of that place at his entrance upon it. His miraculous instruction in the great mysteries of Christianity. His Creed. The mira∣cles wrought by him in his return. His expelling Daemons out of a Gen∣tile Temple, and the success of it. His welcome entrance into the City, and kind entertainment. His diligent preaching to the people. His erecting a Church for divine worship, and its signal preservation. An horrible plague stopped by his prayers. The great influence of it upon the minds of the people. His judging in civil causes. His drying up a Lake by his prayers, which had been the cause of an implacable quarrel between two Bro∣thers; And his restraining the overflowings of the River Lyeus. The signal vengeance inflicted upon two Jews, counterfeit beggars. The fame and multitude of his miracles, and the authorities to justifie the credibility of them. The rage and cruelty of the Decian Persecution in the Re∣gions of Pontus and Cappadocia. His persuading the Christians to withdraw. His own retirement. The narrow search made for him, and his miraculous escape. His betrayer converted. His return to Neocaesa∣rea, and instituting selemnities to the memories of the Martyrs, and the reasons of it. The inundations of the Northern Nations upon the Roman Empire. His Canonical Epistle to rectifie the disorders committed by oc∣cason of those inroads. His meeting with others in the Synod at Antioch, about the cause of Paulus Samosatenus. His return home, age, and death. His solemn thanks to God for the flourishing state of his Church, and com∣mand concerning his burial. The excellent character given of him by S. Basil. His Writings. The charge of Sabellianism. S. Basil's Apolo∣gy for him in that behalf. Modesty to be used in censuring the ancient Fathers, and why. I. S. GREGORY, called originally Theodorus, was born at Greg. Nyss. in vit. Gr. Tham. p. 969. Tom. 2. Neocaesarea, the Metropolis of Cappadocia, situate upon the River Lycus. His Parents were Gentiles, but eminent for their birth and fortunes. He had a Brother called Athenodorus, his fellow∣pupil, and afterwards Colleague in the Episcopal Order in his own Countrey, and one Sister at least, married to a Judge under the Governour of Pa∣lestin. His Father Gr. Tham. Panegyr. ad Orig p. 182. was a Zealot for his Religion, wherein he took care to educate him, together with the Learning of the Gentile World. When he was fourteen years of age his Father died, after which he took a greater liberty of enquiring into things, and as his reason grew more quick and manly, and was advantaged by the im∣provements of education, he saw more plainly the folly and vanity of that Religion, wherein he had been brought up, which presently abated his edge, and turned his inclinations towards Christianity. But though he had lost his Father, his Mother Ibid. p. 184. took care to compleat his breeding, placing him and his brother under Masters of Rhetoric and Eloquence.
By one of which, who was appointed to teach him the Latin Tongue, as a necessary piece of noble and ingenious education, he was persuaded to the study of the Roman Laws, as what would be a mighty advantage to him in what way soever he should make use of his Rhetorical Studies afterwards. And the man himself being no inconsiderable Lawyer, read Lectures to him with great accuracy and diligence, which he as se∣dulously attended to, rather to gratifie his humour and his fansie, then out of any love to those Studies, or design to arrive at perfection in them. Which however sufficiently commends his industry, those Laws (as himself observes Ibid. p. 171.) being vast and various, and not to be learned without trouble and difficulty. And which above all encreased the la∣bour was, that they were all written in Latin, a Language (as he con∣fesses) great indeed and admirable, and suited to the Majesty of the Em∣pire; but which he found troublesom enough to make himself but a competent Master of. II. HAVING laid the foundations of his first and most necessary studies at home, he designed yet further to accomplish himself by fo∣reign travels, going probably first for Alexandria, grown more then ordinarily famous by the Platonic School lately erected there. Indeed I am not confident of the precise assigning this period of his life, but know that I cannot be much wide the mark, Gregory of Nyssa Ubi supr. p. 972. assuring us, that he came thither in his Youth, where by the closeness of his Stu∣dies, but especially by the admirable sobriety and strictness of his life, he visibly reproached the debaucheries of his fellow-Students, who were of more wanton and dissolute manners. They presently fall a me∣ditating revenge, confederating with a common strumpet to put an abuse and affront upon him. Accordingly dressed in a loose wanton garb, she came to him one day as he was engaged in a serious and grave discourse with some learned and peculiar friends, impudently charging him with over-familiar converses, relating what she thought good to af∣firm had either been said, or had passed between them; charging him moreover with cheating her of the reward of their lewd embraces. The company, who knew him to be a person of quite another temper, stor∣med at the boldness and impudence of the woman, while he regardless of the affront, said nothing to it, calmly desiring a friend to give her the money that she asked, that they might be no longer interrupted in their discourses. But behold how ready Heaven is to vindicate the cause of injured innocence. The money was no sooner paid into her hand, but as if acted by a furious Daemon, she fell into fits of the most wild and ex∣travagant madness, roaring out the most horrid noise, throwing her self upon the ground, pulling and tearing of her hair, distorting her eyes, and foming at the mouth, nor could she be freed from the rude treat∣ments of the merciless Daemon, till he whom she had wronged had forgi∣ven her, and interceded with Heaven for her. III. DEPARTING from Alexandria, he came back, as we may probably suppose through Greece, and staid a while at Athens, where H. Ecl. l. 4. c. 27. p. 244. Socrates tells us he studied, and thence returned to his own Countrey, applying himself to his old study of the Law, which he had now a great opportunity to improve by going to Berytus, a City of Phoenicia, and a famous University for the Profession of the Roman Laws, whence Eu∣napius In vit. Preae∣res. p. 117. says of Anatolius, 'twas no wonder if he was incomparably skill'd in the Laws, being born at Berytus, the Mother of those Studies. Hither
he came upon this occasion Panegyr. ad Orig p. 186.. The President of Palestin had taken his Brother-in-law, an eminent Lawyer, along with him to be his Assessor and assistant in governing the affairs of that Province, who not long af∣ter sent for his Wife, and a request that he also would come along with her. All things conspired to make him willing to undertake this jour∣ney, the gratifying his Sister with his company, the importunity and persuasion of his friends, the conveniency of residing at Berytus, for the study of the Law, and the advantage of conveyance, and the public carriages that were sent to fetch his sister and her retinue into those parts. Whether he actually studied at Berytus, cannot be gathered from any account that he himself gives of it, nay rather the contrary Id. ibid. p. 188, though S. Hierom and others expresly affirm it. If he did, he staid not long, quickly growing weary of his Law-studies, being tempted with the more pleasant and charming speculations of Philosophy. The fame of Origen, who at that time had opened a School at Caesarea in Palestin, and whose renown no doubt he had heard sufficiently celebrated at Alexandria, soon reached him, to whom he immediately betook himself, where meeting Gr. Nyss. ib. p. 94. accidentally with Firmilian a Cappadocian Gentleman, and afterwards Bishop of Caesarea in that Countrey, and finding a more then ordinary sympathy and agreeableness in their tempers and studies, they entered into a League of friendship, and jointly put themselves, to∣gether with his Brother Athenodorus, under the tutorage of that so much celebrated Master. Where Vit. Orig. Praef Orig. Oper. Erasmus his mistake must be pardoned, making our Gregory and Theodorus two distinct Scholars of Origen, when 'tis so notoriously known they were but two names of the same person. Though herein the more easily to be excused, that H. Eccl. l. 5 c. 20. p. 369. Nicephorus Callistus long before him, had besides ours, made another Theodorus Scholar also to Origen at that same time at Caesarea, who was, as he tells us, an eminent Bishop in Palestin. But herein there is an universal silence in all other Writers, not the least intimation of it in Eusebius, from whom he derives his accounts of things. So plain it is, that of two several names he made two different persons. IV. GLAD he was to have fallen under so happy an institution, Origen by the most apt and easie methods leading him through the whole re∣gion and circumference of Philosophy. By how many Stages he brought him through the several parts of Discipline, Logic, Physics, Mathematics, Ethics, Metaphysics, and how he introduced him into the mysteries of Theology, S. Gregory himself has given us Paneg. p. 197. &c. large and particular accounts, which it is not material here to insist upon. Above all he endeavoured to settle him in the full belief and persuasion of the Christian Religion, whereinto he had some insight before, and to ground him in the know∣ledge of the holy Scriptures, as the best System of true Wisdom and Phi∣losophy. Five years he continued Origen's Disciple, when he was re∣called into his own Countrey. Being to take his leave, he made an Oration before his Master, and in a numerous Auditory, wherein as he gives Origen his just commendations, so he particularly blesses God Ibid. p. 178, 181. for the happy advantages of his instructions, and return thanks to his tute∣lar and guardian Angel, which as it had superintended him from his birth, so had especially conducted him to so good a Master: elegantly bewail∣ing Ibid. p. 218. . his departure from that School, as a kind of banishment out of Paradise, a being turned like the Prodigal out of his Fathers house, and a being carried captive as the Jews were into Babylon: concluding, that
of all things upon earth, nothing could give so great an ease and conso∣lation to his mind, as if his kind and benign Angel would bring him back to that place again. V. HE was no sooner returned to Neocaesarea, but Origen followed him with a Letter Extat in Orig. Philo. c. 13. p. 41., commending his excellent parts, able to render him either an eminent Lawyer among the Romans, or a great Philosopher among the Greeks, but especially persuading him to improve them to the ends of Christianity, and the practice of Piety and Vertue. For which purpose he lets him know, that he instructed him mainly in those Sciences and parts of Philosophy, which might be introductory to the Christian Religion, acquainting him with those things in Geometry and Astronomy, which might be useful for the understanding and explaining the holy Scriptures, these things being as previously advantageous to the knowledge of the Christian Doctrin, as Geometry, Music, Grammar, Rhetoric, and Astronomy, are preparatory to the study of Philosophy. Advising him before all things to read the Scripture, and that with the most profound and diligent attention, and not rashly to entertain no∣tions of divine things, or to speak of them without solemn premedita∣tion; and not onely to seek but knock, to pray with faith and fervency, it being in vain to think that the door should be opened where prayer is not sent before-hand to unlock it. At his return Gr. Nyss. ib. p. 975. all mens eyes were upon him, expecting that in public meetings he should shew himself and let them reap some fruit of all his studies; and to this he was universally courted and importuned, and especially by the wise and great men of the City, intreating him to reside among them, and by his excellent precepts and rules of life to reform and direct the manners of men. But the modest young man knowing how unfit they gene∣rally were to entertain the dictates of true Philosophy, and fearing lest by a great concourse and applause he might be insensibly ensuared into pride and vain-glory, resisted all addresses, and withdrew himself into the Wilderness, where he resigned up himself to solitude and contem∣plation, conversing with God and his own mind, and delighting his thoughts with the pleasant speculations of nature, and the curious and admirable works of the great Artificer of the World. VI. NEOCAESAREA was a place large and populous, but mise∣rably over-grown with Superstition and Idolatry, so that it seemed the place where Satans seat was, and whither Christianity had as yet scarce made its entrance, to the great grief and resentment of all good men, who heartily wished that Religion and the fear of God were planted in that place. Id. ib. p. 976. Phaedimus Bishop of Amasea, a neighbour City in that Province, a man indued with a Prophetic spirit, had cast his eye upon our young Philosopher, as one whose ripe parts and piety did more then weigh down his want of age, and rendred him a person fit to be a Guide of Souls to the place of his Nativity, whose relation to the place would more endear the imployment to him. The notice hereof being intimated to him, he shifted his Quarters, and as oft as sought for, fled from one Desert and solitary shelter to another, so that the good man by all his arts and industry could not lay hold of him, the one not being more earnest to find him out, then the other was vigilant to decline him. Phaedimus at last despairing to meet with him, resolved however to go on with his design, and being acted , by a divine and immediate impetus, betook himself to this pious stratagem (the like pre∣sident
probably not to be met with in the Antiquities of the Church) not regarding Gregorius his absence (who was at that time no less then three days journy distant from him) he made his address and prayer to God, and having declared that both himself and Gregory were at that moment equally seen by God, as if they were present, in stead of imposition of hands, he directed a Discourse to S. Gregory, wherein he set him apart to God, and constituted him Bishop of that place, and God who steers the hearts of men, inclined him, how averse soever before, to accept the charge, when, probably, he had a more formal and solemn Consecra∣tion. VII. THE Province he entered upon was difficult, the City and parts thereabouts being wholly given to the worship of Daemons Id. ubi supr. p. 977., and enslaved to the observance of Diabolic Rites, there not being above seventeen Christians in those parts, so that he must found a Church be∣fore he could govern it; and which was not the least inconvenience, Heresies had spread themselves over those Countries, and he himself though accomplished with a sufficient furniture of humane Learning, yet altogether unexercised in Theological studies, and the mysteries of Religion. For remedy whereof he is said to have had an immediate assistance from Heaven. For while one night he was deeply consider∣ing of these things, and discussing matters of Faith in his own mind, he had a vision, wherein two august and venerable persons (whom he un∣derstood to be S. John the Evangelist and the blessed Virgin) appeared in the Chamber where he was, and discoursed before him concerning those points of Faith, which he had been before debating with himself. After whose departure he immediately penned that Canon and rule of Faith which they had declared, and which he ever after made the Stan∣dard of his Doctrin, and bequeathed as an inestimable Legacy and de∣positum to his Successors, the Tenor whereof we shall here insert, toge∣ther with the Original Greek; which being very difficult to be exactly rendred into our Language, the learned Reader (if he likes not mine) may translate for himself. There is one God, . the Father of the living Word, and of the subsisting Wisdom and Power, and of Him who is his Eternal Image, the perfect begetter of Him that is perfect, the Father of the onely begotten Son. There is one Lord, the onely [Son] of the onely [Father] God of God, the Character and Image of the Godhead, the power∣ful Word, the comprehensive Wisdom, by which all things were made, and the Power that gave Being to the whole Creation, the true Son of the true Fa∣ther, the Invisible of the Invisible, the Incorruptible of the Incorruptible, the Immortal of the Immortal, and the Eternal of Him that is Eternal. There is one Holy Ghost, having its subsi∣stence of God, which appeared through
the Son to mankind, the perfect Image of the perfect Son, the Life-giving Life, the holy Fountain, the Sanctity, and the Author of Sanctification: by whom God the Father is made ma∣nifest, who is over all, and in all; and God the Son, who is through all. A perfect Trinity, which neither in Glory, Eternity, or Dominion is divided, or separated from it self. To this Creed he always kept himself, the Original whereof written with his own hand, my Author assures us was preserved in that Church in his time. VIII. THUS incomparably furnished, he began to apply himself more directly to the charge committed to him, in the happy success whereof he was infinitely advantaged by a power of working miracles (so much talked of among the Ancients) bestowed upon him. As he was Ibid. p. 980. returning home from the Wilderness, being benighted, and over∣taken with a storm, he together with his company turned aside to shel∣ter themselves in a Gentile Temple, famous for Oracles and Divinations, where they spent the night in prayers and hymns to God. Early in the morning came the Gentile Priest to pay the accustomed devotions to the Daemons of the place, who had told them, it seems, that they must henceforth relinquish it by reason of him that lodged there; he made his lustrations, and offered his Sacrifices, but all in vain, the Daemons being deaf to all importunities and invocations. Whereupon he burst out into a rage and passion, exclaiming against the holy man, and threat∣ning to complain of him to the Magistrates, and the Emperour. But when he saw him generously despising all his threatnings, and invested with a power of commanding Daemons in and out at pleasure, he turned his fury into admiration, and intreated the Bishop as a further evidence of that divine authority that attended him, to bring the Daemons once more back again into the Temple. For whose satisfaction he is said to have torn off a piece of Paper, and therein to have written these words, Gregory to Satan, enter. Which Schedule was no sooner laid upon the Altar, and the usual incense and oblations made, but the Daemons appea∣red again as they were wont to do. Whereby he was plainly convinced that it was an Authority superiour to all infernal powers, and accordingly resolved to accompany him; but being unsatisfied in some parts of the Christian Doctrin, was fully brought over, after he had seen S. Gregory confirm his discourses by another evident miracle; whereupon he freely forsook house and home, friends, and relations, and resigned up himself to the instructions of his divine Wisdom and Philosophy. IX. THE fame of his strange and miraculous actions had prepared Id. ibid. p. 983. the People of Neocaesarea to entertain him with a prodigious reverence and regard, the people generally flocking out of the City to meet him, every one being ambitious to see the person of whom such great things were spoken. He unconcerned in the applause and expectations of all the Spectators that were about him, without so much as casting his eye on the one side or the other, passed directly through the midst of the crowds into the City. Whither being come, his friends that had ac∣companied him out of his solitudes, were very solicitous where and by whom he should be entertained. But he reproving their anxiety, asked
them, whether they thought themselves banished the divine Protection? whether Gods providence was not the best and safest refuge and ha∣bitation? that whatever became of their bodies, it was of infinitely more importance to look after their minds, as the onely fit and proper habitations, which were by the Vertues of a good life to be trimmed and prepared, furnished, and built up for Heaven. But there wanted not many, who were ready enough to set open their doors to so welcom a guest, among which especially was Musonius, a person of greatest ho∣nour, estate, and power in the City, who intreated him to honour his house with his presence, and to take up his lodging there: whose kind∣ness, as being first offered he accepted, dismissing the rest with a grate∣ful acknowledgment of that civility and respect which they had offered to him. X. IT was no little abatement to the good mans joy to think in what a prophane and idolatrous place his lot was fallen, and that therefore it concerned him to lose no time. Accordingly that very day Ubi supr. p. 985. he fell to preaching, and with so good success, that before night he had converted a little Church. Early the next morning the doors were crowded, per∣sons of all ranks, ages, infirmities and distempers flocking to him, upon whom he wrought two cures at once, healing both soul and body, in∣structing their minds, convincing their errours, reclaiming and reform∣ing their manners, and that with ease, because at the same time strengthen∣ing the infirm, curing the sick, healing the diseased, banishing Daemons out of the possessed; men greedily embracing the Religion he taught, while they beheld such sensible demonstrations of its power and divi∣nity before their eyes, and heard nothing reported but what was veri∣fied by the testimony of their own senses. Having thus prepared a numerous Congregation, his next care was to erect a Church where they might assemble for the public solemnities of Religion, which by the chearful contributions of some, and the industrious labour of others, was in a little time both begun and finished. And the foundations of it seem to have been laid upon a firmer basis then other buildings, see∣ing it out-stood not onely Earthquakes, frequent in those parts, but the violent storm of Dioclesian's reign, who commanded the Churches of the Christians in all places to be demolished; and was still standing in Gre∣gory Nyssen's time, who further tells us, that when a terrible Earthquake lately happened in that place, wherewith almost all the buildings both public and private were destroyed and ruined, this Church onely re∣mained entire, and not the least stone was shaken to the ground. XI. S. Gregory Nyssen Ibid. p. 1007. reports one more memorable passage then the rest; which at his first coming to the place made his conversion of the people much more quick and easie. There was a public festival held in honour of one of the gods of that Country, whereto not onely the Neocaesareans, but all the inhabitants of the neighbour-Countrey came in, and that in such infinite numbers, that the Theater was quickly full, and the crowd so great, and the noise so confused and loud, that the Shews could not begin, nor the solemn rites be performed. The People here∣upon universally cried out to the Daemon, Jupiter, we beseech thee make us room. S. Gregory being told of this, sent them this message, that their prayer would be granted, and that greater room would be quickly made them, then they desired. Immediately a terrible Plague brake in up∣on them, that turned their Music into Weeping, and filled all places
with cries and dying groans. The distemper spread like Wild-sire, and persons were sick and dead in a few moments. The Temples, whither many fled in hopes of cure, were filled with carcasses; the Fountains and the Ditches, whither the heat and fervour of the infection had led them to quench their thirst, were dammed up with the multitudes of those that fell into them; some of their own accord went and sate among the Tombs, securing a Sepulchre to themselves, there not being living enough to perform the last offices to the dead. The cause of this sad calamity being understood, that it proceeded from their rash and foolish invocation of the Daemon, they addressed themselves to the Bishop, intreating him to intercede with his God (whom they believed to be a more potent and superiour Being) in their behalf, that he would re∣strain that violent distemper that raged amongst them. He did so, and the Pestilence abated, and the destroying Angel took his leave. And the issue was, that the people generally deserted their Temples, Oracles, Sacrifices, and the idolatrous Rites of their Religion, and took Sanctua∣ry in Christianity, as the securest refuge, and the best way to oblige Heaven to protect them. XII. HIS known prudence, and the reputation of his mighty and (as my Author Id. ib. p. 986. calls them) Apostolical miracles advanced him into so much favour and veneration with the People, that they looked upon whatever he said or did, as the effect of a divine power. And even in secular causes, where the case was any thing knotty and difficult, it was usually brought to him, whose sentence was accounted more just and impartial, more firm and valid then any other decision whatsoever. It happened that two Brothers were at Law about a Lake, which both challenged as belonging to that part of their inheritance their Father had left them. The Umpirage of the case was left to him, who by all the persuasive arts of insinuation first endeavoured to reconcile them, and peaceably to accommodate the difference between them. But his pains proved fruitless and ineffectual, the young men stormed, and re∣solved each to maintain his right by force of Arms, and a day was set when they were to try their titles by all the power which their tenants of each side could bring into the field. To prevent which the holy Bishop went the night before to the place, where he continued all night in the exercises of devotion, and by his prayers to Heaven procured the Lake to be turned into a parcel of dry and solid ground, removing thereby the bone of contention that was between them, the remains of which Lake were shewed many Ages after. Thus Ibid. p. 990. also he is said to have miraculously restrained the violence of the River Lycus, which coming down from the Mountains of Armenia with a swift rapid tor∣rent, and swelled by the tributary concurrence of other Rivers, fell down into a plain Champain Countrey, where over-swelling and some∣times breaking down its banks, it overflowed the Countrey thereabouts, to the irreparable dammage of the inhabitants, and very often to the hazard and loss of their lives. Unable to deal with it any other way, they apply themselves to S. Gregory to improve his interest in Heaven, that God, who alone rules the raging of the Sea, would put a stop to it. He goes along with them to the place, makes his address to him, who has set a bound to the Waters, that they may not pass over, nor turn again to cover the Earth, thrusts his Staff down into the Bank, and prayed that that might be the boundary of the insolent and raging stream, and so
departed. And it took effect, the River ever after mannerly keeping within its Banks, and the Tradition adds, that the Staff it self grew up into a large spreading Tree, and was shewed to Travellers together with the relation of the miracle in my Authors days. In his return from Co∣mana Ibid. p. 997. (whither he had been invited and importuned both by the Ma∣gistrates and People, to constitute a fit person Bishop of that City) he was espied by two Jews, who knowing his charitable temper, either out of covetousness, or a design to abuse him, agreed to put a trick upon him. To that purpose one of them lies along upon the ground and feigns him∣self dead, the other deplores the miserable fate of his companion, and begs of the holy Bishop as he passed by to give somewhat towards his burial, who taking off his coat that was upon him, cast it upon the man, and went on his way. No sooner was he gone out of sight, but the Impostor came laughing to his fellow, bad him rise, and let them make themselves merry with the cheat. He called, pulled, and kicked him, but alas in vain, the comical sport ended in a real Tragoedy, the man was dead indeed, his breath expiring that very moment the garment was cast upon him, and so the Coat really served for what he intended it, as a covering to his burial. XIII. IN an Age so remote from the miraculous Ages of the Church, and after that the World has been so long abused by the impostures of a Church, pretending to miracles as one of the main notes and evidences of its Catholicism and Truth, these passages may possibly seem suspi∣cious, and not obtain a very easie belief with the more scrupulous Rea∣der. To which perhaps it may be enough to say, at least to justifie my relating them, that the things are reported by persons of undoubted credit and integrity, especially S. Basil and his brother Gregory, both of them wise and good men, and who lived themselves within less then an hundred years after our S. Gregory; and what is more considerable, were capable of deriving their intelligence from a surer hand then or∣dinary, their aged Grandmother Macrina, who taught them in their youth, and superintended their education, having in her younger years been Scholar and Auditor of our S. Gregory, and from her I doubt not they received the most material passages of his life, and the account of his miracles, of many whereof she her self was capable of being an eye∣witness, and wherewith she acquainted them, as she also did with the doctrin that he taught, wherein S. Basil Ad Neocaesar. Epist. LXXV. p. 131. Tom. 3. particularly tells us she instru∣cted them, and told them the very words which she had heard from him, and which she perfectly remembred at that age. Besides, that his Brother solemnly Ubi supr. p. 985. professes in recounting this great mans miracles, to set them down in a plain and naked relation, without any Rhetorical arts to amplifie and set them off, Ib. p. 995. and to mention onely some few of those great things that had been done by him, and purposely to suppress Ibid. p. 109. many yet in memory, lest men of incredulous minds should disbelieve them, and count all Fables which were above the standard of their sen∣timents and apprehensions. Indeed as to the main of the thing, I might challenge the faith of all Ages ever since, who have unanimously be∣lieved, and conveyed the report of it down to us, and upon this ac∣count the title of Thaumaturgus, the Wonder-worker, is constantly and uncontrollably ascribed to him in the Writings of the Church. And S. Basil De Spir. S. c. 2. p. 360. Tom. 2. assures us, that upon this very account the Gentiles were wont to call him a Second Moses, and that in his time he was had in such uni∣versal
admiration among the People of that Countrey, and his memory so fresh among them, that no time would be able to blot it out. XIV. IN this faithful and successful management of his place, he quietly continued till about the year CCL. when the Emperour Id. ibid. p. 999 Decius vexed to see the Christian Religion so much get the ground of declining Paganism, published very severe edicts against the Christians, commanding the Governours of Provinces as they valued their heads, to put them into a strict and rigorous execution; wherein Pontus and Cappadocia shared if not deeper, to be sure equal with the rest. All other busi∣ness seemed to give way to this, persecuting the Christians was the de∣bate of all public Councils, and the great care of Magistrates, which did not vent it self in a few threatnings, and hard words, but in studying methods of cruelty, and instruments of torment, the very apprehension whereof is dreadful and amazing to humane nature, Swords and Axes, Fire, Wild Beasts, Stakes, and Engines to stretch and distend the limbs, iron Chairs made red hot, frames of Timber set up strait, in which the bodies of the tormented, as they stood were raked with nails that tore off the flesh: and innumerable other arts daily invented, every great man being careful that another should not seem to be more fierce and cruel then himself. Some came in as Informers, others as Witnesses, some searched all private corners, others seized upon them that fled, and some who gaped for their Neighbours Estates, took hold of the opportunity to accuse and persecute them for being Christians. So that there was a general confusion and consternation, every man being afraid of his nearest relatives, the Father not consulting the safety of his Child, nor the Child regarding its duty to its Parents; the Gentile Son betraying his Christian Father, and the Infidel Father accusing his Son for embracing Christianity, and the Brother accounting it a piece of Piety to violate the Laws of Nature in the cause of Religion, and to condemn his own Brother, because a Christian. By this means the Woods became full, and the Cities empty, and yet no sooner were many houses rid of their proper owners, but they were turned into common Goals, the public Prisons not being able to contain the multitudes of Christians, that were sent to them. You could not go into the Markets, or places of usual concourse, but you might have seen some apprehended, others led to trial or execution, some weeping, others laughing and re∣joicing at the common misery: no regard had to Age, or Sex, or Vertue or Merit, but as in a City stormed by a proud and potent Conquerour, every thing was without mercy exposed to the rage and rudeness of a barbarous and inhumane enemy. XV. S. GREGORY beholding the sad and calamitous state of the present time, and having considered Ibid. p. 1001. seriously with himself the frailty and imbecillity of humane nature, and how few (of his new Converts especially) would be able to bear up under those fierce conflicts which the cause of Religion would engage them in, timely advised his Church a little to decline the force of the present storms, telling them 'twas bet∣ter by flying to save their souls, then by abiding those furious trials to hazard their falling from the Faith. And to let them see that this might be done, and that herein there was no prejudice to their souls, he resolved to shew them the way by his example, himself first retiring out of danger, retreating to a Desert Mountain, accompanied with none but the Gentile Priest whom he had converted, and who ministred to him in
capacity of a Deacon. And it was but time he should withdraw, the enemy chiefly aiming at him as the head of the Party, and laying all possible snares to take him. Being informed where he lay concealed, they went in vast numbers to hunt him out, some besetting round the foot of the Mountain, that he might not escape, others going up searched every place till they came very near him. He persuading his Deacon to a firm confidence of the divine protection, presently fell to prayer, as the other also did by his example, with eyes and hands lift up to Heaven. The Persecutors in the mean time pried into all places, examined every bush and shrub, every crevise of a Rock, every nook and hole, but find∣ing nothing, returned back to their companions at the bottom, hoping that by this time he might be fallen into their hands. And when the Informer described the very place where he lay, they affirmed they saw nothing there but a couple of trees a little distant from each other. The company being gone, the Informer staid behind, and went directly to the place, where finding them at their devotions, and concluding their escape to be the immediate effect of a divine preservation (God having blinded their eyes that they should not see them) fell down at the Bi∣shops feet, gave up himself to be a Christian, and a companion of his soli∣tudes and dangers. XVI. Ibid. p. 1002. DESPAIRING now of meeting with the Shepherd, the Wolves fell with the fiercer rage upon the Flock that staid behind, and not there onely, but ran up and down all parts of the Province, seizing upon Men, Women, and Children, that had but any reverence for the name of Christ, dragging them to the City, and casting them into Prison, where they were sure to be entertained with variety of tortures. S. Gre∣gory in the mean time remained in his solitary retirement, till God ha∣ving mercifully commanded the Storm to blow over, and the tyranny of the Persecution to cease, he quitted his shady and melancholy Walks, and came back to Neocaesarea, and visiting his Diocess all about, esta∣blished in every place anniversary Festivals and Solemnities, to do honour to the memory of the Martyrs, that had suffered in the late Persecution. A great instance of his wisdom and prudence at that time, not onely in doing right to the memory of the Martyrs, but by this means training up people to a readier embracing of Religion, when they saw that it indul∣ged them a little mirth and freedom in the midst of those severe Yokes that it put upon them. He had observed what advantage the idolatry of the Gentiles made by permitting its Votaries liberty (indeed licen∣tiousness) in their religious solemnities, and he reasonably presumed it would be no little encouragement to some to desert their superstitions, and come over to Christianity, if they were suffered to rejoice, and use a little more innocent freedom then at other times, which could not be better done then at the Memorials of the Martyrs, though it cannot be denied, but that this custom produced ill effects afterwards. XVII. IN the reign of the Emperour Gallienus about the year CCLX. and for some years before, God being (as Osorius Hist. l. 7. c. 22. fl. 311. truly enough conje∣ctures) offended with the cruel usage which the Christians met withall from the present Powers, was resolved to punish the World. And to that end did not onely suffer Valerian the Emperour (friendly enough at first, but afterwards a bitter Persecutor of the Christians) to be betrayed into the hands of Sapor King of Persia (who treated him with the highest instances of scorn and insolence) but permitted the Northern T. Poll. in vi. Gallien. c. . 5. p. 717, 718. vid. Zosim. Hit. lib. 1. p. 352. . 359. & Tb. Pll. in vit. Clad. c. 8, p. 86. Nations
like a mighty inundation to break down the Banks, and overflow most parts of the Roman Empire. The Germans betook themselves some into Spain, others passed the Alps, and came through Italy as far as Ra∣venna,; the Alemanni forraged France, and invaded Italy; the Quades and Sarmatae wasted Pannonia, the Parthians fell into Mesopotamia and Syria, and the Goths broke in upon Pontus, Asia, and some parts of Greece. Intollerable were the outrages which these barbarous people committed where-ever they came, but especially upon the Christians, whose goods they plundred, ravished their Wives and Daughters, tortured their persons and compelled them to offer sacrifice, and communicate in their Idol-Feasts: many of the Renegadoes spoiling their fellow-Christians, and some under a pretence of finding, stole, or at least kept their neigh∣bours goods to their own use. In this general confusion, a neighbour Bishop of those parts writes to S. Gregory of Neocaesarea to beg his ad∣vice what to do in this sad state of affairs. Who by Euphrosynus sent back a Canonical Epistle (so often cited and magnified by the Ancients, and still extant) to rectifie these irregularities and disorders, wherein he prescribes the several stations and orders of Penitents, but especially reproves and censures their inordinate avarice, shewing how uncomely it is in it self, how unsutable to Christians, how abhorrent to God and all good men to covet and grasp what is another mans; and how much more barbarous and inhumane in this calamitous time to spoil the op∣pressed, and to enrich themselves by the bloud and ruines of their mi∣serable Brethren. And because some might be apt to plead they did not steal, but onely take up what they accidentally met with, he lets them know, that whatever they had found of their neighbours, nay though it were their enemies, they were bound by Gods Law to restore it, much more to their Brethren, who were fellow-sufferers with them in the same condition. And if any thought it were warrant enough to keep what they had found, though belonging to others, having been such deep losers themselves, he tells them, this is to justifie one wicked∣ness with another, and because the Goths had been enemies to them, they would become Goths and Barbarians unto others. Nay many (as he tells us) joined in with the Barbarians in open persecuting, capti∣vating, and tormenting of their Brethren. In all which cases he pro∣nounces them fit to be excluded the communion of the Saints, and not to be readmitted till by a just penance according to the various circum∣stances of the case, they had made public and solemn satisfaction to the Church. XVIII. NOT long after this, Paulus of Samosata Bishop of Antioch began to broach very pernicious Doctrins concerning the person of our blessed Saviour. To prevent the infection whereof, the most eminent of the Bishops and Clergy of all those parts frequently met in Synod at Antioch, the chief of whom Euseb. H. E. l. 7. c. 27. p. 278. were Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in Cappa∣docia, our S. Gregory and his brother Athenodorus Bishop also in Pontus, and some others. The Synod being sate, and having canvassed the mat∣ter, the crafty Heretic saw 'twas in vain to contend, and therefore dis∣sembling his errours as well as he could, he confessed what could not be hid, and by a feigned repentance salved his credit for the present, and secured his continuance in that honourable place he held in the Church. This Council was held Ann. Chr. CCLXIV. which our S. Gregory seems not long to have survived, dying either this, or most probably the fol∣lowing
year. Lib. 6. c. 17. p. 408. Nicephorus makes him to have lived to a very great age, which he must, if (as he affirms) he died under Dioclesian; and In voc. . p. 628. Suidas by a mistake much more prodigious, makes him to decease in the reign of Julian. A little before his death, being sensible that his time drew near, he sent Gr. Niss. ubi supr. p. 1006. up and down the City and the Vicinage to make a strict enquiry whether there were any that yet were strangers to the Chri∣stian Faith. And being told that there were but seventeen in all, he sighed, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, appealed to God how much it troubled him, that he should leave any part of mens salvation incom∣pleat, but that withall it was a mercy that challenged the most grateful resentment, that when he himself had found but seventeen Christians at his first coming thither, he should leave but seventeen Idolaters to his successor. Having heartily prayed for the conversion of Infidels, and the increase and consummation of those that were converted, he calmly and peaceably resigned up his soul to God: having first enjoyned his friends to make no trouble about his Funeral, nor procure him any pro∣per and peculiar place of burial, but that as in his life time he had carried himself as a Pilgrim and Foreigner in the World, claiming nothing for himself, so after death he might enjoy the portion of a Stranger, and be cast into the common lot. XIX. HE was a man (says De Spir. S. c. 29. p. 359. Tim. 2. S. Basil) of a Prophetical and Apostolic temper, and who in the whole course of his life expressed the height and accuracy of an Evangelical conversation. In all his Id. ad Cler. Neocaes. Epist. LXIII. p. 97. T. 3. devotions he was wont to shew the greatest reverence, never covering his head in prayer, as accounting that of the Apostle most proper and rational, that every one praying or prophecying with his head covered, dishonoureth his head. All Oaths he avoided, making Yea and Nay the usual measure of his communication. Out of regard to our Lords threatning he durst never call his Brother Fool; no anger, wrath, or bitterness proceeded out of his mouth. Slandering and reproaching others he greatly hated, as a quality opposite to a state of salvation. Envy and Pride were stran∣gers to his innocent and guileless soul. Never did he approach the holy Altar, till first reconciled to his Brother. He severely abominated lies and falshood, and all cunning and artificial methods of detraction; well knowing that every lie is the spawn and issue of the Devil, and that God will destroy all those that speak lies. XX. HIS Writings are first particularly mentioned by De Script. in Theodor. S. Hierom, who reckons up his Eucharistical Panegyric to Origen, his short and (as he calls it) very useful Metaphrase upon Ecclesiastes, several Epistles (in which doubtless his Canonical Epistle had the first place) and his Creed or short exposition of Faith, which though not taken notice of in some, is extant in other Editions of S. Hieroms Catalogue. All which (some of his Epistles excepted) are still extant, and probably are all he ever wrote. For though there are other Tracts commonly ascribed to him, yet without any great reason or evidence to warrant their legitimacy, whereof their strongest assertors are not very confident. It appears from Ad Doct. Ec∣cle. Neocaesar. Epist. LXIV. p. 101. S. Basil that he was by some of old suspected as inclining to Sabel∣lianism, which confounded the persons in the holy Trinity, and that many sheltered themselves under his authority from an expression of his, affirming that the Father and Son are two in the consideration of the mind, but one in person. For this S. Basil makes a large Apology, and shews that it was spoken in the heat of disputation against Aelian a Gen∣tile,
, not dogmatically as a point of Doctrin, but in hast and in the fervency of disputation, when judgment and con∣sideration is not at leisure to weigh every thing by nice scruples; that his earnest desire to gain the Gentile made him less cautious and solici∣tous about exactness of words, and that he indulged something to the apprehensions of his adversary, that so he might get the better advan∣tage upon him in the greater and more important principles; that this betraid him into some unwary expressions, which the Heretics of after∣times improved to bad purposes, and strained to another sense then what was originally intended by him that spake them: That as to the parti∣cular charge of the Sabellian errour Ibid. p. 99., he was so far from it, that it had been chiefly confuted and laid asleep by the evidence of that very do∣ctrin which S. Gregory had preached, the memory whereof was preserved fresh among them. However nothing can be more true and modest then what Apol. adv. R∣fin. lib. c. p. 21 Tom. 2. S. Hierom observes in such cases, that it's great rashness and irreverence presently to charge the Ancients with Heresie for a few obnoxious expressions, since it may be, they erred with a simple and an honest mind, or wrote them in another sense, or the passages have been since altered by ignorant Transcribers, or they took less heed and care to deliver their minds with the utmost accuracy and exactness, while as yet men of perverse minds had not sown their tares, nor disturbed the Church with the clamour of their disputations, nor infected mens minds with their poisonous and corrupt opinions. His Writings. Gen. ad Origenem. Metaphrasis in Ecclesiastem. Brevis expositio fidei. Epistola Canonica. Aliae Epistolae plures, quae non extant. Supposititious. . Capita XII. de fide, cum Anathema∣tismis. In Annunciationem S. Dei Genitri∣cis Sermones III. Sermo in Sancta Theophania. Ad Tatianum de Anima . The End of S. GREGORY Thaumaturgus's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. DIONYSIUS BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA. S. DIONYSIUS ALEXANDRIN US. The place of his nativity. His Family and Relations. His conversion how. His studies under Origen. Whether a professed Rhetorician. His suc∣ceeding Heraclas in the Catechetic School. His being constituted Bishop
of Alexandria, and the time of it. A preparatory Persecution at Ale∣xandria, how begun. The severity of it. The Martyrdom of Apollonia, and the fond honours done her in the Church of Rome. The Perse∣cution continued and promoted by Decius his Edicts. The misera∣ble condition of the Christians. The sudden Conversion and Martyrdom of a Guard of Souldiers. Dionysius apprehended and carried into ba∣nishment, there to be beheaded. A pleasant account of his unexpected de∣liverance by means of a drunken rout. His retirement into the Desarts. His return to Alexandria. The great number and quality of the Lapsed in the late Persecution. The contests about this matter. Dionysius his judgment and practice herein. The case of Serapion. His dealing with Novatian about his Schism, and the copy of his Letter to him. His be∣ing engaged in the controversie about Rebaptization, and great modera∣tion in it. His Letter to Pope Sixtus about a person baptized by Heretics. Valerianus the Emperours kindness to Christians. How turned to cruelty. Dionysius brought before Aemilian. His discourse with him, and resolute constancy. He is condemned to be banished. His transportation into the Desarts of Lybia. The success of his Ministry there. Innumerable Bar∣barians converted to the Faith. Gallienus his relaxing the Persecution. His Letter to Dionysius granting liberty to the Christians. Alexandria shut up by the usurpation of Aemilian. The Divisions within, and Siege without. The horrible Pestilence at Alexandria; and the singular kind∣ness and compassion of the Christians there above the Heathens. Diony∣sius his confutation of Sabellius. His unwary expressions, and the charge against him. His vindication, both by himself and by S. Athanasius. His writing against Nepos. Nepos who, and what his Principles and Followers. Dionysius his encounter with the heads of the Party; His convincing and reducing them back to the Orthodox Church. His engaging in the Controversie against Paulus Samosatenus. The loose, ex∣travagant, and insolent temper and manners of that man. Dionysius his Letter to the Synod at Antioch concerning him. The success of that affair. Dionysius his death. His Writings and Epistles. The loss of them be∣wailed. I. S. DIONYSIƲS was in all probability born at Alexandria, where his Parents Vid. Euseb. l. 7. c. 11. p. 260. A. seem to have been persons of considerable note and quality, and his Father, and possibly his Ancestors, to have born very honourable Offices, and himself to have lived some time in great secular pomp and power. He was born and bred a Gentile, but by what particular occasion converted to Christianity, I know not, more then what we learn from a Vision and Voice that spake to him, mentioned by Epist. ad Phi∣lem. ib. c. 7. p. 253. himself, that by a diligent reading whatever Books fell into his hand, and an im∣partial examination of the things contained in them, he was first brought over to the Faith. Having passed his juvenile studies, he put himself under the institution of the renowned Ibid. l. 6. c. 29. p. 229. Hieron. d. Sipt. in Diny. Origen, the great Master at that time at Alexandria, famous both for Philosophic and Christian Lectures, after which he is said by some Anastas. Si∣rait. . c. 22. p. 341. Maxim. Schol. in c. 5 de Coelest. Hira h. p. 24. . 2. to have publicly professed Rhetoric and Eloquence; as indeed there seems a more peculiar vein of Fansie and Rhetoric to run through those fragments of his Discourses which do
yet remain. But I can scarce believe that the Dionysius mentioned by Anastasius and Maximus, and by them said of a Rhetorician to be made Bishop of Alexandria, to have been the same with ours, were it for no other reason, then that he is said to have written Scholia on the Works of S. Denys the Areopagite, which we are well assured had no being in the World till many years after his time. Ann. CCXXXII. Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria being dead, Heraclas one of Origen's Scholars, and his successor in the Catechetic School, succeeded in his room; upon whose preferment Dionysius then Presbyter of that Church was advanced to his place. Wherein he discharged himself with so much care and dili∣gence, such universal applause and satisfaction, that upon Heraclas his death, who sate fifteen or sixteen years, none was thought so fit to be again his successor as Dionysius, who accordingly entred upon that See Euseb. ib. c. 35. p. 232. Ann. CCXLVI. though Eusebius his Chronicon places it two years after, Philippi Imp. Ann. V. expresly contrary to his History, where he assigns the third year of that Emperour, for the time of his consecration to that place. II. THE first years of his Episcopal charge were calm and peaceable, till Decius succeeding in the Empire Ann. CCXLIX. turned all into hurry and combustion, persecuting the Christians with the utmost vio∣lence, whereof the Church of Alexandria had a heavy portion. Indeed the Persecution there had begun Ep. ejus ad Fab. ibid. c. 41. p. 236. a year before, while Philip the Empe∣rour was yet alive, upon this occasion: A certain Gentile Priest or Poet led the Dance, exciting the People of that place (naturally prone to superstition) to revenge the quarrel of their gods. The multitude once raised, ran on with an uncontrolable fury, accounting cruelty to the Christians, the onely instance of piety to their gods. Immediately they lay hands upon one Metras an aged man, who refusing to blaspheme his Saviour, they beat him with clubs, pricked him in the face and eyes with sharp Reeds, and afterwards leading him into the Suburbs, stoned him. The next they seized on was a Woman called Quinta, whom they car∣ried to the Temple, where having refused to worship the Idol, she was dragged by the feet through the streets of the City over the sharp flints, dashed against great stones, scourged with whips, and in the same place dispatched by the same death. Apollonia an ancient Virgin being ap∣prehended, had all her teeth dashed out, and was threatned to be burnt alive, who onely begging a little respite, of her own accord chearfully leapt into the flames. Incredible it is (but that the case is evident from more instances then one) with how fond a veneration the Church of Rome celebrates the memory of this Martyr Vid. Boand. de vit. SS. ad Febr. IX.. They infinitely extol her for the nobility of her Birth, the eminent piety and vertues of her Life, her chastity, humility, frequent fastings, fervent devotions, &c. (though not one syllable of all this mentioned by any ancient Writer) bring in a voice from Heaven stiling her, the Spouse of Christ, and telling her, that God had granted her what she had asked. They make her the tutelar Goddess or Guardian of all that are troubled with the tooth or headach, and in many solemn Offices of that Church, pray that at her intercession God would cure them of those pains; nay formally ad∣dress their prayers to her, that she would intercede with God for them on that behalf, and by her Passion obtain for them (they are the very words of the Prayer) the remission of all the sins which with teeth and mouth they had committed through gluttony and speaking. Innumerable
are the miracles reported of her, and to me, it seems a miracle, and to exceed all the rest, were it true, what is related of the vast number of her teeth. For besides those which are preserved among the Reliques of foreign Churches (which are not a few) we are Vid. Chemnit. exam. Concil. Trid. Part. IV. de reliq. SS. p. 13. col. 1. told, that when King Edward, then afflicted with the Tooth-ach, commanded that all S. Apollonia's teeth in the Kingdom should be sought out and sent him; so many were brought in, that several great Tuns could not hold them. It seems they were resolved to make her ample amends for those few teeth she lost at the time of her Martyrdom. But it is time to return to the Alexandrian Persecution, where they every where broke open the Christians houses, taking away the best of their goods, and burning what was not worth the carrying away. A Christian could not stir out day or night, but they presently cried out, Away with him to the fire. In which manner they continued, till quarrelling among themselves they fell foul upon one another, and gave the Christians a little breathing time from the pursuits of their malice and inhumanity. III. IN this posture stood affairs when Decius having usurped the Empire, routed and killed his Master Philip, his Edict arrived at Alexan∣dria, which gave new life to their rage and cruelty. And now they fall on afresh, and persons of all ages, qualities, and professions are ac∣cused, summoned, dragged, tortured, and executed with all imaginable severity; multitudes of whom, Ibid. p. 238. Dionysius particularly reckons up, toge∣ther with the manner of their martyrdom and execution. Vast numbers Ib. c. 42. p. 240 that fled for shelter to the Woods and Mountains, met with a worse death abroad, then that which they sought to avoid at home, being fa∣mished with hunger and thirst, starved with cold, over-run with disea∣ses, surprized by thieves, or worried by wild beasts, and many taken by the Arabs and barbarous Saracens, who reduced them into a state of slavery more miserable then death it self. In this evil time though many revolted from the Faith, yet others maintained their station with a firm and unshaken courage, and several who till that moment had been strangers and enemies to the Christian Religion, on a sudden came in and publicly professed themselves Christians in open defiance of those immediate dangers that attended it. Whereof one instance may suffice. One who was thought to be a Christian, and ready to renounce his Re∣ligion, being led into the place of Judicature, Ammon, Zeno, and the rest of the military Guard that stood at the door, derided him as he was going in, gnashing upon him with their teeth, and making such grimaces, such mimic and antique gestures, that all mens eyes were upon them. When behold on a sudden before any one laid hand upon them, they came into open Court, and unanimously professed themselves to be Christians. An accident wherewith the Governors and the Assessors upon the Bench were strangely surprized and troubled. The condemned were chearful and couragious, and most ready to undergo their tor∣ments, while the Judges themselves were amazed and trembled. Sen∣tence being passed upon them, they went out of Court in a kind of pomp and state, rejoicing in the testimony they were to give to the Faith, and that God would so gloriously triumph in their execution. IV. S. DIONYSIƲS bore a part in the common Tragoedy, though God was pleased to preserve him from the last and severest act, as a person eminently useful to his Church. No sooner had Epist Dion. ad German. ibid. c. 40 p. 235. Sabinus the Praefect received the Imperial Orders, but he immediately dispatched a Frumen∣tarius,
or military Officer (whose place it was to seize Delinquents, and enquire out seditious reports and practices against the State, and there∣fore particularly belonged to Judges and Governours of Provinces) to apprehend him. The Serjeant went all about, and narrowly ransacked every corner, searching all ways and places where he thought he might hide himself, but in the mean time never searched his own house, con∣cluding he would not dare to abide at home, and yet there he staid four days together, expecting the Officers coming thither. At length being warned of God, he left his house with his servants and some of the Brethren that attended him, but not long after fell into the hands of the Souldiers, and having received his sentence, was conducted by a Guard under the command and conduct of a Centurion and some other Officers to Taposiris, a little Town between Alexandria and Canopus, there pro∣bably to be beheaded with less noise and clamour. It happened in the mean while that Timotheus one of his friends, knowing nothing of his apprehension, came to the house where he had been, and finding it em∣pty, and a Guard at the door, fled after him in a great amazement and distraction, whom a Country man meeting upon the Road, enquired of him the cause why he made so much hast. He probably supposing to have heard some news of them, gave him a broken and imperfect relation of the matter. The man was going to a Wedding feast (which there they were wont to keep all night) and entering the house told his company what he had heard. They heated with Wine, and elevated with mirth, rose all up and ran out of doors, and with a mighty clamour came to∣wards the place where he was. The Guard hearing such a noise and confusion at that time of night, left their Prisoner and ran away, whom the rabble coming in found in bed. The good man supposing them to be Thieves, was reaching his cloaths that lay by him to give them; but they commanded him to rise presently and go along with them, whereat he besought them (understanding now the errand upon which they came) to dismiss him and depart, at least to be so kind to him, as to take the Souldiers Office upon them, and themselves behead him. While he was thus passionately importuning them, they forced him to rise, and when he had thrown himself upon the ground, they began to drag him out by the hands and feet, but quitted him not long after, and returned it's like to their drunken sports. This Trage-comic Scene thus over, Caius and Faustus, Peter and Paul, Presbyters, and his fellow-prisoners, took him up, and leaving the Town, set him upon an Ass, and conveyed him away Vid. Epist. ejus ad Domit. ib. l. 7. c. 11. p. 260. into a desolate and uncomfortable part of the Desarts of Lybia, where he together with Peter and Caius, lay concealed, till the storm was over-past. V. THE Persecution being in a great measure blown over by the death of Decius, Dionysius came out of his Solitudes, and returned to Alexandria, where he found the affairs of his Church infinitely entangled and out of order, especially by reason of those great numbers that had denied the Faith, and lapsed into Idolatry in the late Persecution, among which were many of the wealthy and the honourable, and who had places of authority and power; some freely renouncing, others so far degenerating from the Gallantry of a Christian spirit, that when cited to appear and sacrifice to the gods (as he tells us Ib. l. 6. c. 4. p. 238.) they trembled, and looked as pale and gastly, as if they had come not to offer, but to be made a sacrifice, insomuch that the very Gentiles derided and despised
them. Most of these after his return sued to be readmitted to the Com∣munion of the Church, which the Ecclesiastic Discipline of those Times did not easily allow of, especially after the Novatian principles began to prevail, which denied all communion to the lapsed, though expressing their sorrow by never so long and great a penance. Upon what oc∣casion Novatus and his partner Novatian first started this rigorous and severe opinion, how eagerly Cyprian and the African Bishops stickled against it, how far it was condemned both there and at Rome, in what cases and by what measures of Penance the lapsed Penitents were to be taken in, we have already noted in Cyprian's Life. S. Dio∣nysius was of the moderate Party, wherein he had the concurrence of most of the Eastern Bishops, and as he Epist. ad Fab. ibid. c. 42. p. 241 pleads the general judg∣ment and practice of the holy Martyrs, many of whom had before their death received the lapsed upon their repentance again into the Church, and had themselves freely communicated with them. Whose judgment he thought it not reasonable should be despised, nor their practice controlled, nor the accustomed order overturned. Indeed he himself had ever observed this course, and therefore at the begin∣ning of the Persecution had given Ibid. c. 44. p. 246. order to the Presbyters of the Church to restore peace, and give the Eucharist to Penitents, especially in danger of death, and where they had before earnestly desired it. Which was done accordingly, as appears from the memorable instance of Serapion, an aged person, mentioned by him, who having lapsed in the time of Persecution, had often desired reconciliation, but in that confu∣sed time could not obtain it: but being suddenly surprized by a sum∣mons of death, and having laid three days speechless, on the fourth had onely so much use of his tongue restored him, as to bid his Nephew, a Boy that attended him, go for one of the Presbyters, to give him abso∣lution, without which he could not die. The Presbyter was at that time sick, but pitying the mans case, gave the Boy a little part of the consecrated Eucharist, which he kept by him, bidding him moisten it, and put it into his mouth. Which was no sooner done, but he brea∣thed out his soul with unspeakable comfort and satisfaction, that he now died in communion with the Church. VI. NOR was his care herein confined to his single Diocess, but he wrote Letters about this matter to most of the eminent Bishops and Go∣vernours of the Church. And that he might leave nothing unattempted, he treated with Novatian (or as he calls him Novatus) himself, endea∣vouring by all mild and gentle methods to reduce him to the peace and order of the Church. His Epistle to him, being but short and very pa∣thetical, we shall here subjoin Ibid. c. 45. p. 247.. Dionysius to Novatus our Brother, greeting: FOrasmuch as you your self confess, you were unwillingly drawn into this Schism, make it appear so by your willing and ready returning to the Church. For better it were to suffer any thing, then that the Church of God should be rent asunder. Nor is it less glorious to suffer Martyrdom upon this account, then in the case of not sacrificing to Idols. Yea, in my mind much more honourable. For in the one case a man suffers onely for his own soul, but in this he undergoes Martyrdom for the whole Church of God. And if now thou shalt perswade and reduce thy brethren to peace and concord, thy
merit will out-weigh thy crime. The one will not be charged to thy reproach, and the other will be mentioned to thy praise. And suppose thou shalt not be able to persuade them, yet however save thy own soul. I pray that thou mayest live peaceably, and farewell in the Lord. VII. NO sooner had he well rid his hands of this but he was engaged in another controversie, which involved and disturbed the whole Chri∣stian Church, I mean that concerning the rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Heretics, so hotly disputed between S. Cyprian and Stephen Bishop of Rome. Ibid. l. 7. c. 4. p. 251. Dionysius together with Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and a great many others in the East, stood on Cy∣prian's side, maintaining that they ought to be baptized. But however carried himself in it with great temper and moderation; he distinguished between Apostates who had received their baptism in the Catholic Church, and those upon their return they did not baptize (as Cyprian also affirms) but onely admitted by imposition of hands, and this rule and practice, he tells us Ib. c. 7. p. 253., he had learned from his predecessor Heraclas: but then for pure Heretics, who had no other baptism then what had been conferred by Heretical persons, (which in reality was null and of no effect) these he thought fit to be entered into the Church by Catho∣lic baptism. Besides that, he engaged more as a Mediator, then a Party, writing to Pope Stephen to use moderation in the case, as he did also to Sixstus his successor, and most other Bishops of that time. Indeed that he was not stiff and rigorous in his sentiments, may appear from the in∣stance he relates Ibid. c. 9. p. 254. in his Epistle to Pope Sixtus, wherein he begs his ad∣vice. A certain man in his Church, who went among the Classe of the faithful, both in his and his Predecessors days, beholding the form and manner of Baptism as it was administred among the Orthodox, came to Dionysius, and with tears bewailed his own case, and falling at his feet, confessed that the Baptism which he had received among the Heretics was nothing like this, but full of blasphemy and impiety; that for this reason he was infinitely troubled in conscience, and durst not lift up his eyes to Heaven, begging that he might partake of the true and sincere Baptism, and that grace and acceptation that was conferred by it. This Dionysius would not admit, telling him that his long commu∣nion with the Church was equivalent to it, that he that had so often been present at the giving of thanks, and said Amen to the prayers of the Congregation, that had stood before the holy Table, and had taken the holy food into his hands, and been so very long partaker of the body and bloud of our Lord Jesus Christ, that having done thus for so many years together, he durst not admit him to another Baptism: bidding him to be of good chear, and with a firm faith and a good conscience ap∣proach the holy Sacrament. All which notwithstanding did not quiet the mans mind, but that still he droopt under his fears and scruples, durst not be present at the Lords Table, nor could hardly be persuaded to come to the public Prayers. What answer Sixtus returned to this instance, is uncertain, but by this it is evident, that S. Dionysius was no zealot for the contrary opinion, though it must be confessed, there was something particular in this, that occurred not in ordinary cases, he pre∣suming that so long a communion with the Church, so continued and open a profession of the Orthodox Faith did tantamount a being le∣gally initiated and baptized into it.
VIII. IN these contests he passed over the short reign of Gallus, De∣cius his successor, who not taking warning Dion. Epist. ad Herm. ib. c. 1. p. 250. by his predecessors errour, stumbled at the same stone. And when he found all things quiet and peaceable, must needs fall a persecuting the Christians, whose prayers with Heaven secured the peace and prosperity of the Empire. But this alas was but a preparatory storm to that which followed in the reign of Valerian, whom our Dionysius Ibid. c. 10. p. 255. makes to be the Beast in the Revelation, to whom was given a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies, and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months. He was at first ex∣traordinarily kind to Christians beyond any of the precedent Empe∣rours, even those who were themselves accounted Christians: so that his whole Family was full of pious and good men, and his house a kind of Church. But this weather was too fair and benign to last long: Being seduced and deluded by an Arch-Magician of Egypt, he was prevailed with to fall from his kindness, and to persecute the Christians, whom the Conjurer represented as persons, who by wicked and execrable charms hindred the Emperours prosperity, colouring his pretence from their power over Daemons, whose mischievous Arts they obstructed, and whom they ordinarily banished with the speaking of a word; and persuading him that to urge the Gentile Rites, to maintain Lustrations, Sacrifices, Divinations by the bloud and intrails of Men and Beasts, was the ready way to make him happy. Whereupon Edicts were every where published against the Christians, and they without the least pro∣tection exposed to the common rage. IX. ORDERS being come to Alexandria, Dionysius Ep. ejus ad Crm. ib. c. 11. p. 257. accompanied with some of his Clergy, addressed himself to Aemilian the Governour, who did not at first downright forbid him to hold their solemn Assem∣blies, but endeavoured to persuade him to leave off that way of Wor∣ship, presuming others would quickly follow his example. The an∣swer he returned was short and Apostolical, that we must obey God rather then men, openly assuring him, that he would worship the true God, and none but him, from which resolution he would never start, nor ever cease to be a Christian. The Governour told them, that both by word and writing he had acquainted them with the great clemency of the Emperours towards them, permitting them to be safe, if they would but act agreeably to nature, and adore the Gods that were Protectors of the Empire, and he hoped they would be more grateful then to re∣fuse it. The Bishop replied, that every one worshipped those whom they thought to be gods, that as for themselves they adored and served that one God, who is the Creator of the World, and who gave that Government to the Emperours, and to whom they offered up dayly prayers for the permanency and stability of their Empire. To which the other rejoined, that if he were a god, none hindred them from wor∣shipping him together with them who were truly gods, they being en∣joined to worship [not one, but] gods, and those whom all men owned to be so. Dionysius answered, We cannot worship any other. I see, re∣plied Aemilian, that you are a company of foolish and ingrateful people, and not sensible of the favour of our Lords the Emperours: wherefore you shall stay no longer in this City, but be sent to Cephro in the parts of Lybia, for thither according to the Emperours com∣mand, I resolve to banish you. Nor shall either you, or any of your Sect have leave to keep your meetings, or to frequent your Coemeteria;
which if any dare to attempt, it shall be at his peril, and he shall be pu∣nished suitably to his crime. Be gone therefore to the place allot∣ted you. X. THE sentence was speedily put into execution, Dionysius though then sick, not being allowed one days respite to recover himself, or pro∣vide for his journey thither. Indeed when he came distinctly to under∣stand the place of his exile, he was a little troubled, knowing it to be a place destitute of the society of good men, and perpetually exposed to the incursions of Thieves and Robbers; but was better satisfied when told that it was near a great and populous City, whose neighbourhood would furnish him with persons both for Converse, and for opportuni∣ties of Conversion. Cephro was the most rude and barbarous Tract of the Lybian Desart, and Colythius (which as Lib. 6. c. 10. p. 402. Nicephorus tells us, was that particular part of it to which Dionysius was designed) the most uncom∣fortable it's like of all the rest. Thither therefore was he sent, whom great numbers of Christians quickly followed, partly from Alexandria, and partly out of other parts of Egypt. At his first arrival he was trea∣ted with rudeness and showrs of stones, but had not been long there, be∣fore he not onely civilized their barbarous manners, but reclaimed them from idolatry, and brought them to embrace the Christian Faith. And as he met with success, so he shifted his quarters, preaching up and down those wild and disconsolate parts, and turning the Wilderness into a Church. Nor could all the malice and threatnings of the Gover∣nour hinder, but that the Christians still assembled at Alexandria, not∣withstanding that their beloved Bishop was ravished from them, and that Aemilian proceeded with the utmost rigour against all that were brought before him, killing many with all the arts of cruelty, keeping others for the rack and torment, loading them with chains, and thrust∣ing them into squalid and nasty Dungeons, forbidding any of their friends to come near them. Though even in the height of these afflictions God supported their spirits, and animated others to venture in, and to administer comfort and necessaries to them, not scrupling though with the peril of their heads to interr the bodies of the Martyrs. XI. HOW long Dionysius continued in his banishment, I find not, probably till Valerian was taken captive by the King of Persia, Ann. CCLIX. when Gallienus his Son ruled alone, who from the unhappi∣ness of his Father took the measures of his carriage towards the Chri∣stians: he saw that while he favoured the Christians, Heaven smiled upon his designs, and things went on in a smooth and uninterrupted course; but when once he began to bear hard upon them, the Tide tur∣ned, and the divine vengeance pursued and overtook them, and that therefore nothing could be more prudent and reasonable, then to give a check to the present fury, and suffer them to go on securely in the exer∣cise of their Religion, which he did by this following Edict Euseb. l. 9. c. 13. p. 262..
Emperour Caesar P. Licinius GALLIENUS, Pius, Felix, Augustus, to Dionysius, Pinnas, Demetrius, and the rest of the Bishops. WE have given Order that the Indulgence of our bounty shall be extended throughout the World, that all Religious places shall be freed from force and violence. Wherefore ye also may freely enjoy the benefit of our Rescript, so as no man shall dare to vex or molest you, and what you now may lawfully enjoy has been long since granted by Us. And for this end Aurelius Cyrenius Our High Steward shall keep the Copy of this Edict which we have now granted. The like Rescript he also sent to other Bishops, giving them the free leave of their Coemeteria, the places where they bureid their dead, and often assembled for their Religious Solemnities, especially the memo∣rials of the Martyrs. XII. SCARCE was Dionysius quietly resetled at home, when he was alarum'd by another accident, which forced him for a while again, if not to retire, at least to keep so close, that he was not capable to exe∣cute his charge. Tr. Poll. in vit. Aemil. p. 778. & in vit. Gall. c. 4. p. 715. Aemilianus the Praefect partly by his own ambition, and partly forced by an unhappy accident wherein he was involved, took the Empire upon him, the Roman Army in Egypt joyning with him, partly out of dislike to Gallienus, partly out of affection to Aemilian, who was a brisk active man. Immediately he seized upon the Store∣houses, that Countrey being the common Granary of the Empire. Gal∣lienus being acquainted with the news, ordered Theodotus his General to march with an Army into those parts, who besieged Alexandria, and reduced the City to great extremity. For they were not more vigo∣rously assaulted by the enemy from without, then undermined Dionys. Epist. ad Hierach. ib. c. 21. p. 266. by Parties and Factions within, the City being divided into two Factions, one contending for Gallienus, and the other for Aemilian. So that there was no converse nor commerce between them, Dionysius being compelled in all his private affairs, and the public concernment of his Church to transact with his friends by Letters, it being safer, as he tells us, for a man to tra∣vel from East to West, then to pass from one part of Alexandria to ano∣ther, so barbarous and inhumane were the outrages committed there. The issue was, that Gallienus his Party prevailed to let in Theodotus and his Army, who seized the Tyrant, and sent him to the Emperour, who caused him to be strangled in Prison. XIII. HOW stormy and tempestuous is the Region of this Lower World! one Wave perpetually pressing upon the neck of ano∣ther. The Persecution was seconded by a Civil War and a cruel Fa∣mine, and that no sooner over, but a terrible Plague followed close at the heels of it; one of the most dreadful and amazing Judg∣ments which God sends upon mankind. It over-ran City and Coun∣try,
sweeping away what the fury of the late Wars had left, there not having been known (saith the Historian Zosim. Histo. l. 1. p. 347.) in any Age so great a destruction of mankind. This Pestilence (which some say Pomp. Lt. in vit. Galli. p.m. 1235. utrop. H. Rom. l 9. p. 1924. came first out of Aethiopia) began in the reign of Gallus and Volusian, and ever since more or less straggled over most parts of the Roman Empire, and now kept its fatal residence at Alexandria, where by an impartial se∣verity it mowed down both Gentiles and Christians, and turned the Pa∣schal solemnity (it being then the time Dionys. ib. c. 22. p. 268. of Easter) into days of weeping and mourning, all places were filled with dying groans, and sorrows ei∣ther for friends already dead, or those that were ready to depart, it being now, as formerly under that great Egyptian Plague, and some∣thing worse, there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not an house where there was not only one, but many dead. In this sad and miserable time how vastly different was the carriage of the Christians and the Heathens. The Christians out of the superabundance of their kindness and charity without any regard to their own health and life, boldly ventured into the thickest dangers, dayly visiting, assisting, and ministring to their sick and infected brethren, chearfully taking their pains and distempers up∣on them, and themselves expiring with them. And when many of those whom they thus attended, recovered and lived, they died themselves, as if by a prodigious and unheard of charity, they had willingly taken their diseases upon them, and died to save them from death. And these the most considerable both of Clergy and People, chearfully embracing a death that deserved a title little less then that of Martyrdom. They embraced the bodies of the dead, closed their eyes, laid them out, washed and dressed them up in their funeral weeds, took them upon their shoulders, and carried them to their Graves, it not being long be∣fore others did the same offices for them. The Gentiles on the contrary put off all sense of humanity, when any began to fall sick, they presently cast them out, ran from their dearest friends and relations, and either left them half dead in the high-ways, or threw them out as soon as they were dead, dreading to fall under the same infection, which yet with all their care and diligence they could not avoid. XIV. NOR were these the onely troubles the good man was exer∣cised with, he had contests of another nature that swallowed up his time and care. Sabellius a Libyan, born at Ptolemais a City of Pentapolis, had lately started Dion. Epist. ad Sex. ib. c. 6. p. 252. Nipb. l. 6. c. 26. p 419. dangerous notions and opinions about the doctrin of the holy Trinity, affirming the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be but one subsistence, one person under three several names, which in the time of the Old Testament gave the Law under the notion of the Father, in the New, was made man in the capacity of the Son, and descended af∣terwards upon the Apostles in the quality of the Holy Ghost. Diony∣sius as became a vigilant Pastor of his Flock, presently undertakes the man, and while he managed the cause with too much eagerness and fer∣vency of disputation, he bent the stick too much the other way, assert∣ing not onely Basil. ad Mg. Phi. Epist. XLI. p 60., a distinction of Persons, but , a difference of Essence, and an inequality of Power and Glory. For which he is severely censured by S. Basil and some of the Ancients, as one of those that mainly opened the gap to those Arrian impieties that after broke in upon the World. Though S. Ubi spr. Basil could not but so far do him right, as to say that it was not any ill meaning, but onely an over-vehement desire to oppose his adversary that betrayed him into
those unwary and inconsiderate assertions. Some Bishops of Pentapo∣lis immediately took hold of this, and going over to Rome represented his dangerous errours; where the case was discussed in a Synod, and Letters written to Dionysius about it, who in a set Apology answered for himself, and declared his sense more explicitly in this controversie, as may be seen at large in De Sentent. Dionys. Tom. 1. p. 548. &c. vid Phot. Cod. CCXXXII. col 901. Athanasius, who has with infinite pains vin∣dicated our Dionysius, his Predecessor, as a man sound and orthodox, and who was never condemned by the Governours of the Church for im∣pious opinions, or that he held those abominable tenets which Arrius broached afterwards. And certainly S. Basil might and would have passed a milder censure, had he either perused all Dionysius his Writings, or remembred how much he concerned himself to clear S. Gregory of Neocae∣sarea, Dionysius his contemporary, from the very same charge, for which he could not but confess he had given too just occasion. XV. NO sooner was this controversie a little over, but he was en∣gaged in another. Euseb. ibid. c. 24. p. 270. Nepos an Egyptian Bishop lately dead (a man emi∣nent for his constancy in the Faith, his industry and skill in the holy Scriptures, the many Psalms and Hymns he had composed, which the Brethren sung in their public Meetings) had not long since fallen into the errour of the Millenaries, and had published Books, to shew that the promises made in the Scriptures to good men, were , ac∣cording to the sense and opinion of the Jews to be literally understood, and that there was to be a thousand years State upon Earth, wherein they were to enjoy sensual pleasures and delights. Endeavouring to make good his assertions from some passages in S. John's Revelation, stiling his Book , A Confutation of Allegorical Expositors. This Book was greedily caught up and read by many, and advanced into that esteem and reputation, that Law and Prophets, and the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles were neglected and thrown aside, and the doctrine of this Book cried up, as containing , some great and extraordinary mystery, concealed before from the World: the more Simple and Unwary being taught to disband all sub∣lime and magnificent thoughts of our Lords glorious coming, the Resurre∣ction and final judgment, and our conformity to him in glory, and to hope for a state in the Kingdom of God, wherein they should be entertained with such little and trifling, such fading and transitory things as this World does afford. Dionysius being then in the Province of the Arse∣noitae, where this Opinion had prevailed so far, as to draw whole Chur∣ches into Schism and Separation, summoned the Presbyters and Tea∣chers, who preached in the Country Villages, and as many of the People as had a mind to come, advising them that in their Sermons they would publicly examine this Doctrin. They presently defended themselves with this Book, whereupon he began more closely to join issue with them, continuing with them three days together from morning to night, weighing and discussing the doctrins contained in it. In all which time he admired their constancy and love to truth, their great quickness and readiness of understanding, with so much order and decency, so much modesty and moderation were the Discourses managed on both sides, doubts propounded, and assent yielded. For they took an especial care not pertinaciously to defend their former opinions, when once they found them to be erroneous, nor to shun any objections which on either part were made against them. As near as might be they kept to the
present question, which they endeavoured to make good; but if con∣vinced by argument that they were in the wrong, made no scruple to change their minds, and go over to the other side, with honest minds, and sincere intentions, and hearts truly devoted to God, embracing whatever was demonstrated by the holy Scriptures. The issue was, that Coracion the Commander and Champion of the other Party, pub∣licly promised and protested before them all, that he would not hence∣forth either entertain, or dispute, or discourse, or preach these opinions, being sufficiently convinced by the arguments which the other side had offered to him: all the Brethren departing with mutual love, unani∣mity, and satisfaction. Such was the peaceable conclusion of this Meet∣ing, and less could not be expected from such pious and honest souls, such wise and regular Disputers. And happy had it been for the Chri∣stian World, had all those controversies that have disturbed the Church, been managed by such prudent and orderly debates, which as usually conducted, rather widen the breach, then heal and mend it. Dionysius to strike the controversie dead, while his hand was in, wrote a Book concerning the Promises, (which S. Hierom, forgetting what he had truly said De script. in Dionys. elsewhere, that it was written against Nepos, tells Praef at. in l. 18. Com. in Esa. p. 242. T. 5. us was written against Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons, mistaking the person probably for his opinion) in the first part whereof he stated the question, laid down his sense concerning it: in the second he treated concerning the Revelation of S. John (the main Pillar and Buttress of this Opinion) where both by rea∣son and the testimony of others, he contends that it was not written by S. John the Apostle and Evangelist, but by another of that name, an ac∣count of whose judgment herein we have represented in another place Antiq. Apost. Life of S. John n. 14.. XVI. THE last controversie wherein he was concerned was that against Paul of Samosata Bishop of Antioch, who had Euseb. ubi sup. c. 27. p. 277, 281. Epiph. Haeres. LXV. p. 262. Athanas. de Syn d. Arim. & Seleuc. p. 920. Niceph. l. 6. c. 27. p. 420. confidently ven∣ted these and such like impious dogmata, that there is but one person in the Godhead, that our blessed Saviour was, though a holy, yet a meer man, who came not down from Heaven, but was of a meer earthly extract and original, in whom the word (which he made not any thing distinct from the Father) did sometimes reside, and sometimes depart from him, with abundance of the like wicked and sensless propositions. Besides all which he was infinitely obnoxious in his Epist. Synod. II. Antioch. ap. Euseb. ib. c. 30. p. 280. &c. morals (as few men but serve the design of some lust by Schism and bad opinions) covetous without any bounds, heaping up a vast estate (though born a poor mans son) partly by fraud and sacriledge, partly by cruel and unjust vexations of his brethren, partly by fomenting differences, and taking bribes to assist the weaker party. Proud and vain-glorious he was beyond all measure, affecting Pomp and Train, and secular Power, and rather to be stiled a temporal Prince then a Bishop, going through the streets and all public places in solemn state, with persons walking before him, and crouds of people following after him. In the Church he caused to be erected a Throne higher then ordinary, and a place which he called Se∣cretum, after the manner of Civil Magistrates, who in the inner part of the Praetorium had a place railed in, with Curtains hung before it, where they sate to hear Causes. He was wont to clap his hand upon his thigh, and to stamp with his feet upon the Bench, frowning upon, and reproaching those, who did not Theatrically shout and make a noise while he was discoursing to them, wherein he used also to reflect upon his predecessors and the most eminent persons that had been before him, with
all imaginable scorn and petulancy, magnifying himself as far beyond them. The Hymns that were ordinarily sung in honour of our Lord, he abolished as late and novel, and in stead thereof taught some of his proselyted Females upon the Easter solemnity to chaunt out some which he had composed in his own commendation, to the horrour and asto∣nishment of all that heard them, procuring the Bishops and Presbyters of the neighbouring parts to publish the same things of him in their Ser∣mons to the People, some of his Proselytes not sticking to affirm, that he was an Angel come down from Heaven. All which he was so far from controlling, that he highly encouraged them, and heard them him∣self not onely with patience but delight. He was moreover vehemently suspected of incontinency, maintaining , subintroduced Women in his house, and some of them persons of exquisit beauty, con∣trary to the Canons of the Church, and to the great scandal of Religion. And that he might not be muh reproached by those that were about him, he endeavoured to debauch his Clergy, conniving at their Vices and Irregularities, and corrupting others with Pensions, and whom he could not prevail with by evil arts, he awed by power, and his mighty interest in the Princes and great ones of those parts, so that they were forced with sadness to bewail at home, what they durst not publish and declare abroad. XVII. TO rectifie these enormities most of the chief Bishops of the East resolved to meet in a Synod at Antioch Euseb. ib. c. 27. p. 277. &c. 30. p. 279., to which they earnestly invited our Dionysius. But, alas, age and infirmities had rendred him in∣capable of such a journey, and had given him a Writ of Ease, upon which account he begged to be excused from it. But that he might not be wanting in what he could, he sent Letters, wherein he declared his sense and opinion of those matters, and in his Epistle to the Church of An∣tioch, to shew his resentment of the thing, he not onely wrote not to the man, but gave him not so much as the civility of a salutation. In this Sy∣nod the crafty Fox hid his head, dissembling his sentiments, and pallia∣ting his disorders, and confessing and recanting what he was not able to conceal, so that for the present he still continued in his place. How he was afterwards discovered and laid open, convicted, condemned and deposed in another Synod in that City, and Domnus substituted in his room; how he refused to submit to the sentence of the Council, and for some time maintained his station by the power of Zenobia, a Queen in those parts, and a Jewish Proselyte whose favour he had courted and obtained; and how at last upon the Bishops appeal he was turned out, and the Synodical Decree executed by the immediate order of the Em∣perour Valerian, is without the limits of my business to enquire. XVIII. A little after this first Synod at Antioch died our S. Denys in the XII year of Gallienus Vid. ib. c. 28. p. 278. Ann. CCLXV. when he had sitten seventeen years Bishop of Alexandria, dying probably the same year and on the same day with S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, whose memories are accordingly celebrated September XVII. in the Calendar of the Roman Church. His memory was continued at Alexandria (as we learn from Haeres. LXIX. p. 311. Epiphanius) by a Church dedicated to him, but flourished much more in the incompara∣ble Vertues of his past life, and those excellent Writings he left behind him, which mainly consisted of vast numbers of Epistles; and 'tis proba∣ble all his Writings were nothing else, his larger Tracts being written in the nature of Epistles. Which, were they still extant, in stead of those
little fragments preserved by Eusebius, besides other advantages, they would probably furnish us with the most material transactions of the Christian World in those times, then which in those early Ages there was not a more active and busie period of the Church. His Writings, whereof some Fragments onely are now extant. Liber de Poenitentia ad Cononem Epi∣scopum Hermapolitanum. Libellus de Martyrio ad Originem. De Promissionibus adversus Nepotem Libri II. Ad Dionysium Romanum adversus Sabellium, Libri IV. Ad Timotheum Libri de Natura. De tentationibus Liber ad Euphran. Commentarius in primam partem Ec∣clesiastis. Epistola ad Cornelium Episcopum Ro∣manum. Epistola ad Stephanum Episcop. Rom. de Baptismo. Ad Sixtum Papam de Baptismo Epi∣stolae III. Adversus Germanum Episc. Epistola. Epistola ad Fabium Antiochiae Episc. Epistola ad Novatianum de Schismate. Epistola de Poenitentia ad Fratres per Aegyptum constitutos. Ad gregem suum Alexandrinum Epi∣stola objurgatoria. Epistola ad Laodicenos. Epistola ad Armenios de Poenitentia. Epistola ad Romanos . Alia ad eosdem de Pace & Poenitent. Ad Confessores Novatianos Romae Epistolae III. Ad Philemonem Presbyterum Roma∣num de Baptismo. Epistola itidem ad Dionysium Pres∣byterum Rom. de Baptismo. Epistola suo & Ecclesiae suae nomine ad Sixtum & Eccl. Rom. de eademre. Ad Dionysium Romanum de Luciano Epistola. Epistola ad Hermammonem. Epistola ad Domitium & Didymum. Epistola ad Compresbyteros Alexand. Epistola ad Hieracem Episc. Aegyptiac. Epistola de Sabbato. Epistola de Mortalitate. De Exercitatione Epistola. Epistola ad Ammonem Bernenicensem Episcopum, contra Sabellium. Alia ad Telesphorum. Ad Euphranorem alia. Ad Ammonem & Euporum Epistola Ad Basilidem Episcopum Pentapolit. Epistolae plures. Ex his superest Epistola Canonica de diversis Ca∣pitibus. Extat Gr. L. Tom. 1. Con∣cil. & alibi cum Commentario Balsamonis. Epistolae , seu Paschales plurimae. Epistola ad Ecclesiam Antiochenam adversus Paulum Samosatenum. Doubtful, or rather Supposititious. Epistola ad Paulum Samosatenum Gr. L. Concil. Tom. 1. Responsiones ad Pauli Samosateni de∣cem Quaestiones, Gr. L. ibid. The End of S. DIONYSIUS Alexandrinus's Life.
A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE Three First Ages OF THE Christian Church. Tatian. Orat. contr. Graec. p. 167. . Chrysost. Homil. II. in verb. Esai. vidi Domin. Tom. 3. p. 740. . LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in S. Pauls Church-yard. MDCLXXVI.
A Chronological Table. Ann. Chr. Roman Emperours. Consuls. Ecclesiastical Affairs. 1 Augusti. 43 C. Julius Caesar Vipsania∣nus. Our Lords Circumcision: His being presented in the Temple. His flight into Egypt. L. Aemil. Paulus. The Massacre of the Infants at Bethlehem.   The death of Herod about the time of the Passover. 2   44 P. Vinicius Nepos. Archelaus declared Tetrarch of Judaea. P. Alphinius Varus. 3   45 L. Aelius Lamia. In the beginning of this (or ra∣ther the end of the foregoing year) our Lord returned out of Egypt. L. Servilius Geminus. His education and abode at Nazareth. 4   46 Sex. Aelius Catus. Angustus refuses the title of Lord. C. Sentius Saturninus. 5   47 L. Valerius Messala. Great Earthquakes hapned. Cn. Cornelius Cinna. Tiber overflows.   An Eclyps of the Sun, March. 28 6   48 M. Aemil. Lepidus. About this time the Jews and Samaritans accused Archelaus to Augustus, who banished him to Vien in France. L. Arruntius Nepos. 7   49 A. Licinius Nerva.   Q. Cec. Metellus Creticus. 8   50 M. Furius Camillus.   S. Nonius Quinctilianus. 9   51 Q. Sulp. Camerinus.   C. Poppaeus Sabinus. 10   52 P. Corn. Dolabella.   C. Junius Silanus. 11   53 M. Aemil. Lepidus. The Jews taxed by Quirinus the Roman Governour. In those days rose up Judas of Galilce, and drew away much people af∣ter him. He is slain, and his two sons crucified. T. Statilius Taurus. Our Lord is generally supposed to have been born Decem. XXV. six days before the Com∣mencement of the common Aera. Ann. Augusti Imp. XLII. For though in strictness the XLII. Year of August. ended Nov. XXVII. (accounting his reign from his entering upon the Trium∣virate) yet seeing the civil Roman year expired not till the last of Decemb. it may be said to ex∣tend all that time. His XLIII. year in common reckoning, and the first year of the vulgar Aera of our Lord commencing Jan. 1. when the Romans began their year and the new Consuls took place.
12   54 T. Germanicus Caesar. By occasion of the Passover our Lord goes up with his Parents to Jerusalem, and there disputes with the Rabbins in the Tem∣ple. C. Fonteius Capito. 13   55 C. Silius Nepos. Augustus solemnly makes his Will, and lays it up with the Ve∣stal Virgins. L. Munacius Plancus. 14 Tiberius ab Aug. 19. 56 Sex. Pompeius Nepos. Augustus dies, and is interred with great funeral honours. Serv. Numerius affirms upon his Oath, that he saw him ascend into Hea∣ven. 1 Sex. Apuleius Nepos. 15   1 Drusus J. Caesar.   2 C. Norbanus Flaccus. 16   2 T. Statil. Sesenna. The Magicians and Mathe∣maticians banished Rome by Ti∣berius. 3 L. Scribonius Libo. 17   3 C. Caelius Rufus.   4 L. Pomponius Flaccus. 18   4 Cl. Tib. Nero III.   5 D. German. Caesar II. 19   5 M. Junius Silanus. Josephus called Caiaphas made High-priest of the Jews by the favour of Valerius Gratus the Roman Governour. 6 L. Norbanus Balbus.   20   6 L. Valerius Messala.   7 M. Aurelius Cotta. 21   7 Cl. Tib. Nero IV.   8 Drusus J. Caesar II. 22   8 C. Sulpicius Galba.   9 D. Haterius Agrippa. 23   9 C. Asinius Pollio.   10 C. Antistius Vetus. 24   10 Sex. Cornel. Cethegus.   11 L. Vitellius Varro.
25 Tiber. 11 Cossus Cornel. Lentulus. Towards the end of this year Pontius Pilat is sent to be Pro∣curator of Judaea. 12 M. Asinius Agrippa. 26   12 Cn. Cornel. Lentulus. Gaet. Pilat commands the Roman Standards with the Image of Ti∣berius upon them to be brought into the Temple to the great offence of the Jews. 13 C. Calvisius Sabinus. 27   13 M. Licinius Crassus. Herod Antipas putting away the daughter of Aretas King of Arabia, marries Heroidas his brother Philips wife. 14 L. Calphurnius Piso. 28   14 Ap. Junius Silanus. Joseph our Lords reputed Fa∣ther is by some said to decease this year. 15 P. Silius Nerva. 29   15 C. Rubellius Gemini. John the Baptist begins to preach and to baptize, (probably) about Mid-summer, or as B. Usher thinks, Octob. 19/ 16 C. Fusius Gemini. 30   16 C. Cassius Longinus. Our Lord baptized Jan. 6. ha∣ving completed the 29. year of his age, and 13. days. 17 M. Vinucius Quartinus. His first Passover April 6. 31   17 Tiber. Nero Caesar. V. His second Passover, March 28. His cure of the Paralytic at the Pool of Bethesda. His send∣ing out the 12 Apostles. 18 L. Aelius Sejanus. John the Baptist beheaded. 32   18 Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus. The third Passover, April 14. 4000 fed with 7 loaves. Christs Transfiguration. The LXX. Di∣scriples sent out. Zachaeus conver∣ted. Bartimaeus cured of his blindness. 19 A. Vitellius Nepos.   Suff. M. Fur. Camill{us} Scrib. 33   19 Ser. Sulpit. Galba. Lazarus raised. Our Lords triumphant entry into Jerusalem. The Lords Supper instituted. The fourth Passover. Our Lord ap∣prehended, arraigned, crucified April 3. rises again, and ascends into Heaven. 20 L. Cornelius Sylla. The 7 Deacons chosen. S. Ste∣phen stoned, Dec. 25.
34 Tiber. 20 P. Fabius Persicus. The Persecution following S. Stephen's death. 21 L. Vitellius Nepos. S. Philip's preaching at Sama∣ria. His converting and baptizing the Eunuch.   Peter and John return to Je∣rusalem. 35   21 C. Cestius Gallus Ca∣merinus. S. Paul converted, Jan. 25. 22 M. Servilius Rufus. S. Peter visits the Churches. Jonathan the son of Annas made High-priest. Many favours conferred upon the Jews by Vi∣tellius. 36   22 Q. Plautius Plautianus. al. Laelianus. Peters Vision. 23 Sex. Papinius Gallienus. Cornelius his Conversion. Peter accused for his converse with the Gentiles at his return to Jerusalem. 37 Caligula à Mart. 16. 23 Cn. Acerronius Proculus. S. Paul comes to Jerusalem, and after 15 days is by revela∣tion commanded to depart thence. He goes for Tarsus. 24 1 C. Pontius Nigrinus. 38   1 C. Caesar Caligula. II. A cruel Persecution raised a∣gainst the Jews at Alexandria by Flaccus the Praefect of Egypt 2 L. Apronius Caesianus. 39   2 M. Aquilius Julianus. Pontius Pilat lays violent hands upon himself. 3 P. Nonius Asprenas. The great increase of the Church of Antioch. The Believers first called CHRISTIANS there. 40   3 C. Caesar Caligula III. Suff. L. Gellius Publicola. Caligula commands Petronius to set up his Statue in the Temple at Jerusalem: but at the great instance of the Jews it is de∣ferred. 4 M. Cocceius Nerva. 41 Claudius à 1 Febr. 4 C. Caefar Caligula IV. S. James the Great the Apostle beheaded by the command of He∣rod. Peter delivered out of Prison. 1 Suff. Q. Pompon. Secundus Cn. Sentius Saturninus. 42   1 Tib. Claudius Imp. II. Barnabas and Paul set forward in their preaching of the Gospel. They plant the Christian Faith in Seleucia, Cyprus, and other places. 2 C. Licinius Caecina Largus
43 Claudii. 2 T. Claudius Imp. III. Claudius abrogates many of the Roman Festivals. 3 L. Vitellius II. Elion is made High-priest of the Jews in the room of Matthias the Son of Ananus deposed. 44   3 L. Q. Crispinus II. al. Vibius Priscus. Herod dies, being immediately struck by an Angel for his pride and ambition. 4 T. Statilius Taurus. 45   4 M. Vicinius Quartinus. The Blessed Virgin said by some to die this year, by others three years after. 5 M. Statilius Corvinus. The Apostles disperse themselves to preach the Gospel to the several Provinces of the Gentile World. 46   5 C. Valerius Asiaticus. Paul and Barnabas Preach at Lystra: Paul stoned there. Their return to Antioch. 6 M. Valerius Messala. al. M. Jun. Silanus. 47   6 T. Claudius Imp. IV. 30000 of the Jews, raising a tumult in the Feast of Ʋnlea∣vened Bread slain by Ventidius Cumanus Procurator of Judaea. 7 L. Vitellius III. 48   7 A. Vitellius Postea Imp. A Council holden by the Apo∣stles and others at Jerusalem to determine the Controversie about legal Rites. The Decrees of the Synod sent to the Churches. 8 L. Vipsanius Poplicola. 49   8 Cn. Pompeius Gallus. Barnabas preaches the Gospel in Cyprus: S. Paul in Syria, Ci∣licia, &c. 9 Q. Verannius Laetus. The Jews banished Rome by the edict of Claudius. 50   9 C. Antistius Vetus. S. Paul having travelled through Macedonia, comes to Athens, di∣sputes with the Philosophers, con∣verts Dionysius the Areopa∣gite, and thence passeth to Corinth, where he resides 18 moneths. 10 M. Suilli{us} Rufus Nervilian{us}. 51   10 T. Claudius Imp. V. S. Paul continues at Corinth, where he meets with Aquila and Priscilla not long before banished Rome by the decree of Clandius. Hence he writes to the Thessalon. 11 Ser. Cornelius Corfitus.
52   11 P. Cornelius Sylla Faustus. S. Paul departs from Corinth, passes to Ephesus thence to Jerusa∣lem, and returns back to Ephesus. 12 L. Salvius Otho Titianus. 53   12 D. Junius Silanus. He preaches and disputes daily in the School of Tyrannus, con∣vinces the Jews, and converts great numbers to the Faith. 13 Q. Haterius Antoninus. 54 Nero à 13 Oct. 13 M. Asinius Marcellus. S. Paul fights with Beasts, i.e. men of evil and brutish manners at Ephesus. He preaches there still, and in the parts thereabouts. 14   1 M. Acilius Aviola. 55   1 Nero Claudius Imp. S. Pauls departure from Ephe∣sus. He passes through Macedonia and Greece, and gathers contribu∣tion for the Saints at Jerusalem. 2 L. Antistius Vetus.   56   2 Q. Volusius Saturninus. S. Paul comes to Jerusalem, and is apprehended in the Temple, and secured in the Castle. His impri∣sonment at Caesarea, and arraign∣ment before Felix the Roman Go∣vernour. 3 P. Cornelius Scipio. 57   3 Nero Claud. Imp. II. S. Paul kept Prisoner at Caesa∣rea under Felix. 4 L. Calpurnius Piso. 58   4 Nero Cl. Imp. III. S. Pauls arraignment before Fe∣stus. He is sent to Rome, where he arrives about the end of this, or the beginning of the following year. The time of S. Paul's being sent to Rome, depends upon Festus his coming into Judaea to succeed in the room of Felix: which though it cannot be Precisely determined, yet plain it is, that it must be while Pallas (Felix his Brother, by whose mediation with the Emperour, Felix at his return had his life spared when accused by the Jews for his mal-administration) was yet in some favour with Nero, wherein he was declining some time before, and from which he seems wholly to have fallen upon Agrippina's death (upon whose interest he stood at Court; who was slain Neron. V. Ann. Chr. LIX. Pallas himself being Poisoned Neron. VIII. Ann. LXII. 5 M. Valerius Messala. al. 59   5 C. Vipsanius Poplicola. al. Apronianus S. Pauls free imprisonment at Rome. He writes his Epistles to the Ephesians, Colossians, Philip∣pians, to Timothy and Philemon. 6 C. Fonteius Capito. 60   6 Nero Cl. Imp. IV. About the latter end of this year S. Paul is set at liberty, and before his departure out of Italy writes his Epistle to the Hebrews. 7 Cossus Cornelius Lentulus
61 Neronis. 7 C. Caesonius Paetus. S. Paul now released, travels for the propagation of the Gospel, especially in the Western parts, , Clem. Rom. Ep. Ad Corinth. P. 8. prcha∣bly into Spain, or Britain. 8 C. Petronius Turpilianus al. Sabinus. 62   8 P. Marius Celsus. S. James the less, the Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of Jerusa∣lem, thrown by the Jews from the Temple, and knocked on the head with a Fullers Club.   L. Asinius Gallus. 9 Suff. Seneca & Trebellius. 63   9 L. Memmius Regulus. Simeon chosen to be S. James his successor in the See of Jeru∣salem. 10 Paulus Virginius Rufus. Anianus succedes S. Mark in the Bishoprick of Alexandria. Euseb. Chron. 64   10 C. Lecanius Bassus. Nero burns the City of Rome, and to wipe off the odium from himself, charges it upon the Chri∣stians, and raises the First Perse∣cution against them under that pretext. 11 M. Licinius Crassus Frugi. 65   11 P. Silius Nerva. Some of the most learned Chronologists of the Roman Church place the Martyrdom of these two great Apostles two years later, viz. Ann. Chr. LXVII. Which if any like better, I will not contend, the Persecution probably extending to the last of Nera, though it seems mose probable that they should suffer about the beginning of it. S. Peter and Paul suffer Martyrdom at Rome.   C. Julius Atticus Vestinus. Several prodigies at Jerusalem foreshew the destruction of that Church and State. 12 Suff. Anicius Cerealis. 66   12 C. Suetonius Paulinus. Nero residing in Achaia, com∣mits the mannagement of the War against the Jews to Vespasian. 13 L. Pontius Telesinus. 67   13 L. Fonteius Capito. Verspasian carries on the War with great diligence and success. 14 C. Julius Rufus. Josephus is taken Prisoner. 68 Galba à Jun. 10.   C. Silius Italicus. Phanassus the son of Samuel the last High Priest of the Jews. 1 M. Galerius Trachalus Turpilianus
69 Otho à Jan. 15.   Ser. Sulpitius Galba. Imp. II Vespasian being proclaimed Emperour, leaves Judaea, goes to Alexandria, and thence for Rome. Vitellius ab April. 20   T. Vinius Rufinus. al. Cris∣pinianus. Vespasian{us} à 1. Julii 1   70   1 Fl. Vespasianus Imp. II. Titus remanded by Vespasian to prosecute the Jewish War. 2 T. Vespasianus Caesar. Jerusalem besieged, taken, sacked, and burnt. 1100000 of the Jews perish, 97000 taken prisoners. 71   2 Imp. Vespasianus III. The Jewish Nobility, and the spoils of the Temple carried in triumph to Rome. 3 M. Cocceius Nerva, postea Imper. S. Bartholomew the Apostle said to be martyred this, by others, the following year. 72   3 Imp. Vespasianus IV. Ebion, so called from an affe∣cted poverty, born at Cocaba a Village in Basanitis, and Cerin∣thus noted Heretics, begin more openly to shew themselves about this time. 73   4 Fl. Domitianus. S. Thomas slain at Maliapor in India. 5 M. Valerius Messalinus. S. Martialis at Ravenna in Italy. 74   5 Imp. Vespasianus V. The last Cense made at Rome: several very aged persons then no∣ted, mentioned by Pliny, lib. 7. c. 49. justifying the great Age of se∣veral Ecclesiastic persons of those times. 6 T. Vespasianus III.   75   6 Imp. Vespasianus VI. The Temple of Peace dedicated by Vespasian, and the Jewish spoils laid up in it.   Tit. Vespasianus IV. 7 Suff. Domitianus IV. 76   7 Imp. Vespasianus VII.     Tit. Vespasianus V. 8 Suff. Domitianus V.
77 Vespasiani 8 Imp. Vespasianus VIII. Linus Bishop of the Church of the Gentile Christians at Rome suffers Martyrdom, having sate 12 years, 4 moneths, and 12 days: though others allow but 11 years, 2 moneths, and 23 days.   Tit. Vespasianus VI. 9 Suff. Domitianus VI. 78   9 L. Ceionius Commodus Verus. Antipas a faithful Martyr slain at Pergamus. Onuphr. by others referred to Ann. 93. 10 C. Cornelius Priscus. 79 Titus à Jun. 24 10 Imp. Vespasianus IX. A great eruption of Vesuvius; in the over-curious search whereof Pliny the Elder perished the fol∣lowing year. 1 Tit. Vespasianus VII. 80   1 Titus Vespas. Imp. VIII. Titus commands Josephus his History of the Jewish War to be laid up in the Library at Rome. 2 Fl. Domitianus VII. 81 Domit. à Sept. 13. 2 M. Plautius Sylvanus.   3   1 M. Annius Verus Pollio. 82   1 Domitianus Imp. VIII.   2 T. Flavius Sabinus. 83   2 Imp. Domitianus IX. Domitian banishes the Philo∣sophers out of Rome and Italy, and severely punishes the incest of the Vestal Virgins. 3 T. Virginius Rufus II. 84   3 Imp. Domitianus X.   4 Ap. Junius Sabinus. 85   4 Imp. Domitianus XI. Anianus S. Marks successor in the Bishoprick of Alexandria, dies, and is succeeded by Avi∣lius. 86   5 Imp. Domitianus XII.   6 Ser. Cornelius Dolabella.
87 Domit. 6 Imp. Domitianus XIII. Domitian assumes divine ho∣nours, commanding himself to be stiled Lord and God.   7 A. Volusius Saturninus.   88   7 Imp. Domitianus XIV.   8 M. Minucius Rufus.   89   8 T. Aurelius Fulvius. Philosophers and Mathemati∣cians again banished out of Rome.   9 A. Sempronius Atratinus.   90   9 Imp. Domitianus XV. Apollonius Tyanaeus the fa∣mous Magician, set up by the Gentiles as Rival to our Saviour, is brought before Domitian, shews tricks of Magic, and is said imme∣mediately to vanish out of his sight.   10 M. Cocceius Nerva II. The Second Persecution.   91   10 M. Ulpius Trajanus. This Cletus is by the Greeks, and that with greatest probability, made the same with Ana∣eletus, which breeds a great difference in their account of years. But because the account of the Greeks is not so clear and smooth, we have chosen, in assigning the times of the Bishops of Rome, to follow the Writers of that Church. Cletus Bishop of Rome mar∣tyred this (if not rather the fore∣going) year, April 26. he is suc∣ceeded by Clemens, May 16.   11 M. Acilius Glabrio.   92   11 Imp. Domitianus XVI. About this time S. John is sup∣posed to be sent by the Proconsul of Asia to Rome, and by Domi∣tian to have been put into a Vessel of hot oil, and then banished into Patmos.   12 A. Volusius Saturninius II.   93   12 Sex. Pompeius Collega.   13 Cornelius Priscus.   94   13 L. Nonius Asprenas Tor∣quatus. S. John writes his Book of Revelations.   14 M. Arricinius Celemens. Jewish Antiquities.   95   14 Imp. Domitianus XVII. Fl. Clemens, Domitians Cou∣sin-german, and Consul with him this year, put to death for being a Christian. His Wife Fl. Domitil∣la, Domitians Neece, banished for the same cause.   15 T. Flavius Clemens Mart.  
96 Nerva à 18. Sept. 15 C. Fulvius Valens. Nerva revoking the Acts of Domitian, S. John is released of his banishment, and returns to Ephesus.   16     1 C. Antistius Vertus   97   1 Coc. Nerva Imp. III. S. John (this year probably) after solemn preparation writes his Gospel at the earnest request of the Asian Churches. T. Virginius Rufus III.   2 Suff. C. Cornelius Tacitus, historicus.   98 Trajan à Jan 27. 2 Imp. Nerva IV. Avilius dying, Cerdo succeeds in the See of Alexandria.   1 M. Ulpius Trajanus II. S. Clemens Bishop of Rome is banished, and condemned to the Marble Quarries in the Taurica Chersonesus.   99   1 C. Sosius Senecio II.   2 A. Cornelius Palma.   100   2 Imp. Trajanus III. S. John dies, and is buried at Ephesus.   M. Cornelius Fronto III.     3 Suff. Plinius junior. S. Clemens of Rome is thrown into the Sea, with an anchor tied about his neck, November 9. ha∣ving been sole Bishop of Rome 9 years, 11 moneths, and 12 days.   101   3 Imp. Trajanus IV. Anacletus (according to the computation of the Church of Rome) succeeds in that See, April 3.   4 Sex. Articuleius Paetus.   102   4 C. Sosius Senecio III.   5 L. Licinius Sura.   103   5 Imp. Trajanus V. Elxai a false Prophet, Author of a new Sect, arises. Epiph. Hae∣res. 19.   6 L. Appius Maximus.   104   6 L. Licinius Sura II.   7 P. Neratius Marcellus.  
105 Trajani 7 T. Julius Candidus. Barsimaeus Bishop of Edessa suffers Martyrdom; others Place it, Ann. 109.   8 A. Julius Quadratus.   106   8 L. Ceionius Commodus Verus. The Greek Menology men∣tions 11000 Christian Souldiers banished by Trajan into Armenia, and that 10000 of them were cru∣cified upon Mount Ararat.   9 L. Tullius Cerealis.   107   9 C. Sosius Senecio IV. The Third Persecution where∣in Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem is crucified in the 120 year of his age.     10 L. Licinius Sura III. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch condemned, and sent to Rome to be thrown to wild Beasts.   108   10 Ap. Annius Trebonius Gallus. Ignatius his bones are conveyed back to Antioch, and there so∣lemnly interred.   11 M. Atilius Bradua.   109   11 A. Cornel. Palma II. Onesimus S. Paul's Disciple, whom the Martyrologies make Bishop of Ephesus, stoned at Rome, Feb. 16.   12 C. Calvisius Tullus II. Primus made Bishop of Ale∣xandria.   110   12 Clodius Crispinus. Euaristus succeeds Anacletus Bishop of Rome, though the Greeks, who make Cletus and Anacletus the same Person, make him immediately to follow Cle∣mens.   13 Solenus Orfitus Hasta.   111   13 L. Calpurnius Piso. Justus dying Zacchaeus suc∣ceeds in the See of Jerusa∣lem.   14 Vettius Rusticus Bolanus.   112   14 Imp. Trajanus VI.   15 C. Julius Africanus.  
113 Trajani 15 L. Publius Celsus.   16 C. Clodius Crispinus.   114   16 Q. Ninnius Hasta.   17 P. Manlius Vopiscus.   115   17 M. Valerius Messala. vel ut al. Adrianus & Salinator. The Jews at Alexandria, and about Cyrene in Egypt rebel, who are slain in great num∣bers.   18 C. Popilius Carus Pedo.   116   18 Aemilius Aelianus. Papias Bishop of Hierapolis sets on foot the Millenarian Do∣ctrin. 19 L. Antistius Vetus. 117 Adrian{us} ab Aug. 9. 19 Quinctius Niger.   20     1 T. Vipsanius Apronianus.   118   1 Imp. Adrianus II. The Fourth Persecution raised against the Christians, reinforcing that which had been set on foot by Trajan. 2 T. Claudius Fuscus   119   2 Imp. Adrianus III. Pope Evaristus martyred. He sate 9 years, 3 moneths, 10 days. He was succeeded by Alexander a Roman.   3 Q. Junius Rusticus. Justus made Bishop of Alexan∣dria.   120   3 L. Catilius Severus. The Christians severely prose∣cuted at Rome, whereof many Martyrs, and more driven to hide themselves in the Cryptae and Coe∣meteria under ground.   4 T. Aurelius Fulvus, postea Imp. Antoninus.   121   4 M. Annius Verus II. A great tumult at Alexandria about the Idol Apis found there. 5 L. Augur.   122   5 M. Acilius Aviola. The Persecution rages in Asia, under the Government of Arrius Antoninus the Proconsul.   6 Corellius Pansa.  
123 Adriani 6 Q. Arrius Paetinus. Adrian comes to Athens, and is initiated in the Eleusmian my∣steries. 7 C. Ventidius Apronianus. Quadratus Bishop of Athens, and Aristides present Apologies to the Emperour in behalf of the Chri∣stians. 124   7 M. Acilius Glabrio. Serenius Granianus writes to the Emperour in favour of the Christians, by whose Rescript to M. Fundanus Proconsul of Asia (Granianus his successor) the pro∣ceedings against them are miti∣gated. 8 C. Bellicius Torquatus.   125   8 P. Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus II.   9 Q. Vettius Aquilinus. 126   9 Vesproni{us} Candid, Ver{us} II Ambiguus Bibulus. al. M. Loll. Pedius Adrian revisits Athens, fini∣shes and dedicates the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, and an Altar to himself. 10 Q. Jun. Lepidus. 127   10 Gallicanus.   11 C. Caelius Titianus. 128   11 L. Nonius Asprenas Torquatus. Aquila, a Kinsman of the Em∣perours, first turns Christian, then apostatizing to Judaism, translates the Old Testament into Greek. 12 M. Annius Libo.   129   12 Q. Juventius Celsus.   13 Q. Julius Balbus.   130   13 Q. Fabius Catullinus. Aelius Adrianus having repai∣red Jerusalem, calls it after his own name, Aelia. 14 M. Flavius Aper. The Martyrdom of Alexander Bishop of Rome, after he had sate 10 years, 5 moneths, 20 days, to whom succeeded Sixtus a Roman.
131 Adri∣ani. 14 Ser. Octavius Laenas Pon∣tianus. Hymenaeus made Bishop of Alexandria, being the sixth Bi∣shop of that See. 15 M. Antonius Rufinus. 132   15 Sentius Augurinus. The Jews rebel against the Ro∣mans under the conduct of Bar∣chochab an Impostor. 16 Arrius Severianus. Justin Martyr converted to Christianity about this time, or it may be, the following year. 133   16 Hiberus. The Jews dispersed and over∣come by the prudent Arts of Ju∣lius Severus the Roman Ge∣neral, though not fully suppres∣sed till the following year, when Barchochab was executed. 17 Jul. Silanus Sisenna. 134   17 C. Julius Servilius Ursus Severianus. Basilides the Haeresiarch makes himself famous at Ale∣xandria. 18 C. Vibius Juventius Verus. 135   18 Pompeianus Lupercus. Marcus, the first of the Gen∣tile Converts, made Bishop of Jerusalem, all hitherto having been of the Circumcision. 19 L. Juni{us} Atticus Acilianus. 136   19 L. Ceionius Commodus Verus. Gentulius, Amantius, Cerea∣lis, and several others suffer Mar∣tyrdom. 20 Sex. Vetulenus Pompeia∣nus. 137   20 L. Aelius Verus Caesar II. Phlegon the Trallian, for∣merly servant to the Emperour Adrian here ends his Book of Olympiads. Olym 229. An. 1. 21 P. Caelius Balbinus Vibullius Pius. 138 Antoninus Pius Jul. 10 21 Sulpicius Camerinus.   1 Quinct. Niger Magnus. 139   1 Imp. Antoninus Pius II.   2 Bruttius Praesens.
140 Antonini Pii. 2 Imp. Anton. Pius III. Ʋpon Sixtus his Martyrdom Telesphorus is chosen Bishop of Rome, according to the Roman account. 3 M. Aurelius Caesar. J. Martyr presents his first (u∣sually put second) Apology for the Christians. 141   3 M. Peducaeus Syloga Priscinus.   4 T. Hoenius Severus. 142   4 L. Cuspius Rufinus. About this time the most absurd and sensless Heretics, the Ophitae, Cainitae, and Sethiani arise. 5 L. Statius Quadratus. 143   5 C. Bellicius Torquatus. T. Claudius Atticus   6 Herodes. 144   6 Lollianus Avitus. Eumenes or Hymenaeus bishop of Alexandria dies, Marcus the seventh Bishop of that See suc∣ceeds. 7 C. Gavius Maximus. Valentinus the Heretic appears. 145   7 Imp. Anton. Pius IV.   8 M. Aurelius Caesar II.   146   8 Sex. Erucius Clarus II. Marcion after his frequent recantations, again lapses into He∣resie, which he Propagates more in∣dustriously then before. 9 Cn. Claudius Severus. 147   9 M. Valerius Largus.   10 M. Valerius Messalinus. 148   10 C. Bellicius Torquatus II.   11 M. Salvius Julianus II. 149   11 Ser. Corneli{us} Scipio Orfit{us}. Celadion succeeds as the eighth Bishop of Alexandria. 12 Q. Nonius Priscus.
150 Anton. Pii. 12 Romulus Gallicanus.   13 Antistius Vetus. 151   13 Sex. Quinctilius Gordian{us}.   14 Sex. Quinct. Maximus. 152   14 Sex. Acilius Glabrio. Pope Telesphorus martyred, having sate 11 years, 9 moneths, 3 days. Petav. &c. 15 C. Valerius Omollus Va∣rianus. Hyginus succeeds. 153   15 Bruttius Praesens II.   16 M. Antonius Rufinus. 154   16 L. Aurelius Caesar. In the Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome recorded by Optatus and S. Augustin, Anicetus is set before Pius: according to which account Anicetus his succession in that See, and conse∣quently Polycarps coming to Rome, must be placed fifteen years sooner. See the life of S. Polycarp, Num. IV. p. 115, Anicetus according to the ac∣count of the Greeks succeeds about this time in the See of Rome, not long after which S. Polycarp comes thither: and this no doubt much truer then the computation of the Church of Rome. 17 Sextilius Lateranus. 155   17 C. Julius Severus.   18 M. Rufinus Sabinianus. 156   18 Plautius Sylvanus. Pope Hyginus martyred, after he had sitten four years, wanting two days, to whom Pius succeeds. Petav. Ricciol. Briet. &c. 19 Sentius Augurinus. 157   19 Barbatus.   20 Regulus. 158   20 Q. Fl. Tertullus.   21 Licinius Sacerdos. 159   21 Plautius Quinctillus.   22 Statius Priscus.
160 Anton. Pii. 22 T. Vibius Barus.   23 Ap. Annius Bradua.   161 M. Aurelius L. Aelius Verus: à 6. Martii. 23 M. Aurelius Caesar III.   1 L. Aelius Verus Caesar II.   162   1 Q. Junius Rusticus. Justin the Martyr presents his other Apology to the Emperour in behalf of the Christians.   2 Vettius Aquilinus. The Fifth Persecution begun.   163   2 L. Papirius Aelianus. Justin suffered Martyrdom (probably about this time) at Rome, or at most, the next year.   3 Junius Pastor   164   3 C. Julius Macrinus. Marcus and Timotheus mar∣tyred at Rome.   4 L. Cornelius Celsus   165   4 L. Arrius Pudens. Ʋpon Pope Pius his martyr∣dom, Anicetus is advanced into the Chair: though Eusebius and the Greeks according to their ac∣compt, make his Pontificate Com∣mence, Ann. Christ. 154. and accordingly fix the time of Poly∣carps coming to Rome.   5 M. Gavius Orfitus.   166   5 Q. Servilius Pudens.   6 L. Fusidius Pollio.   167   6 L. Aurelius Verus. S. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna suffers Martyrdom there, together with Germanicus and others.   7 T. Numidius Quadratus.   168   7 T. Junius Montanus. Theophilus made Bishop of Antioch, who learnedly defends the cause of Christianity against the Gentiles, Eusebius refers it to the following year. 8 L. Vettius Paulus.  
169 M. Aurelii L. Aelii Veri. 8 Sosius Priscus. Gervasius and Protasius un∣dergo Martyrdom about this time at Millain.   9 Q. Caelius Apollinaris.   170   9 L. Julius Clarus. Melito Bishop of Sardis, and Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis present their Apologetics to the Emperour for the Christians.   10 M. Aurelius Cethegus.   171   10 L. Septimius Severus II. al. T. Tibinus Serenus. Montanus and his Accompli∣ces Authors of the new Prophecy, begin now more plainly to discover themselves, having craftily broa∣ched their errours some years be∣fore.   11 Herennianus. al. C. Scoedius Natta.   172   11 Claudius Maximus. Tatian, heretofore Justin Mar∣tyrs Scholar, becomes authour of the Sect, called Encratitae.   12 Cornelius Scipio Orfitus. Bardesanes the Syrian inse∣cted with Valentinianism.   173   12 Claudius Severus. Pope Anicetus crowned with Martyrdom, having been Bishop of Rome 8 years, 2 moneths, 7 days.   13 T. Claudius Pompeianus. Soter succeeds.   174   13 Annius Trebonius Gallus. M. Aurelius his Victory over the Quadi and Marcomanni in Germany, gained by the Prayers of the Christian Legion.   14 L. Flaccus.   175   14 Calpurnius Piso.   15 M. Salvius Julianus.   176   15 T. Vitrasius Pollio.   16 M. Flavius Aper.  
177 M. Aurel. 16 L. Aurel. Commodus Imp. Soter being taken away by mar∣tyrdom, Eleutherus a Greek suc∣ceeds in the Church of Rome.   17 Plautius Quinctillus. Athenagoras the Christian Philosopher of Athens is now sup∣posed to have presented his Apo∣logy   178   17 Vettius Rufus. The foregoing year a Persecu∣tion raged horribly in France, wherein besides many others died Pothinus Bishop of Lyons, to whom succeeded Irenaeus, the year following.   18 Cornelius Scipio Orfitus.   179   18 Imp. L. Aurelius Commo∣dus II. The Cataphyrygian Heresie greatly prevails.   19 Vespronius Candidus Verus.   180 Commodus à Mart. 16. 19 Bruttius Praesens II. Julianus created Bishop of Alexandria.   1 Sex. Quinctili Gordianus. Pantaenus a Christian Philoso∣pher opens the Catechetic School at Alexandria.   181   1 Imp. Commodus III. The Persecution against the Christians much abated.   2 Antistius Burrhus.   182   2 Petronius Mamertinus. Theodotion of Pontus, first a Marcionite, then a Jew, tran∣slates the Old Testament into Greek.   3 Trebellius Rufus. The Temple of Serapis at Ale∣xandria burnt down.   183   3 Imp. Commodus IV.   4 M. Aufidius Victorinus.   184   4 M. Eggius Marullus seu Marcellus. Commodus introduces the worship of Isis (formerly prohibi∣ted) into Rome.   5 M. Papirius Aelianus.  
185 Commodi 5 Triarius Maternus.   6 M. Atilius Metilius Bradua   186   6 Imp. Commodus V. About this time Lucius a Prince of Britain is said to have sent Letters to Pope Eleutherius to furnish him with Preachers to publish the Christian Faith in these parts.   7 M. Acilius Glabrio. Origen born.   187   7 Tullius seu Clodius Crispinus. Apollonius a great Philoso∣pher, and (as S. Hierom affirms) a Senator, pleads his own, and the cause of the Christian Religion before the Senate, for which he suf∣fers Martyrdom.   8 Papirius Aelianus.   188   8 C. Allius Fuscianus. The Capitol burnt by Light∣ning, which destroyed the adja∣cent buildings, especially the fa∣mous Libraries.   9 Duillius Silanus.   189   9 Junius Silanus. Demetrius ordained Bishop of Alexandria, who sate 43 years.   10 Q. Servilius Silanus. Serapion made Bishop of An∣tioch, this, or as others, the fol∣lowing year.   190   10 Imp. Commodus VI. Commodus will have himself accounted Hercules, the son of Jupiter, and accordingly habits himself; with other extravagant instances of folly.   11 Petronius Septimianus.   191   11 Cassius Apronianus. Julian a Senator, and many others said to be martyred about this time.   12 M. Attilius Metilius Bradua II.   192   12 Imp. Commodus VII. Pope Eleutherius having sate 15 years and 23 days, dies; in whose room Victor an African suc∣ceeds.   13 P. Helvius Pertinax.  
193 Pertinax à 1 Januar.   Q. Sosius Falco.   Did. Julian{us} à Mart. 28.   Severus à Maii 11. 1 C. Julius Clarus.   194 Severi 1 Imp. Severus II. Clemens Alexandrinus Pan∣taenus his Scholar and successor in the Catechetic School, was famous about this time. 2 Clodius Albinus Caesar II. Pope Victor excommunicates Theodorus the Heretic. 195   2 Q. Fl. Tertullus. Narcissus made Bishop of Je∣rusalem. He is famous for mi∣racles and an holy life. 3 T. Fl. Clemens. 196   3 Cn. Domitius Dexter. Pope Victor revives the con∣troversie about the celebration of Easter, threatens to excommuni∣cate the Asiatic Churches, for which he is severely reproved by many, and especially by Ire∣naeus. 4 L. Valeri{us} Messala Priscus. Several Synods holden to this Purpose. 197   4 Ap. Claudius Lateranus. The Jews and Samaritans re∣bel, and are overcome, and their Religion strictly forbidden. Se∣verus triumphs for that Vi∣ctory. 5 M. Marius Rufinus.   198   5 Tib. Aterius Saturninus.   6 C. Annius Treboni Gallus 199   6 P. Cornelius Anulinus. Severus creates his son An∣toninus Emperour, his son Geta Caesar, and bestows a large Do∣native upon the Souldiers, which gave occasion to Tertullian to write his Book De Corona. 7 M. Aufidius Fronto.
200 Severi 7 Tib. Claudius Severus. The Christians at Rome se∣verely treated by Plautianus Prae∣fect of the City, and in Afric by Saturninus the Proconsul. 8 C. Aufidius Victorinus. Tertullian writes his Apologe∣tic either this, or the following year. 201   8 L. Annius Fabianus. Pope Victor after 9 years, and 2 moneths, being martyred, leaves the place to Zephyrinus. 9 M. Nonius Mucianus. Tertullian presents his Dis∣course to the President Scapula. 202   9 Imp. Severus III. The Sixth Persecution; where∣in Leonidas, Origens Father suffers Martyrdom at Alexandria: Irenaeus at Lyons in France. 10 Imp. Antoninus Caracalla. 203   10 P. Septimius Geta. Origen a very Youth sets up a Grammar School at Alexandria, and becomes famous. 11 L. Septimius Plautianus. At 18 years of Age he is pre∣ferred by Demetrius the Bishop to be Instructor of the Catechu∣mens. 204   11 L. Fabius Chilo Septimius. The Secular Games celebrated at Rome, upon which occasion, probably, Tertullian wrote his Book De Spectaculis, and it may be, that De Idololatria. 12 M. Annius Libo. 205   12 Imp. Antoninus Caracalla II.   13 P. Septimius Geta Caesar. 206   13 M. Nummi{us} Annius Albin{us}. Origen makes the famous at∣tempt upon himself, in making himself an Eunuch. 14 Fulvius Aemilianus.
207 Severi 14 M. Flavius Aper. Tertullian writes against the Marcionites; and his Book De Pallio, and was then (probably) made Presbyter of Carthage. 15 Q. Allius Maximus. About this time Minucius Fe∣lix is supposed to publish his Dia∣logue called Octavius. 208   15 Imp. Antoninus Caracalla III.   16 P. Septimius Geta Caesar II. 209   16 T. Claudius Pompeianus.   17 Lollianus Avitus. 210   17 M. Acilius Faustinus.   18 C. Caesonius Macer Rufinianus. 211   18 Q. Epidius Rufus Lollia∣nus Gentianus.   Antoninus Caracalla à 4 Febr. 1 Pomponius Bassus. 212   1 M. Pompeius Asper. Alexander a Cappadocian Bishop, made Bishop of Jerusa∣lem. 2 P. Asper. 213   2 Imp. Caracalla IV.   3 P. Caelius Balbinus. 214   3 Silius Messala. A disputation held at Rome between Caius and Proclus one of Montanus his Disciples; where∣upon Pope Zephyrin excluded Proclus and Tertullian commu∣nion with the Church of Rome, which occasioned Tertullians star∣ting aside to Montanus his Party. 4 Q. Aquilius Sabinus.
215 Antonini 4 Aemilius Laetus. Tertullian writes against the Orthodox, against whom he in∣veighs under the name of Psy∣chici. 5 Anicius Cerealis. 216   5 Q. Aquilius Sabinus. II.   6 Sex. Corn. Anulinus. 217   6   A Greek Translation of the Bible, called the Fifth Edition, found in a Hogs-head at Jericho, inserted by Origen into his Octa∣pla. 7 Bruttius Praesens Macrinus & Diadumen. F à 10. April. 1 Extricatus. 218   2 Anton. Diadumenus Caesar.   Antoninus Elagabalus à 7 Jun. 1 Adventus. 219   1 Imp. Elagabalus II. Pope Zephyrin dies. He sate 22 years, and so many days. Suc∣ceeded by Callistus. 2 Licinius Sacerdos. 220   2 Imp. Elagabalus III. Julius Africanus a famous Christian Writer, sent upon an Embassie to the Emperour, for the rebuilding of Nicopolis (ancient∣ly Emmaus) a City in Palestin. 3 M. Aurelius Eutychianus Comazon. 221   3 Annius Gratus.   4 Claudius Seleucus. 222   4 Imp. Elagabalus IV. Hippolytus Bishop of Portus composes his Paschal Canon. Alexander Mam. à Martii 6. 1 M. Aurelius Severus Alexander Caesar.
223 Alexandri 1 Maximus. Among the famous men of this time was Ulpian the Lawyer, who collected all the Imperial Edicts formerly published against the Christians. 2 Papirius Aelianus. 224   2 Claudius Julianus. The Christians cruelly perse∣cuted at Rome at the instigation of Ulpian the great Lawyer. 3 Claudius Crispinus. Pope Callistus martyred, af∣ter he had sate 5 years, 1 moneth, 12 days. Urban chosen in his room. 225   3 L. Turpilius Dexter.   4 M. Maecius Refus. 226   4 Imp. Alexander II.   5 C. Quinctilius Marcellus. 227   5 D. Caelius Balbinus II. Hippolytus Bishop of Portus suffers Martyrdom. 6 M. Clodius Pupienus Maximus. 228   6 Verttius Modestus. Origen ordained Presbyter by Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus of Caesarea. 7 Probus. 229   7 Imp. Alexander III. The Sixth Greek Edition found at Nicopolis. 8 Dio Cassius historicus. 230   8 Calpurnius Agricola. Origen prosecuted, and Syno∣dically condemned by Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria. 9 Clementinus.
231 Alexandri 9 T. Claudius Pompeianus. Origen resigns up his Cateche∣tic School to his Scholar Heraclas, who is soon after chosen Bishop of Alexandria.   10 Felicianus. Pope Urban beheaded. He is succeeded by Pontianus. 232   10 Julius Lupus. Origen departs from Alexan∣dria, and fixes his residence at Caesarea in Palestin. 11 Maximus. Plotinus becomes Ammonius his Scholar at Alexandria. 233   11 Maximus II.   12 Ovinius Paternus. 234   12 Maximus III. Pontianus Bishop of Rome banished into Sardinia. 13 Urbanus. 235   13 L. Catilius Severus. Maximinus raises the Seventh Persecution against the Chri∣stians. 14   Origen writes his exhortation to Martyrdom. Maximinus à 18 Martii 1 L. Ragonius Urinatius Quintianus. Pope Pontianus suffers mar∣tyrdom in Sardinia..   Anterus succeeds in the Chair. 236   1 Imp. Maximinus. Anterus scarce having possessed his place one moneth, is slain; and Fabian elected in his room. 2 C. Julius Africanus. 237   2 P. Titius Perpetuus.   3   Pupienus Balbinus à Maii 26. 1 L. Ovinius Rusticus Cornelianus. 238   1 M. Ulpius Crinitus.   Gordianus à Mense Martii. 1 C. Nonius Proculus Pontianus.
239 Gordiani 1 Imp. Gordianus. Zebinus Bishop of Antioch dies; Babylas is chosen to that See.   2 M. Acilius Aviola. 240   2 Vettius Sabinus. About this time Origen is thought to have taken his second journey to Athens, where he fini∣shed his Commentaries upon Eze∣kiel. 3 Venustus. 241   3 Imp. Gordianus II.   4 T. Claudi{us} Pompeian{us} II. 242   4 C. Aufidius Atticus.   5 C. Asinius Praetextatus. 243   5 C. Julius Africanus. Origen is sent for into Ara∣bia, where he disputes with, and converts Beryllus from his un∣sound and erroneous opinions. 6 Aemilius Pappus. 244   6 Fulvius Aemilianus.   Philipp{us} à mense April. 1 Peregrinus. 245   1 Imp. Philippus.   2 Tib. Fabius Titianus. 246   2 Bruttius Praefens. Dionysius, one of Origens Scholars, and successors in the Schola , made Bishop of Alexandria. 3 Nummius Albinus. 247   3 Imp. Philippus II. The Annus Millesimus ab U. C. begun this, ended the follow∣ing year, and celebrated by the Emperour with all imaginable so∣lemnity and magnificence. 4 M. Philippus F. Caesar.
248 Philippi 4 Imp. Philippus III. Cyprian chosen Bishop of Carthage. 5 M. Julius Philippus F. II. 249   5 Fulvius Aemilianus II. A tunnilt raised at Alexandria by an Impostor, gives occasion to a preliminary Persecution against the Christians there. 6   Decius à Maio. 1 Vettius Aquilinus. 250     The Eighth Persecution raised by Decius. 1 Imp. Messius Decius. S. Cyprian in retirement. 2 Annius Maximus Gratus. Pope Fabian martyred. After whose decease a vacancy in that See for above a year, Novatian endeavouring to thrust him∣self in. 251   2 Imp. Decius II. Great Schisms in the African Churches about the lapsed. 3   Gallus & Volusianus F. à Dec. 1 Q. Etruscus Deci{us} F. Caesar. Cornelius elected Bishop of Rome. 252   1 Imp. Trebonian{us} Gallus II. The Novatian Doctrines con∣demned in a Synod of 60 Bishops at Rome.   The Emperours renew the Per∣secution begun under Decius. 2 C. Vibius Volusianus. A great mortality throughout the World. 253   2 C. Vibius Volusianus II. Cornelius first banished, then recalled, cruelly beaten, and at last beheaded. 3   Valerianus cum Gallie∣no F. à Dec. 1 M. Valerius Maximus. Lucius succeeds him. 254   1 Imp. Licinius Valerianus II Origen dies, and is buried at Tyre. 2 Imp. Gallienus. Valerian the Emperour at first a great Patron of the Christians. 255   2 Imp. Valerianus III. Pope Lucius after one year, and three moneths suffers Martyrdom. Stephen a Roman chosen to be his successor. 3 Imp. Gallienus II.
256 Valeriani 3 M. Valerius Maximus. The great controversie about the rebaptizing such as had been baptized by Heretics hotly venti∣lated. 4 M. Acilius Glabrio. The heats between Cyprian and Stephen of Rome. 257   4 Imp. Valerianus IV. The Nineth Persecution be∣gun by Valerian. 5 Imp. Gallienus III. Sabellius confounds the Per∣sons in the Trinity, and spreads his Heresie. 258   5 M. Aurelius Memmius Fuscus. Pope Stephen slain Aug. 2. which others refer to the foregoing year. Sixtus succeeds. 6 Pomponius Bassus. S. Cyprian beheaded at Car∣thage, Sept. 14. 259 Gallienus solus, capto Valer. 6 Fulvius Aemilianus al. Gallienus IV. Pope Sixtus and his Deacon Laurentius receive the Crown of Martyrdom. 7 Pomponius Bassus II. al. Valerianus jun. Dionysius succeeds in the See of Rome. 260   7 cornelius Secularis. Paul of Samosata made Bishop of Antioch. 8 Junius Donatus. Gallienus stops the Persecution against the Christians. 261   8 Imp. Gallienus IV. Dionysius Bishop of Alexan∣dria writes to Pope Dionysius to vindicate himself from the suspi∣cion of Sabellianism charged upon him. 9 Volusianus. 262   9 Imp. Gallienus V. Aemylian attempts to make himself Emperour, and besieges Alexandria, where the Christians are reduced to great straits. 10 App. Pompeius Faustinus. 263   10 Nummius Albinus.   11 Maximus Dexter.
264 Gallieni 11 Imp. Gallienus VI.   12 Aemilius Saturninus. 265   12 Valerianus Caesar II. A Synod held at Antioch a∣gainst Paulus Samosatenus the Bishop of it. 13 L. Caesonius Lucillus Macer Rufinianus. Dionysius Bishop of Alexan∣dria, and Gregory Bishop of Neo∣caesarea depart this life. 266   13 Imp. Gallienus VII. Hymenaeus ordained Bishop of Jerusalem. 14 Sabinillus. 267   14 Ovinius Paternus.   15 Arcesilaus. 268   15 Ovinius Paternus II. Claudius the Emperour perse∣cutes the Christians at Rome. Claudius à Mart. 21. 1 Marinianus. 269   1 Imp. Aur. Claudius.   2 Ovinius Paternus III. 270   2 Flavius Antiochianus. Another Synod held at Anti∣och, wherein Paul of Samosata is condemned and deposed, and Domnus placed in his room. Aurelianus à Mart. 1 Furius Orfitus. Pope Dionysius dies, Decem. 26. 271   1 Imp. Aurelianus. Felix chosen Bishop of Rome. 2 Pomponius Bassus al. C. Jul. Capitolinus. 272   2 Quietus. Many suffer Martyrdom about this time. 3 Voldumianus.
273 Aureliani 3 M. Claudius Tacitus.   4 Furius Placidianus. 274   4 Imp. Aurelianus II. Zenobia Queen of the Palmy∣reni, a Jewess, and (if some might be credited) a Christian, over∣come by Aurelian, and carried in triumph to Rome. 5 C. Julius Capitolinus. 275   5 Imp. Aurelianus III. Pope Felix crowned with martyrdom, after he had sitten 4 years and 5 moneths. His suc∣cessor was Eutychianus a Tus∣can. Tacitus à 25. Sept. 1 T. Nonius Marcellinus. 276 florianus April 12. 1 Imp. M. Cl. Tacitus II.   Probus à Jul. 1. 1 Fulvius Aemilianus. 277   1 Imp. Aurelius Probus. The Manichaean Heresie springs up, planted by Manes a Persian, originally called Curbicum, the Author of that wild and execrable Sect. 2 Anicius Paulinus al. M. Furius Lupus. 278   2 Imp. Probus II. Anatolius Bishop of laodicea, eminent for his skill in Philoso∣phy and Humane Learning. He had formerly been Colleague with Theotecnus Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestin. 3 M. Furius Lupus al. Virius. Cyrillus the 18 Bishop of An∣tioch. 279   3 Imp. Probus III.   4 Ovinius Paternus al. C. Junius Tiberianus. 280   4 Junius Messala.   5 Gratus.
281 Probi 5 Imp. Probus IV. Theonas created Bishop of Alexandria, the 15 Bishop of that Church. 6 C. Junius Tiberianus. 282   6     7 Imp. Probus V. Carus cum FF. Numeri∣ano, Carino Aug. 12. 1 Pomponius Victorinus. 283   1 Imp. M. Carus.   2 M.A. Carinus Caesar. 284   2 Imp. Carinus. Eutychianus Bishop of Rome crowned with Martyrdom, De∣cemb. 8. His successor was Caius, a Dalmatian, and a Kinsman (as is said) of Dioclesian. Dioclesia∣nus à Sept. 17. 1 Imp. Numerianus. The Dioclesian Aera begins here. 285   1 Imp. Dioclesianus II.   2 Aristobulus. 286   2 Maximus Junius Priscillianus. Though this seems the most proper period for the Martyrdom of the Thebaean Legion when maximian was sent against the Rebels in France; yet is it said in the Acts of their Mar∣tyrdom, that in their journey out of the East, they came to Rome, and were confirmed in the Faith by Marcellinus then Bishop of it. Which if so, they could not suffer sooner then Ann. Chr. CCXCVI. when Marcellinus succeeded in that See. The Thebaean Legion under the command of Mauricius, being sent to attend upon Maximian in his expedition against the Bagau∣dae, and refusing to do sacrifice, are first decimated, and then uni∣versally destroyed at Octodurus in France. 3 Vettius Aquilinus. 287   3 Imp. Dioclesianus III. Dioclesian and Maximian write to the Proconsul of Afric to Punish the Manichees, to burn their Books, execute their Per∣sons, and confiscate their Estates. 4 Imp. Maximianus Herculeus.
288 Dioclesiani 4 M. Aurelius Maximus.   5 Pomponius Januarius. 289   5 Annius Bassus.   6 L. Ragonius Quinctianus. 290   6 Imp. Dioclesianus IV. Tharacus, Probus, and An∣dronicus suffer Martyrdom at Tarsus in Cilicia. 7 Imp. Maximianus Herculeus II. 291   7 C. Junius Tiberianus.   8 Cassus Dio. 292   8 Afranius Hannibalianus.   9 M Aur. Asclepiodotus. 293   9 Imp. Dioclesianus V. Dioclesian assumes the title of Lord, challenges divine honours, and suffers himself to be adored as God. 10 Imp. Maximianus III. 294   10 Constantius Chlorus Caesar.   11 Galerius Maximianus Caesar. 295   11 Nummius Tuscus.   12 Annius Cornelius Anulinus. 296   12 Imp. Dioclesianus VI. Caius Bishop of Rome marty∣red April 22. 13 Constantius Caesar II. Marcellinus a Roman succeeds in the Government of that Church, who in the Dioclesian Persecu∣tion lapsed and sacrificed to Idols, though recovering he died a Mar∣tyr.
297 Dioclesiani 13 Imp. Maximianus Hercu∣leus V.   14 Galerius Caesar II. 298   14 Anicius Faustus. Zabdas ordained the 27 Bishop of Jerusalem. 15 Severus Gallus. 299   15 Imp. Dioclesianus VII.   16 Imp. Maximianus Hercu∣leus VI. 300   16 Constantius Chlorus Caesar III. The Christians at Rome haras∣sed out in working at Dioclesians Baths, most of whom, when the Work was finished, were put to death, though the Tenth Persecu∣tion did not universally begin till three years after, Ann. Chr. 303. Diocles. 19. 17 Galerius Armentarius Caesar III. FINIS.
