c3147 12125972 54600
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday the 10th of February, 1667. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christo∣pher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Am glad to see you here again, to tell you what I have done in this In∣terval, which I am con∣fident you will be plea∣sed with, since it is so much for the Honour and Security of this Nation: I have made a League Defensive with the States of the Ʋnited Provinces; and likewise a League for an efficacious Mediation of Peace be∣tween the two Crowns, into which League that of Sweden by its Ambassadour hath offered to enter as a Principal. I did not at Our last Meeting move you for any Aid, though I lie under great Debts contract∣ed in the last War; but now the Posture of Our Neighbours abroad, and the Conse∣quence
of this New Alliance will oblige Me for Our Security to set out a consider∣able Fleet to Sea this Summer; and be∣sides, I must Build more Great Ships; and 'tis as necessary that I do some things in or∣der to the Fortifying some of Our Ports. I have begun something My self in order to these Ends; but if I have not your speedy Assistance, I shall not be able to g through with it: Wherefore I do earnest¦ly desire you to take it into your speedy Consideration; for the loss of a little time now, may beget a Prejudice not to be re∣paired. And for the setling a firm Peace as well at home as abroad, one thing more I hold My self obliged to recommend to you at this present; which is, That you would seriously think of some Course to beget a better Union and Composure in the minds of my Protestant Subjects, in Matters of Religion; whereby they may be induced, not onely to submit quietly to the Government, but also cheerfully give their assistance to the Support of it. In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.
