C3445 16989947 105639
By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of Robbers or Highway-men, and for a Reward to the Apprehenders. CHARLES R. WE minding to Secure all Our Loving Subjects in Travelling and Going about their Lawful Occasions, Do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, and We do hereby Command all Our Officers of Iustice, and other Our Loving Subjects, That they use their utmost Diligence and Endea∣vour for the Apprehending all Robbers, or Highway-men. And whereas We have sufficient and credible Information, That James Husbands, William Hill, John Ashburnham, William Hancock, Henry Bugby, William Blocksom, Andrew Edwards, Phi∣lip King, William Harvey, John Nevison, and Francis Morley, are persons notoriously known to be such as do daily commit such Offences in Despite and Defiance of the Law, and are some of them Indicted, to the end they may be proceeded against according to Law: And for the Encouragement of such as shall Apprehend any of the Offenders above named, or any o∣ther such Offender or Offenders, We are Graciously pleased, and do hereby Declare, That any Per∣son or Persons who shall at any time within the space of One whole Year next after the Date hereof, Apprehend any of the Persons above named, or any other Robber or Highway-man, and cause him to be brought into Custody, shall within Fifteen days after his Conviction, have a Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so Apprehended and Convicted. And all and every Sheriffs, and She∣riff of the respective Counties and Sheriffwicks where such Conviction shall be had, are, and is hereby Required, upon the Certificate of the Iudge, or Two or more Iustices of the Peace, before whom such Person or Persons shall be Convicted of such Apprehension and Conviction, to pay unto the Person or Persons who shall Apprehend such Offender or Offenders, the Reward aforesaid, within the time aforesaid, for each and every Offender so Apprehended and Convicted as aforesaid, out of Our Moneys Received by such Sheriff or Sheriffs in that County where such Conviction shall be, which shall be allowed unto him or them upon his or their Accompts in the Exchequer: For the Allowance where∣of, this Proclamation shall be a sufficient Warrant. And lastly, We do hereby Charge and Com∣mand all Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Iustices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, and other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take notice of this Our Royal Proclamation, and give due Obedience thereunto, and also to be Aiding and Assisting in all things tending to the Execu∣tion thereof, as they tender Our Displeasure, and upon pain of being proceéded against as Contem∣ners of Our Royal Authority. Given at Our Court at Whitehall this One and thirtieth day of January 1682/3. And in the Five and thirtieth year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1682/3.
