c4087 9642518 43895
ARTICLES OF VISITATION & ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the DIOCESE of WINCHESTER, In the Primary EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God GEORGE By Divine Providence Lord Bishop of WINCHESTER. LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the Kings-Head in S. Pauls Church-yard, M.DC.LXII.
The Tenor of the Oath to be Administred to the Church-wardens and Sidemen of every Parish. YOu shall Swear to enquire with your best diligence, and to make a true answer unto every Article in this Book now given you in Charge; and to Present every Per∣son that now is, or of late was, inhabiting within your Parish, that hath done any Offence, or omitted any Duty, therein mentioned. And this you shall do, as in the sight of God, up∣rightly and truly, without Favour or Malice, Hope of Reward, or fear of Displeasure, So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of WINCHESTER. TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments and Fur∣niture thereunto belonging. I. IS your Parish Church or Chappel kept in good and sufficient repair? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate? the Windows well glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastned, and conveniently placed, and all things so decently ordered, as becometh the House of God? II. HATH. the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chappel, or any part thereof, been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto, been imbezelled, sold
or made away? In whose hands or custody doth the same, or any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard herein. III. IS there a Font of stone, with a good Cover thereunto, stand∣ing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church for the Administration of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel▪ a decent Communion Table, for the Administration of the Lords Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen cloath, and another Covering of white and pure Linnen to spread thereupon? And have you a fair Com∣munion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Cover of silver, and one or more Flagons of silver, or pewter, thereunto belonging? IV. HAVE you in your said Church or Chappel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloath or Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Transla∣tion, in a large Volume, and the Book of Common-Prayer, both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies, set forth by Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesia∣stical? And a Printed Table of the Degrées wherein Marriage is pro∣hibited? V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his Publick Ministration in the Church provided, and to be duely washed at the Charge of the Parish. VI. HAVE you a Register Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are married. Christned, or Buried, within your Parish? together with the Names and Sirnaes of both the Parents of the Children so Christened, expressing the day, month, and year of all such Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly, within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Registry? VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and Licences of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your Church or Chappel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the Churchwardens Accompts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein to kéep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hears-cloath, for the Burial of the Dead?
TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging to the Church. I. JS your Church-yard sufficiently senced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Caltel? Hath any person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own ground or habitation, without al∣lowance from the Ordinar? Have any Trées there growing béen cut down? how long since, by whom? and to whose use and benefit? II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, (with all the out-houses thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or, have any of the said Housee, or Out houses, béen defaced or pulled down without licence from the Ordinary? and by whom? Hath any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close, belonging to your Par∣sonage or Vicarage house? or cut up any Trees growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same? III HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages, belonging to your Par∣sonage or Vicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-tythes, and Portions of Tythes, or other yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same béen withheld from your Minister? or by whom; as you know, or have heard? IV. HAVE any of the Ancient Gleb-lands belonging to your Parso∣sonage or Vicarage béen taken away, or exchanged for other, without the frée consent of the Incumbent, and licence from the Ordinary? Have any Inclosures béen made in your Parish, to the detriment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage, and converting Arable-land into Pasture? by whom hath the same béen made? and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnisied thereby in the pearly value thereof; as you know, believe, or have heard? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally Ordained, accord∣ing to the Laws of the Church of England? II. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simonaical compact?
III. HATH he béen legally Instituted and Inducted into his Bene∣fice? and did he within two months after his Induction, publickly in the Church, upon some Sunday or Holy-day, in the time of Divine Ser∣vice, read the 39 Articles of the Church of England, established by Au∣thority, and there publickly declare his assent thereunto? IV. HATH he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend, or Dig∣nity? Is he constantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you? How many week in any one year hath he been absent from it, without urgent necessity? V. HATH your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in Holy Orders? an able and discreet person, and conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bi∣shop to serve in your Church or Chappel? and doth he serve in any other Church beside? and what yearly Stipend doth your Minister allow him? VI. DOTH your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacra∣ments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child∣birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common-Praier, without any additi∣on, omission, or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book? VII. DOTH your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating any Di∣vine Office in your Church or Chappel, wear the Surplice, together with such other Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his Degree? VIII. DOTH he observe the Holy-daies and Fasting-daies, as also the Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as in the Common-Praier-book, or by the Ecclestastical Canons is ap∣pointed? giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next before? IX. HATH your Minister been licenced to preach by the Bishop, or either of the two Vniversities? If so; Doth he then constantly (un∣less in case of sickness, necessary absence, or other reasonable impedi∣ment) himself preach in your Church or Chappel, one Sermon everie Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed preacher, or being so Licensed, be hindred by sickness, or otherwise, as aforesaid; doth he procure a Ser∣mon to be so preached by some other Minister, a Licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully Ordained? X. DOTH your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Pa∣rish,
in the Church Catechism? and doth he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to be confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he en∣deavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and other Sectaries, (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion establi∣shed in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof? XI. DOTH. he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any Child past Infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers default, yet remain∣ing unbaptized in your Parish? Doth he baptize any without Godfa∣thers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? XII. DOTH he in his Sermons preach sound Doctrine, tending to the edification of the people in the knowledg and faith of Iesus Christ, and obedience to Gods holy Commandments? or hath he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the publick peace and unity either of Church or State? XIII. HATH he presumed to Marry any persons in private houses? or such as being under age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes first published on three Sundaies or Holy-daies in the Church? or at any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the Morning; unless he had License or Dispensation so to do? XV. DOTH any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Hath he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Doth he before his Lecture read Divine Service, according to the Book of Common-Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. HATH your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or private Fasts, Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Autho∣rity? or doth he, or any other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private houses within your Parish for people of several Families to resort unto, under the pretence of Preach∣ing, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of sober, unblameable, and exemplary Life? Doth he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a fre∣quenter of Tavern or Ale-houses? a common Gamester? a prophane or obscene Iester? a Swearer, Rayler, Scoffer, or Quarreller? Doth
be set Neighbours at variance one with another? or encourage them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any person, either within your Parish, or without? Doth he wear his hair of an immoderate or un∣comely length? Is his apparel grave and decent, both for fashion and colour, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation, in any kind whatsoever, Disorderly or Scandalous, and unbeséeming a Minister of Iesus Christ? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I. JS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Here∣tick or Schismatick? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker or other Sectary, that refuse to come unto the publick Assem∣blies, Prayers, or Services of the Church, or that make profession of any other Religion then what is established in the Church of England? and if there be any such, what are their Names? II. IS there any person in your Parish that lieth under a common fame, or vehement suspition of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common drunkards within your Parish, or common swearers, or blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be railers, un∣clean or filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction and discord amongst their neighbours? III DO any of your Parish upon the Sundayes or Holy dayes, fol∣low their bodily and ordinary labour? or permit their servants so to do? are any shops kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Inn∣kéepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of Bear or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those dayes? IV. DOTH every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duely resort unto your Church, Chappel or Chappels, upon every Sunday and Holiday appointed for Divine Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order and decency, during all the whole time of Common-Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God there rised? and are there any among you that come onely to the Preaching, and not to the Common-Prayers of the Church? V. DOTH every person reverently uncover his head, and so con∣tinue all the time of Divine Service and Sermon in the Church? Do they all reverently knéel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed
and Gospel are read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Iesus is mentioned? VI. ARE there anie in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be baptized publickly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which case, the child may be baptized at home by a lawfull Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other form than is appointed? Or do they kéep them unbaptized any longer time then the Church alloweth? And are there any Infants or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized? VII. DOTH every Houshoulder in your Parish cause their children and servants to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundaies and Holy-daies, as in the Book of Common-Praier is appointed: that when they are well instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop? VIII. IS there anie person in your Parish, who being 16. years of age, and well instructed in Religion, doth not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of which Easter is alwaies to be one? Doth anie in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling? or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there anie strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? IX. HAVE you anie among you that be denounced and declared ex∣communicate for anie crime committed? How long have they béen so excommunicated? And do anie of your Parish kéep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved? X. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlaw∣fully married, contrary to the laws of God? Or anie that being law∣fully divorced, have married again? Or anie that being lawfully mar∣ried, and not separated or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? XI. ARE there anie married-women in your Parish, who after their delivery from the peril of Child-birth, refuse to make their publick thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and make their offerings according to custom? XII. ARE there anie belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their duty for Easter offerings to your Minister? Or anie that refuse to contribute, and pay the rate assessed upon them, for the repair of your
Church or Chappel, and for the providing of such books, furniture and or∣naments, as be requisite for the performance of all Divine offices there? XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England: And are there any Wills or Testaments, of persons dead in your Parish, that be yet unproved? Or any goods administred, without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or else where, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they béen bestowed? XIV. DO you know, or have you heard, of any Patron or other per∣son in your Parish, having the presentation or gift of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, who hath made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or Minster to it upon any bargain, either for money or pension, or lease, reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or any part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal compact whatsoever? XV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews béen erected in your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chappel without leave from the Ordinary? TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons. I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clark, aged 21 years at the least? Is he of honest life and con∣versation? and sufficient or able to perform his duty in read∣ing, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are his wages only paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him? II. DOTH he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish) diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at due time? And doth he kéep your Church or Chap∣pel clean from dust, cobwebs, and other annoyance? Doth he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours before the beginning of Di∣vine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this life, doth he upon notice given him thereof; toll a Bell, as hath béen ac∣customed, that the neighbours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favour of God?
TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School-masters, Physitians, Chirurgeons, and Midwives. I. JS there any Hospital, Almes-house, or Frée-School founded in your Parish? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Go∣vernors, or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder, and of such Grants and Ordinances as have béen made concerning the same? II. DOTH any man kéep a publick or private School in your Pa∣rish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Bishop, or his Chancellor? Doth your School-master teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religi∣on, set forth by Authority? Doth he cause them, upon Sundaies and Ho∣ly-daies, orderly to repair to your Church or Chappel, and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Di∣vine Service and Sermon? III. DOTH any man in your Parish, practise Physick, or Chirur∣gery, or any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without approbation and licence from the Ordinary? TIT. VII. Concerning Church-wardens and Side-men. I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly cho∣sen by the joynt consent of your Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Pa∣rishioners? II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accompts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church∣wardens the moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. DO you the Churchwardens and Side-men take diligent care, and see who of your Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chappel, upon Sundays and Holy-days? And if you find any to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do you by Warrant from some of the Iustices of Peace, levie of them by way of distress upon their goods, the sum of 12 pence for everie such day of their absence, according the Act of Parliament in that case
provided: And do you distribute the several sums so levied, among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law? IV. DO you note them that come late to Church after Divine Ser∣vice is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do you suffer none to stand idle, or talk together in the Church-porch, or to walk in the Church, or Church-yard, during the time of Praiers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices? V. DO you suffer no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by men, women, or servants, or children, in your Church or Chappel? Are you carefull that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Commun∣ion-Table? Do you permit no Minstrels, no Morris-dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought or come into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation? VI. DO you against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of Communicants? VII. DO you cause all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chappel, to subscribe their names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this Diocese? and do you permit no other to preach? VIII. HAVE you (the Churchwardens and Side-men) now sworn to give in a true answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, taken sufficient time to draw up your Presentments, and therein consulted with your Minister for his faithfull assistance? FOR know you assuredly, That as the true discharging of your Office is the chief means whereby publick Disorders, Sins, and Offences in your Parish may be reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by publick fame; That in such cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful Omission and Perjury. GEO. WINTON. THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the younger sort, in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be confirmed; especially such as having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the Holy Communion.
