C6189 12685804 65766
A COPY OF A Remonstrance LATELY DELIVERED IN TO THE ASSEMBLY. BY Thomas Goodwin. Ierem: Burroughs. William Greenhill. William Bridge. Philip Nie. Sidrach Simson. and William Carter. Declaring the Grounds and Rea∣sons of their declining to bring in to the As∣sembly, their Modell of Church-Government. LONDON: Printed in the Yeer, 1645.
To the READER. THe Copie of this ensuing Remonstrance (for so I title it, as deeming it no other) lately delivered in to the Assembly by the Dissenting Brethren, falling under my view (by a divine providence) I endeavoured a transcript thereof, ayming at no other end but the reserving it by me for my private and particu∣lar satisfaction. Since which time upon occasionall converses with divers of the Presbyterian party, I have been an often eare-wit∣nesse of many untrue and unjust aspersions which reflected upon the Reverend Authors, as if the Independants (so they are pleased to call them) could not, or durst not (according to the de∣mand of the Assembly) produce a Model and bring in thither, such a Frame of Church-government with the Reasons and grounds thereof as they contend for; or rather, that they had in their conceptions some Chimara, or some Utopian Frame, which in the issue would prove either abortive or ridiculous; and that therefore being privy to the weaknes of their own principles, they have rested onely, instead of a perfect Body, an airy, and (to use some of their own words) a rayling accusation against the Reverend Assembly, intending nothing lesse then the product of a Compleated Frame, and nothing more than the cheating of the people, whom they know do expect such an accomplisht plat∣form. These and the like undue bespatterings, asht from the mouthes of some whom I dare not but call Brethren, and that upon those who for their personall endowments they themselves acknow∣ledge to be both pious and learned; and frequently hinted into the minds and thoughts of the godly and well-affected of either part
(who at present by reason thereof are at a losse both in their judge∣ments and expectations) coming within my hearing and obser∣vation; I found (weighing the rationall considerations exhibited in this Remonstrance for their refusall to deliver in to the As∣sembly their Model of Church-government, as was imposed on them) an irresistable dictate from my conscience, to convert the Manuscript into a printed Copie. Wherein the ingenious Reader may clearly perceive, and truly judge what was the direct Remo∣ra that deterred them (contrary to their primary resolves) from doing that which was required by the Assembly, and what like∣wise are their reall intentions for the future, namely, to let the Churches have the benefit of what they have prepared to that pur∣pose, which I am confident in as convenient a time as is sutable to such a work, they will perfect and exhibit to open view. As for the godly and learned Authors themselves, I humbly crave their pardon that I have presumed without their knowledge to present this their Copie to the world, professing that no sinister ends at all byassed me: 'Twas onely the satisfying of my own Conscience, and my earnest desires that the truth and candour of their cause, and their proceedings therein, may (notwithstanding the besmearings that others endeavour to cast on both) be rightly resented by the godly and judicious, that hath swayed my resolutions: which ends if I attain, I have enough.
December 12. 1644. We gave in Reasons of our dissenting, to this Assembly, against the subordination of Synods, and they were committed to be answered and brought in. April 4. 1645. An Order was made by this Assembly, that the Bre∣thren of this Assembly, who have formerly entred their dissents to the Presbyteriall Government, shall be a Committee to bring in the whole Frame of their Judgements, concerning Church Government, in a body with their grounds and Reasons. It was also by this Assembly, lately imposed on us, to make report of what we had done in the Committee. HOw willing and ready we have been from the begin∣ning of the Discussions in this Reverend Assembly, to make known whatever we hold, concerning Church go∣vernment, as we have had publique testimony in this Assembly, so we have manifold instances and evidences of it; Wit∣nesse that constant, free, and open expressing our selves upon all occasions, and in all questions propounded to the debate, with of∣fers to give an open Account at any time, in what ever should be asked us by any Brother. Our profferring divers times to bring in Propositions, stated to our sense for the dispute, and when we were made a Committee to that purpose, in the point of Ordination, and did bring our Judgements concerning it for a dispute, It was laid aside. And at another time, when we ourselves brought in papers, giving the state of the question, about that extraordinary way of Or∣dination, which were read, and returned back unto us, it being publiquely professed that that was not an allowed way and course of this Assembly, for any of the Brethren to bring in papers, unlesse they were made a Committee by the Assembly it self. And so we were prevented of doing the like for time to come. Likewise our frequent complainings of the stating of questions, so that we could not fully argue for our Judgements, we being bound up to the questions as stated by you. The usuall answer to our Complaints heerin being, That the Assembly sate not to argue the
opinions of a few men, but that if we had any thing to say to the assertion brought in, we might. As also our earnest contending to have some questions (which you all know are the greatest and most fundamentall points) fairly dispu∣ted and debated, is a sufficient testimony of this our willingnesse. As in the entrance into the dispute of Government, the first day, we pressed the handling of this, That there is a platform of Government for the Churches, under the Gospel, laid down in the Scripture, and desired to have discussed, what are the sure and certain wayes, whereby we may judge what of Government, is held forth Jure divino therein, which should have been fundamentall to all the disputes that were to follow: and this was professedly laid aside by you, which therfore in none of the subsequent debates, we could renew, and thus Ar∣guments were cut off, It being that great and necessary Medium, by which the particulars should be confirmed, and in a manner, the whole controversie decided; the greatest difference that were likely to grow betwixt us, being this, That the forms of Government, you pretend to, and we deny, are asserted to be Jure divino. In like manner that other next great question, about the intire power in Congregations, that have a sufficient Presbytery for all Censures, which as it is in order the first that presents it self for discussion (as was urged) so also it is one of the greatest points in difference be∣twixt us and you: Yet the debate of this was not onely denied the first place in the dispute, but was to this day declined by you; Al∣though to have it argued was contended for by us, and not by us onely, but by many of those, that are for a subordinate govern∣ment thereof to Synods. And though earnest desires and motions for it were renewed and inculcated, yet were they as often laid aside. Yea and this, although it was once expresly commended by the grand Committee of the Honorable Members of both Houses, joyned with twelve Divines of the Assembly, to be next disputed, as the best means, both of expedition, and of ending the Controversie. And over and above all this, to argue this our willingnesse to dispute our way, In the aforesaid Honorable Committee appoint∣ed by an Order of the Honorable House of Commons, to find out wayes, of accommodating different Judgements in the Assembly, the Sub-Committee of Divines, consisting of two of us, and foure
others, appointed by that Honorable Committee to prepare waies and Propositions of Accommodation, brought in the main and most of what practically we desired, and we therein added, That if such a libertie shall seem in the wisdome of this Honorable Committee, to be so prejudiciall to the peace of the Church as not to be permitted, we hum∣bly desire, the doctrinall principles wherein we differ about Church-Govern∣ment, may be taken into serious consideration, and some other way of ac∣commodation in practise thought upon, as shall seem fit to this Honorable Committee: and this was presented to that Honorable Committee and those twelve of the Assembly, to be transmitted, whether to the Honorable Houses, or the Assembly as they should think meet. After this, when upon occasion of something brought in by one Brother, and intertained, we took hold of that example, and one of us, with consent of the rest, brought in seven Propositions, which contained matter of difference betwixt us, professing, That if this Reverend Assembly would debate them, or any one of them, we would bring in more, untill we had brought in all the Frame, and the Assembly them∣selves should pick and chuse what they would debate, and what not. But these Propositions were rejected with a refusall to debate any one of them. And after all this, though the main parts of the Presbyteriall government, had been then voted by the Assembly, and sent up to the Honorable Houses (as, namely, that about Ordination, and the Presbyteriall government over many Congregations, as also concern∣ing the Subordination of Nationall, Provinciall and Classicall Assemblies) and there was not much remaining about Church-government, to be concluded in this Assembly: yet this Reverend Assembly re∣quiring, (by occasion of a book published, that reflected on these proceedings, that we had no hand in, nor knowledge of) a whole Frame of Government, with the grounds and reasons thereof, to be brought in by us, and voted us heerto to be a Committee, we yeilded our selves to be a Committee, to bring in part by part, in like manner as the Presbyteriall Government was brought into the Assembly, and disputed: but that was not accepted. And then it being said, that there was something in Church-government, remaining un∣discussed, and unresolved; and it being further alledged that the Assembly ad not sent up all that which they had concluded, but meant to present an entire Frame and Body to the Honorable
Houses: And that we might take away all occasions of any such jealousies that we were unwilling to discover what we held (which were commonly in mens mouthes abroad) we yeilded to be a Committee, to bring in the whole to this Assembly, though upon all the fore-mentioned disadvantages, and were purposed and resolved amongst our selves so to do, and that in as conve∣nient a time as a work of such a compasse could, (in such a man∣ner as was proposed by you) be dispatched by us. And as in the debate about making us a Committee, the Assembly would not declare (though pressed by us) what they would do with that Mo∣dell, and those Reasons we should bring in; so the voting of what yet remained in Church-government, was hastened by you. And when not long after, upon occasion of the debate of one particular point, in which we differed from this Assembly, we moved it might be deferred, because we should present our Judge∣ments and Reasons about it, with the rest, (for therein lay that which we accounted the favour of being made a Committee by you) it was publiquely answered, that therefore the Assembly should the rather go on to the concluding of it, because we intended to bring it in; and before we could dispatch that Body we intended, so as to re∣port it unto you according to your order; (the collection of the materials whereof, spent us two or three moneths, and we could not obtain the liberty to bring in any thing but the whole) this Assembly had presented to the Honorable Houses, as well what had been sent up by peeces afore, as what was since concluded, in one intire Frame. By all which we perceived, that that which was the main end and use of presenting such a Modell to this Assem∣bly, would be frustrated. And furthermore, we having given in (as this Assembly knows) but two heads of dissenting reasons: The one against the Presbyterial go∣vernment over many Congregations: The other against the subordination of Synods. By the successe of the latter we see, that this Assembly can assume the liberty (if it so please) to reserve those we shall now present, unanswered, as they have done those our dissenting Rea∣sons against subordination of Synods, although it contain a great and main part of that wherein we differ, as also is of all other, of the greatest mo∣ment, both to this Church and State, and hath been given in to this Assembly ten moneths since, and their votes concerning thes
Subordinations, as long since presented to the Honorable Houses, but have not been answered by any reply brought in to this As∣sembly, and so not ready to have been sent up to the Honorable Houses. And if These we might now bring in, should be undertaken to be answered by this Assembly, yet we still retain the sense of so much remedilesse prejudice, by being bound from replying again, as doth make us justly wary: we may for ever lie under whatever mis∣interpretations may happen, (suppose but through mistake of yours, or imperfection of our expression) without clearing our meaning, and we may be bound up from further urging or dri∣ving home that wherein the strength of any Argument lies, if the dint thereof should be avoided by some specious diversion. And although our former Reasons given in after dispute to both the Honorable Houses, according to their Order, were therefore not our own, but to be disposed of according to their appointment; yet what we should now give in, we conceive to be in our own power. Upon these considerations we think that this Assembly hath no cause now to require a Report of us, nor will that our Report be of any use, seeing that Reports are for Debates, and Debates are for Re∣sults to be sent up to the Honorable Houses, who have already voted another form of Government then what we shall present. However it may be of more use some other way, which by this course may be pre∣vented, And therefore we are resolved to wait for some further opportunitie, to improve what we have prepared. FINIS.
