C7476 12233487 56654
SENTENCES FOR CHILDREN English and Latine. Collected out of sun∣dry Authors long since By LEONARD CƲLMAN, And now translated into English By CHARLES HOOLE: For the first enterers into Latin. P. Antesignanus in his Epistle to the Saraei, brethren. Let others affect the opinion of learn∣ing; I do plainly and ingenuously con∣fess, I have seriously addicted my self both to fashion, and promote Childrens studies all that ever I can. LONDON. Printed for the Company of Stationers, 1658.
SENTENTIAE PUERILES Anglo-Latinae. Quas è diversis Au∣thoribus olim collegerat LEONARDƲS CƲLMAN, Et in vernaculum sermonem nuperrimè transtulit CAROLƲS HOOLE: Pro primis Latinae Linguae Tyronibus. P. Antesignatus in Epist. ad Saraeos fratres. Doctrinae opinionem affectent alii; ego pro mea virili parte me puerorum & formandis & promovendis studiis omnem meam operam addixisse aper∣tè & ingenuè fateor. LONDINI. Sumptibus Societatis Stationa∣riorum, 1658.
Sentences (or Sayings) of Wise∣men , collected for them that first enter to the Latine tongue. Sentences of two words. BE helpful to thy friends. Abstain from other Mens things. Conceal a secret. Be easie to be spoken to. Try thy friends. Fool-bardiness is dangerous. Make use of thy friends. Honour good Men. Be kind-spoken. Do well to good Men. Say well to all Men. Know thy self. Respect thy Kinsfolk. Follow concord. Hate slandering. Advise blamelesly. Fear cosenage. Keep a thing given. Restore a thing deposited. Accuse no Man. Give content to thy friends. Ʋse diligence. Keep thy credit. Drunkenness makes Men mad. Shun drunkeness.
Exercise honesty. Judge indifferently. Take care of thy family: Do things that are just. Instruct thy children. Avoid filthy things. Avoid fallings out. Moderate thy passion. Put an end to brables. Judge justly. Maintain Justice. Keep thy Oath. Learn willingly. Avoid idle pastimes. Obey the Laws. Praise honest things. Rule thy tongue. Read over thy Bookes. Teach thy children. Hate strife. Think of mortal things. Be afraid of the Magistrate. Be cleanly. Give place to thy better. Forbear thy inferior. Stand in aw of thy Master. Please the multitude. Hate a lye. Shun a whore. Provoke no body. Mock no body. Swear not. Dispraise no body. Be against no body. Nothing is long-lasting. Please every body.
Rule thine eyes. Be not idle. Aviod idleness. All things are changed. Love peace. Follow after godliness. Avoid disgrace. Honour the Prince. Rashness is dangerous. Obey the Prince. Keep Modesty. Keep thine own things. Exercise wisdom. Look at what is to come. Reverence thy Parents. Respect Religion. Honour the King. Moderate thy laughter. Seek what is right. Obey reason. Shun reports. Make use of wise men. Be sober. Salute (men) willingly. Reverence thy superior. Cast away suspition. Ʋse temperance. Observe the time. Dwel with thy self. Stick to the truth. Ʋse vertue. Hate violence. Moderate thy pleasure. Answer modestly. Keep modesty.
Sentences of three words. LOƲE overcometh all things. Self-love is blind. Weapons regard not Laws: Fortune doth help adventurous Men. Continual diligence overcometh the hardest things. A covetous person alwayes needeth. Nothing is more miserable than covetousnesse. Nothing is unconquerable with Gold. Art overcometh nature. A bow too much bent is broken. Do not covet other mens things. Abstain from vices. Monies do make friends. Covetousness is the head of vices. Some men excel others. Ʋsing (to do a thing) is most effectual. The end of War is uncertain. Be mindful of a courtesie received. The Fortune of War is doubtful. War is to be made by counsel. The life of Man is short. Old Men are twice Children▪ Gods worship is an holy thing. The heart of Man is untamable. The heart of Man is wicked. Many faults are to be winked at. Every Comparison is odious. Every Man hath his gift. Gentlenesse getteth friends. Froward Folks are to be won by fair means. Conscience is a thousand Witnesses. Too much meat is hurtful. Anger is an enemy to Counsel.
Covetousnessess is unsatiable: Covetousness of money is to be avoided. His misery is to be upbraded to no man. We must not answer raising speeches. Slothfulness breeds forgetfulness. Time brings many things about. It is hard to leave things that one is used to. Riches bring forth haughtiness. Time takes away grief. We must despair of no body. Gifts can do much. Offenders are to be Punished. Riches are the occasion of vices. It is a very hard thing to Conquer Nature. Kingdoms decay by discord. Those things are difficult which are honest. A rich mans speech is unwarie. Division doth lessen an estate. Try every thing that is doubtfull. The issue of things is doubtfull. Every rich man is unsatiable. Time is the Physician of grief. Exshcise is the best Master. Exercise can do all things. Equall things please equall men. Banishment doth grace many men. Nothing is more certain than triall. We are made wiser by age. Forgetfulness is the companion of drunkenness. Age is spoiled with wine. The end of Villanies is base. Rich men have many kinfolks. Felicity doth raise up enmities. Hunger is the best sauce. Fortune makes men insolent. Envy is a companion of prosperity.
Fiercenesse is asswaged by mildnesse. A fool doth own the thing done. Women are unconstant. We must give way to fury. Shun things that are too lofty. Look at the end of thy life. Beauty is marred with Wine. Fortune doth help resolute men. Nothing is more miserable than hunger. Nothing is constant in this life. Age is fleeting. We must not believe a blab. Death is the end of misery. Joy is joyned to grief. One good turn begets another. Labour is the foundation of glory. Honour doth nourish arts. The Minds of men are various Money getteth honour. Humane chances are doubtful. There is an interchange of humane things. The end of sutes is unnhappy, The end of things is uncertain. Anger is the torment of it self Labours past are pleasant. Truth is in Wine. It is an hard thing to bridle Anger. Envy is a companion of boasting. The dispositions of men are diverse. Ʋnadvised men quickly fall to ruine. A discommodity must be sweetned with mirth. Necessity is a very great dart. God helps the painful person. Partnership is alwayes unfaithful. Inconstancy disdaineth friends. A thing unknown is not desired.
Beggary is unsatiable. An injury is overcome with a good turn. The enterchange of things is pleasant. Every ignorant man is unconstant. Misfortune is to be objected to no body. It is an hard thing to bear wrongs. Praise stirreth up the wit. Strife doth breed strife. All things flourish by labour. The tongue hath destroyed many men. Labours are the foundation of glory. Keep in thy tongue with thy finger. Labour is a mans treasury. Praise is the reward of virtue. Nothing is sweeter than liberty. An evil Person doth seek his liberty. A thing evil gotten is quickly gone. Hunger teacheth many things. An evil thing is born by patience. The minde is foreknowing of a thing to come Silence adorneth a woman. It is a most miserable thing to die with hung Nothing is safe to mortal men. Gifts do catch men. Mutuall defence is most safe. Love teacheth musick. Death throws down all afore it. Death is unavoidable. Crosses hasten old age. Chastity is a womans dowry. Memory is the treasury of Arts. We must not answer railing terms. Nature is content with a few things. No body is born for himself. Believe nothing rashly.
Thou oughtest not to lye. Necessity bath no law. Do not brag of thine own things. Do not despise other mens things. Do not back-bite any body. Nothing doth resist necessity. Necessity breaketh iron. Too much niggardliness is to be avoided. The night is void of shame. Do nothing too much. Nothing is greater than daily use. Faith is no where safe. Affirm nothing untried. It is in vain to resist nature. Nothing is more fleeting than time. Smooth carriage gets friends. Opportunity makes a thief. Wealth takes away friends. Every beginning if troublesome. Opportunity is not to neglected. Riches swiftly pass away. Hatred is abated by plyantness. Time affords all things. Riches are gotten by skil. Idleness is the rust of the wit. Povertry stirreth up arts. Let a Scholar obey his Master. All things obey Money. Rash counsel is unluky. Poverty bereaves us of friends. Things gotten are to be kept. Shame fastness is unprofitable for a beggar: The most voices overcome. Nothing is sweeter than ones Country. Putting off from day to day is odious.
The beginning is the half of the whole. The things which hurt us, do teach us. Every land is ones Countrey. Too much laughter is to be avoided. Like things favour like. Like rejoyceth in the like. All slavery is miserable. Only fortunate men are loved. Sleep is the image of death. Hope preserves the afflicted. Study makes men courteous. Every one likes his own things best: The spring doth follow the winter. A fool doth speak foolish things. Studies do declare the mind. Chance turns all things upside down. Silence is safe every where. Proud men are hardly reformed▪ The wise man is the only rich man. Hope doth sustain banished men. Every man pleaseth himself. Fulness doth breed fierceness. Idle persons have every day holy-day. The speech doth cure sorrow. Nothing is more profitable than silence. Time is a devourer of things. Time is short. Time runs away very swiftly. All things are changed in time. Time reveals all things. All things are dispatched in time▪ Nothing is swifter than time. All things are done in time. Time doth asswage grief. The belly is without ears, (i. e.) it will not be perswaded.
We lust after things forbidden. The speech of truth is plain. The judgement of the common people is fond. Vertue being commended doth increase. All things are consumed by use. The gifts of Men are diverse. Sentences of four words. OTher things become another Age. (i. e.) Some things become one Age, some another. Other Men have other faults. (i. e.) One Man hath one fault, and one another▪ We must use friends with Modesty. Daily exercise can do all things. We must take heed of flattering persons. We know our friends in adversity. Good friends are rare. Old friendship is seldom abolished. Nothing is hard to a lover. Ambition is most mischievous in a Common-wealth. Friendship is to be preferred before all things. The year doth fructifie, not the earth, Every Mans mind is revealed by his speech. There is no discretion till towards years. Evils that one is used to, do not offend. Love is not curable. Crosses do of-times stir up the wit. A covetous King is pacified with Gold. The desire of a covetous Man is never satisfied. It is not a wise Mans part to be adventurous. Nothing is more precious than a faithful friend. Every thing hath a mean. There be few friends that admonish one freely. Modesty is beauty sufficient enough.
Friendship refuseth no labour. The eyes especially win love. Covetous men cannot be satisfied. No vice is more mischievous than covetousness. Laws are like to spiders webs. One good turn doth alwaies provoke another. A benefit is to be measured by the mind of the giver. The upbraiding of a benefit is irksome. Civill war is a dangerous evill. Many good things are lost by being neglected. We must use good friends somewhat sparingly. All things become good men. Men are perswaded by good words. The matching of unequal parties is bad. Fearfull dogs do bark the more eagerly. Too much subtilty doth hurt sometimes. That is dear which is rare. Custome doth make all hard things easie. Counsel prevails much every where. A good conscience is very sweet. Custome is more prevalent than any tyrant. A common shipwrack is comfort to all. Counsell is unprofitable after the things are done. Wisedome is more precious than all riches. Care doth follow money as it increaseth. An enemy deceiveth when he flattereth. Friends are changed with fortune. Fear doth argue base spirits. Riches a burden to a good mind. Scholars delight in the company of scholars. It is a pleasant thing to remember labours. Our own country soyl is pleasant. The greater part is alwayes of the worst. Loss is to be preferred before base gain. Severall countreyes afford several things:
A gift is valued by the minde of the giver, Riches are the cause of brablings. We ought to condemn no man rashly. A mans own miserie is to be concealed. A Rose doth not grow upon a sea-onyon. The idle hand brings want. Love is bred by looking at one. We are all made wiser by loss. Mourning possesseth the last of joy, (i. e.) After the great∣est  joy comes mourning. Drunkenness doth discover the greatest secrets of the mind. The greatest things arise from small beginnings. It is a common thing for men to mistake themselves. A sword must not be given to children. upbraiding of calamity must be cast to no man: (i. e.) No man must be upbraided with his calamity. Experience is the mistress of providence. Great things are made of little ones. Vices come from idleness. He that hath tried dangers is soon afraid of them. Prosperity hath many kinsfolks. Fortune is very like the wind. It is a bad thing to deceive other men: There is no certain knowledge of things to come. Thou shalt be made evil by the company of evil men. The company of evil men is to be avoided. The agreement of brethren is rare. Too high things are to be avoided. Faith is to be kept even towards an enemy. It is a grievous fault to speak things that are not to be spo∣ken. Glory is not bought with monies. Men are prone to mischief. The fashion of a man is known by his speech: A mean kinde of life is the safest.
Nothing is more intollerable than a fortunate fool. Angry folks do nothing well. Agreement is rare amongst brethren. Idle persons have alwaies holy-dayes. Ʋnthankfulness is the head of all vices. In every thing there is need of courage▪ A friend is tried in adversity. Variety is delightfull in every thing. Laws are silent amongst weapons. Impatiency doth exasperate all things. Violence doth do all things ill-favoredly. Honour doth cost innumerable pains. Anger waxeth old the slowliest of all things. A good friend is a great treasure. Ʋnlooked for evils are more grievous. Glory hath a very great spur. (i. e.) It sets on apace. Envy doth torment its owner. Nothing is more mischievous than a bad tongue▪ Carelesness breeds many mischiefs. Crosses oft times bestir the wit. Anger is not appeased by angriness. Labour is a treasure to men. Labour receives the glory of vertue. Hard labour overcometh all things. A longer life is a long-lasting calamity. Bear willingly that which must needs be. We must strive to do nothing our nature being against it. An evill weed dyeth not. The mind is a fore-teller of that which is to come. Many things are wanting to them that desire many things. It behoves a lyar to have a good memory. Bad gain is equal to loss. An Oake is hewen down with many blows. Froward persons interpret nothing well. Evill counsell is the worst to the counsellor. Nothing is dearer to men than money.
Death is common to every age. Evil things are neer to good things. A fool is wise after the evil is received. Forced wits do answer badly (i. e.) make an ill proof. Modesty conduceth much to health. Miserable men use to envy happy men. Nature loves nothing that is solitary. It is a busie matter to contend in Law. Do not follow the errors of the common people. Quiet rest hath known few, (i. e.) few men enjoy quietness Nothing is more effectual than plain truth. Ʋndertake not things beyond thy power. Nothing is more filthy than a lecherous old-man. Nothing is more absurd than a covetous rich-man. No mortal man is absolutely blessed. Natures necessity is satisfied with a little. No man is hurt but from himself. Rashness doth much hurt men. No possession is better than that of friends. Nothing is more subject to misery than man. Nothing is sweeter than a friendly admonisher. Nothing is more common than to deceive men. Too much mildness is not allowed of. Fortune doth not alway smile upon one. Wealth procureth friends. No man can have all things. No man is wise at all times: It is the best to make use of another mans folly. All things are to be done in their own time. All things are quickly changed. The masters eye doth fatten the horse. Idleness doth teach many vices. It is the sweetest thing of all to receive. All good things consist in peace. We are all worse by too much liberty.
The speech is the picture of the deeds. The eyes are more faithfull than the ears: Every soyl is a valiant mans countrey. Poor folks death is without noise. Poor folks words are to no purpose. Old mens opinions are the best. Small things are not to slighted. Soon-ripe wits do soon decay. His own country is most pleasant to every man. Nothing is better than publique concord. Goods increase by sparing and pains. It is a wise mans part not to take notice of many things. Nothing is pleasant to a troubled mind. It is a very hard thing to be an honest man. Stubborness is the companion of an haughty spirit. Honesty maketh a confident wit. Obedience is not to be given to a man when he doth a∣miss. Envy ceaseth after death. Mens minds grow wanton in prosperity. So many men, so many minds. Such a man, such a speech. Such a Prince, such a people. Every man flatters his own evils. What is more filthy than proud unskilfulness? So many men so many opinions. As much you shall have, at so much you shall he valued. Such a question, such an answer. Asking advice is an holy thing. A fool understands a thing when it is done and past. We are all wise when a thing is past. Redness is the colour of vertue. There is seldome any calamity alone. Reason doth degenerate without exercise.
Only men in miserie are free from envy. A mans quality is known by his talk. In is better to answer many men by silence. A calm doth easily follow a storm. His own trade maintains every man Nothing is more pleasant than old age that may take its ease Seasonoble talk is the best. Speech is the character of the mind. Her own King doth please the Queen. Sparing is too late in the bottom. Whosoever doth covet is alwaies poor. His own studies delight every man. We are able to do nothing without means. Nothing is better in the life than health. No man is born without faults. Too much wisdome is not wisdome. His own error is to be attributed to every one. We must attempt nothing beyond our strength. Every one is delighted in his own study. Hope bears up the minds af men. Dishonest gain doth bring loss. Time draws all things along with it. His own pleasure doth draw on every man. A friend is tried in time of adversity All things are more light in time. Immoderate Wine is a cause of mischief. Consultation is worse when the belly is full. The common sort do measure friendship by profit. The more seldome use commendeth pleasures. Where fear is, there shame is. Where friends are, there riches are. Where love is, there the eye is. Where the pain is, there the finger is. One man is no man. As every one is, so he speaketh.
No possession is greater than verue. The changes of things are diverse. Faults cannot be concealed Vain-glory is not to be sought after. Sentences of more words. LEarn what thou mayest avoid by the fall of other men Shame is to be thrown away, as oft as necessity con∣strains A boar is oft, times held by a little dog. We are all disposed to idleness. Adversities are to be undergone with a patient minde. Flattery is the greatest plague in friendship. It is the duty of a young man to reverence his betters. So much it is to accustome (ones-self) in his young years Old age is more slow to all kind of learning: The doers and consenters are punished alike. One mans weale, is another mans bane. One mans wealth is another mans plunder. Another life, another course of living. A true friend is a great treasury. Friends are known in adversity. True love knoweth not how to keep any measure. A mind that is used so hardship, is less offended. Every mans mind is discovered by his speech. Art is hardly put to its shifts without the help of means. An Ass had rather have straw than gold. Gold hath oft-times perswaded men amiss. Eccellent learning is the staff of life. A benefit bestowed upon thankfull persons is wont to come home with profit. It is better to be honestly poor, than badly rich. The city is most happy, which is governed by wise men. Good laws are bred out of evil manners.
That which is done to good men is not lost. Railing terms do not hurt good men. Good men come to good mens feasts of their own accord▪ A dog doth alwaies haunt a poor stranger. An hasty bitch doth bring forth blinde whelps. An old dog cannot be wonted to a chain. Those things which are seen, are more certain than those that are heard. We are not quickly to believe what is spoken. Wise men conceal their evils at home. We must beware of him that hath once deceived us. Whatsoever is gotten by hire is dearer to us. You may better overcome one by advice, than angriness. There is no need of advising after a thing be done and past. Counsel is to be asked of men that are advised & discreet. Acquaintance is to had with honest men. Choose rather to have thy body grieved than thy minde. It is an hard thing to correct an evil nature. Being to take a journey, never make use of a naughty Com∣panion. Custome is ever the most prevalent in all things. Care prevails much in every thing. We must not fall out with a friend that hath deserv'd well. He hath no friends whom fortune is against. It is main wisedom to play the fool in due seasons. Differing manners do follow differing studies. They that disagree are easily overcome, they that do agree, not easily. No man is beloved, but he to whom fortune is favoura∣ble. It is a hard thing to feign a jest with a heavy heart. He is a rich man who thinketh he wanteth nothing. Riches are gotten by labour, and are lost by prodigality. An ameuds is never made to God, our parents, and school-masters.
A true friend is a hard thing to be found. When thou art rich rememher to do good to the poor. Learning is to no purpose, unless reason be joyned to it. A portion doth not make a good marriage, but vertue. It is an hard thing to leave those things which you have been long wonted to. Every one talks of his own matters. Whilest I cannot, as I desire, I live, as I can. Condemn no man before his cause be known. The vertue of parents is a great portion. Whilest the Cat sleepeth the Mice skip about. Wealth is given to none now, but rich men. It is harder to bear prosperity, than adversity. A learned poor man is prefered before an unlearned rich  man. A great thing doth rise from a little beginning. A wise-man doth amend his own by another mans fault. We are made more wary by other mens mistakes. It is a banishment to a man, where he liveth not conveni∣ently. It is an excellent virtue to be silent in matters. A sword doth wound the body, but the speech woundeth the mind. We our selves do not acknowledge our own fauls. It is the part of a valiant man to contemn a false ill re∣port. It is the part a valiant man not to be troubled in adver∣sity. One doth easilier advise other men, than himself. The discommodities of fortune do not at all trouble a wise man. Errour and repentance are the companions of haste. He is happily wise, who is wise by another mans danger. He will quickly finde a cudgel, that hath a mind to beat a  Dog.
A word doth quickly fly out, yet it never returneth. Prosperity doth undo one whilest it fawneth upon him. He is very happy, to whom no evil hath hapned in his life. Thou art happy whosoever shalt learn by another mans grief▪ to be able to be free from thy own. It is an easie thing to conquer an absent man, that makes no resistance. He is wise to no purpose, that is not wise for himself. A cock can do very much upon his own dunghil. Vertue proceeding from a fair body is more pleasing. It is the best revenge to overcome an enemy by good turns. A mean fortune is more safe, than a lofty. The inheritance of a good name is more honest than that of  riches. The guessing at a mans mind is difficult. A covetous man hastneth all things, whatsoever he doth. Calm waters have also their storms. The masters honesty makes also the family better. There is an old contest betwixt the mother in law, and the daughter in law. Things unlook'd for do fall out oftner than what you look for Famous wits never wanted emulators. He that willingly beareth the yoke, makes it light. The day it self is sometimes a mother sometimes a step-mo∣ther. Conceal thy misery, left thou make thy enemies merry. Huge wealth is not got without deceit. Ingratitude conteins all vices in its self. A discommodity is alwayes a companion of commodities. We are by nature quick sighted into other mens faults, not into our own. If you command your anger, you shall live a very healthfull life. It is a wearisome thing to busie our selves every where a∣bout several matters. In bad matters we had need of good counsel.
A friend is known in adversity. We are not to slumber in a dangerous business. It is the property of one that doateth to wish things impos∣sible to himself. Shame is unprofitable when necessity compelleth. We must bring a buyer of our selves to ware that will not off. Time tryeth friends, as the fire doth gold. An envious man waxeth lean at the prosperity of another. Sutes use to take away the quietness of the minde. A longer life useth to bring more inconveniences. He is commended, not who hath lived long, but who hath li∣ved well. Evil gain alwaies bringeth loss. The sharpness of the mind waxeth dull by the riot of the body▪ A man must be liberal, but according to his ability. No body would be bad unless there were gain. Men believe eye-witnesses more willingly than ear-witnes∣ses. The burden that is born well is made light. Men are over-come by praise and compliancy. A wicked woman is more savage than all wilde beasts. A thrifty dame is not every where to be met with. A woman is the preservation or overthrow of a house. It is a most miserable kind of death to die with hunger. Evil communication corrupts good manners. Thoa shalt lose greater matters, unless thou keep small ones. Many things do befall a man, which he would not. A mean is to be accounted the best in all things. Many good things have befaln to many beyond their hope. Many envy the good things to others, which they want them∣selves. The manner of the speech useth to shew the disposition of the mind. He displeaseth many▪ that humors himself too much. It is much better to remedy the beginnings than the end. Naughty company infects good manners.
Be acquainted with your friends manners, but hate them not. All mortal things have many changes. Great things do decay by discord, they grow strong by con∣cord. Every wise man and good man hateth a lie. Idleness doth occasion many mischiefs to men. It is a very great bevefit to know how to use poverty. Nothing is ours, that can be taken from us. There is no falling out, where there is the same minde. Have no commerce with wicked men. It matters not how long you live, but how well. Punish no man, unless you well consider the matter. Insult not over a miserable man▪ lot is common. A good man is never made rich on a sudden. No living creature, no ware is harder to be known than a man. Thou must not live that thou mayest eat, but thou must eat that thou mayest live. Wisdome is gotten, not by age, but by wit. Goodness of wit will do thee no good, unless thou make use of it. Do not torment thy minde with cares. Stir not a bad matter that is well ended. Nothing is more base than to quarrel with a friend. There is no man, in whom there is not some fault. It is not a benefit, which is done for advantage. He maketh no small gain, that escapeth loss. Do not learn any filthiness, neither do you suffer it. Gold doth not set out a woman, but good manners. Nature hath not granted women to rule. A woman knoweth nothing, but what she hath a mind to. Nature doth not suffer a woman to bear rule. There is nothing happy on all parts. Nothing is worse than heaviness in things that concern men. Thou canst bear no burden more troublesome than poverty. I pray you do not believe all men withall things. Do not study to do mischief, presuming upon thy wealth.
There is nothing so grievovs as poverty. Do not haste to be rich, lest you quickly become poor. Naughtiness of manners doth quickly infect nature. There is nothing so unkind, but you may make it friendly. Nothing is better than health in this life. No man doth so diligently look after other mens business, as he doth after his own. Do not go about that which cannot be done. There is nothing so long-lasting which continuall diligence  cannot make easie. The night, love, and wine, do perswade filthy things. It hurts not any man to hold his peace, it hurts to have spo∣ken. The same man cannot say many things, and to the purpose. There is nothing more odious, than that which is allwayes  the same. It is an hard thing to take from nature its own right. Fearn that is to be burnt grows in fields that are not hus∣banded. Servants do nothing well, unless the Master be by. All things do not befall, which you purpose in your mind. Every thing that is too much, is to be avoided in all things. We are rather to believe our eyes than our ears. Things devised for the best, do oft-times fall out for the worst. A man should alwayes learn something (even) when he grows old. All the best things have difficult ends. All men wish better to themselves than to another man. Every thing breeds errour by making haste. Every evil at its first coming up is easily suppressed. All delay though it be very little, doth seem very long. We must take that which we have at present, in good part. It is the best for one to take a fit time. Ʋndertake not a burden which thou art unfit for. Every superfluous thing doth flow from a full brest. Death is the utmost of all things.
Those things which cannot be altered, are to be patiently born. Our fathers manners are not to be found fault withall, but endured. Few men are moderate in prosperity. Anger is the worst perswader in doing things. His own countrey is most pleasant to every man. We are wise for the most part after a thing be done. Horns shoot out on a sudden to Rams that are well fed. Anger and lust are the worst advisers. It is better to be envied than pittied. Very many things are to be known, but the best to be retei∣ned. Rash anger is the causer of many evils. Medicines are to be applyed to a breeding evil. The beauty of the body is a brittle good thing. It presently appears what plant is fruit full. A little spark being neglected, hath caused a very great fire. It is a dangerous thing to adventure ones self to the wa∣ters. There is the most scarcity of the best things. It is the part of a wise man to do nothing rashly. Like are easily gathered together with like. Good ware doth quickly finde a chapman. Things past may be blamed, but they cannot be amended. More are overcome by fair means, than by hard means. It is a fine thing to know the season of every time. It is better to die than to lead a dishonest life. Grief will be well eased with sweet words. It is good to keep a measure in anger and pleasure. It is better to stand in need; than to grow rich by wickedness It is better to hold ones peace, than to speak unseemly things One eye-witness is more worth than ten ear witnesses. The tongue kills more than the sword. Nothing is pleasant to a troubled heart. A fat belly doth not beget a fine wit. The smoke of our countrey is brighter than a strange fire.
Every man hears more at home, than he doth abroad. Eyes see more than an eye. Honest deeds proceed from honest minds. It is a mans country wheresoever he lives well He is a poor man, not who hath little, but who desires much Naughty company brings forth bad fruit. When shame is lost, all vertue quickly decays. Things present make us to have consideration of things t come. It is a fine thing to change injuries into curtesies. It doth children hurt to drink wine. That which is taken up suddenly is not long-lasting. Those things that are seen are more certain than those tha are heard. What any one hath a great mind to, that he cannot forget. Thou must not do that which thou blamest others for. Whatsoever happens besides hope, account it to be gain: They that avoid labours, wish far holy-dayes. Whosoever refuseth labour, doth get no good. See often, what you say of any man, and to whom. It is not presently good which many men do. That which seems good to one man, seems bad to another: That which is not used to it, refuseth labour. He that hasteth too much, dispatcheth somewhat late, (i. e.) the most haste, the worst speed. He that knoweth not how to dissemble knoweth how to rule. He that hath enough, let him wish no more. He that knoweth not that he doth amiss, will not be cor∣rected How many mischiefs doth idleness bring upon men? You can corect by no pains, that which is inbred by nature, (i. e.) What is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh. Every man is carefull about that▪ which he hath a mind to He that bestoweth a benefit upon an unthankfull person loseth his labour.
Whatsoever is natural, is not easily changed. He that catcheth at a double profit at once, is deceived of both▪ What the destinies have decreed, no man can avoid. What is done cannot he undone. Let every man exercise himself in the art which he know∣eth▪ They that vaunt proudly of themselves, have bad neigh∣bours. Those things are to be born patiently, which you suffer de∣servedly▪ A contrary state is to be feared, especially in prosperity. Means cannot last when the charge exceeds the gain. A small matter in the beginning doth increase to a greater▪ A thing hard to be done, is yet overcome by continual indu∣stry The custome of an evil thing is the worst that can be. Humane things are by nature prone to corruption. It is an evil thing to covet many things. He is a great King whosoever shall rule well. A friend that suffers with us, is a comfort in miserie. Prosperity maddeth, and destroyeth unwary men. Leisure and rest belong to old age. Wisdom is of-times under a thred-bare-cloak. Anger ariseth oft-times from very light causes. It is not an easie thing to fly without wings. A shril noise is a womans houshold goods. The best wits do oft-times lie hid in a secret place. Every one doth much approve of his own study. It is wisdom to learn of a wise man. The tongue must be ruled with a great deal of care. They are fools that will not be corrected. All fortune is not to be overcome by suffering. If you cannot do what you desire, you must desire what you can do. An old man is troublesome to young mens company. There is nothing more worthy than wisdome. A wise man hath all his wealth in himself. Never bewray the secrets of thine own mind.
It is a base thing for a wise man to say, I wist not: Excellent vertue was ever envied by wicked men. An old man sees many things, which he would not. If you say what you list, you shall hear what you list not. Oft times all the people rue for a bad mans ill-doing. A fool is changed, just as the Moon. You may oft-times overcome him with patience, whom you cannot overcome with force. Things otherwise invincible may be overcome with money. It is better to remedy the beginning, than the end. The single-hand fight is but weak. Life is unpleasant without a friend to live with us. No man offends by being silent, but very often by speaking. We all in common despise things that are present. It repents every man of his own condition, he admires an∣other mans. We can do nothing without Gods help. God doth alwayes bring like to like. We often embrace the worst things for good. A mind that guesseth too much aforehand, doth always fear▪ It is better to be silent, than to utter things to be kept si∣lent. The event is oft-times unlike the advise. The end and issue of a thing is ever to be looked at. No time is to be spent unprofitably. Such things will be said to you, as you shall say your self▪ Men do then judge, when they begin to repent. Time brings the truth to light. A drunken man asleep is not to be awaked. Slowness in doing things is odious. Every one is valued so much worth, as he hath. Every man becomes such as they with whom he is familiar▪ Bashfulness is a good sign in a young-man. Violence breeds hatred, and hatred dissentions. Strength doth no good without counsel.
Where every one hath his treasure, there also he hath his heart. As your speech shall be, so shall you be answered. The will is oft-times to be commended, where power is wanting. Will and labour breed Arts. A Woman is alwayes wavering, and unconstant. A Wife that hath lost Chastity, hath lost all things. We learn our Wives faults after the marriage. Men are taken with pleasure, as fish are with an hook. Art is the only refuge in poverty. Get thy living as thou canst, but not by wickednesse. Nature hath given a defect to every thing created. Where one feels it smart, there he layeth his hand. Our life is like a bubble on the water. The pleasantness of Wine doth lessen the wearisomness of old age. Holy Sentences to be taught Scholars upon Holy-dayes. WE can do nothing without God. God requires the affection of the heart. The Lord is wont to be with the afflicted. All things depend upon God. We must not look after earthly things. A tree is known by its fruits. We must work well continually. Our crosses are from God. Covetousnesse doth cause forgetfulness of God. We add nothing to the word of God. All things are to be hoped for from the Lord alone. When the Word of God is lost, all things are lost. The welfare of the soul doth depend upon Gods Word. Covetous men do deride the Word of God. The Lord throweth down presumptuous men. Sin is derived to us from Adam.
God bestoweth upon us all things that we need. Man is prone to vanity by nature. Help is to be expected from God. Covetousness doth blind, and harden the heart. God is the author of all works. The blessing of God makes all things fruitful. All good things are given to a believer. We are only the Stewards of our goods. The goodness of God doth clearly appear in all things. We must not make war, unless necessity compel us. They that first begin the war, are oft-times overcome. Kingdoms got by war, are lost by war. Good things befall the godly by the grace of God. Good works do prove faith. The blessing of the Lord doth nourish, and uphold believers. The knowledge of God is life eternal. All things are done by Gods decree: All things are possible to him that believeth: The counsels of God are not changed. All good things are communicated to believers. Christians are the Temple of God. Charity is the badge of believers. Charity is the fulfilling of the Law. There is no counsel against the Lord. Carnal men do not see the Kingdom of God. Sole confidence must be had in God. He that hath Christ by faith, hath all things. Christ is the treasure of all good things. The cross doth follow the confession of faith. Glory doth follow the Crosse. We must have a fellow feeling with all men. The cross is the trial of our faith. All things must be done with a sure conscience. Blindness is a punishment of the contempt of Gods Word. All things are to be done with advise, and industry.
Every calamity is a punishment of sins. Believers commit all things to God. Believers in Christ have eternal life. The Church is to be governed by concord. All power is given to Christ. He that is of the truth, doth hear Christ. All creatures do obey Christ. The Kingdom of Christ shall endure for ever. There is no worship of God without faith. The counsel of God is immutable. All care is to be committed to God, Christ al ne doth deliver us from death. Nothing can be wanting to them that follow Christ. We must deal kindly with our enemies. The desire of having is the root of all evil. We must not trust in Man. Mens Counsels are ordered by God. There is no remedy against death. The will of God is to be looked at in all things. God doth help us in afflictions. God hath a care of us. We must blame nothing rashly. An account must be given of every idle word. God amends us by the cross. God is the Fountain of all good things. God helpeth his servants speedily. God alone is the searcher of hearts. Nothing is impossible to God. God is the maker of all things. God doth send help in time. God alone is everlasting. God is known by faith. God is the hope of the faithful▪ Nothing is hidden to God. All things obey God.
God ruleth all things. Every Doctrine must be tried. God hath subdued all things to man. God respecteth not persons. God seeth and heareth all things. Gods counsels are hidden from us. We must obey God rather than Men. God hath reserved all things for himself alone. We must add nothing to Gods commands. Riches come to us by Gods blessing. God doth deliver those that are his in his own time. The rich and the poor are of Gods making. Where God is not, there is nothing. Mans cunning can hide nothing from God. If God be against us, all creatures are against us▪ God will not have men to be idle. The desire of Riches withdraws men from God. God feeds and preserves us beyond our care. God is a Spirit, and to be worshipped in Spirit. The works and counsels of God are unsearchable. God alone and freely forgives sin. God worketh all our good works in us. God admonishes us by his Word, before he doth punish. God correcteth his, but doth not cast them away. He that exalteth himself shall be made low. The examples of many men are not to be followed. Outward things do not defile a man. Those things befal not, which we determine, but which God hath decreed. It is blindness to minde outward things, and neglect the in∣ward. The amendment of our life is made by the law of God. Foolishness is the punishment of drunkenness. Nothing is wanting to the faithful. The world hateth the faithful.
Rage depraveth the judgement. Faith is the gift of God. Faith alone doth justifie. Faith is freely given. God respecteth faith. Works are the signes of faith. Faith makes us the Sons of God. Faith is tryed in adversity. The death of the faithful is life. God hath a care of faithful men. The faithful have enough in time of famine. Faith is the fountain of good works. Faith resteth upon the word of God. The care of things to come is unprofitable to us. The faithful do not perish for want of meat. True faith cannot be idle. Every ones faith is known by its fruits. Glory must be given to God, not to our selves. God heareth the groaning of the oppressed. Over-much talk is not without sin. Over-much talk is an argument of folly and lying. God by grace promiseth good things to them that are yet un∣born. God lifteth up the humble. We must not trust in man. All things do serve man. God requires humility. Mans life is a warfare. Honour belongs only to God. Mens endeavours are unprofitable. Humane comforts do fail. Man is a living creature that is subject to calamity. Man is born to misery. Man receives all things from God. God bestowes his gifts upon the humble.
Men are governed by wisdom, not by their own strength: God doth bring down all lofty things. Mans heart is wicked of its own nature. Humane reason acknowledges God. Man is the author of calamities to himself. It is the best revenge to overcome an enemy by a good turn. The Judgements of God are unsearchable. Disobedience is displeasing to God. It is a dangerous thing to judge other men. Infidelity defileth all things. We must judge after the cause be known. The counsels of wicked men do not prosper. Ʋnbelief is the root of all sins. Wicked men are overthrown by their own devises. Wicked men scorn Gods gifts. They that know not the Law of God, are accursed. All things are to be undertaken in the fear of God. It is a wicked mans pleasure to hurt another mans name▪ We are saved in the name of Jesus only. We must not be lazie in good, works. What a wicked man most feareth, doth befall him. All things fall out ill to ungodly men. We must get our living by labour. God blesseth liberal men. We must labour to do good to our neighbour. The mirth of just men never endeth. Store of children is a very good gift of God. The longer life is a long-lasting misery. We must obey the Magistrate. The time of death is certain. Diseases come because of sin. We must give respect to our betters. God doth not do miracles rashly. Bad men are to be punished, that good men be not hurt. The mercy of God is the beginning of our welfare.
The mercy of God is necessary for all men. A hard death comes after a good life. They that do not obey wholsome admonitions are lost. Death hath no authority over believers. A wicked Ruler is given to a wicked people. Evil is not put away by another evil, but by good. God doth make use of ill instruments. We must not judge rashly. No evil will go unpunished. Nothing is worse than ingratitude. We must speak evil of no man. No man is without sin. No man is innocent before God. No man is born for himself alone. A just man doth abuse nothing. Wicked men do not endure correction. There is nothing more easie, than to charge men falsly. No Prophet is accepted in his own Country. The number of Gods people is very small. We can do nothing of our selves. There is nothing more infectious than bad doctrine. God doth not forget his own. Nothing is blinder than a wicked mans heart. God regards no outward thing. You have not begun well enough, unless you go on to th'end God detesteth idlenesse. We are all sinners. All the works of men are impare. The workman is worthy of his meat. A new life is the best repentance. The lust of the eye deceiveth us. All our things are in the hands of God. All things are possible to him that believeth. God respecteth not the work, but the affection. All things are made for man.
All things are made by the Word of God. All things are to be construed to the better sense. Opportunity is every where to be observed. Zaziness to pray is as evil sign. God doth cast down the mighty: The Lord makes much of the godly. Sin is the cause of death. Charity covereth sins. The punishment of wicked men is eternal. We ought to obey our Parents. The memory of godly men is eternal. God revengeth the poor. Sins are not done away by works. Sweet things are seasoned with bitter for the godly. All things fall out for good to the godly. A good Prince is given from the Lord. Sins are forgiven by the grace of God. God is most sure to feed his. That which is without faith is sin. There is no respect of persons with God. A poor mans wages must not be put off. God alone doth forgives sins. The world is governed by Gods providence▪ God ready to favour us is the best inheritance. A child brings its sustenance with him into the world. He that coveteth to get more, getteth less. They that attempt great things, bring nothing to pass. The common-wealth flourisheth because of the godly. It shall be rendred to every one according to his deeds. Good admonitions make reprobates worse. We must use goods, but not trust in them. Let reprehension be without reproaching. Old age is to be reverenced. God destroyeth the proud. Evil company is to be avoided.
The success is from God. Pride is the destroyer of souls. We must not give an offence to Children. Wisdom doth defend us, not weapons. It never went well with seditious persons. No man is saved without faith in Christ. No man is wise without the Word of God. Wise men endure correction. Satan can do no hurt, unless God give him leave. God makes void the counsels of wise men. Humane wisdom is folly in the things of God. We must be slow to be angry. Quietness is not to be looked for in this life. They that fear the Lord shall live well. The will of God is good. We are nourished by the Word of God. The will of God is firm. God forbiddeth revenge. The truth will alwayes have persecutors. A good wife is given by the Lord. Every one must look to his own calling The contempt of the truth is a very grievous sin. It is the greatest valour that can be to conquer our own lust. The more common, and ordinary Rules for Childrens behaviour. WHen you get up it a morning, begin the day in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And commit your self to Christ by saying the Lords prayer, Thank God, that he hath given you a good night. And then pray, that he would bless that whole day to you, that you fall not into sin. When you come anon into the sight, bid your Father and your  Mother good morrow.
After that, comb your head, wash your face with your hands, that you may get you to the school as fast as can be. Before you go in, you shall pray that Christ would vouchsafe you his Spirit, because without his assistance, that which any one goeth about, is to no purpose. When you come into the school, be willing to attend, and what ever you do, do it heartily. Give a modest answer. Do not snappishly find fault with things that are amiss, but in a modest way. Above all things have a care you deserve not to be whipt. Do not offend your Master, or your fellows at all, either by word or deed. Rather teach, than conquer him that wrangles with you. When you are dismissed from the school, make haste home, and loyter not in the street. If you be to do any thing for your parents at home, be sure to go about it, and dispatch it. But if you have leisure to get by your self what was read to you before in the school, get it: for there is nothing more precious than time. Consider that it is irrevocable, and lost which is past. When dinner time comes spread the table, in due time. But before you set any thing upon the table, be sure to wash your pots and glasses. First of all▪ the table cloth must be laid on the table, then the brass circle or ring, then the salt seller, after these the trenchers or plates, and last of all the bread. And in the same manner the table is got ready, so also it must  be taken away. First the trenchers shall be taken up, then the salt meats, and the salt. After that the cheese, and whatsoever else there is of a se∣cond mess. Last of all the table-cloth, and the bread is taken away.
Stand with your feet straight, and set together, carefully minding, that there be nothing wanting. And when any thing is to be filled, or reached, or set on, or taken away, do it mannerly. When you are sent any whither, make haste again. Say grace, or give God thanks before, and after meat. Do not trouble or interrupt other folks talk as you stand by, but when you are asked a question, give a short an∣swer. Do not confound the pots, and flagons out of forgetfulness, so as to pour out one for another, if there be several sorts of wine. Do not forget the salt. Set not any thing that is cut or broken upon the table. Within even at supper-time, be sure to see to the snuffing of the candles, and that no ugly stink ffend the noses of the guests. When you snuff the candle, do not put it out. But do not use your self to slap up whatsoever is taken a∣way  from the table, or they have set up in the house. When grace is said, after all things are taken away, refresh your minde with some honest recreation amongst your fel∣lows, till the time recall you from your play, into the School. And if it happen that you sit at the table, observe these things. First of all, have your nailes pared. Wash your hands. Sit up straight. Be content with the master of the house's placing you. Avoid drunkenness. Be sober. So shew your self merry, as that you alwaies remember what becomes your age. Put your hand to the dish last of all.
If any thing more dainty than other be offered you, refuse i modestly. If it be urged upon you, take it, and thank them. Presently, after you have cut off a little bit, give back again  what is left, either to him, or some other that sits at the table. But give nothing back to another mans Wife, when her hus∣band fits by. Likewise give nothing back to a Prince, or great man. For you may break, what you think is the best, for your Parent, Friend, or kinsfolk. If any dainty bit be offered you, as fish liver, and some such like things, taste sparingly of it, and give the rest about you. If any body drink to you, pledge him cheerfully. But drink sparingly your self, If you be not thirsty, yet put the cup to your lip. Look pleasantly on them that talk. Say nothing your self, unless you be asked. If any silthy thing be spoken, do not smile at it, but make a  face, as though you understood it not. Back-bite no body at the table. Do not make as though you were a better man than another. Do not brag of your own things. Do not scorn other folks things. Be kind towards your fellows of a mean condition. Accuse no body. Be not a blab of your tongue. If you see the meal is too long, after you have crav'd leave, and saluted the guests, go away from the Table. Do not cut bread upon your breast. As you cut, hold not your fingers before the knife. Eat what is set before you, and by you. When you are to take any thing out of the dish, hold it upon the point of your knife. Do not lay your self over the meat, like a swine.
Do not mix or jumble with your fingers, what things are orderly laid in a dish. When you are to eat an egg, cut your bread into little gob∣bets first. But have a care that nothing run beside. Eat your egg quickly. Throw not your shels again unbroken into the dish. Drink not, whilest you are eating an egg. As you eat it, do not daub your doublet. As you eat pepper too, do not lick it up with your finger. Do not wipe your lip-ends, or your nose with your sleeve as you are at meat. Wipe not your nose, but with your hand∣kercher, and that civilly, and modestly. Scrape not off the snot with your finger. Put not your fingers into the salt seller, or salt-meat, or any thing seasoned with Pepper. Take not too thick nor too large morsels, but cut every one of them. Take nothing out of your mouth unto your trencher. Scratch not your head whilest you are at your meat. All lavish laughter is ill-favoured at a meal. When you are to drink, wipe the outside of your lips (or your lip ends) with two fingers. Let to grease or fat be seen to float in your cup. But drink not with your meat in your mouth, and before you have let it down. It is a clownish thing to eat and talk both at once. Likewise to teach, or yawn, or spit out often, is accounted an unmannerly thing too. It is accounted a wilde and rude thing, to lean upon ones el∣bow. It is a foolish thing to eat toasts out of a cup amongst a company of Men. Lean not backwards as Clowns use to do. Take what is enough in your spoon, and sup it up.
As you sup it let none drop, and do not sup twice at  spoonful. Do not sup again, till you have chewed and swallowed that down. It is the property of dogs to devour huge mouthfuls, and to gnaw bones. If any meat stick on the bones, cut it off handsomely with your knife. Do not rashly gaze about, to see what other guests cut, or have on their trenchers. Do not put into a pottinger what is once bitten or gnawn. It is an ill-favoured thing to throw bits of bones, or meat under the table. It is an unseemly thing too, to make clean ones teeth with  his nails, tongue, or knife, but that is to be done when the feast is ended. Let your meat be moderate, and provoking mirth. Dine more sparingly. Sup more plentifully. After supper delight your self with pleasant tales. Take as much meat and drink as is sufficient, not for lust, but for nature. When you have dined, do something in a merry manner. Toward supper walk a little while. Being to get your supper do so too: Study and write with an empty stomack. THE END.
Sapientum sen∣tentiae,  pro primis Latinae Linguae Tyronibus collectae. Sententiae duarum dictionum AMicis opitulare. Alienis abstine. Arcanum cela. Affabilis esto. Amicos probato. Audacia periculosa. Amicis utere. Bonos honora. Blandus esto. Bonis benefacito. Benedic omnibus. Cognosce teipsum. Cognatos cole. Concordiam sectare. Calumniam oderis. Consule inculpaté. Dolum time. Datum serva. Depositum redde. Deferto nemínem. Delecta amicos. Diligentiam adhibe: Existimationem retine: Ebrietas dementat. Ebrietatem fuge.
Exerce probitatem. Aequum judica. Familiam cura. Fac justa. Filios erudi. Fuge turpia. Inimicitias fuge. Iracundiam tempera. Inimicitias dissolve Justè judicato. Justitiam colito. Jusjurandum serva. Libenter disce. Ludos fuge. Legibus pare. Laudato honesta. Linguam tempera: Libros evolve. Liberos institue. Litem oderis. Mortalia cogita. Magistratum metue. Mundus esto. Majori cede. Minori parce. Magistrum metue. Multitudini placet. Mendacium oderis. Mieretricem fuge. Neminem irritato. Neminem irriseris. Ne jurato. Neminem vitupera. Nemini adverseris. Nihil diuturnum. Omnibus placeto.
Oculis moderare. Otiosus nè sis. Otium fuge. Omnia mutantur. Pacem dilige. Pietatem sectare, Probrum fugito. Principem honora. Pericolosa temeritas. Principi obedito. Pudorem serva. Propria custodi. Prudentiam exerce, Respice suturum. Reverere parentes. Religionem cole. Regem honora. Risum moderare. Rectum quaere. Rationi obtempera. Rumores fugito. Sapientibus utere, Sobrius esto. Saluta libenter. Seniorem venerare. Suspitionem ab jicito. Temperantiam exerce. Tempori pare. Tecum habita. Veritati adhaereto. Utere virtute. Violentiam oderis. Voluptatem tempera. Verecundè responde. Verecundiam serva.
Sententiae trium dictionum. AMor vincit omnia. Amor sui caecus. Arma nesciunt leges. Audentes fortuna juvat. Assiduitas durissima vincit. Avarus semper eget. Avaritiâ nihil miserius: Auro nihil inexpugnabile. Ars vincit naturam. Arcus nimis intensus rumpitur. Aliena conscupiscere noli. A vitiis abstineto. Amicos pecuniae facíunt. Avaritia vitiorum eaput. Alii aliis praestant. Assuefactio efficacissima est. Belli exitus incertus. Beneficii accepti memento. Belli fortuna anceps. Bellum gerendum consilio. Brevis hominum vita. Bis pueri senes. Cultus res sacra. Cor hominum indomabile. Cor hominis pravum. Crimina multa dissimulanda. Comparatio omnis odiosa. Cuique sua dos. Comitas amicos pa rit. Comitate vincendi morofi. Conscientia mille testes. Cibus immodicus noxius. Consilio inimica iracundia.
Cupiditas est inexplebilis. Cupiditas pecuniae fugienda. Calamitas nemini exprobranda. Convitiis non respondendum. Defidia generat oblivionem. Dies affert multa. Difficile assueta relinquere. Di vitiae fastum pariunt. Dies aegrítudinem adimit. Desperandum de nemine. Dona multum possunt. Delinquentes sunt corrigendi. Divitiae vitiorum ministrae. Difficillimum vincere naturam. Discordiâ dilabuntur regna. Difficilia quae honesta. Divitis incauta oratio. Divisio rem attenuat. Dubium quodcunque probato. Dubius rerum eventus. Dives omnis inexplebilis. Doloris medicus tempus. Exercitatio optimus Magister. Exercitatio potest omnia. Aequales aequalia delectant. Exilium multos honestat. Experimento nihil cettius. Aetate prudentiores reddimur. Ebrietatis comes oblivio. Aetas corrumpitur vino. Flagitiorum turpis exitus: Felicium multi cognati. Felicitas incitat inimicitias. Fames optimus coquus. Fortuna reddit insolentes. Felicitatis comes invídia.
Ferocitas lenitate sedatur. Factum stultus agnoscit. Faeminae sunt inconstantes. Furori cedendum est. Fuge nimis alta. Finem vitae specta. Forma perit vino. Fortes fortuna adjuvat. Fame nihil miserius. Firmum in vitâ nihil. Fugax est aetas. Futili nihil credendum. Finis miseriae mors. Gaudium dolore junctum. Gratia gratiam parit. Gloriae fundamentum labor. Honos alit artes. Hominum mentes variae. Honores praebet pecunia. Humani casus ancipites. Humanarum rerum vicissitudo: Infelix litium exitus. Incertus rerum exitus. Ira tormentum sui ipsius. Jucundi acti labores. In vino veritas. Ira compescere arduum. Jactantiae comes Invidia. Ingenia hominum varia. Inconsulti facilè ruunt. Incommodum hilaritate condiendum Ingens telum necessitas. Industrium adjuvat Deus. Infida semper societas. Inconstantia fastidit amicos. Incognitum non amatur.
Inexplebilis est mendacitas. Injuria beneficio vincitur. Jucunda rerum vicissitudo. Ignorans omnis instabilis. Infelicitas nemini objicíenda. Iujurias tolerare difficile. Laus excitat ingenium. Lis parit litem. Labore omnia florent. Lingua multos perdidit. Labores gloriae fundamentum. Linguam digito compesce Labor est thesaurus hominis. Laus merces virtutis. Libertate nihil dulcius. Malus similem quaerit. Malè partum dilabitur. Multa docet fames. Malum patientiâ tollitur. Mens praesaga futuri. Mulierem ornant silentium. Miserrimum fame mori. Mortalibus nihil tutum. Munera capiunt homines. Mutua defensio tutissima. Musicam docet amor. Mors omnia sternit. Mors est inevitabilis. Mala senium accelerant. Mulieris dos pudicitia. Memoria thesaurus artium, Maldictis non respondendum. Natura paucis contenta. Nemo sibi nascitur. Nihil temerè credideris.
Nil mentire debes. Necessitas caret lege. Ne tua jactato. Ne aliena despicito. Ne cui obtrectato. Necessitati nihil repugnat. Necessitas frangit ferrum. Nimia parsimonia vitanda. Nox pudore vacat. Ne quid nimis. Nihil assuetudine majus. Nusquam tuta fides. Nihil inexpertum affirmes. Natura frustra repugnatur. Nihil fugacius tempore. Obsequium amicos parit. Occasio facit furem. Opulentia tollit amicos. Omne principium grave. Occasio non negligenda. Opes celeriter dilabuntur. Odium obsequio lenitur. Omnia fert aetas: Opes arte parantur. Otium ingenii rubigo. Paupertas excitat artes. Praeceptori discipulus obediat. Pecuniae obediunt omnia. Praeceps consilium inauspicatum. Paupertas amicis nos spolia Parta sunt conservanda. Pudor mendico inutilis. Plurium calculus vincit. Patriâ nihil dulcius Procrastinatio est odiosa.
Principium dimidium totius. Quae nocent, docent. Quaevis terra patria. Risus nimius cavendus. Similia similibus favent. Simile simili gaudet. Servitus omnis misera. Soli fortunati amantur. Somnus mortis imago. Spes servat afflictos. Studium humanos reddit. Suum cuique pulchrum. Sequitur ver hyemem. Stultus st ulta loquitur. Studia mentem indicant. Sors omnia versat Silentium ubicunque tutum. Superbi difficilè corriguntur. Solus sapiens dives. Spes alit exules. Sibi quisque placet. Satietas ferocitatem parit. Semper feriae inertibus. Sermo medetur tristitiae. Silentio nihil utilius. Tempus edax rerum. Tempus breve est. Tempus celerrimè aufugit. Tempore omnia mutantur. Tempus omnia revelat. Tempore omnia peraguntur. Tempore nihil velocius. Tempore fiunt omnia, Tempus dolorem lenit. Venter caret auribus.
Vetita magis appetimus. Veritatis simplex oratio. Vulgi judicium stultum. Virtus laudata crescit▪ Usu omnia consumuntur. Varia dona hominum. Sententiae quatuor dictionum. ALiam aetatem alia decent. Aliis aliud vitii est Amicis utendum cum modestia. Assidua exercitatio omnia potest. Ab hominibus blandientibus caven dum. Amicos inter adversa cognoscimus. Amici boni rari snnt. Amicitia vetus rarò aboletur. Amanti nihil est difficile. Ambitio in Republicâ pestilentissima. Amicitia omnibus rebus anteponenda: Annus fructificat, non tellus. Animus cujusque sermone revelatur. Ante annos prudentia nulla. Assueta mala non offendunt. Amor non est sanabilis. Aversa saepe excitant ingenium. Auro placatur Rex avarus. Avari cupiditas nunquam expletur. Audere non est sapientiae. Amico fido nihil pretiosius. Adest unicuique rei modus. Admonentes liberè rari sunt. Ampla satis forma pudicitia.
Amiciria nullum pondus recusat. Amorem oculi potissimum conciliant. Avari non possunt satiari. Avaritiâ nullum vitium tetrius. Aranearum telis similes leges. Beneficium semper beneficium provocat. Beneficium animo donantis metiendum. Beneficii exprobatio molesta est. Bellum civile malum perniciosum. Bona multa negligendo perduntur. Bonis amicis parciùs utendum. Bonos viros omnia decent. Blandis verbis homines exorantur. Conjugium inequalium malum est. Canes timidi vehementiùs latrant. Calliditas nimia interdum obest. Charum est quod rarum est. Consuetudo omnia dura lenit. Consilium ubique plurimùm valet. Conscientia recta suavissima est. Consuetudo quovis tyranno potentior. Commune naufragium omnibus solatium. Consilium post facta inutile. Cunctis opibus sapientia pretiosor. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam. Cum blanditur inimicus fallit. Cum fortunâ murantur amici. Degeneres animos timor arguit. Divitiae bonae mentis onera. Docti doctorum familiaritate gaudent. Dulce est meminisse laborum. Dulce est paternum solum. Deteriotum semper major pars. Damnum turpi lucro praeponendum. Diversae terrae iversa producunt.
Donum à dautis animo pensatur. Divitiae sunt causae jurgiorum. Damnare facilè neminem debemus. Dissimulanda est sua miseria. Esquillâ non nascitur Rosa. Egestatem affert manus otiosa. Ex aspectu nascitur amor. Eruditiores efficimur omnes damno. Ex trema gaudii luctus occupat. Ebrietas abditissima pectoris profert. Ex minimis initis maxima. Errare commune est mortalibus, Ensis pueris non committendus. Exprobratio calamitatis nemini objicienda. Experientia est providentiae Magistra. Ex parvis fiunt magna. Ex otio vitia proveniunt. Expertus pericula facilè expavescit. Felicitas multos habet cognatos. Fortuna simillima vento est. Fallere alios malum est. Futurorum uulla certa cognitio. Fies malus malorum contubernio, Fugiendum est malorum commercium. Fratrum concordia rara est. Fugienda sunt nimis alta. Fides etiam hosti servanda. Gravis culpa, tacenda loqui. Gloria pecuniis non emitur. Homines ad malum proclives. Hominis figura oratione cognoscitur. Humile vitae genus tutissimum.
Insipiente fortunato nihil intolerabilius. Irati nihil rectè faciunt. Inter fratres rara concordia. Ignavis semper feriae sunt. Ingratitudo vitiorum omnium caput. In omni re opus est animo. In adversis amicus probatur. In omni re varietas delectat. Inter arma silent leges. Impatientia res cunctas exasperat. Impetus cuncta malè ministrat. Innumeris laboribus honos constat. Ira omnium tardissimè senescit. Ingens thesaurus bonus amicus. Inopinata mala graviora sunt. Immensum gloria calcar habet. Invidia suum torquet authorem: Improbâ linguâ nihil perniciosius. Innumera mala parit securitas. Ingenium mala saepe movent. Ira non sedatur iracundia. Labor est thesaurus hominibus. Labor virtutis gloriam accipit. Labor improbus omnia vincit. Longior vita diuturna calamitas. Libenter feras quod necesse est. Minervâ invitâ nihil tentandum. Mala herba non perit. Mens est praesaga futuri. Multa petentibus desunt multa. Mendacem memorem esse oportet. Malum lucrum aequale dispendio. Multis ictibus dejicitur quercus. Morosi nil candidè interpretantur. Malum consilium consultori pessimum. Mortalibus nihil charius pecuniâ.
Mors omni aetati communis est. Mala sunt vicina bonis. Malo accepto stultus sapit. Malè respondent coacta ingenia. Modestia sanitati multum confert. Miseri felicibus invidere solent. Natura nihil solitarium amat. Negotiosa res est litigare. Ne vulgi sequaris errores. Novit paucos secura quies. Nihil efficacius simplici veritate. Ne majora viribus suscipias. Nihil turpius sene libidinoso. Nihil absurdius divite avaro. Nullus mortalium absolutè beatus. Naturae necessitas exiguo placatur. Nemo laeditur nisi à seipso. Nocet temeritas multùm mortalibus, Nulla amicorum melior possessio. Nihil est homine calamitosius. Nihil dulcius amico monitore. Nihil vulgarius quam fallere homines Nimia lenitas non probatur. Non semper arridet fortuna. Opes amicos conciliant. Omnia habere nemo potest. Omnibus horis nemo sapit. Optimum alienâ infaniâ frui. Omnia suo tempore peragenda. Omnes res facilè mutantur. Oculus Domini saginat equum. Otium multa docet vicia. Omnium est dulcissimum accipere▪ Omnia bona pace constant. Omnes deteriores sumus licentia.
Oratio factorum est simulachrum. Oculi auribus sunt fideliores. Omne solum forti patria Pauperum mors est fine strepitu. Pauperum sermones sunt vani Praestantiores sunt senum sententiae. Parva non sunt contemnenda. Praecocia ingenia citò desistunt. Patria sua cuique jucundissima. Publicâ concordiâ nihil utilius. Parsimoniâ & labore crescunt res. Prudentis est multa dissimulare. Perrurbato cordi nihil jucundum. Perdifficile est bonum esse. Pertinacia, elati animi comes. Probitas magnun ingenium facit. Peccanti non praestandum obsequium. Post mortem cessat invidia. Prosperis rebus animi luxuriant. Quot capita, tot sensus Qualis vir, talis oratio▪ Qualis princeps, talis populus. Quisque suis malis blanditur. Quid turpius arroganti imperitiâ? Quot homines, tot sententiae. Quantum habebis, tanti eris. Qualis procontatio, talis responsio. Res sacra est consultatio. Rem peractum stultus intelligit. Re praeteritâ omnes sapimus. Rubor virtutis est color. Raro ulla calamitas sola. Ratio degenerat sine exerciratione.
Soli miseri carent invidiâ. Sermone qualitas viri cognoscitur. Silentio multis respondetur aptius. Sequitur facile tempestatem serenitas. Sua quemque alit ars. Senecture otiosâ nihil jucundius. Sermo opportunus est optimus. Sermo character animi est. Suus Rex Reginae placet. Sera in fundo parsimonia. Semper inops quicunque cupit. Sua quemque studia delectant. Sine opibus nihil valemus. Sanitate nihil in vitâ melius. Sine vitiis nemo nascitur. Sapientia nimia non est sapientia. Suus cuique attribuendus est error. Supra vires nihil tentandum. Suo quisque studio delectatur. Spes mentes hominum fovet. Turpe lucrum adducit infortunium. Tempus omnia secum trahit. Trahit sua quemque voluptas. Tempore adversitatis probatur amicus. Tempore omnia fiunt leviora. Vinum immodicum, malorum causa. Ventre pleno, pejor consultatio. Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat. Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Ubi timor, ibi pudor. Ubi amici, ibi opes. Ubi amor, ibi occulus. Ubi dolor, ibi digitus. Unus vir, nullus vir. Ut quisque est, ita loquitur.
Virtute nulla possessio maior. Variae sunt rerum vices. Vitia celari non possunt. Vana gloria non est petenda. Sententiae plurium dictionum. AB aliorum casu disce quod vites. Abjiciendus pudor quoties urget necessitas. A cane non magno saepe tenetur aper. Ad otium proclives sumus omnes. Adversa aequo animo sunt toleranda. Adulatio, maxima in amicitiâ pestis. Adolecentis est majores natu revereri. Adeò in teneris consuescere multum est. Ad omnem disciplinam tardior senectus. Agentes & consentientes pari paenâ puniuntur. Alterius salus, alterius est exitium. Alterius opes, alterius sunt spolia. Alia vita, alia vivendi ratio. Amicus verus, thesaurus est magnus. Amici in rebus adversis cognoscuntur. Amor verus nullum novit habere modum. Animus duris rebus assuetus, minus offenditur. Animus cujusque sermone revelatur. Ars laborat citra fortunae opem. Asinus mavult stramina, quam aurum. Aurum multis saepe suasit perperám. Bacillus vitae est egregia eruditio. Beneficium collatum in gratos solet foenerari▪ Bene pauperem esse, melius est quam ditescere male. Beatissima civitas, quae à sapientibus regitur. Bonae leges ex malis moribus procreantur.
Bonis quod sit, haud perit, Bonos viros nihil maledicta vulnerant. Boni ad bonorum convivia ultro accedunt. Canis pauperem peregrinum semper infestat. Canis festinans caecos parit catulos. Canis antiquus catenae assuefieri non potest. Certíora quae videntur, quàae quae audiuntur. Credendum non citò est, quod dicitur. Celant sua mala domestica sapientes. Cavendum ab eo qui semel imposuit. Charius est quicquid mercede paratur. Consilio meliùs vincas, quàm iracundiâ. Consultatione, re peractâ, non opus est. Consilium petendum à consultis & prudentibus. Consuetudo cum bonis viris est habenda. Corpus magis dolore affici quam mentem velis. Corrigere naturam malam difficile est. Comite scelesto haud unquam iturus utere. Consuetudo in rebus omnibus semper est potentissima: Cura in omni re plurimùm valet. Cum amieo bene merito non est suscipiendum certamen Cui fortuna adversatur, amicos non habet. Desipere in loco, summa sapientia est. Dispares mores disparia studia sequuntur. Dissidentes facilè superantur, concordes haud facilè. Diligitur nemo nisi cui fortuna secunda est. Difficile est tristi fingere mente jocum. Dives est qui nihil sibi desse putat. Divitiae labore parantur, prodigalitate pereunt. Deo, parentibus, praeceptoribus non redditur aequivalens
Difficilis res est inventu verus amicus. Dives memineris, ut prosis pauperculis. Doctrina vana eft, ratio ni accesserit. Dos non facit faustum conjugium, sed virtus. Durum est ea relinquere, quibus diu assueveris. De suis quisque verbum facit. Dum non licet, ut expeto, vivo, ut queo. Damnaveris nullum causâ non cognitâ. Dos est magna, virtus parentum. Dum felis dormit, faliunt Mures. Dantur opes nullis nunc, nisi divitibus. Difficilius est foelicem, quam adversam ferre fortunam. Doctus pauper diviti indocto praeponitur. Ex parvo initio res magna oritur. Ex vitio alterius sapiens emendat suum. Ex aliorum erratis ipsi cautiores efficimur. Exilium est illic homini, ubi parùm commodè vivit. Exima est virtus praestare silentia rebus. Enfis vulnerat corpus, sed animum oratio. Errata ipsi nostra non a gnoscimus. Fortis est, falsam infamiam contemnere. Fortis animi est non perturbari in rebus adversis. Faciliùs quis consulit aliis, quam sibi. Fortunae incommoda nihil movent sapientem. Festinationis comites sunt error, & poenitentia. Feliciter sapit, qui alieno periculo sapit. Facilè fustem invenerit, qui cupit caed ere canem.
Facilè volat verbum, tamen nunquam redit. Fortuna prospera, dum blanditur, perdit. Felicissimus', cui nihil contigerit in vitâ mali. Felix, quicunque dolore alterius disces posse carere tuo. Facile est absentem vincere, qui non repugnat. Frustra sapit, qui sibi non sapit. Gallus in suo sterquilinio plurimùm potest. Gratior est pulchro veniens è corpore virtus. Hostem beneficiis vincere, oprima ultio est. Humilis fortuna tutior est quàm excelsa. Haereditas famae, quàm divitiarum honestior. Humani animi difficilis est conjectura. Homo avarus, quicquid agit, properat omnia. Habent & suam perrurbationem tranquillae aquae. Heri probitas familiam etiam reddit meliorem. Inter socrum & nurum vetus est bellum. Insperata accidunt magis saepius, quàm quae speres. Ingenia praeclara aemulis nunquam caruerunt. Jugum qui fert volens, leve efficit. Ipsa dies quandoque parens, quandoque noverca. Infelicitatem absconde, ne inimicos reddas laetos. Ingentes opes non parantur sine fraude. Ingratitudo omnia vitia in se complectitur. Incommoditas semper comes est commoditatum. In aliena vitia naturâ sumus occulati, non in nostra. Irae imperans vitam vives validissimam Incumbere variis ubique est languidum. In rebus malis opus est bono confilio.
In adversis rebus amicus cognoscitur. In periculoso negotio non est dormitandum. Impossibilia optare sibi, delirantis est. Inutilis est pudor, quum urget necessitas. Invendibili merci oportet ultrò emptorem adducere. Indicat amicos tempus, ut aurum ignis. Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. Lites animi tranquillitatem adimere solent. Longior vita solet plurima incommoda afferre. Laudatur, non qui diu, sed qui bene vixit. Lucrum malum damnum semper affert. Luxu corporis hebetescit mentis acies. Liberalem oportet esse, sed pro facultare. Lucrum nisi esset, nemo malus esset. Libentiùs oculatis, quàm auritis testibus creditur. Leve fit, quod bene fertur, onus, Laude & obsequio vincuntur homines. Mulier mala cunctis feris est ferocior. Matrona frugi passim non est obvia. Mulier domûs salus est & calamitas. Miserrimum mortis genus, fama emori. Mores bonos colloquia prava diruunt. Majora perdes, parva ni retinueris. Multa eveniunt homini, quae non vult. Modus omnibus in rebus optimus habendus. Multa bona multis praeter spem evenerunt. Multi invident aliis bonum, quo ipsi carent. Mentis habitum sermonis cultus solet indicare. Multis displicet, qui sibi nimium placet. Multò praestat medicari initia, quàm finem. Mores bonos convictus inficit improbus.
Mores amici noveris, non oder is. Mortalia omnia mutationes multas habent. Magnae res discordiâ pereunt, concordiâ valent. Mendacium od  omnis sapiens & bonus. Multa mala affert hominibus otium. Maxima utilitas scire uti paupertate. Nihil nostrum est, quod auferri potest. Nulla discordia, ubi idem est animus. Ne commercium habeas cum improbis. Non refert quàm diu vixeis, sed quàm bene. Ne quenquam punito, rem nisi expende ris. Noli misero insultare: sors communis est. Nunquam repente vir bonus ditatus est. Nullum animal, nulla merx difficilior cognitu quàm ho∣mo. Non vivendum, ut edas, sed edendum, ut vivas. Non aetate, sed ingenio, acquiritur sapientia. Non proderit tibi ingeni elicitas, nisi exercueris. Ne curis tuum ipsius animum excrucies. Ne moveris malum bene conditum. Nihil turpius, quàm cum familiari bellum gerere. Nemo est hominum, in quo non aliud vitii inest. Non est beneficium, quod in quaestum mittitur. Non parùm lucri facir, qui damnum effugit. Ne disce turpitudinem, néve admiseris. Non foeminam aurum exornat, sed boni mores. Natura non dedit imperare foeminis. Nihil praeter quod gliscit, novit foemina. Natura non sinit praeesse foeminam. Nihil est ab omni parte beatum. Nihil pejus moerore in rebus mortalium. Nullam feres pauperie molem acerbius. Ne cuncta semper, oro, credas omnibus. Ne studeas malefacere, confisus opibus tuis.
Nihil est tam grave, quam paupertas. Ne festina ditescere, ne pauper fias statim. Naturum iniquitas morum planè inficit. Nihil est tam grave, qin amicum feceris. Nihil sanitate in vitâ praestantius. Nemo sic diligenter aliena, ut sua, curat negotia. Nè conare, quod fieri non potest. Nihil est tam diuturnum, quod non emolliat assiduitas. Nox, amor, vinum turpia suadent. Non ulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum. Non est ejusdem & multa & opportuna dicere. Nihil odiosius, quam quod sempet idem est. Naturae suum jus eripere difficile est. Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris. Nihil rectè faciunt ministri, nisi adest herus. Non omnia veniunt, quae in animo statueris. Omne nimium cunctis in rebus est fgiendum. Oculis magis habenda fides quàm auribus. Optimè cogitata saepe pessimè cedunt. Oportet senescentem semper aliquid addiscere. Optima quaeque difficiles habent exitus. Omnes sibi meliùs esse malunt, quàm alteri. Omnis res properando parit errorem. Omne malum nascens facile opprimitur. Omnis mora, quantumvis pusilla, longissima vide∣tur Opportet id, quod adest, boni consulere. Optimum erit si quis tempus spectaverit aptum: Onus, cui impar sis, nè subiveris. Omne supervacuum pleno de pectore manat. Omnium rerum extremum est mors.
Patienter ferenda, quae mutari non possunt. Patrum mores non sunt arguendi, sed ferendi. Pauci in secundis rebus moderati sunt. Pessimus autor rerum gerendarum ira. Patria sua cuique jucundissima est. Post factum plerunque magis sapimus. Proruunt cornua arietibus bene pastis. Pessimi sunt consultores ira & cupido. Praestat in visum esse, quàm miserabilem. Plurima sunt cognoscenda, sed optima retinenda, Praeceps ira multorum malorum author. Pharmaca nascenti sunt adhibenda malo. Pulchritudo corporis fragile bonum est. Protinus apparet quae planta frugifera sit. Parva scintilla contempta maximum excitat incendium. Periculosum est se aquis credere. Praestantissimarum rerum summa raritas est. Prudentis est nihil remerè agere. Pares cum paribus facilè congregantur. Proba merx facilè emptorem reperit. Praeterita reprehendi possunt, corrigi non possunt Plures vincuntur aequabilitate, quàm duritiâ. Pulchrum est modum cujuscunque scire temporis. Praestat mori, quàm foedam vitam vivere. Placidis dictis dolor rectè curabitur. Ponere modum irae & voluptati, bonum est. Praestat egere, quàm scelere ditescere. Praestat tacere, quàm loqui indecentia: Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quàm auriti decem. Plures necat lingua, quàm gladius. Perturbato cordi nihil est jucundum. Pinguis venter non gignit sensum tenuem, Patriae fumus igne alieno luculentior.
Plus audit quisque domi, quâm foris. Plus videut oculi, quam oculos. Probis ab animis facta promanant proba. Patria est homini ubicunque feliciter agit. Pauper est, non qui parùm habet, sed qui plus cupit. Perversae sodalitates malum fructum ferunt. Pudore amisso omnis virtus ruit. Praeterita compellunt nos futurorum rationem habere. Pulchrum est injurias in gratiam commutare. Pueris nocet potare vinum. Quod repente tollitur, non est diuturnum. Quae cernuntur, certiora sunt, quàm quae audiuntur. Quod quisque vehementer amat, ejus non potest obli∣visci. Quod aliis vitro vertas, ipse ne feceris. Quicquid praeter spem evenit, id deputato esse in lucro. Qui fugitant labores optant dies estos Quicunque recusat laborem, non fert fructum. Quid de quoque viro, & cui dicas, saepe caveto, Quod multi faciunt, non continuò bonum est. Quod uni bonum, alteri malum videtur. Quod non est assue tum, laborem recusat. Qui nimiùm properat, seriùs absolvit. Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit imperare. Quod satis est cui contingit, nihil amplius optet. Qui se peccare nescit, corrigi non vult. Quàm multa mala hominibus affert otium? Quod naturâ est insitum, nullo corriges negotio. Quisque advigilat ad id quod expetit. Qui beneficium collocat in ingratum, perdit operam.
Quicquid nativum est, id haud facilè mutatur. Qui simul duplex captat commodum, utroqùe frustretur Quoq fatis decretum est, nemni licet evitare. Quod factum est, infectum fieri non potest. Quam quisque nôrit artem, in hâc se exerceat. Qui de se praedicant arrogantiùs malos habenr vicinos. Quae meritò pateris, facilè ferenda sunt. Rebus maximè prosperis metuenda diversa fortuna. Resnon potest confistere, cùm quaestum superat sumptus Res initio pusilla crescit in majus. Res factu ardua, tamen assiduâ iudustriâ evincitur. Rei non bonae consuetudo pessima est. Res humanae naturâ proclives sunt ad corruptelam. Res mala est multa concupiscere. Rex magnus quise bene rexerit, Solatium in miseriis amicus compatiens. Secundae res incautos dementant, & perdunt. Senectutis est otium. & quies. Saepe etiam sub palliolo sordido sapientia est. Saepe de levissimis causis existit ira. Sine pennis volare haud facile est. Supellex mulieris est clarus clamor. Saepe summa ingenia in occulto jacent. Suum quisque studium maximè probat. Sapientia est à viro sapiente discere. Summâ curâ lingua regi debet. Sulti sunt, qui corrigi nolunt. Superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. Si non potes quod vis die velis quod possis. Senex homo est molestus caetui juvenum. Sapientiâ non est res ulla dignior. Sapiens in se omnem habet substantiam- Secreta animi nun quam prodito.
Sapienti turpe est dicere, non putavi. Semper malis invisa fuit egregia virtus. Senex multa, quae non vult, vid et. Si dixeris, quae vis, quae non vis, audies. Saepe mali malefacta viri populus luit omnis. Stultus, perinde atque luna, immutatur. Saepe vincas sapientiâ, quem non viceris impetu. Solâ pecuniâ possunt expugnari alioqui invicta. Satius est initiis mederi, quàm fini. Solitariae man tis invalida pugna est. Sine convictore amico insuavis vita est. Silendo nemo peccat, loquendo persaepe. Spernimus in communè omnes praesentia. Suae quemque sortis poenitet, alienam miratur: Sine ope divinâ nihil valemus. Semper fimilem ducit Deus ad similem. Saepenumerò pessima pro bonis amplectimur. Semper metuit nimium praesaga mens. Satius est tacere, quam tacenda proloqui. Saepe consilio dissimilis eventus. Spectandus semper est finis, & rei exitus. Tempus nullum est infructuosè transeundem. Talia dicentur tibi, qualia dixeris ipse. Tum judicant homines, ubi jam poenitet. Tempus ad lucem ducit veritatem. Temulentus dormiens non est excitandus. Tarditas in rebus gerendis odiosa. Tanti quisque habetur, quantum habet. Talis quisque fit, cum qualibus habet familiaritatem. Verecundia bonum in adolescente signum. Violentia odium parit, odium dissentiones. Vis sine consilio nihil prodest.
Ubi quisque thesaurum habet, ibi habet & cor. Vt tua fuerit oratio, ita tibi respondebitur. Voluntas saepe laudanda est, ubi vires desunt. Voluntas & labor procreant artes. Varia & mutabilis semper foemina. Uxor, quae pudicitiam amisit, omnia perdidit. Uxorum vitia post nuprias discimus. Voluptate capiuntur homines, ut hamo pisces. Unicum confugium in egestate est ars. Victum para undecunque, at non ex crimine. Unicuique dedit vitium natura creato. Ubi quis dolet, ibidem & manum habet. Vita nostra similis bullae in aqua. Vini hilaritas minuit senectutis molestiam. Sententiae sacra festis diebus juventuti literariae proponendae. ABsque Deo nihil possumus. Affectum cordis exigit Deus. Afflictis adesse solet Dominus. A Deo pendent omnia. Ad terrena non respiciendum. Arbor ex fructibus cognoscitur. Assiduè bene operandum. Adversitates nostrae à Deo. Avaritia infert Deì oblivionem. Ad verbum Dei nihil addendum. A solo Domino cuncta speranda. Amisso verbo Dei omnia amittuntur. Animae salus à verbo Dei pendet. Avari verbum Dei derident. Audaces Dominus dejicit. Ab Adamo peccatum in nos derivatum est.
A Deo omnia donantur, quibus egemus. Ad vanitatem naturâ proclivis est homo. Auxilium à Domino expectandum. Avaritia cor excaecat & indurat. Author omnium operum Deus. Benedictio Dei omnia foecundat: Bona omnia dantur credenti. Bonorum nostrorum dispensatores tantùm sumus. Bonitas Dei rebus in omnibus elucet. Bellandum non est, nisi necessitate urgente. Bellum moventes primi saepe vincuntur. Bello parta, bello pereunt regna. Bona piis adveniunt Dei gratiâ. Bona opera probant fidem. Benedictio Domini credentes alir & sustenta▪ Cognitio Dei vita aeterna. Consilio Dei omnia fiunt. Credenti omnia sunt possibilia. Consilia Dei non mutantur. Credentibus omnia bona communicantur. Christiani templum Dei sunt. Charitas symbolum credentium. Charitas est plenitudo legis. Consilium nullum contra Dominum. Carnales regnum Dei non vident. Confidentia sola habenda in Deum. Christum qui fide habet, omnia habet. Christus est omnium bonorum thesaurus. Crux sequitur confessionem fidei. Crucem sequitur gloria. Compatiendum omnibus. Crux est probatio fidei. Conscientiâ certâ omnia facienda sunt. Caecitas est poena contemptûs verbi Dei. Consilio & Industriâ omnia gerenda.
Calamitas omnis, peccatorum poena est. Credentes omnia Deo committunt. Credentes in Christum habent vitam aeternam▪ Concordiâ Ecclesia regenda est. Christo data est omnis potestas. Christum audit, qui ex veritate est. Christo obediunt omnes creaturae. Christi regnum in aeternum durabit. Cultus Dei sine fide nullus. Consilium Dei immutabile. Cura omnis Deo committenda. Christus unus, à morte liberat. Christum sequentibus nihil deesse potest. Cum hostibus beneficè agendum▪ Cupiditas habendi radix omnium malorum. Confidendum non est in homine. Consilia hominum à Deo moderantur. Contra mortem non est remedium, Dei voluntas omnibus in rebus spectanda. Deus opitulatur in afflictionibus. Deus curam nostri habet. Damnandum temerè nihil, est. De verbo otioso reddenda est ratio. Deus emendat nos cruce. Deus fons omnium bonorum. Deus subitò suos adjuvat. Deus solus scrurator cordium. Deo nihil non possibile. Deus conditor rerum omnium. Deus in tempore succurrir. Deus solus sempirernus est. Deus fide agnoscitur. Deus spes fidelium. Deo nihil est occultum. Deo omnia parent.
Deus regit omnia. Doctrina quaevis probanda. Deus homini omnia subjecit. Deus non respicit personas. Deus videt & audit omnia. Dei consilia nobis abscondita. Deo plus obediendum, quam hominibus. Deus sibi soli omnia reservavit. Dei mandatis nihil addendum. Divitiae obveniunt benedictione Dei. Deus suos liberat suo tempore. Dives & pauper à Deo facti. Deus ubi non est, ibi nihil. Deum humana astutia nihil celare potest. Deo adversante omnes creaturae adversantur. Deus homines non vult otiosos esse. Divitiarum cupiditas à Deo abducit. Deus pascit ac servat nos ultra nostram curam. Deus est Spiritus, & in spiritu adorandus. Dei opera & consilia inscrutabilia. Deus solus & gratis remittit peccata. Deus operatur omnia bona opera in nobis. Deus verbo suo monet, antequam puniat: Deus corrigit, sed non abjicit suos. Extollens se humiliabitur. Exempla multorum non sunt imitanda. Externa non inquinant hominem▪ Eveniunt non quae nos instituimus, sed quae Deus decre∣vit. Externa curare, neglectis internis, caecitas est. Emendatio vitae fit lege Dei. Ebrietatis poena, stultitia. Fidelibus nihil deest. Fideles mundus odit.
Furor depravat judicia. Fides Dei donum est. Fides sola justificat. Fides gratis data. Fidem respicit Deus. Fidei signa, opera sunt. Fides facit filios Dei. Fides adversitate probatur. Fidelium mors vita. Fideles sunt Deo curae. Famis tempore satiantur fideles. Fides bonorum operum fons. Fides verbo Dei nititur. Futurorum cura nobis inutilis. Fame fideles non pereunt. Fides vera non potest esse otiosa. Fides cujusque ex fructibus cognoscitur. Gloria Deo tribuenda, non nobis. Gemitus oppressorum exaudit Deus. Garrulitas non est absque peccato. Garrulitas stultitiae & mendacii argumentum. Gratiâ nondum natis promittit Deus bona. Humiles erigit Deus. Homini non fidendum. Homini cuncta serviunt. Humilitatem vult Deus. Hominis vita militia est. Honor solius Dei est. Humani conatus inutiles. Humana solatia pereunt. Homo calamitosum animal. Homo ad calamitatem nascitur. Homo omnia à deo accipit Humilibus dat deus dona sua.
Homines sapientiâ, non viribus suis reguntur. Humiliat Deus omnia excelsa. Hominis cor ex natura sua malum. Humana ratio Deum agnoscit. Homo sibi ipsi calamitatum author. Hostem beneficio vincere, optima ultio. Judicia Dei inscrutabilia. Inobedientia Deo displicet. Judicare alios, periculosum. Infidelitas omnia impurat. Judicandum est post causam cognitam. Impiorum consilia non succedunt. Incredulitas radix omnium peccatorum. Impii suo consilio consumuntur. Impii dona Dei contemnunt. Ignorantes legem Dei maledicti sunt. In timore Dei omnia agredienda. Impiis voluptas est alienam famam laedere. In solo nomine Jesu salvamur. In operibus bonis non est torpendum. Impius quod maximè timet, accidit ei. Impiis omnia cedunt in malum. Labore comparandus victus. Liberalibus benedicit Deus. Laborandum est ut prosimus. Laetitia jusiorum nunquam perit. Liberorum copia Dei donum optimum. Longior vita, diuturna calamitas. Magistratui parendum. Mortis certum tempus. Morbi ob peccatum veniunt. Majoribus honor exhibendus. Miracula non temerè fiunt à Deo. Mali puniendi ut non laedantur boni. Misericordia Dei initium salutis nostrae.
Misericordia Dei omnibus necessaria. Mors dura sequitur bonam vitam. Monitis salutaribus non obtemperantes pereunt. Mors in credentes nihil juris haber. Malus Magistratus populo malo datur. Malum non alio malo, sed bono pellitur▪ Malis Deus utitur organis. Non temerè judicandum. Nullum malum impunitum. Nihil pejus Ingratitudine. Nemini maledicendum. Nemo sine peccato est. Nemo coram Deo innocens. Nemo sibi soli natus est. Nulla re abutitur justus. Non ferunt impii castigationem: Nihil facilius quàm calumniari. Nullus Propheta acceptus in patriâ. Numerus populi Dei paucissimus. Nihil possumus ex nobis. Nihil pestilentius malâ doctrinâ. Non obliviscitur suorum Deus. Nihil caecius corde impii. Nihil externi moratur Deus. Non satis benè coepisti, nisi perseveres. Otium execratur Deus. Omnes sumus peccatores. Omnia homnium opera impura. Operarius cibo suo dignus. Optima poenitentia, vita nova. Oculorum concupiscentia decipit. Omnia nostra in manu Dei posita. Omnia possibilia sunt credenti. Opus non respicit Deus, sed animum. Omnia propter hominem condita sunt.
Omnia verbo Dei condita sunt. Omnia in melius interpretanda. Opportunitas nusquam non observanda. Orandi torpor malum praesagium. Potentes Deus dejicit. Pios fovet Dominus. Peccatum causa mortis. Peccata operit charitas. Poena impiorum aeterna. Parentibus obedire debemus. Piorum memoria aeterna. Pauperes ulciscitur Deus. Peccata non delentur operibus. Piis condiuntur dulcia amaris. Piis omnia cedunt in bona. Princeps bonus à Domino datur. Peccara remittuntu ex gratia Dei. Pascit Deus suos certissimé. Peccatum est quod absqe fide est. Personarum acceptio non est apud Deum. Pauperi merces non est deferenda. Peccata solus Deus remittit. Providentiâ Dei mundus gobernatur. Propitius Deus optima haereditas. Puer alimentum in mundum secum affert. Qui plus ambit, minus consequitur. Qui magna moliuntur, ihil efficiunt. Respublica propter pios floret. Reddetur unicuique juxta facta sua. Reprobos recta monita reddunt deteriores: Rebus utendum, sed non fidendum. Reprehensio sit sine calumnia. Senectus veneranda. Superbos perdet Deus. Societas mala vitanda.
Succesus à Deo est. Superbia animarum perditrix. Scandalum non praestandum pueris. Sapientia, non arma, defendit. Seditiosis nunquam feliciter cessit. Sine fide in Chistum nemo salvatur. Sine verbo Dei nemo est sapiens. Sapientes ferunt castigationem. Satan nocere nequit, non permittente Deo. Sapientum consilia Deus irrita facit. Sapientia humana, stultitia in rebus Dei. Tardè est irascendum. Tranquillitas in hâc vitâ non speranda. Timentes Dominum bene vivent. Voluntas Dei bona. Verbo Dei alimur. Voluntas Domini stabilis. Vindictam prohibet Deus. Veritas semper persecutores habebit. Uxor bona datur à Domino. Vocatio cuique sua curanda. Veritatis contemptus gravissimum peccatum. Vincere cupiditatem maxima fortitudo. Communiora, atque quotidiana morum puerilium praecepta. SUrgens manè, primum diei initium auspicaberis in nomine Patris, & Filii, & Spiritus Sancti. Et Dominica oratione commendabis te Christo. Gratias ages, quod eam noctem voluit prosperam tibi. Deinde precaberis, ut diem itidem illum totum tibi fortunet bene, ne impingas in peccatum. Mox veniens in conspectum, felicem diem precaberis  parentibus.
Inde, capillitium comes, manu vultum lavabis, ut quàm primùm recipias te ad ludum. Ante ingressum, Spiritum suum ut tibi largiatur Chri∣stus,  orabis, quia citra illius opem frustra est quod tentatur. Cùm veneris in phrontisterium, libenter ausculta, & quod agis, toto pectore agito. Responde verecundè. Prava non mordicus confuta, sed  verecundé. Ante omnia cave, ne meritò vapules. Ne quid dicto factóve vel praeceptorem offendas vel sodales tuos. Disputantem contra te magis doce, quàm vince Dismissus à ludo domum propera, nec in plateâ moram feceris. Domi si quid est obsequii praestandum parentibus, dili∣genter obi. Quod si vacat tecum repetere, quod praelectum est in  scholâ, repete. Nihil enim in vitâ pretiosius tempo∣re. Cogita, quòd irrecuperabile est, & perit, quod transigitur. Ubi hora ingruerit prandii mensam adornato in tempo∣re. Sed ante apparatum pocula diligenter mundato. Mensae primùm supponitur mappa, indè circulus aere∣us, proximè salinum, post haec orbes, ad postremum panis. Eodem autem modo quo apparatur, ita & removetur Mensa. Orbes colligentur primùm, post hac salsamenta & sal. Inde caseus, vel quicquid aliud est secundarum Men. sarum. Ad ultimum unà cum pane removetur & mappa.
Erectis & compositis pedibus sta, solicitè animadver∣tens nè desit quid; & cùm insundendum, sive quid porrigendum, apponendum, aut tollendum est, civili∣ter id feceris. Amandatus aliquò, reditum matura. Ante & post epulas Deo benedicas. Astans non turbabis, vel interturbabis aliorum sermo∣nem, sed interrogatus breviter respondeto. Cantharos & vasa ne per oblivionem consundas, ut alte∣rum fundas per altero, si varia vina. Salis ne obliviscitor. Scissum vel confractum mensae nè apponito. Sub noctu inter coenam advigilato attentè pro emun∣gendis lucernis, & nè quid foedi paedoris in nares re∣doleat convivantium. Emungens candelam, ne extinguito. Sed ne assuescas etiam quicquid de mensa remotum est,  vel reconditum domi habent, abligurire. Actis gratiis, sublatis omnibus, si quid vacat, lusu quo∣piam honesto animum laxa cum sodalibus, donec ho∣ra revocat in ludum à lusu. Si autem contingat, ut ipse quoque mensae accumbas, haec observabis. Imprimis, ungues praescissos habeto. Manus lavato. Erectus accambito. Hospiti collocanti acquieveris. Ebrie tatem suge. Sobrius esto. Sic praebebis hilarem te, ut semper memineris quid de∣ceat aetatem tuam. Postremus omnium admoveto manum patinae.
Si quid datur lautius, recusato modestè. Si instabitur, accipe, & gratias age. Mox decerptâ portiuncolâ, quod reliquum est, illi red∣dito,  aut alicui proximè accumbenti. Alterius autem uxori, marito assidene, nihil reddi∣deris. Similiter principi aut magnati nihil reddide∣ris. Parenti, amico, cognaris licet srangere, quae optima vi∣dentur. Si quid lautius ministratur, ut hepar piscium, & alia quaedam, partiùs gustaveris, reliquum distribuas. Si quis praebibit tibi, hilariter illi bene precare. Sed ipse bibito modicè, Si non sitis, tamen admoveto cyathum labiis. Arride loquentibus. Ipse ne quid loquare, nisi rogatus. Si quid obscaeni dicetur, né arride, sed compone vlrum quasi non intelligas. Ne cui in mensâ obtrectato. Ne cui temet anteponito. Ne tua jactato. Ne aliena dispicito. Esto comis erga tenuis fortunae sodales. Deferto neminem. Ne sis linguâ fut li. Si vders convvum esse prolixius, precatus veniam, ac salutatis convivis, subducito te mensâ. Panem pectore ne proscideris. Digitulos proscindens cultro nè opposueris. Quae ante & juxta reposita sunt edito. Decerpturus ex catino puippiam, summo cultro com∣pehendito. Nè, ut sus, effundas te supra cibum.
Ne confundas, vel turbaveris digitis, quae posita sunt in catino. Ova manducaturus, panem conscindito frustatim prius. Verùm ne quid praeterfluat, curato. Maturè edas ovum. Testas non contractas in catinum rejicito. Inter edendum ovum, non potabis. Comesturus, thoracem nè commacules. Piper quoque edens, digito ne praelinge. Suprema labia ur nasum manicâ nè immungas intaer e∣pulandum. Nasum non abstergas nisi sudariolo, idque civiliter atque modestò. Mucum digito non exculpito. Salino digitos ne indas, neque salsamentis, & piperatis omnibus. Buccellas ne nimis densas sumito vel amplas, sed singu∣las conscindito. Ex ore nihil extraxeris in orbem. Caput inter epulas ne scalpito. Omnis cachinnus effusus in convivio turpis est. Potaturus duobus digitis labra suprema abstergito. Non appareat supernatans in poculo tuo saginamen aut pinguedo. Sed nec cibum habens in ora, & nec dum vorato, pota∣bis. Simul & mandere & loqui rusticum est. Screare similiter, aut oscitare, expuere crebriùs simili∣ter incivile habetur. Agreste & ethnicum habetur, in supremum cubitum recumbere. Panem tinctum vino edere ex poculo in coetu homi∣num, ridiculum est. Non recumbes in dorsum more rusticorum. Cochleari quantum satis est haurito, & sorbeto.
Inter sorbendum nihil distilles, neque bis uno haustu sorpseris. Donec manderis & glutiveris, ne sorbeas iterum. Canum est immensos bolos vorare & ossa rodere. In ossibus si quid pulpamenti haeret, modestè cultro proscindito. Alii verò convivae, quid praecerpant, vel appositum ha∣beant,  ne temerè circumspectaveris. Quod semel dentibus demorsum, aut rosum est, pa∣ropsidi ne inseras. Turpe est ossium & eduliorum quisquilias sub mensam dejicere. Indecens quoque, unguibus, linguâ, aut cultro re∣purgare dentes, sed agendum id est extra convivium. Cibus efto temperatus ac festivus. Prande parciús. Caena liber aliús. A caenâ suavibus fabulis temet oblecta. Cibi vel potûs, non quantum libidini, sed quantum na∣turae satis est, sume. Pransus, hilariter quaedam facito. Sub caenam paulisper ambula. Caenaturus idem facito. Jejunus studebis, acscribes. FINIS.
