D1171 R139 12264590 57965
A DISCRIPTION OF TREDAGH IN IRELAND. With the Antiquity, Scituation, Natural Strength, and Fortifications of the said Place. Licensed September the 25th. J. F. 1689. THis Town being now the Key, or Inlet to Dublin from the North, and as well for that reason, as for its Fortifications and natural strength, the most important Garrison in the whole Kingdom; the subduing of which gains Dublin, and consequently the best part of Ireland; on which account it has been the desire of the most Curious to know the Scituation and Strength of this impor∣tant Place. Tredagh (for its Antiquity) is the first Corporation in Ireland, before the Metroplis Dublin it self: It being an Ancient Prerogative, when the Major of Tredagh is Chosen, to dispatch a Horse∣man with all Expedition to the Lord Mayor and Court of Alderman then As∣sembled in the Tolsall, to acquaint them that the Mayor of Tredagh is Chosen, up∣on which immediately the Lord Mayor of Dublin is Sworn the same day. It stands in the Province of Ʋlster in the County of Louth, on the River of Boyn, on the Mouth of the said River running full on the Sea, and within twenty Miles of Dublin by Land: The River Boyn di∣vides it as the Thames does London and Southwark, or as the Liffy does Ostman-Town and Dublin. It has over it a spacious Bridge with Nine Arches and Pillars, and a very Commodious Haven, in which Ships of the greatest Burthen may ly at Anchor; and Merchant-men of two or three hundred Tun sail up to the Key. It took the name of Droghedah from the Bridge, which (to the wonder of the Natives) was built over the River. Drohed, in the Irish Language signifying a Bridge or Passage over the Water, since by the English, Dredagh, now generally Tredagh. It is a very Fair, Rich, and Popolous City, famous for all sorts of Commerce and Traffick, both by Sea and Land: This is evident by the richness of their Mer∣chants and Tradesmen, some of whom are valued Twenty, some Thirty, some Forty thousands pounds Sterlin. It is strongly Fortified as well by Art as Nature, having round it a strong Wall of 6 Foot, in some Places 7 Foot deep, with a Bastion at every Corner, besides several Terrets, or Towers, with small Cannons mounted on the said Towers, and two Demilunes, or Half-moons, on each side of the Town, on each of which, are planted Four Demiculverins: And two Plat-forms to the Water-side, with as many great Cannons. Within the Circumference of this spa∣cious Wall it has Six Gates, viz.
Dublin Gate. St. Johns Gate. West Gate. Lawrance Gate. Shop Gate. Pillory Gate. Dublin Gate is that which opens on Dub∣lin side, and enters the City that way which gives Denomination to the whole Street, at the end of which stands the Corn-market, besides the Streets which take their Denomination from the Gates, as, Dublin-street. St. Johns-street. West-street. Lawrance-street. Shop-street. Pillory-street. There are several other very large and spacious Streets, as Dear-street, on the Left-hand at the Upper-end of the great Street, where stands the Tolsall, which is an Ancient and Curious Structure, the Seat of Judicature, and Place of their publick Assemblies. Bridges-street on the other-side the Bridge, upon which is built the Town-Jayl, called Guild hall, over the Boyn, be∣sides Alleys, Courts, and Lanes, innumer∣able. To pass by Shop-street, which is the most eminent and remarkable for Mer∣chants, there are two Famous Keys, Savi∣ours and Merchants Key, upon which is built the Custom-house, the Burs, or Ex∣change. There were once as many large Churches as Streets, most of which were Demo∣lished in the time of the War: There yet remains the Famous Church of St. Peters, well beautified and kept in its Primative splendor; and St. Johns Church in St. Johns Street, which are the only two Churches endow'd, and a Chappel of Ease allowed to St. Peters, tell St. Lawrance Church be built. There is likewise a large Convention or Meeting-house on Sa∣viours Key. The Popish Chappel in West-street is pull'd down. Besides what has been mention'd, there is yet one thing more remarkable called the Mill Mount, which being in the Cen∣tre of the Town, Commanding the Coun∣trey 6. or 7. Miles round every way, so that if this place were but well Built and Fortified, it would make the Town Inac∣cessable and almost Impregniable: The Neglect of this Fortification gave O. Crom∣well such speedy and easy Access into that Garrison, who reduced it in a weeks time, which the Wild Irish could hardly do in 3. Years. This sucessfull Conqueror Marched out of Dublin with a Detatchment of 10000 Chosen Men the 30th. of August, 1649 with a Train of Artillery and 4. Whole, and 5. Demy Cannnons, Sir. George As∣cough with his Fleet blocking them up by sea, He came before Droghedah, on the 2d. of September. Where (without the Ceremonies of Drawing Lines, or Make∣ing Trenches, the Usual formalites of a Seige, he presently planted a strong Bat∣tery, which Quickly levelled the Steeple of a Church on the south-side of the Town, and a Tower by it, which Battery con∣triving (with the Fleet Blocking them up by sea) the 9th. of the same Month (which was within a weeks time) he be∣came master of the place, having taken it by storm, and put all to the sword, to the Number of above 3000. We doubt not but the same success will attend the no less Victorious General his Grace the D, of Schomberg in this present undertaking and thee Speedy Reducing of this Important place, which will prove for effectual an Inlett to the Subduing the whole Na∣tion. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Bowers, next the Corner of St. Martins Lane. MDCLXXXIX.
