E3898 16350528 105326
Sr. HEN MORGAN F. H. van. Houe. sculp:
THE HISTORY OF THE BUCANIERS: BEING AN Impartial Relation Of all the Battels, Sieges, and other most Eminent Assaults committed for several years upon the Coasts of the VVEST-INDIES By the Pirates of Jamaica and Tortuga. Both English, & other Nations. More especially the Unparallel'd At∣chievements of Sir H. M. Made English from the Dutch Copy: Written by J. Esquemeling, one of the Bucaniers, very much Cor∣rected, from the Errours of the Original, by the Rela∣tions of some English Gentlemen, that then resided in those Parts. Den Engelseman is een Duyvil zoor een Mensch. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun i the Poultrey. 1684.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. COpies, with what Art and Delicacy soever they may be taken, never attain to the Worth and Accuracy of the Original, unless the Original it self had been drawn by an unskilful, or a partial hand, and then its fail∣ings and imperfections may be rectified by the Copyer; but to
Copy from a sophisticated Copy, of a sorry Original, is the Devil, and this has happened in the late Translation of the History of the Buccaniers, which being written originally in the Dutch, with a French-mans name, for the Author cannot be thought otherwise than counterband Ware. For the French were never found to be over-rea∣dy to learn other Languages, and especially for one to make choice to express himself in so harsh an one as Dutch, rather than in his Mother Tongue, is a Miracle. Wherefore the Dutch Relation it self may reasonably be supposed to have been jobbled up between a French-man and a Hollander, the first furnishing the Matter, and the latter the Disposition and Orna∣ments.
Now who can other∣wise think but these two would glory over, and extol their own Nations as much as possibly they could; we having never found either Nation so over-conscien∣cious, but that their Historians were always ready to put the In∣tegrity and Impartiality due and requisite to the Title upon the stretch, rather than their Country∣men should suffer by a plain and faithful Representation. Now a Piece delineated by such suspi∣cious hands, to be afterwards drawn by a Spaniard, who is no less jealous of, and zealous for the Honour of his Nation, must infallibly have its truth and pro∣bity a little tainted. Thus we must of necessity conclude, that a
man must have abandoned his Reason, who gives entire Credit to such a spurious Relation, and to have delivered up his Sense and Experience as a prey to Cre∣dulity and Imposture. This the Publisher of the following Sheets was sensible of, and therefore though he knew both the Dutch Original and the Spanish Transla∣tion contained most excellent Re∣marks in point of Natural Histo∣ry, with several Observations never before extant upon that Province. He thought not fit to prosecute his Design of having them rendred into the English Tongue, before that he had had them stand the Test of such who had resided many years in those Parts, and, as it were, been pre∣sent
at, and Eye-witnesses of those Pyratical Expeditions, and so were fully acquainted with the Interests and Affairs of our Buc∣caniers; these Gentlemen were pleased to correct, purge and re∣form it of many Abuses and Mistakes, wherewith this Ac∣count was sullied by Self-interes∣sed Pens; so as Reader, you have here the History of the Buccaniers exposed open before you, and in a condition to undergo the most impartial View and Scrutiny. Yes, you have it here prun'd of all those Tautologies wherewith the other Accounts are loaded, which is in∣deed, as the Hollander says, Veel Spreken en niet seggen. But the merit of these Sheets does not only consist in Abbreviation and Conciseness,
but the Reader will quickly find how much more it is to be valued than a slavish, a superstitious draft of so Erroneous a Translation as is that of the Spanish, which has en∣deavoured to pourtraict the Spa∣niards more mild and favourable, and the Buccaniers more cruel and barbarous than they really were. And here I cannot forbear putting the Reader in mind of God's just Judgment upon the Spaniards for their inhumane usage of the poor and miserable Native Indians, and look upon our Coun∣try-men, how horrid soever some of their Actions may have been, as Instruments of the Divine Ven∣geance for the punishing those e∣normous Crimes, and unparallel'd Barbarities committed by that Na∣tion
upon a naked, defenceless sort∣of People, and whose only Crime in their Eyes was their Riches, and so Destruction was pull'd upon them by the goodness and plenty of their Possessions. And I must needs add, that how home and real soever may be the Accu∣sations of our Buccaniers Inhuma∣nity and Barbarism, yet that they are but meer Infants, meer Novi∣ces in Cruelty, in comparison of the Spaniards; witness all Relations of their American Conquests, which even all the Artifice of Priest-craft, and the plausible pretence of Religion has not been able to var∣nish over. Having thus cleared this Ac∣count of all the filth and ordures, wherewith this Account was poi∣soned
and infected, I do not que∣stion but that I may safely assert this Piece to be as agreeable to, and as necessary for an English Reader, as any this Age has pro∣duc'd, it thoroughly acquainting us with the Lives, Laws, and Man∣ners of the Buccaniers, they being for the most part our Country∣men, or at least the Bravest of them, who have distinguisht themselves in several occasions with that incredible Bravery and Gallantry, that their Great, Bold, and Generous Exploits in point of Military Conduct and Valour, are in no wise to be match'd by any Circumstances of the Expeditions of the most famous Conquerours of the Universe. And so far do they exceed the pitiful, sottish
Courage of a Town-Fop for aMi∣stress, or of our common English Highway-men, that their most sparkling, most illustrious Action seem guilty of Pusillanimity in comparison of those of our Buc∣caniers; for they had not to do with an Effeminate, Dastardly Degenerate sort of People, but with such as were spirited by their Religion, and fought pro Diis & Focis, and were Headed by brave Leaders, being commonly those who having perform'd extraordi∣nary Atchievements in the Spanish Dominions in Europe and Africa have afterwards Employment conferred upon them in the West-Indies, as a Reward for their Ser∣vices. But though the Spaniards have a sufficient stock of real Bra∣very,
yet they seldom miss of shewing it greater in their Words than in their Actions. Thus in the Translation into that Tongue, you find many flourishes that ought to have been left out, but which indeed are as easie to be known as a Child is by his Father, or as they themselves say, Cada uno es hijo de sus obrus. And indeed we may say that both the Dutch Author and Spanish Translator were both of a Herd in that respect, and as the Spa∣niard says, Oncias bobas, for do va una van totas.
To the Honourable Sir Henry Morgan, These few Lines are Humbly Dedicated. THat man's his Makers Image, it is said, But what's his Makers form I never read: If there be any likeness, 'tis i'th' Mind, Which still Aspires, and scorns to be Confin'd; Godlike Ambition! Does this only Prove, And shews the Kindred Mankind has to Jove; Desire of Rule taught men the Art of War, 'Twas this that caus'd the Blest above to Jar: This made the Heroe!— This Godlike fury the Ambitious Hurl'd, And led the daring Man t' o're run the World: So sure 'tis plain, that those who thus Aspire, Have in their Souls, the most Coelestial fire. How much of Jove must then the English have, Who're always known to be so stout and brave?
Handfulls of men have scour'd a Nation through, Witness their Gallick Wars, & Flemish too, And taught the vanquisht War by their own overthrow. But 'twould be mean to mention more, since Fame Sufficiently Records the English Name: Say but they're English Redcoats, fire a Gun, One makes their foes to tremble, th'other run; Let the great Morgan, our fam'd Buccanier, In his late Enterprise, make this appear, Who with a handful of brave English men, Frighted the whole America of Spain. And when he was upon the Indian Shore, Had he from Englands King deriv'd his Power, Charles had been Crown'd the Indies Em∣perour. Tho' the Poles brag of their last years Cam∣paign, And th' French King boast of what ha's done to Spain. Great Morgan's Fame shall last as long as there Is beat of Drum, or any sound to War. A. B.
The TABLE of the Passages mentioned in this HISTORY. PART I. CHAP. I. THE Introduction. CHAP. II. The Original of the American Pi∣rates. p. 1.
CHAP. III. How the Pirates Arm their Vessels, and order their Voyages. p. 4. CHAP. IV. The Original of Francis Lolonnois, and the Progress of his Exploits. p. 26. CHAP. V. Lolonnois sets forth a Fleet to ravage the Sea Coast Towns of the Spanish Dominions, with strange and dis∣mal resolutions to sack and plun∣der. p. 32. CHAP. VI. He prepares to assail the City of St. James de Leon, and the Town of Nicaragua, which proves fatal to him. p. 48.
CHAP. VII. Of the Famous Exploits, and Re∣markable Actions of Capt. Henry Morgan. p. 60. CHAP. VIII. Captain Morgan attempts to preserve the Isle of St. Catherines, but fails of his Design; He takes Puerto del Principe. p. 64. CHAP. IX. He attacks Puerto Velo, and takes it with little expence, and a small force. p. 71. CHAP. X. The City of Maracaibo upon the Coast of Venezuela taken. Several Pi∣racies committed on those Seas. The ruine of three great Spanish Vessels, sent to prevent the Robberies of the Pirates. p. 80.
PART II. CHAP. I. CAptain Morgan undertakes ano∣ther Expedition. p. 105. CHAP. II. His success in the River de la Hache. p. 107. CHAP. III. The Island of St. Catherine taken p. 112 CHAP. IV, The Castle of Chagre taken. p. 116. CHAP. V. Captain Morgan goeth to Chagre, and from thence to Panama. p. 120.
CHAP. VI. The Spaniards defeated, and the City of Panama taken. p. 128. CHAP. VII. The City of Panama set on fire, and the effects thereof. p. 132. CHAP. VIII. Captain Morgan returns to Chagre, and divides the Spoil. p, 139. PART III. CHAP. I. SOme of the Pirates return to Ja∣maica, with some things remar∣kable in their Voyage. p. 144. CHAP. II. They arrive at the Island de los Pinos. p. 156.
CHAP. III. The French are Shipwrackt nigh the Islands of Guadinillas. p. 160. CHAP. IV. The Isle of Cayana taken by the Dutch, and retaken by the French. p. 166. CHAP. V. The French fight with the Dutch at Tobago, but are beaten. p. 168. CHAP. VI. The French goeth the second time to Tobago, and taketh it. p. 171. An Appendix. A Description of Tortuga. p. 173. A Description of Hispaniola, with an account of its Inhabitants, Towns, Villages, Fruits, Trees, Fowls, Quadrupeds, &c. p. 176.
BUCANIERS HISTORY. PART I. CHAP. I. The Introduction. THE Harpyiae of old were Fa∣bled to have been a Ravenous kind of Fowl, inhabiting a certain Island, who plundered all that came near theplaces of their abode; but we do not read that they rang'd far a∣broad in search of their Prey. But here are a worse kind of Cattel, who would spare no Travel, refuse no hazards, yea, rake Hell itself, before they would like Fools, run a bootless Errand: Which the poor Spaniards had too sad experience of, tho, I dare swear, they would rather have been so credulous as to have given an im∣plicite Faith to the Relations of Travel∣lers
(tho Licentiate Lyars) than to have been at the Charge of so costly an Ex∣perimental Knowledge, as this proved to them, as you may see in this History. These young Sparks, I warranttye, were at first such Jovial Blades, as could not en∣dure the cares that usually attend Riches, and could never sleep contentedly, so long as their Pockets were full, and therefore resolved to rid themselves of that trou∣blesome Guest that robs the Miser of his nights rest, and gave themselves over to Drinking, Carousing and Whoring, In∣dowments, in their account, of a Soul truly Generous. You may easily conceive that they could not long follow this course of life, but they must quickly sound the bottom of their Pockets; for all things have a bottom, but the Ocean and Hell. When they had thus squandred away all their Monies they found, that tho it be a vile Trash, yet it is such, that without it they had as good be out of the World, unless they could, like Chamaelions, live upon the Air, and therefore set their wits a working to procure more, that they might follow their former pleasures of Quaffing, and be solaced with the ravi∣shing Society of their Female Deities. And hearing that his most Catholick Ma∣jesties Subjects had store of that Catho∣lick
Medicine that could cure them of all their Distempers, they were resolved to make bold with them for some of it in a fair way, but if that would not do, in plain terms they had a mind to have it, right or wrong, and if they could but come at it, they never questioned their right to it. For they never had been great Admirers of Moral Philosophy, and had never so much conversed in Diogenes his Tun, as that of the Tavern, accounting all the Moral Philosophers but dull Pedants. Away they go with this resolution, though they had not at all a like success; for For∣tune, as if she had owned some of them a spite, made them the very Opprobry of their Enemies. However, those whom For∣tune was more propitious to, sufficiently re∣veng'd the others Quarrel. The Spaniards, you may be sure werenot very fond of their visit, and knowing that they came for some of their Gold, they were not willing to part with it easily, & therefore either con∣veyed it to strong Forts out of their reach, or hid it in its first receptacle, the Bowels of the Earth. But they had e'en as good done, as is reported of the Beavers, who when pursued by Hunters for their stones, knowing for what they are so hunted, bite them off, which the Hunters finding, desist their further pursuit. For they finding
their Bodies, but missing that they came for, enjoyn'd them a severe Penance, mak∣ing them keep Fast till the Pride of their flesh was much abated. But not content with this, they put them to as severe an In∣quisition, as ever his Unholiness, or any of his Cabinet-Council invented, to extort from them a confession of the unrighteous Mam∣mon. Yet further, knowing it was hard to trust them who were so well instructed in the Art of Equivocating with Hereticks, when they had got all they could this way, they threatned to burn their Houses, and sell them for Slaves, unless they would ransom both. When they had got all they expected, and now made themselves men, they thought it best to be gone in time, and to return to their Ports, whence they set forth, that they might again a little in∣dulge their former pleasures, never resol∣ving to make an Idol of what they had thus Purchased. Where in a little time, part∣ly the Taverns, and partly their Female Friends, like Spunges, quickly sucked up their superfluous Monies, and then turned them out to seek their new adventures. But that I may not detain you longer in the Entry, I shall proceed to give you an account of those Cannibals adventures.
ROCK. BRASILIANO. FRANCIS LOLONOIS. PETER FRANCIS. BARTOLOMEW PORTUGUES. E. H. Van Houe. Sculp.
CHAP. II. The Original of the American Pirates. THE American Pirates or Buca∣neers, are the Subject of this History; a sort of People who cannot be said to deserve any other Title, as not being maintain'd or up∣held in their Actions by any Soveraign Prince. For certain it is, that when the Kings of Spain have complain'd by their Embassadors to the Kings of England and France, of the Molestations and Robberies done upon the Spaniards, both at Land and at Sea, by those Pirates upon the Coasts of America, even in the Calm of Peace, it has been always answer'd, that such persons did not commit those Acts of Hostility and Piracy, as Subjects to their Majesties, and therefore his Catho∣lick Majesty might proceed against them as he should think fit. The King of
France also added, That he had no For∣tress or Castle upon the Island of Hispanio∣la, nor receiv'd any Tribute thence. It was likewise declar'd by the King of England, that he had never given any Pa∣tents or Commissions to those of Jamaica, for committing any Hostility against the Subjects of his Catholick Majesty. The first Pirate that was known upon the Island of Tortuga, was Peter the Great, born at Dieppe in Normandy, who took the Vice Admiral of the Spanish Fleet near the Cape of Tiburon, upon the We∣stern side of Hispaniola. This Pirate ha∣ving been Cruzing at Sea for some time, without finding any thing to answer his Expectation, at length espy'd a great Ves∣sel belonging to the Spanish Fleet, sepa∣rated from the rest; and tho' they judgd her to be much above their strength, yet such was their covetousness of the Prey, that theywere resolv'd to have the Ship, or die in the Attempt; to that purpose they bor'd a hole in the sides of their own Boat, that their own Vessel sinking under them, they might be compell'd to attach the Enemy the more vigorously. Thus re∣solv'd, they approach'd the Ship in the dark, and boarding it immediately, with only a Pistol in one hand, and a Sword in the other, they ran into the great Cabin,
where they found the Captain, and some of his Companions playing at Cards. The Spaniards seeing the Pirates aboard before they had discover'd them at Sea, cry'd out, Jesus bless us, are these Men, or De∣vils? In the mean time others of the Pi∣rates made sure of the Gun-Room and Arms therein, killing all that made any opposition. Peter the Great, having thus made him∣self Master of this famous Prize, detain'd in his Service as many of the common Sea-men as he had need of, and set the rest ashoar; and then with all his wealth set sail for France, where he continu'd, without ever returning to America again. The Planters and Hunters of Tortuga had no sooner understood this happy suc∣cess of those Pirates, but they resolv'd to follow their Example, but wanting Boats and small Vessels, they set forth in their Canows, and began to Cruze about Cape de Alvarez, where the Spaniards us'd to Trade from one City to another with Hides and Tobacco, and other ne∣cessary Commodities. Of these Boats laden, they took a great number, and carry'd their purchase to Tortuga, where they sold it to the Ships that waited in Port for their return; and thus with the gains of these Prizes, they
provided themselves with necessaries to undertake more considerable designs. Some of their Voyages they made toward the Coast of Campeche, and others toward that of New Spain, where the Spaniards at that time drave a great Trade, and where they met a great number of Tra∣ding Vessels, and sometimes Ships of great Burthen. So that in less than a months time two great Ships which the Spaniards had laden with Plate in the Port of Campeche, and bound for Caraca's, were by them taken and brought into Tortuga. Which Successes so encourag'd the people of the Island, that from those small Beginnings within a little space of time there were to be numbred in that small Island and Port above twenty Ves∣sels of those sort of people. CHAP. III. How the Pirates Arm their Vessels, and Order their Voyages. BEfore these Pirates go forth to Sea, they give notice to every one that is engag'd in the design, of the day that they are punctually to Embark, with orders to every one in particular to pro∣vide
as many pound of Powder as the Voyage may be thought to require. Being all aboard, the first thing considered is where to get provisions of Flesh, especially Pork: For which purpose they readily conclude to rob such and such Hog-yards, where the Spaniards usually keep a thou∣sand Head of Swine together. Nor do they give any Quarter to the Swine∣keepers, if they offer to disturb or resist them in their Vocation. Being thus furnisht with provisions, they allow to every man twice a day as much as they can eat, without weight or measure. Nor has the Captain any proportion of Flesh, or any thing else more than the meanest Sea-man. Their next deliberation is, where to go and seek their Fortunes; and then for the Charges, and Division of what is got by the common Stock, that is concluded upon under Hand and Seal. First, how much the Captain is to have for his Ship; then the Salary for the Carpenter or Ship∣wright that careen'd the Vessel, which generally comes to a hundred, or a hun∣dred and fifty pieces of Eight. For pro∣visions and victualling they draw out of the common Stock two hundred pieces of Eight. The Surgeons Salary and Me∣dicaments are rated at two hundred and
fifty pieces of Eight. Lastly, They agree in writing what recompence every one shall have for the loss of a Limb; for the loss of a Right Arm six hundred pieces of Eight, or six Slaves; for the loss of a Left Hand five hundred pieces of Eight, or five Slaves; for a Right Leg five hun∣dred pieces of Eight, or five Slaves; for the LeftLeg four hundred pieces of Eight, or four Slaves; for an Eye one hundred pieces of Eight, or one Slave; and for a Finger, the same. They are very just in their Division, yet with regard to Qualities and Places, so the Captain is allowed five or six porti∣ons to what the ordinary Seamen have. The Masters Mate has two portions, and the other Officers proportionable to their Employments. After whom they draw equal parts from the highest to the lowest Mariner, the Boys not being omit∣ted; for they also draw their half shares; because that when they take a better Ves∣sel then their own, 'tis the Boys duty to set fire on the forsaken Ship. They observe very good Orders one among another. For in the Prizes that they take, no man is suffer'd to take any thing in particular to himself. And they make a solemn Oath to each other, not to conceal the least thing they find among the
Purchase: so that if any one be found to have falsified that Oath, he is turn'd out of the Society. On the other side they are very civil and charitable one to another, insomuch that if any one wants what another has, they freely part with it for the others use. After they have taken a Prize, the first thing they endeavour to do, is to set the Prisoners ashore, detaining only some few for their own use, whom they also set at liberty after two or three years ser∣vice. Sometimes they cruze a long time, but meet with nothing considerable: but then it is that they will venture upon any des∣perate design, rather then return empty. Which minds me of the Story of Peter Francis, an Arch-Pirate, who having been a long time at Sea with his Boat, and twenty six Persons waiting for the Ships that were to return from Maracaibo to∣wards Campeche, and finding no Booty, resolv'd to direct his course to Rancherias, near the River de la Plata, where lies a rich Bank of Pearl, to the Fishery of which, they usually send a dozen of Ves∣sels from Cartagena, with a Man of War to guard them. Now this Pearl Fleet rid at an Anchor at that time, at the mouth of the River de la Hacha, the Man of
War being scarce half a League distant from the small Ships, the wind calm. The Pirate spying them in that posture, pre∣sently pull'd down his Sails, and row'd along the Coast, pretending to be a Spanish Vessel that came from Maracaibo; but no sooner was he come to the Pearl Bank, but he presently set upon the Vice-Ad∣miral of the Fleet, mounted with eight Guns, and threescore Men well arm d, commanding them to surrender, and after a stout Resistance of the Spaniards, took her. Being thus possess'd of the Vice-Ad∣miral, he resolv'd next to adventure upon the Man of War, and so to master the rest of the Fleet. To this purpose he presently sunk his own Boat in the River, and putting forth Spanish Colours, weigh∣ed Anchor with a little wind, which be∣gan then to stir. But the Man of War perceiving one of his Fleet to set Sail, weigh'd, and stood after the Vessel that mov'd, fearing lest the Mariners might have some design to run away with the Ship and Wealth which they had aboard. Thereupon the Pirates gave over their re∣solutions of Attacking the Man of War, and attempted to get out of the River, and gain the open Sea, with the Spoil they had got, to which purpose they made all the Sail the Vessel would bear. But so it
happens, that the Devil sometimes bears his dearest Friends a shame, so it fell out with our Captain, for by reason that the Pirates had laid on too much sheet, a sud∣den gust of wind brought their main Mast by the Board, so that now wanting Wings, the Man of War gain'd upon 'em every moment, and at length coming up with 'em, laid the hardy Pirate aboard. Nor did the Spaniards gain an easy Victory for the resolute Rascals, loth to let go so rich a Prize, held it fast in their Sword hands, till over-power'd with number, they were forc'd to surrender, though it was not done without Articles neither, which the Spaniards were forc'd to allow'em, That they should set them on shore upon free Land, without doing any harm to their Bodies. Upon which Composition, to their great dis∣consolation with sorrowfnl hearts, they parted with all they had taken, which was worth, only in Pearls, above a hundred thousand pieces of Eight, besides the Ves∣sel, Provision and Goods, which being put together, would have held the brisk Boys tack in Wine and Wenches for one half year, though they had spent like so many Caesars. Nor must we omit another bold At∣tempt much of the same nature, perfor∣med by a certain Portuguize, a Person
known by no other name, then Portugal Bartholmew, who cruising in his Boat from Jamaica, where he had only thirty Men, and four small Guns, upon the Cape de Corriente, in the Island of Cuba, met with a great Ship bound for Havana, from Ma∣ra Caebo, and Cartagena, well provided with twenty great Guns, and threescore and ten Men, Seamen and Passengers. I will not dispute whether this Pyrate un∣derstood Latin or no, but certain it is, he apprehended something of the Proverb, That Fortune favours the Daring. In short he would not see any Prize go by his Mill, and so without Complements he attach'd this great Ship with his few men; The first time he was repuls'd; but fin∣ding he had received no great damage, he resolv'd to try the to'ther, Nothing ven∣ture, nothing have; so that after a long and obstinate Combate he made himself Master of the great Ship with his small Vessel. For some body must be beaten, and it seems the Pyrate would not, there∣fore the others must. In this Encounter the Portugal lost ten Men, and four woun∣ded, so that he had twenty still safe and sound. Having thus possess'd themselves of the Ship, the next thing was what to do with it. The wind, which is not always the
Seamans Friend, nor won't blow as men would have it, would not let 'em go to Jamaica, because it blew full i'their Teeths, therefore they resolv'd to steer to Cape St. Anthony, on the West side of the Island of Cuba, there to recruit them∣selves, and take in fresh water. But as ill luck would have it, and ill luck will rule the Rost sometimes, being almost within sight of the Cape, they were unexpectedly met by three great Ships coming from New-Spain, and bound for Havana. These three Ships, there being no way to escape, and certainly he would have escap'd if he could, made Prize of the Pyrate, and rescu'd the Ship out of his Clutches, Nor was the Pyrate to be blam'd for not doing more then Her∣cules himself could do. So that they who were Lords and Masters before, through the sudden change of Fortune, in a mo∣ment found themselves poor, oppress'd, and stripp'd of all their Wealth, and disap∣pointed of a thousand Jovial designs which they had in their heads. Well, but what be∣came of these poor Rats? Soon after the great Ship, wherein they had the happi∣ness to be stow'd, arriv'd at Campeche, where the Merchants coming aboard to visit the Captain of the Vessel, knew the Portuguize Pyrate, and knew him to be
one that had been the plague and vexation of those Coasts, one that had committed more Insolencies, Murders, and Robbe∣ries, then he was at that time in a capa∣city to make satisfaction for. Thereupon they resolv'd to hang him and his Com∣panions fairly out of the way. To this purpose they set up a Gibbet, with a reso∣lution to rid him out of the way next mor∣ning, without any other Ceremony, then only carrying him from the Ship to the Gallows; For they did not think it re∣quisite to stand upon the Formality of Ju∣ries to one that was never us'd to trouble his Conscience with Justice and Honesty. The poor Portugal having intelligence of this dismal Plot, he resolv'd not to hang if he could help it. And therefore me∣ditating an escape he got two empty ear∣then Jarrs, wherein the Spaniards carry Wine from Spain to the West-Indies, and stopp'd them close, which he intended to use instead of Bladders, he fix'd, rather to trust the Sea then the Land. Then wai∣ting for the Night, when all the rest were asleep, with a Knife that he had got by stealth, he gave the Sentinel that guarded him such a mortal and certain stab, that he soon discharg'd him of his double dili∣gence, and so committed himself to the Sea, and by the help of his Jarrs soon
got ashore, where he took Sanctuary in the Woods, and fed upon wild Herbs till the heat of the pursuit was over: When the Coast was clear, away he crept out of the Woods, and in a fortnights time, af∣ter he had measur'd forty Leagues, hun∣gry, thirsty, and full of fears, and morti∣fying his Body with a kind of Lent that no way pleas'd, he arrived at the Cape of the Mischievous Golphe, where he found a Vessel of Pirates, and Comerades of his own acquaintance come from Jamaica. To these Pirates he related his Adver∣sities and Misfortunes, and withal desir'd them to lend him a Boat and twenty Men, being resolv'd to return to Campeche, and to fetch away that great Ship, wherein he had been so rudely entertained. The Pi∣rates heard him like Gentlemen, with Commiseration, and like Christians, most charitably granted the poor Portugal his desire, who being thus equipped, made all imaginable haste to execute his design, and by way of surprize, for he was not so kind as to send word of his coming, he made himself easily Master of the Vessel, assailing the Seamen, before they could put themselves in a posture of Defence. And now was the adventurous Portugal by a second turn of Fortunes Wheel brave and wealthy again, who had been so late∣ly
in the same Vessel a poor Prisoner con∣demned to the Gallows. With this great Purchase he design'd greater things, for the Ship was full of rich Merchandise, though the Plate had been carried ashore, and thus having grasp'd an Empire in his hopes, away he Sail'd for Jamaica. But coming near the Island of Pino's, to the South of Cuba, Fortune foully plaid the flut with him again, never to shew him favour more. For a sudden and violent storm arising at Sea, dash't the Ship against Rocks or Sands call'd Jardines. The Por∣tugal and his Men escap'd in a Canow, and got at length to Jamaica, to prepare him∣self for new designs. We come now to a Dutchman, a Na∣tive of Groninghen in the Low-Countries; who was call'd by his own Companions Brasilano, as having spent most of his time in Brasile; nor would he ever be known by any other name. This Fellow was forc'd to retire from Brasilie, at what time the Portuguizes re∣took that Plantation from the West-India Company of Amsterdam; and so came to Jamaica; where being at a plunge how to get a Livelyhood, he entered himself into the Society of the Pirates; under whom he served as a private Seaman for some time. Among them his Courage,
that ought to have been better employed, gain'd him such a Reputation, if it may be so called, that he was thought fit to be the Captain of a dissenting Faction of Mutineers, who having taken a disgust against their old Commander, deserted his Boat, and sitted themselves out again un∣der the Conduct of Brasiliano. Nor had he been out many days at Sea, before he took a great Ship coming from New-Spain, where he found a great quan∣tity of Plate, which he carried, Vessel and all to Jamaica. This Action caused him to be much esteem'd at home, and fear'd abroad, tho as to the Government of himself a meer Brute, as one that in his drink would kill and slay all people he met in the Streets; and to the Spaniards barbarously cruel, out of an inveterate hatred he had against that Nation. Which, with the rest of his actions that follow, plainly demon∣strate that he never was a Person that studied Cases of Conscience. For he roasted several of the Spaniards alive up∣on wooden Spits, because they would not shew him the Hog yards, where he might steal Swine. After he had exercised se∣veral of these Cruelties upon the Coast of Campeche, a dismal tempest surpriz'd him so violent, that he lost his Ship, only
the Seamen and himself escaped with their Muskets, and some Powder and Bul∣let. These got ashore with much ado in their long Boat, and keeping along the shore, march'd directly with all the speed they could to Golpho Treste, which was a place where the Rovers us'd to put in to refresh themselves. In their March, sorely oppress'd as they were with Hunger and Drought, almost as merciless as themselves, they were pur∣su'd by a Troop of Spanish Horse, consist∣ing of about an hundred. But Brasiltano nothing terrifi'd; cheer'd up his Compa∣nions, who were no more than thirty, tel∣ling 'em twas better to die with their Arms in their hands, than to fubmit to those from whom they could expect no∣thing but Torments, and a languishing Death. Thereupon they took their Ad∣vantage of ground, fac'd the Spaniards; and manag'd their Fire-Arms with that dexterity, that they took the Spaniards off their Horses, like so many Bows from so many Cherry-trees. So that the Dons not liking their warm entertain∣ment, made that use of their Horses, that men do who have no mind to be kill'd. The Pyrates thereupon seeing themselves out of danger, stripp'd the Dead, and made bold with what was most conve∣nient
for their present supply, which done, they borrow'd several Horses which were feeding in the adjoyning fields; for neither was Horse-stealing a Crime with them; neither did they care to go afoot when they could ride. Pursuing their Journey, they spy'd a Boat from Campeche, well man'd, guarding certain Canows that were la∣ding Wood. To keep their hands there∣fore in ure, they resolv'd to have those Boats; and to that purpose sent a De∣tachment of six of their Men, who as they were much better at watching than pray∣ing, watch'd their opportunity so well, that by the next morning they got posses∣sion of all the Canows, and by the help of them presently pickt up the Diminutive Man of War that lay to guard the rest. Having thus made themselves Masters of this small prey, and being again got up∣on their own Element the Water, they wanted nothing but bodily sustenance, which rather than want, they kill'd their Land Horses, of which they had now no farther need; and having quarter'd the Delicious Flesh, they salted it with such Salt as the Wood-cutters had brought along with 'em for their own use; excel∣lent Victuals till they could get better; and better they will have ere it be long, or they'l lose their Aims.
Thus resolv'd, away they put to Sea with the Fagot-Fleet, and now happy Man catch a Mackerel, which was gli∣ding along from New Spain to Maracaibo. Have at her then by ghess: For they knew no business that Vessel had to do at Maracaibo; thereupon they seiz'd her, laden with several sorts of other mens Goods, and a considerable quantity of pieces of Eight, which without examining whose they were, they took possession of Vessel and all, and so return'd to Jamaica, where they were joyfully receiv'd, and look'd upon as Angels by the Taverns and Baudy-houses, where they wasted in a trice, what they had been purchasing with great Hazard and Hardship. For to their Immortal praise be it spoken, they spar'd for no cost that pamper'd their Debauchery with Wine and Strumpets: Insomuch that there was one whom I knew, that gave no less than 500 pieces of Eight to a common Harlot, to please his voluptuous Fancy in beholding her as she came into the World, and was to go out of it; that is to say in the Original, that he might have a delightful prospect of her naked Body. Another at the same time, in his Frolicks brought a whole Pipe of Wine, causd it to be brought out into the Street, and in the heat of his Courtesie, forc'd all that
pass'd by to drink with him, threatning to pistol all that refus'd to be complaisant to his humour. And because he could not drink it that way fast enough, he would with both hands lave the Liquor out of the Tub, and throw it upon the Cloaths of the Women and People as they hap∣pen'd to come by: Not considering in his present generosity, that it cost him the hazard of his Life. Nor are they less liberal one to another. For if any one of the Crew has wasted all his Dividend, they freely supply him again as long as it lasts. And so long they have great Credit at the Taverns and Stews; but it behoves them to be very careful how they run very deep in Debt, in regard 'tis a common Custom in Ja∣maica to sell one another for Debt, as it happen'd to one I knew, that in less than three Months had consum'd no less than three thousand pieces of Eight. Therefore Brasilliano, having in a short time spent all his ill-gotten gains, was con∣strain'd to undertake another Sea-ramble to recruit his Fortunes. To this purpose he set forth again to the Coast of Cam∣peche, which was the place that afforded most profit. Being there arriv'd, he put himself into a long Boat, for discoveries sake; but then it was that Fortune cros∣sed
the Proverb, not always assisting the venturous. For poor Brasilliano was there taken with all his Men, and carry'd be∣fore the Governour, who presently cag'd 'em up in a Dungeon, with a design to send 'em all to Heaven in a string. Which guilty Brasilliano, who was conscious of his deserts, well understanding, made use of his wits to prevent. To which purpose he wrote a Letter, and sent it to the Go∣vernour, as coming from other Pirates, in a threatning Stile, That his Donship should have a care what he did to those persons he had in his Custody, as he tender'd the good of his Country-men, swearing withal, that if he did not let their Friends go, they would give no Quarter to any of the Spanish Nation that should fall into their Clutches. This caus'd the Governour to put on his Castillillian Considering Cap. So that he calling to mind the divers and sundry mis∣chiefs those Rovers had done upon the Spanish Coasts, and weighing well how many they might do more, releas'd the Goal-Birds, binding them by Oath, to leave their Trade of Piracy for ever. And because he understood the constitu∣tion of their Consciences, he sent them in the next Gallys for Spain, which was to them a second Inquisition. And therefore
soon after their Arrival there, they made use of all their Wits to get rid of that Religious Place, so that in a short time they all return'd again to Jamaica, which they lik'd much better than the Air of Spain, not so agreeable with their de∣signs. Having there recruited themselves, they quite and clean forgot their Oaths, as if they had left 'em behind in Europe, and putting forth to Sea again, committed greater Robberies and Piracies than be∣fore, revenging themselves upon the Spa∣niards, for yoaking their Consciences with all the Cruelties that their Rage and Fu∣ry could invent. Thereupon the Spaniards perceiving there was no way to convert these Infi∣dels, nor lessen their Number, which ra∣ther daily multiply'd, so that there was no Truce to be made with these Sea-Locusts, they resolv'd to diminish the number of their Ships, and to deprive these Water-Rats of the opportunity of doing mischief, by forbearing Trade as much as it was possible. But this Spanish project did little good, for the Pirates no sooner smelt it, but they resolv'd to take another course; and gathering into greater numbers to prey upon the Land, to leave playing at the small Game of taking Ships, and to try what they could do upon whole Towns.
The first of these Land-Invaders was one Lewis Scot, a bold Brittain, who fack'd and pillag'd Campeche it self; who after he had almost ruin'd the Town destroy'd all that he could, and put the Town to an excessive Ransom, forsook it, for those that came after to take his gleanings To Scot succeeded Mansfeildt, a hopeful Suc∣cessor, who attempted to set footing in Granada, and so extend his Piracies to the South-Sea. Wherein he made a very praise-worthy progress, till want of pro∣visions drave him back. His first Assault was upon the Island of St. Katherines, where he took some few Prisoners, who shew'd him the way to Cartagena, one of the Chief Cities of New Granada. But now commend me to the Renowned John Davis a Jamaican born, one that had suckt in Piracy with his Mothers Milk, whose Exploits ought to be engrav'd on Pillars of Brass, who having been cruz'd, in vain, in the Gulph of Pocatauro, and finding no Rivation, resolv'd to land in Nicaragua it self. To that purpose having found a conve∣nient Hole to lay his Ships snug, and out of view, he took along with him four∣score of his Crew, out of an honest de∣sign to Rob the Churches, aud Rifle the Houses of the most wealthy Citizens of
Nicaraegua. So rowing up the River in the Night-time, in the Day-time they lay conceal'd among the Trees that, grow very thick in those Countries upon the Shoars, and thus the third Night they drew near the unfortunate City, where the Centry plac'd upon the Watch took them for Fisher-men fishing in the Lake, but was damnably mistaken; which he also took the rather for granted, because he heard'em speak Spanish; a Language, which though the Pirates do not learn Grammatically, yet are they very well vers'd in it, as improving the learning for their own ends. The Sentry thus de∣ceiv'd, and as secure as a Thief in a Mill, was presently seiz'd by an Indian of the Crew, and dextrously murdered without any noise or hubbub. Having thus laid the Sentry asleep, that they might be in a better capacity to disturb the sleeping peo∣ples Rest, they enter'd the City, and knocking at four or five of the chief Houses in the shape of Friends, they were no sooner let in, but they plaid the De∣vils, falling with an incredible diligence to their Trade of Ransacking and plunde∣ring whatever they could lay their hands on, having first made sure of the Proprie∣tors, and then Administring upon the Goods of the Intestate. Nor were they
forgetful in this heat of business to rifle the Churches, and sacred places according to their first pious Intentions,—per∣forming all their vows according to the form of the Indictment, Not having the fear of God before their Eyes. By this time they who had escap'd their clutches, had by their Cries and Lamen∣tations, put the whole Town into uprore and Alarum; so that the people began to rally, and put themselves into a posture of defence. Which the bold Enemy per∣ceiving, they made all the haste they could to retire with the Booty they had got, car∣rying along with 'em some Prisoners to redeem their Brethren, if any one should happen to be taken in the pursuit. But they got all safe to their Ship, as the De∣vil would have it; and well it was they were so speedy, for they were no sooner got out to Sea, but they beheld above five∣hundred well arm'd Spaniards upon the shore; to whom, however they put off their Caps very civilly, crying out, You come too late Gaffers. And so in truth they did, for they could not with their appea∣ring force the obstinate Rovers to restore a doight of what they had got, and besides before they would dismiss their Prisoners, they constrain'd 'em to procure their Guests as much flesh as they thought requisite for their Voyage.
This Purchase of theirs amounted to above four thousand pieces of Eight in ready Cash, besides a great quantity of uncoin'd Plate and Jewels, computed to be worth about fifty thousand pieces of Eight more. Which they carried all safe to Jamaica, where they spent it according to the Proverb, so that they were con∣strained in a short time to seek out new Adventures. To which purpose C. Da∣vies, now more renown'd among his Gang then Bacchus, that Conquered India, was chosen Admiral of seven or eight Boats; with which he directed his course first to the North of Cuba, but failing there, he steer'd toward the Coast of Florida, where he sack't a small Town, by the name of St. Austins of Florida. To which place, though there belong'd a Castle that had in it 200 men, yet could they not prevent the pillaging the Town. Such Sons of Thunder and Lightning are the true Buccaneers.
CHAP. IV. The Original of Francis Lolonnois, and the Progress of his Exploits. THis same Dragon of a Buccaneer, was born in France, at a place call'd Les Sables, or the Sands of Olonne. Though had he never been born, it might have been better for some hundreds. In his Youth he was sent to the Charibdy Islands as a slave, where without being put to School, he learnt Roguery sufficient to ad∣vance his Name among the wicked. Be∣ing out of his Time, he went to the Aca∣demy of Hispaniola, where he studied for some time among the Hunters, before he began his Exploits against the Spaniards. At first he was no more then a Batchelor of Art, or common Mariner, but at length he was thought worthy of a high∣er degree, and was made Governor of Tortuga, where Fortune favour'd him at first with such a liberal success, that he gained great Riches. But after she had
thus given him her Milk, she at length kick'd down the Pail. And first, in a vio∣lent storm she cast away his Ship; at what time he and all his men were sav'd, yet being come ashore, the Spaniards fell upon him, killing the greatest part of his men, and wounding him himself; nor could he have possibly escap'd, had not his misery helpt him at a dead lift. For after many inventions he bethought himself of a pro∣ject to smear his Face with sand, and his own blood, Which when he had done, he lay down close among the dead, till the Enemy had quitted the Field. When they were gone, up he got, bound up his wounds as well as he could, and so in a Spanish disguise trudg'd away to Cam∣peche, where he saw the rejoycings of the Spaniards for his suppos'd Death, expres∣sed by Bonfires, and many other tokens of Publick Joy. While he stay'd there, he got in with several slaves, to whom he promis'd Liberty, if they would follow him; who not much liking their present Condition, followed his directions, which was to steal him one of their Masters Ca∣nows. Trim Tram, quoth the Proverb. These Fellows very honourably and justly stole him one of their Masters Boats, in which, at length, by the assistance of his Benefactors, he got aboard, and so got
safe to Tortuga, the Seminary where he had first commenc'd Doctor in the Art of Villany. There in a short time, though his Fortunes were very shallow, he got two Canows, with Men and Arms, as Taylors furnish young Gentlemen with new Cloaths, upon Credit. Thus set up again, he directed his Course for the North-side of Cuba, where lies a small Town, by the name of de los Cayos, the In∣habitants of which Place drove a great Trade in Tobacco, Sugar and Hides; but all in small Boats, because of the shallows in those parts. There Lolonnois resolved at first to drive a small Trade, like a young beginner. But being discovered by the Fishermen, who gave notice of his coming, he was disap∣pointed of his present design. For the Townsmen sent away immediately to the Governor of Havana, giving him notice that Lolonnois was come to destroy them with two Canows; who, though he did not believe Lolonnois to be alive, yet at their importunity, sent them a Ship and ten Guns for their security: Of this, Lo∣lonnois had intelligence, but was so far from retiring out of fear, that hearing the Ship lay at an Anchor in the River of Estera, he resolv'd to Attack her, not a little enrag'd at something of farther In∣telligence
that he had received, that the Spanish Governor had given Order to the Captain not to return, unless he had total∣ly destroyed the Pirates, to which pur∣pose he had given them a Negro to offici∣ate the Office of a Hangman, in the dis∣patch of all but Lolonnois himself, whom he ordered to be brought to Havana, for a more splendid Execution. Therefore Lolonnois resolv'd, if he could, to Triumph over the Triumphers, and to let em un∣derstand that they had reckon'd with∣out their Host. To effect his pur∣pose, he first seiz'd certain Fishermen to shew him the entrance into the Port in the night time, when they came near the Ship, the Watch call'd out, From whence their Vessel, and whither they had seen any Pirates? To which, Lolonnois constrained the Fishermen to answer, They had seen no Pirates, nor any thing like a Pirate, which lull'd the Spaniards into a persuasion that the Rovers were gone. But the next morning by break of day, Lolonnois assail'd the Vessel so vigorously, that notwithstanding all the resistance the Spaniards could make, they were forc'd to surrender their Ship, Hangman and all to the Victor, who after he had shut 'em down under Hatches, caused the poor wretches to be brought up one by one, to
satisfy his revenge with the loss of their Heads. Amongst the rest, the Negro Hangman appeared, who begged hard for his life, whom Lolonnois, after he had made him confess as much as he desired to know, sent to accompany his Masters. He reserved only one to carry the Tidings to the Governor of Havana with a Message also in writing, telling him That he had only retaliated the Kindness which he had intended for himself and his Friends; and that he hoped to execute the same sen∣tence upon his Donship, which he had designed for his punishment. Assuring him that all the Mercy which he should hereafter shew to any Spaniard whatever that fell into his hands, should be to give him no Quarter. On the other side the Governor fretted at his loss, foam'd at the Insolence of the Message, and swore in answer to it, That he would never give Quarter to the Pirates. But the Spaniards, whowere sensible that the Pirates had a hundred more opportunities of Re∣venge then he, desired him not to make so rash an Oath, that would be much more to their prejudice, then that of the Pi∣rates, who had got a trick by their Cou∣rage and Valour, to keep out of his pow∣er, so that upon second thoughts, he thought fit to curb his passion, and think well of their cooler advice.
In the mean time Lolonnois gave the Governor leave to Rodomontade, while he made merry in his Ship, which did not a little glad his heart, as being a Vessel fit for his turn: for now he wanted nothing but more Men, and more Provisions to visit the Governor himself. To recruit himself therefore, after he had cruzed a while in the adjoyning Seas to little or no purpose, he steered for Maracaibo, where by a Wile (and policy sometimes goes beyond strength) he took a Ship laden with Plate and other Merchandise, to buy Cocao Nuts: And so satisfied for the present, he returned to Tortuga, where he was received with no small joy by the Inhabitants, who knew it would not be long before they should have their share. And now swell'd with these Successes, he began to meditate great Things, designing a Fleet that should carry no less then 500 Men with necessary Provisions, believing himself to be some petty Prince, and threatning the destruction of all the Sea∣cost Towns of the Spanish Dominions. Such is the hatred of those that have no∣thing, to those that are Masters of Plenty.
CHAP. V. Lolonnois sets forth a Fleet to ra∣vage the Sea-Coast Towns of the Spanish Dominions, with strange and dismal Resolutions to sack and plunder. VVHat Cruelties the Spaniards com∣mitted in their new Conquer'd Countries of America, is well known to all the world, by the Relations of their own Countrymen, therefore though these Buccaneers cannot be excus'd, yet they may be in some measure look'd upon as the scourges of God for the impious extirpa∣tions of those poor innocent Indians. Well then, Lolonnois having these lofty designs in his head, gives notice of his Intendments to all the Pirates far and near. And now methinks I see 'em assembl'd; and now methinks I hear the great and fu∣rious Lolonnois speaking to the listning and greedy Rovers like another Agamennon to
his Greeks, Sons of Thunder, whose da∣ring Arms are able to pull Jupiter from his Throne, Shall we alwaies lie hunting paltry Fisher Boats? Have not the Spani∣ards Towns and Cities, where Gold and Silver, Pearls and precious Stones lie Mountain high in Piles?—And now methinks I hear the Boystrous Rout in∣terrupting him, cry out with loud Ac∣clamations, Long live Captain Lolonnois—The Spaniards tear up the Bowels of our. Mother Earth for Gold and Silver, but we'l tear both from out the Spaniards bowels—When Lolonnois beheld this mischievous Unanimity among the Pi∣rates, he strook while the Iron was hot, and hastned Contributions and Preparati∣ons with all the speed imaginable. Mi∣chael de Basco too, a famous Pirate, but one that with more prudence had preser∣ved what he had got, and now liv'd at ease, and in dignity, as being Major of the Island, taken with the Grandure of the Design, offer'd to joyn with Lolonnois, upon Condition he might command the Land Forces, which being agreed with some other Covenants (as Thieves many times far sooner cement then honest men) a Fleet is presently got ready, and six hundred and odd Miscreants are stow∣ed in it; all full of Hopes, and swell'd
with expectation; so that if you could have look'd into their Bellies, you might have seen whole Towns i'their Guts, for they had already swallow'd all the Spanish America. All things being in a readiness, they set Sail for Bayala, upon the North-side of Hispaniola, where they took in a supply of French Hunters, Volunteers, and fur∣nish'd themselves with Provisions, and other Necessaries, and now there is no man of Compassion, but would pity the poor Diego's, and Roderigoe's, to consider the sad disaster that threatned them. From thence they set Sail to the Eastern Cape of the Island of Punta d Espada, where they espied a Ship coming from Porto Ricco, bound for New-Spain. The Trojans never hoop'd so, when they lan∣ded in Italy, as the Pirates did at the sight of that Ship, which they saw coming to offer itself as the first fruits of their inten∣tended Harvest. This Ship Lolonnois re∣solv'd as Admiral to take alone, and therefore ordered the rest of the Fleet to stay for him upon the Eastern side of the Cape de Punta d' Espada. Nor did the Spaniards refuse the Combat, though they had had time sufficient to have gotten out of the way, as being well arm'd, and well man'd. But they had better have been
asleep in their Beds. For after they had toil'd, and sweat, and fought for three hours together, all to no purpose, they were at length forc'd to submit to the Conquerour. This Ship was mounted with sixteen Guns, and had fifty fighting men to defend her; but notwithstanding all that force, she was constrained to ac∣commodate the Victors with a hundred and twenty thousand weight of Cocao, forty thousand pieces of Eight, and Jew∣els to the value of ten thousand more. Which was all sent to be unladen at Tor∣tuga, with orders to return to the Island of Savona, where they should be expect∣ed at the general Rendevouze. In the mean time the rest of the Fleet in their course to Savona, met with ano∣ther Vessel carrying from Comana, money to pay the Garrisons, to the Island of Hispaniola; which was taken without Resistance; yielding the Victors a Ship with eight Guns, seven thousand weight of Powder, and a great quantity of Mus∣kets, with other necessaries, and twelve thousand pieces of Eight to defray Char∣ges. All this fell as pat as a Pudding to a Friers mouth, for now they were able to fight the Spaniards with their own Wea∣pons. Great encouragements to the
wicked, who are soon encourag'd to do mischief; besides, that the Ship being re∣turn'd with recruits of Men from Tortu∣ga, and their new Prize made them ap∣pear formidable. In this splendid con∣dition they hastned to Maracaibo. For seven hundred men must be maintain'd, and because they could not maintain them∣selves, therefore the Spaniards must; nor would they be charitable of themselves, and therefore they must be made so. This Maracaibo is seated in the Pro∣vince of Nuevavene Zela, in twelve de∣grees, and some few minutes of Northern Latitude. The Island is twenty Leagues long, and twelve broad. The Gulph upon which the City stands, is call'd the Gulph of Venezuela, or Bay of Maracai∣bo; at the mouth of which lie the two Islands of Vigilias, or the Watch Isle, and the Isle des Polomas, or Pigeon's Isle, be∣tween which two Islands lies the passage into the Bay. On the West-side of this Bay stands Maracaibo, pleasant to the sight, well built along the shore, and con∣taining three or four thousand Persons, and among them some eight hundred Per∣sons able to bear Arms. There is in it one well built Parish-Church, four Mo∣nasteries, and an Hospital. The Trade of the Town consists in Hides and Tobacco,
besides, that the Inhabitants are rich in Cattel and Plantations, affording large quantities of Cocao Nuts, and all sorts of Garden Fruits. The Port of Maracaibo is large, and very convenient for the building of Ships, by reason of the great quantity of Timber easily transported thither. Gibraltar is seated upon the same Lake some forty Leagues higher up in the Coun∣try; a large Place, consisting of about 1500 Inhabitants; of which 400 are able to carry Arms. But the greatest part of the Inhabitants keep open Shops, where they follow some one Mechanick Trade or other. The Country round about it, is full of Plantations of Sugar and Cocao. As soon then as Lolonnois was arriv'd with his Fleet in the Golph of Venezuela, he came to an Anchor without ken of the Watch-Island. The next day he set Sail for the Bay of Maracaibo, where he lan∣ded his men about a League from the Fort, which commands the Barrs, call'd de la Barra, which Fort is nothing else but some few Baskets of Earth plac'd upon a rising ground, which serves as a Plat-form for sixteen great Guns, surrounded with several heaps of Earth to cover the De∣fendants. The Governor of this Fort having spied their landing, plac'd an Am∣bush
in their way, which might, perhaps, have done the Pirates some mischief, but being discovered by them, was wholly defeated, and cut off; according to the Proverb of harm watch, harm catch. For the Pirates were old Birds, not to be caught with Chaff. By'r Lady that was but an ill beginning for the poor Spaniards, that had not met such a rude company of Boy∣sterous Hectors never i'their lives before. Lolonnois having remov'd this obstacle of an Ambush out of the way, march'd directly to the Castle, which after a contest of three hours, was taken by those fellows, that did not fight with Spanish Gravity, but without fear or wit. Which bad success, together with the report which the poor scrubs that escap'd from the slaughter of the Ambush, That the Pirates were coming two thousand strong, put the Inhabitants of Maracaibo into such a disorder, they made their escape to Gibraltar with all the speed they could, carrying the best of their goods along with 'em in their Canows. The Castle thus taken, the Ships weigh'd, and stood farther into the Bay: and the Victors march'd directly to the Town, whither the Fleet made all the hast they could to land more men. When they came to the Town, they found the Peo∣ple fled, but their Houses plentifully stor'd
with Brandy, Flower, Bread, Pork, Wines, and good store of Poultry; upon which they made bold to fall on, like men that had been thrashing hard a day or two be∣fore: so they fed like Misers when they come to a Banket Free-cost. Having thus replenish'd their Bodies with corporal food, they possess'd themselves of all the best Houses in the Town, plac'd their Sentries, and took up the Church for their Main-Guard. For though they got ne∣ver so many Victories, they never trou∣bled themselves with Thanksgiving days, nor would their business permit 'em to keep one day in seven. After which, they sent out a detachment of Men into the Woods, to find out the Inhabitants; who return'd the same night with 2000 pieces of Eight, several Mules laden with Houshold Goods and Merchandise, and twenty Prisoners, whom they put to the Rack, as their Fore-fathers had serv'd the Indians before, to make them confess the rest of their hidden Treasure; but they could get little out of 'em. Which put Lolonnois into such a Rage, that he who made no more of murthering Spani∣ards, then of killing Sprats, presently drew his Cutlace, and cut one before the rest, as small as minc'd meat, threatning to serve all the others so, if they did not
reveal where the remainder of their Treasure lay. Upon which, one there was who promis'd to conduct him where he should find what he look'd for: but the Discovery being timely known, the Spaniards remov'd their Bodies, and buried their Wealth under ground, so that the Pirates were forc'd to be contented above the Earth. Having stayed about 15 days at Mara∣caibo, they resolv'd to visit Gibraltar, ha∣ving embark'd all their Prisoners, and the wealth which they had plunder'd; for the Pirates were under suspicions, that the Inhabitants of Maracaibo had carried all their Wealth, pretended to be hidden, to that place. The Inhabitants of Gibraltar having no∣tice of this design of the Pirates upon their Persons and Purses, sent to the Governor of Merida, who being an old Flandrian Soldier, came to their assistance with 400 men, who together with the Inhabitants, made up a body of 800 fighting Soldiers. Nor did he omit any thing that was ne∣cessary, by raising batteries to prevent their landing, and guard the Avenues to the Town. He stopp'd up the common way to the Town, and open'd another, which was all mire and dirt, and full in the teeth of a battery of eight Guns. Of
all which preparations the Pirates knew nothing, so that they embarked for Gi∣braltar, as to a certain Fair. But when they came within sight of the Town, they saw the Royal Standard hanging forth, and perceiv'd the people in a posture to defend themselves. Lolonnois, whose courage Dangers ra∣ther whetted than appall'd, finding the Spaniards resolv'd not to part with their Lives and Estates by fair means, resolv'd not to be scare-crow'd away however, but to make an Experiment what he could do by compulsion. Thereupon he calls a Council of War to consult upon the mat∣ter: There he gave the Officers and Sea∣men to understand the difficulty of the Enterprize, in regard the Spaniards had had so much time to make provision a∣gainst their coming. However, said he, courage my heart of Oak—Shall we fear Men, that fear not Heaven nor Hell? No, Hell nor Death can be to us like losing that beloved Booty that we have pur∣chas'd with so much toil and labour. Then let's not seek to preserve our Lives we value less, to lose our Gold and Silver, which we value more. Follow then the Example of your Leader, and let not their numbers daunt us. For 'tis not number, but an obstinate Resolution to die, which
signifies nothing, or overcome, and then you are Princes that does the work. In∣flam'd with this Martial Harangue, they pro∣mis'd to follow him, though he led them to storm the Palace of Philus the God of Riches himself. Since then ye have pro∣mis'd, I expect performance to the utmost; nor shall I spare to pistol with my own hands him that leaves both me and his own courage in the lurch. Thus resolv'd, they landed next morn∣ing by break of day, to the number of three hundred eighty Men, well arm'd with Cutlaces and Pistols; at what time the Brethren in iniquity shook hands a∣gain, like Knights of Rhodes, vowing to live and die together. Which Ceremony perform'd, away they march'd with the help of a Guide whom they had provided, who leading them right, brought them to the way that was obstructed; upon which they were forc'd to take the other pas∣sage that was open'd among the Woods, all mire and durty, where though the Enemy fir'd at 'em with that fury, that they could neither hear nor see, yet the undaunted Sons of Hercules, by cutting down branches of Trees, made their pas∣sage over the Durt and sinking Mire, and with the same boldness adventur'd up to the Battery which defended the Post.
Which having spit all its venom of small shot, & pieces of Iron, the Spaniards sally'd forth with that fury and number, that they put the Pirates to a stand. Thereupon they retreated to find out some other way, but could find none: at length af∣ter they had made two or three Attempts more in the first place in vain, Lolonnois bethought himself of an old stratagem that did his work. For suddenly retiring, he made a shew of flight, which the Spaniards perceiving, sally'd forth in great disorder to pursue the Fugitives. But when the Pirates had drawn the unwary Spaniards far enough from their Batteries, they turn'd head of a sudden, and slew two hundred Spaniards before a Cat could lick her Ear; and presently possessed themselves of the Batteries, the Spaniards without, not thinking it safe to come in again, and those that were within, be∣lieving it more convenient to surrender upon Quarter for their Lives, than to contend any longer with such politick swash-bucklers. The Terwagaunts thus Masters of the Town, pulld down the Spanish, and set up their own Colours, remov'd the Guns from the Batteries to the Great Church, where they fortified themselves, while others fell to taking of prisoners. Of the Spaniards were slain
above five hundred, besides those that were wounded, and died in the Woods. Of the Pirates only forty slain, and forty wounded, who had as good have been slain, because they all died of their wounds. As for their own Dead, they were so kind as to give 'em decent Burial; but for the Spaniards, they flung them in∣to the Sea, and sent them by water to Purgatory. Which done, they fell to their Calling; plundering, rifling, ran∣sacking all that they could lay their hands on. For there are no men more metho∣dical than Pirates, first kill, then take; which order if they should not observe, they might chance to go without their Booty. Nor did the Pillage of the Town serve their turns; they went and plunder'd all the Planters in the Country round about. For as their Fury was irresistible, so their Avarice was unsatiable. Whether they would have hack'd and hew'd so stoutly for the defence of their Prince and Country, is the Question. But cer∣tainly Men could never fight better than these fellows that fought for their own Interest. So that this was to be accounted savage Fury, rather than Courage; a-la∣mode of Beast of the Forrest, whose wrath is not to be opposed in their hun∣ger. Never did the Spaniards feel
better Carvers of Mans-flesh; they would take off a Mans Arm at the shoulders, as ye cut off the Wing of a Capon; split a Spanish Mazard as exactly as a Butcher cleaves a Calf's Head, and dissect the Thorax with more dexterity than a Hang∣man when he goes to take out the Heart of a Traitor. However, it could not be true Valour, because it wanted Generosity; for they suffered their prisoners to starve to death, not allowing them any thing but the flesh of Horses and Asses to seed on. Or if they were kind to any, it was only to the Women, whom they fed somewhat bet∣ter, to supply the fury of their Venereal Extravagancies. And then for Auricular Confession, they extorted it with that cruelty, that generally the people died un∣der the Tortures of their Function. For all were sinners that deserv'd condemna∣tion without mercy, who would not, or could not discover where their own or their neighbours Treasure lay hid. At length, after they had been in the Town four whole weeks together, acting the part of Devils rather than Men, they sent four of their prisoners to demand a sum of money to redeem their Town from Burning, no less than ten thousand pieces of Eight; for the bringing in of
which they allow'd no longer time than two days, knowing that delays bred dan∣ger. Which being past, and the sum not paid, they began to enlighten the un∣derstandings of the people with the flames of their Habitations; so that the poor Spaniards perceiving they would be some∣times as good as their words even to their Enemies, were forc'd to pay the sum de∣manded. However, they could not save the Church belonging to the Monastery, which was burnt down to the ground. From Gibraltar they return'd to give a second Visit to Maracaibo, demanding thirty thousand pieces of Eight to redeem their Town from total Destruction. Such exact Chymists they were, that they knew how to make use of Fire, much better than our doating Mountebanks, to extract the Philosophers Stone, and their Aurum Potabile, where they had the power in their hands. The people willing to do their utmost to be rid of such merciless Quacks, sent some persons to treat with them about their Demands, which while they were doing, another party went a∣shore, and fetch'd away the Images, Bells, and Pictures of the Great Church. For as they were no Saints themselves, so they could endure no Superstition in others. At length the Treaty was concluded, and
Peace was granted for that time to the poor Town of Maracaibo, for twenty thousand pieces of Eight, and five hundred Cows; which when they had receiv'd, they set sail with their whole Fleet to the unspeakable Joy of the Inhabitants. From thence they steer'd to Hispaniola, and came to an Anchor in Cow-Island, or Ila de la Vaca, possess'd for the most part inhabited by French Buccaneers, where they unladed their whole Cargo, and made a Di∣vidend according to the method already describ'd. Their whole Booty in ready money amounted to 260000 pieces of Eight, besides uncoyn'd Plate and Jewels to a vast sum, and Linnen, Silk, and se∣veral other Commodities, which were all divided according to the exquisite Ju∣stice among themselves, as well to those that were slain and wounded in the Ser∣vice as to the Living, not omitting pecu∣liar Rewards for signal Actions. But all this Mass of Wealth, the Stews and Ta∣verns soon devour'd according to Custom, insomuch that in a short time they were constrain'd to bethink themselves where to get more.
CHAP. VI. Lolonnois prepares to assail the City of St. James de Leon, and the Town of Nicaragua, which proves fatal to to him. THis last expedition you may be sure had won Lolonnois a high Esteem a∣mong those Devils Incarnate. So that there was no great fear but that he might have men enough as bad as himself, to fol∣low such a Champion when ever he held up his finger. For every one repos'd such a confidence in his Conduct, for seeking their Fortunes, that they thought them∣selves secure under his Banners. There∣upon he publish'd his design upon Nicara∣gua; which being known, he was imme∣diately furnished with seven hundred men, which he dispos'd into six Ships. With this Fleet he steer'd away, and took his Provisions in at Bayaha in Hispaniola, which done, away they Sailed to Mata∣mana, to the South of Cuba, to furnish
themselves with the poor Fishermens Ca∣nows, which are very numerous in those parts to serve them in shallow waters. From thence they went to Gracias a Dios in fifteen degrees of Northern latitude, where they met with such a tedious Calm, that by the meer motion of the waves, they were thrown into the Gulph of Hon∣duras, where in regard they began to want Victuals, they resolv'd with their Canows to enter the River of Xagua, inhabited by the Indians, whom they plunder'd and destroyed meerly for the sake of their Millet, Hens and Hogs, for they thought it no more Charity to knock the Indian: on the head, then that they should starve for want of their usual Diet. And be∣cause they would not be idle while the calm weather lasted, knowing that of Idleness came no good, they resolved to keep their hands in use, by pillaging all the Towns & Villages that lay along the Coast of that Gulph, which they did to get Pro∣visions for the accomplishment of their designs, without going to Market. To which purpose, having rifled several Vil∣lages, as they took 'em in their way, at last they came to Pucerto Cavallo, where the Spaniards had two Store-houses for the Commodities which they bought up higher in the Country, till the arrival of
the Ships that carried them off. Their Fortune gave them a blessed opportunity to seize a Ship mounted with 24 Guns, and sixteen Mortar-pieces, a great additi∣on to their strength, which they made bold with, never troubling themselves to condemn it in their Admiralty. But for the Store-houses, they burnt em, condem∣ned by their Laws for being empty at that time, as they did all the Houses in the same place for the same Crime. Several of the Inhabitants they took Prisoners, to be the sport of their Insolence, and more then Heathenish Cruelties, if you will allow them to be Christians; which 'tis thought you may chuse whether you will or no. For it was a custom of Lolonnois, after he had tormented any persons that either would not, or could not confess, imme∣diately to mince 'em in pieces with his Hanger, and then pull out their Tongues, lest their Cries should ascend to Heaven; which was a kindness he profess'd to owe to all the Spaniards in the world out of his natural affection to that Nation. Having thus almost annihilated all their Prisoners excepting two, whom they preserved for discoveries, they march'd on to Santo Piedro, ten leagues distant, three hundred strong, led by Lolonnois himself. By that time they had march'd
three leagues, they met with an ambush of Spaniards, whom they totally defeated with the loss of most of the party, put∣ting the Prisoners to tormenting deaths, without Compassion, after they had ask'd 'em what Questions they thought fit for their purpose: fulfilling the Proverb, con∣fess and be hang'd, Lolonnois found by some of their answers, that the Spaniards attended him in other places as he was to pass forward, thinking to exhaust his force, by fighting him in several parties. There∣fore he commanded them to shew him another way; which because the poor wretches could not do, he slit open the breast of one of his Prisoners, and pul∣ling out his heart, gnawed it for very vexation with his Cannibals Teeth. By which he perceived there was no other way to the Wood; so that he was forc'd to proceed. The next day he met with another party of Spaniards, which he assail'd with that de∣sperate fury, that in less then an hours time, he sent the greatest part to the other world. In that, appearing to be pretty honest, for he was downright with the Spaniards, what they must trust to, if they came in his way: so that it was their own fault if they did not beware by other mens harms. As it happened to a third Ambuscade, both
stronger, and more advantageously plac'd then the former. But the Pirates threw such a number of Tewksbury Mustard-balls among 'em, that they soon sing'd them out of their fastnesses, put them into dis∣order, and then according to their usual custom kill'd and wounded the greatest part of them before they could reach the Town. When they came near to the Town, they found but one path to it, and that strongly barricado'd: the other parts of the Town were surrounded with cer∣tain shrubs call'd Raqueltes, full of thorns, and very sharp pointed, R. like Palisado's; behind which, the Inhabitants ply'd 'em with their great Guns. But Raqueltes them no Raqueltes's; for so soon as they saw the Enemy begin to fire, down they popp'd, till the shot was over, then with their Cutlaces hacking down the Raquel∣tes, and with hand Granado's and Pistols, falling in close with the amazed Spaniards, they hardly miss'd a shot. So that the Spaniards were forced to hang out a white Flag, and surrendred upon Condition, on∣ly to have Quarter but for two hours. In which short space the Inhabitants carried away what they could, and fled to the Neighbouring Towns. But after the two hours were expir'd (for give the Devil his due, they kept their words according to
their agreement.) Lolonnois sent Messen∣gers of his own after them, to bring back not only their Goods, but their Persons to boot; though however they did it, they had made a shift to save the greatest part of their Merchandize of most value. Having staid in this Town some few days, and got all they could scrape toge∣ther, they burnt it to ashes and hasted to the Sea-side, where they found some of their Companions that had not been idle, but had sufficiently preyed upon the Fisher∣men that lived there about, or came from the River of Guatimala. And so having done as much mischief as it was possible for them to do in these parts, they resolv'd for the Islands on the other side of the Gulph, there to cleanse and careen their Vessels, but chiefly for Provision, know∣ing that the Tortoises of those places were pleasant and excellent Diet. They had no sooner resitted their Ships, but they heard of a Ship that was arriv'd from New-Spain upon the Coast where they had been plundring. Thereupon they made hast to the Port, where the Ship lay at Anchor, and was unlading the Merchandise which it had brought thi∣ther, unhappy tidings, which made them redouble their speed. However they could not make such hast, but that they
in the Ship had notice of their coming, so that they were prepared to receive them, being mounted with 42 Guns, and mann'd with a hundred and thirty fighting Seamen, which Lolonnois look'd upon as nothing. Therefore with no more then his own Ship, that carried only twenty two Guns, and a Fly-boat, he fell upon his prey. But the Spaniards gave him such a warm entertainment, that he was forced to retire for a while. But that was only to return again with greater force and stratagem together. For upon the second assault, in the midst of the thick mist, which the Powder made, he sent four Ca∣nows well mann'd, who boarded the Ship on both sides with that nimble fury, that the Spaniards were forc'd to knock under board. But the Ship being taken, they found not in her what they expected, on∣ly fifty bars of Iron, a small parcel of pa∣per, and some earthen Jars of Wine, which, as it vex'd Lolonnois to the heart, so it plagued the rest of the Company to the very Guts, and made a great Fraction a∣mong the Honourable Society. For presently after, Lolonnois call'd a Council of War, where after he had gi∣ven Fortune a volley of Oaths, he bid'em however not despair, promising them Mountains of Gold at Guatimala, whither
he propos'd to go. Some lik'd his pro∣posal, others not. Especially the young Traders in Piracy, who were disheartned to find that pieces of Eight were not to be gathered off the Trees in the Spanish Dominions like Cocao Nuts. So that they quitted the Fleet, and return'd home. Only some few there were, who vowed rather to die, then return back empty fisted, alledging they could not look their Wenches in the face without their Pockets full of Spanish Gold. Thus was the unfortunate Lolonnois for∣faken by the major part of his Crew, and among the rest, by Moses Vanclein, one of the chief Swash-bucklers of the whole Gang, and Peter of Picardy, another Sea-Royster, who seeing Fortune frown on Lolonnois, thought it high time to desert the deserted. These two Spit-fires in their way to Tortuga, coasted along the Continent, till they came to Veragnas, which Town they got, and after they had ransack'd every corner of it, set it on fire; but the mis∣chief they did, was more then the Booty they got, and they return'd home to ban Fortune for her shrewish unkindness. As for abandon'd Lolonnois, he remain'd in the Gulph of Honduras, cursing all the Whores in the world for Fortunes sake,
where he sustained great want of all sorts of Provisions, so that they were forced to kill Monkeys for their sustenance. At last coming to the Island de las Pertas, his Ship fell upon a bank of Sand; where it stuck so fast, as if she had been nailed to the bottom of the Sea, so that they were constrain'd to break the Ship in pieces, and with the Planks, and some of the Nails, to build themselves a Boat, to get away from that unfortunate place. When their long Boat was finish'd, it was resolved they should go to the River of Nicaragua, to seize some more Ca∣nows, to fetch away the rest of their Crew, in regard the Boat would not hold them all, and to avoid disputes, they cast lots which should be the Persons. The lot fell upon Lolonnois, and one half of the rest, who in a few days arriv'd at the River of Nicaragua before men∣tioned; but now the reward of all his merciless Cruelties began to tumble thick upon him. For there he met with his Matches, a numerous body of Indians and Spaniards, who entertain'd him so rough∣ly, that they slew the greatest number of his Companions, so that he, and those that remain'd alive, had much ado to es∣cape. But notwithstanding his loss, the Devil still owing him a farther spight, he
resolv'd not to return to his fellows, till he had taken some Boats, such as he look'd for; which made him determine to pro∣ceed farther to the Coasts of Cartagena. In his way he landed upon the Indians of Darien, a sort of Savages like himself, by whom, the term of his violent Inhumani∣ties being expired, he was taken Prisoner, and torn limb from limb alive; after which, they threw the dismembered pie∣ces of his body into the fire, and scattered the ashes in the air, that no Trace or Mo∣nument might remain, that ever any such inhumane Monster had a Being. This you'l say was notably designed by the In∣dians; but such is the course of the world, that Infamy will live as well as the better sort of Fame. As it happens now to this most ignominious Lolonnois, who as long as this History of his life and death re∣mains, will never be forgotten. As for those that remain'd in the Island de las Pertas, waiting for the return of those who cast Losts, and were favour'd by fortune to their own destruction, they hearing no news of their Captain, nor his Companions, embark'd themselves at last in a Ship of a certain Pirate, who happen'd to pass that way. That special stick of wood came from Jamaica, with an intent to land at Gracias a Dios, and from thence
to mount up the River with their Canows, with an intent to surprize Cartagena. And now these two parcels of Brethren in wickedness being joyn'd together, you would not think how they sang Old Rose for joy. The one finding themselves de∣liver'd from their misery and poverty, wherein they had by that time wasted ten entire months; and the other because they were now considerably strengthen'd for designs of greater moment, than be∣fore they could propose to themselves. Thereupon they all put themselves into their Canows, and so mounted up the Ri∣ver to the number of five hundred Man∣slayers, leaving only a small Guard for their Ships. Nor did they take any pro∣visions along with them, believing they should find enough provided at other peoples cost, which was never intended for them. But these great Expectations of theirs utterly deceiv'd them. For the Indians having notice of their coming, had clear'd the Coast all along, leaving their Nests empty: So that they were reduc'd to such necessity and hunger, that they were forc'd to feed upon such homely Sallads as they found growing upon the Banks of the River, without those pleasing additions of Oil and hard Eggs. But this Horse-diet afforded so little
nourishment to their hot stomachs, that their hearts as well as strength began to fail them. So that after they had rang'd the Woods and Villages up higher in the Country, in search of that relief which was not to be found, they were constrain'd to return back to the Sea Coasts, where they left their Ships; yet so distressed in that laborious and tiresom march, that ma∣ny of them ate their own Shoes, the Sheaths of their Swords and Knives, and some like Rats fed upon their own cloaths, eating the covers of their naked∣ness, lest they should have no nakedness to cover; and well it was they met with none of the Indians, which certainly had they so done, they had certainly gone to pot, to attone the fury of their craving Maws. At length they arriv'd at the Sea Coast, where they found some relief of their former miseries, and means to get more; however, the greatest part of them perished through faintness, and other diseases contracted by a tedious Famine, which was the reason that the remaining part thought it convenient to disperse.
CHAP. VII. Of the Famous Exploits, and Remark∣able Actions of Capt. H. Morgan. WE are now to tell of Actions more humane, and more agree∣able to the temper of Men truly valiant. This person having serv'd his Time at the Barbado's, after he got his Liberty, trans∣ported himself to Jamaica, where he found two Vessels of Sparks that were going to seek their Fortunes which he thought a ve∣ry good opportunity for himself to do the fame. Thereupon he got into the Society, and in a short time learnt the Trade so exactly, that after he had made three or four Voyages with some profit and suc∣cess, he agreed with some of his Com∣rades with a joynt stock to buy a Ship. And such was the esteem which the rest had of him, that they agreed to submit to him as their Captain. With this Ship he set forth from Ja∣maica, with an intention to cruze upon the Coasts of Campeche, in which Voyage
he had the good fortune to take several prizes, with which he returned trium∣phant to his first Port. At his return he met with an Old Gamester, whose name was Mansfeildt, of whom mention has already been made, who was at the same time setting out a considerable Fleet, with a design to land upon the Continent, and make Booty of all that came in his way. This Mansfeildt seeing C. M. return with so many prizes, judg'd him to be what he was, a person of courage and conduct, and therefore chose him for his Vice-Admiral. And thus having fitted out fifteen Ships great and small, they set sail from Jamaica with five hundred Men, part Walloons, part French. The first place where they landed was the Island of St. Katherines in twelve de∣grees and a half of Northern Latitude, near the Continent of Costa Ricca. There in a short time they forc'd the Garrison to surrender, and to deliver into their hands all the other Forts belonging to it. All which they demolish'd but only one, where they put a Garrison of their own, and all the Slaves they had taken from the Spaniards. For it was not reasonable that they should keep Slaves, who were now Slaves themselves. Having so done,
they passed over by the help of a Bridge, which they made in a few days into ano∣ther Island close adjoyning, you may be sure by the story, to that of St. Catherines, and so having destroyed and ruined both the Islands with Fire and Sword, after they had left all necessary Orders with their Garrison, they put forth to Sea again, with the Spaniards they had taken priso∣ners, whom they afterwards set ashoar near Puerto Velo, and then fell to cruzing upon the Coast of Costa Ricca, with a de∣sign to plunder all the Towns in those parts, and so to go forward to Nata. But hearing that the Governour of Pana∣ma was coming on to encounter them with a numerous Force, and seeing the whole Country alarum'd, they retir'd with all speed, and return'd to St. Cathe∣rines, where they found that the Gover∣nour of the Garrison had not only put the great Island into a good posture of de∣fence, but had advanc'd several Planta∣tions in the lesfer, suffcient to revictual the whole Fleet upon occasion, which made Mansfeildt desirous to take a Lease of those two Islands lying so near the Spanish Dominions, without sealing Inden∣tures, or paying Rent, whether the Spa∣niards would or no; but the Governour of Jamaica, not liking his Proposal, he went
to Tortuga to see what Assistance he could get there for the same purpose: But there Death took him in Execution at Natures Suit, and carry'd him away to Goal, so that he was never heard of more. In the mean time, Monsieur Simon, who was left Governour of St. Catherines by the Pirates, hearing no News of Mans∣feildt, receiv'd a Summons from the Go∣vernour of Costa Ricca, to deliver up the two Islands to his Catholick Majesty; for he did not like him for a Neighbour by no means, promising withal, if he would surrender them fairly without thumps and knocks, a good reward; but Death and the Cobler was to be his doom, if he held out to extremity. Monsieur Simon to this return'd an Answer bold enough, if words would have done it, that he would rather die than surrender. Whereupon the Spaniards much more po∣tent than he, landed in spite of his teeth, and after as stout a defence as his number could make, and the lofs of most of his Men, forc'd him to surrender upon the same terms it had been delivered by the Spaniards. There was found upon the Island eight hundred pound of Powder, two hundred and fifty l. of small Bullets, & some other provisions of War. Soon after the Island was taken, appear'd an English
Vessel, which being seen at a distance, Monsieur Simon was sent to decoy it into the Port, as if it had been still in the Pi∣rates possession, which he perform'd, be∣cause he could not help it, with a perfect fidelity to the loss of fourteen Men, one Woman and her Daughter, which it seems were sent from Jamaica, to stock this new Plantation. Thus far there was no great harm done; the King of Spain had his Mare again, and all's well. CHAP. VIII. Captain Morgan attempts to preserve the Isle of St. Catherines, but fails of his Design. He takes Puerto del Principe. CAptain Morgan finding that his Pre∣decessor Mansfeildt was dead, us'd all his Endeavours imaginable to preserve the Island of St. Catherines, by reason of the conveniency of its Situation to infest the Spaniards. To which purpose he wrote to several Merchants in Virginia and New-England, to send provisions and other ne∣cessary
things to secure and strengthen the Island against all hopes of ever being retaken, together with some chast Wo∣men for procreation. But all these thoughts and cares were laid aside, when he heard it was surrender'd back to the Spaniards; and thereupon he put himself upon other new Designs. To which pur∣pose he saild away to the Island of Cuba, in hopes to reinforce his number as he pass'd along. Cuba is a fertile and pleasant Island, in length an hundred and fifty German Leagues, and forty in breadth, in twenty and twenty three degrees of Northern Latitude. It is surrounded with a great number of small Islands, by the name of Los Caos, of which the Pirates make as great use as of their own proper Ports, where they generally keep their Rende∣vouze, and hold their Councils of War, where with most advantage to assail the Spaniards. This great Island is water'd with divers fair and large Rivers, then En∣trances in which form several commodi∣ous Havens. Of which the most remark∣able on the South side Sant Jago, Bayame, Santa Maria, Spirito Santo, Trinidad, Xagua, and Cabo de Corrientes. To the North, La Havana, Puerto Mariano, Santa Cruz, Mata Ricos, and Barracoa.
There are besides two Principal Cities which govern the whole Island; Sant Jago to the South, with a Bishop & a Governour ex∣tending their Jurisdiction over the one half of the Island; the chief Trade of the City being Tobacco, Sugar and Hides. The other is the City of Havana, one of the most famous and strongest places in the West-Indies, governing the other half of the Island. It is defended by three Castles, large and strong, and contains about ten thousand Families; and here the Plate-Fleet touches, homeward bound for Spain, to take in the rest of their Cargo, as Hides, Tobacco, and Campeche Wood. Captain Morgan had not been above two months in the South Ports of the Island before he had got together a Fleet of twelve sail, and about seven hundred Men, part English, part French. Being thus reinforc'd, they call'd a Council (for 'tis good to do nothing rashly) what En∣terprize to undertake. The bolder sort were for assaulting the City of Havana it self under the shelter of the night. But that proposal being rejected as an attempt of too great difficulty, they concluded to pour all their Force upon Puerto del Prin∣cipe, whose Inhabitants were look'd upon to be very rich, as driving a ready money
Trade with Havana, and for that the Town had never yet experienc'd the Courtesies of the Pirates, being at a di∣stance from the Sea. This being therefore resolv'd upon, away they steer'd to the Coasts that were nearest to it, and came to an Anchor in the Bay of Puerto de Santa Maria, where it fell out unluckily for their Design, that a Spanish prisoner swam ashoar in the night time, and gave Intel∣ligence to the Town of their approach; which caus'd the Spaniard immediately to hide their Wealth, and carry away their moveable goods. The Governour also arm'd all the people of the Town, both Freemen and Slaves, cut down the Trees, and laid several Ambuscado's in their way. But Captain Morgan finding the ordi∣nary passages to the Town impassable, took another way, cutting his passage tho∣row a Wood, and by that means escaping the Ambuscado's, got safe to the Plain that lies before the Town call'd La Sa∣vana or the Sheet. The Governour see∣ing his new Guests come, sent a Party of Horse to welcom them into the Country, thinking to over-run them immediately; but the Pirates maintain'd their Order so exactly, and made such a dextrous use of their Fire-Arms, that the poor Spaniards
dropt from their Horses like rotten Pears, with their Governour for one; which made the rest turn tail, thinking to flie to the Woods for Refuge; but ere they could reach their Sanctuaries, they were most of them cut off, with very little loss to their Adversaries, who now en∣ter'd the Town, where the Inhabitants defended themselves like the true Race of the Goths & Vandals for a time. But hearing the dreadful Menaces of the Foe, who threaten'd to fire the Town, and chop their Wives and Children as small as Herbs to the Pot, if they did not present∣ly surrender; they presently surrender'd at discretion. Having thus got possession of the Town, they lock'd up all the Spaniards, with their Wives and Children, in the several Churches, and there leaving them to their Prayers and Devotions, they fell to their own business of plundering and ransack∣ing, not only the Town, but the Country round about; from whence they brought in daily great store of goods, prisoners, and provision, with which they made good cheer, and feasted themselves, but never remember'd the poor prisoners, who starv'd in the Churches for hunger. Nor did the Pirates think they could die in a better place; besides that, their Graves
were at hand; the Women also ran the same hard fortune. From whence you may easily ghess they were none of the handsomest. At length finding no more to plunder, and that provisions grew scarce, they thought it high time to break up house∣keeping. However, before they went, they laid two Taxes upon the people; the first to redeem themselves from being trans∣ported to Jamaica, and the second to pre∣serve the Town from being reduc'd into Ashes. For this the unfortunate Spaniards earnestly begg'd some time, which was generously granted: But the Pirates ha∣ving after that, intercepted a Negro with Letters from the Governor of St. Jago, exhorting them not to make too much hast to pay their Ransoms, in regard he was pre∣paring to come to their relief, the Captain was fain to be contented with a Present of five hundred Beeves, and salt proportio∣nable, to be carried aboard by themselves, since they could not pay the Porters: and when they were aboard, the Spaniards were made to help, kill, and salt the meat to boot. After this, they parted from Puerto del Principe, and steered to a certain Island, where they made a dividend of the pur∣chase, which amounted to about fifty
thousand pieces of Eight in Mony and Goods. But when they came to cast up their Accounts, and found the smallness of the sum not enough to pay their debts, the lean mischief they had done, not on∣ly caus'd great sorrow and tribulation, but great confusion among 'em. Captain Morgan propounded to seek out for a fat∣ter Purchase, but the French not agreeing complacently with the English, were for going by themselves, and seeking their own Fortunes; with which resolution they parted company, and left Captain Mor∣gan, not in the suds, but alone with those of his own Nation; so that he was for the present constrain'd to return to Jamaica.
CHAP. IX. Captain Morgan attacks Puerto Ve∣lo, and takes it with little Expence, and a small Force. YOU are not to think, because the French had forsaken the English, that therefore the English had forsaken them∣selves. They that did so, were mistaken. For such was the Bravery of Captain Morgan, that he instilled courage with his words, and infused such spirits into his Men, that they were already eager after new designs, out of a persuasion that the execution of his Orders, was the only way to obtain a sufficient Booty. Of this Opinion was a certain Pirate of Campeche, who at the same time joined with Captain Morgan, to seek for better advantages under his Conduct, then he had met with from his own. By this means Captain Morgan in a few days gathered together a Fleet of nine Sail, what with Ships, and what with
great Boats, mann'd with four hundred and fourscore Seamen. All things being ready, they put forth to Sea, directing their course to the Continent, and arri∣ving safe upon the Coast of Costa Ricca. There Captain Morgan discovered his In∣tentions to the rest of the Captains and Seamen to plunder Puerto Velo, in the night-time, which he thought the more easy to do, in regard it was impossible the Enemy could have now any notice of their coming. Some objected, that they had not a sufficient number of men; to which Captain Morgan reply'd, That what they wanted in men, they had in Hearts and Courage; and that the fewer they were, the more and better would be their shares. By which arguments, especially the latter, they resolved to follow their Captain to Puerto Velo, though it stood at the bottom of Hell. This City is seated in the Province of Costa Ricca in ten degrees of Northern Latitude, fourteen Leagues from the Gulph of Darien, and eight from Nom∣bre de Dios; and is esteemed the stron∣gest place in the West-Indies, excepting Havana and Cartagena. It is defended by two Castles seated at the mouth of the Haven, to hinder the entrance of any Ships. The Garrison consists of three
hundred men, besides four hundred Fami∣lies in the Town. And though the chief Merchants dwell at Panama, yet their Storehouses are here, whither they bring their wealth, to be ready against the Ships come in. Captain Morgan knowing well all the Avenues to the City, arriv'd in the dusk of the evening at Puerto Naos, ten leagues distant from Puerto Velo to the West. From thence they Sailed up the River as far as Puerto Pontin. There they put themselves immediately into their Boats, leaving only a few men for the guard of their Ships, and to Sail them the next day to the Port. About midnight they landed at a place called Estera longa Lemos, and march'd from thence by land to the first Posts of the City. To which, as soon as they approach'd, they sent three or four before hand, and among the rest, an En∣glishman, who had been a Prisoner in the Town formerly, to seize or kill the Sen∣tinel They seiz'd him so dextrously, that he had not time to scare a Mouse, and brought him bound to the Captain, who with many severe threats and menaces, examined him to such particulars as he de∣sired to know. Being come to the Castle next the City, they presently begirt it so close, that no
man could get in or out: & by the mouth of the Centry demanded present possession of the Castle, or else to be cut all into Rashers. But the Spaniards being upon the defye, the Guns of the Castle began to open, like so many Blood-Hounds, which alarum'd the City. However, the noble Sparks of Venus, well knowing their busi∣ness admitted no delay, and so bestirred their stumps, that they presently constrai∣ned the Castle to surrender, and accor∣ding to their promises, put all the Spani∣ards to the Sword, to the end the Spani∣ards might trust 'em another time. But now I remember me, they did not put 'em to the Sword, but shut 'em up all to∣gether in a Room, and then blew 'em up every Mothers Son, Castle and all into the Air, Which was much the better way of the two. Then falling into the Town, which was not yet prepar'd for their en∣tertainment, they fell, some to securing the Lay Inhabitants, others to prevent the Ecclesiasticks from hiding their Treasure. The Governor finding he was not able to rally the Citizens, retired into the re∣maining Castle, and thence fired upon the Pirates that were hard at their Devo∣tions. Thereupon they ceased from their present employment, and turned all their Fury upon the Castle, and the Governor
who defended himself so bravely, from break of day till Noon, that the Cap∣tain began to despair of the Enterprise. In the midst of these doubts, finding a∣nother lesser Fort taken by another Party, he resolv'd not to be brav'd; and there∣fore causing four broad Ladders to be im∣mediately made, he constrain'd the Re∣ligious People, as well Nuns as Friers, to fix 'em to the walls; nor would it serve them to plead that they knew not what belong'd to those things. All this while the Governor valuing his honour before the lives of the Mass-mumblers, spar'd none that approach'd the walls. The Friers and Nuns besought him by all the Saints to save his own, and their lives; for as Godly as they were, they lov'd this world much better then the other. But neither Prayers nor Tears could prevail; so that many an Orapro nobis was sent to Purgatory, before they could finish the work; which being at last effected by re∣ligious hands, the ungodly mounted up in fwarms with fire-balls, and pots of Gun∣powder in their hands; so that the Spani∣ards no longer able to resist, flung down their Arms, and cried for Quarter. On∣ly the Governor would neither receive nor give: for Quarter being offered him, he reply'd, he would rather die like a va∣liant
Soldier, then be hang'd like a Cow∣ard, so that they were enforc'd to kill him, notwithstanding the cries of his Wife and Daughter, who beg'd him upon their knees to desire Quarter, and save his life. Having finish'd this Jobb, which was a tough one, and secur'd all their Prisoners, they thought it high time to go to supper; which they did in as plentiful manner as the Country would afford: after eating, very methodically they fell upon the Wo∣men, another recreation of Heroick toil, forcing the unwilling, and never exami∣ning whether it were Adultery or Forni∣cation which they committed; which de∣baucheries of theirs, together with the unhealthiness of the Country, and the stout resistance of the Governor, cost ma∣ny their lives. The news of this disaster being carried to the Governor of Panama, he prepared for the rescue of the Town, but they car'd no more for the Governor of Panama, then they car'd for a louse: having their Ships at hand, and no intention to stay for his coming. So that after they had killed the most part of the Inhabitants, some by starving, others by torturing them to death, for discoveries sake; they prepar'd for a departure, having sent all their Pil∣lage
aboard. Before they went, accor∣ding to Custom, they set a Tax upon the City of 100000 pieces of Eight, to pre∣serve the Town from burning, and the Castles from being blown into the Air. The poor people sent Commissioners to the Governor of Panama, to represent their condition to him; who having got a body of men together, forthwith ad∣vanc'd toward the Pirates. But they in∣stead of avoiding him, went forth to meet him, at a narrow passage through which he was of necessity to pass: and at the first encounter put to flight the grea∣test part of his number. So that he was forc'd to retire like Tom Ladle, as he came. However, as if his Tongue had been shar∣per then his Sword, he sent a Rodomontado to the Captain, Desperately threatning what he would do, when he had taken 'em, if he did not suddenly depart with all his Forces. But they who had so well thrash'd his Jacket before, laugh'd at his bounces, and sent him word that they continued in their resolu∣tions, unless the Mony demanded were paid, and therefore bid him save by his good advice what he could not defend with his Sword. The Governor seeing that neither blows nor huffing would do any good, left the poor people to make the best conditi∣ons
they could do for themselves, so that finding no other Remedy, they were forc'd to pay down the whole 100000 pie∣ces of Eight. This Action of the English so astonish'd the Governor, that only four hundred men should take such a great City, guar∣ded with so many Castles, that for his sa∣tisfaction, he sent to Captain Morgan a Messenger, to send him a Pattern of the Arms wherewith he had performed such a desperate attempt. The Captain having civilly treated the Messenger, gave him a Pistol, and some few Bullets to present to the Governor, whom he desired to ac∣cept that slender pattern of the Arms wherewith he had taken Puerto Velo, and to keep them for a twelve month, at what time he promis'd to come to Panama, and fetch them away again. The Governor having well viewed the Pistol and Bullets, and heard of the Message which was brought him; to save the Cap∣tain a labour, sent him forthwith his Pistol and Bullets again, thanking him for his favour, to lend him those Arms of which he had no need. Withal, he sent him a gold Ring, with another Message, desiring him not to give himself the trouble of coming to Panama, where he was not like to speed so well as he had done at Puerto Velo.
After these Complements pass'd, Cap∣tain Morgan taking along with him the best Guns belonging to the Castles, and nayling the rest, Sailed away for the Island of Cuba, in search of a convenience where to divide the Spoil, which amounted in ready Mony to two hundred and fifty thou∣sand pieces of Eight, besides Cloth, Lin∣nen, Silks, and other sorts of Merchan∣dise; which dividend being equally made, away they hastned to visit their Mistresses at Jamaica, where every Jupiter could not choose but be welcome to his Danae in a golden shower; and all the Tavern doors stood open, as they do at London on Sundays in the After-noon, till like so many Graves, they had bury'd the Capita Mortua of their Prodigal Pockets.
CHAP. X. The City of Maracaibo upon the Coast of Venezuela taken. Se∣veral Piracies committed upon those Seas. The ruine of three great Spanish Vessels, sent to prevent the Robberies of the Pirates. IT is a strange thing to consider, that they who get with most labour, should be so free to spend with most profuseness. Yet so it happens generally all over the world: and such was the temper of our late Triumphers over Puerto del Principe. However they had so providently order'd their business, that precisely by that time their Pockets grew low, there was ano∣ther design concluded upon. To which purpose Captain Morgan gave order to all his Commanders to rendevouze at Cow-Island, to the South of Hispaniola, where they were no sooner arriv'd, but the Fame of the Commanders in chief, drew a
great number of others, as well English as French to joyn in the Expedition. There was also taken up a Ship of 36 Guns, that came from New-England, which was ad∣ded to therest of the Fleet. So that now they disdain'd any other Enterprizes, but such as were of high Importance. Which Ship being afterwards blown up by an ac∣cident, they neither took it for an ili Omen, nor did it breed in their high flown thoughts the least despair. At length, when all things were in a readiness, they set Sail for Savona, the appointed place of Rendevouze, where they were to have met, in all fifteen Vessels, of which Captain Morgan commanded the biggest, which carried no more then fourteen small Guns; but for men, their number was to have been considerable, somewhat more then nine hundred. Thither Captain Morgan steer'd with seven or eight small Vessels, and five hundred Men, in hopes to meet the rest according to appointment. Some few days after he arriv'd at the Cape Cabo de Lobos, where they were forc'd to stay, by reason of contrary winds, which was an Enemy that so many Hercules's could ne're have conquer'd. But at the three weeks end, the winds permit∣ting, they doubled the Cape, and procee∣ded on till they came to the Port of Ocoa.
There they landed some men, and sent them into the Woods to seek for water, and what Provisions they could find; where they killed several Beasts, and a∣mong the rest some Horses. But the Spaniards not satisfied to see their Provisi∣on carried away without being paid for, resolv'd to lay a Trap for these new Cor∣sairs. To this purpose they sent for three or four hundred men from Santo Domingo, not far distant, whom they order'd to drive the Fields, yet so as the Cattel being to be seen at a distance, might be a bait to fell the Corsairs into their Ambuscado's. Within a few days the Corsairs return'd with an intent to hunt, but finding no∣thing to kill, a party of fifty rambled up farther into the Woods, and spying a great heard of Cows, with only two or three persons to guard them, they pre∣sently fell a slaughtering the poor Cattle without mercy. All this while the Spani∣ards, watching like so many Cats, let 'em alone, but as soon as they attempted to carry any thing away; they presently fell upon the Butchers, thinking to have dealt by them, as they did by the Cows. Thereupon the Lyons were forced to quit their Prey, and retreat toward their Ships, which they did in such good order, sometimes retiring, and sometimes be∣stowing
a round Volley upon the Enemy, that the unfortunate Spaniards dropt like Acorns. So that the rest seeing the dis∣aster of their companions, endeavoured to save themselves by flight; but then the Corsairs turn'd head, and pursuing the Fugitives, kill'd the greatest part of them, and then fetched away their Booty. The next day the Admiral himself offended at the incivility of the Spaniards, landed with two hundred men, and rang'd the Woods in search of the remaining part of those Ruffianly Spaniards, that had disturb'd his Cow-killers: But finding none, he reveng'd himself upon the Hovels of the miserable Rusticks that lay scatteringly up and down in the Fields and Woods where he passed. After this arriving at Savona, and not meeting the Ships according to appoint∣ment, the Captain was not a little impa∣tient; for patience is a remedy for a mad Dog, and not for a Man. Then never blame a Man for being impatient. Pa∣tience therefore being tired, the Captain would have steer'd away without them; but provisions growing short, he thought it better to stay than go, till he had got more provant. To which purpose he landed a hundred and fifty Men upon the Island of Hispaniola, to borrow from some
Towns near Santo Domingo; but the Spa∣niards were so well provided for his com∣ing, that his Messengers thought it better to return empty-handed, than to venture certainty of Death for uncertainty of Beast. Seeing then the rest of the Ships did not come, he first made a review of his Men, whom he found to be five hundred effective; and so with the Proverb in his mouth, The more the merrier, &c. So he put off to Sea, but chang'd his resolu∣tion of visiting the Coasts of Caracas, as he intended, where his company would have been as welcom as Water into a Ship, and began to consider what was next to be done. At length by the Ad∣vice of a French man, who had served Lolonnois, it was resolv'd that Maracaibo should once more feel the weight of their fury, hoping that they might have well recruited themselves in two years time. To this purpose they steer'd their course toward Curasao; but leaving that Island, they cast Anchor before another Island called Rubas, an Island subject to the King of Spain, and inhabited by Indians, who are a kind of Mungrel. Catholicks, but such as will sell Coals to the Devil. Here the Corfairs, according to custom, ex∣chang'd Linnen, Thread, and other things
of that nature for Sheep, Lambs and Kids, not in a Piratical, but Merchantlike man∣ner. Having stay'd there two days, he sail'd away in the night time, that it might not be known which way he steer'd. The next day they arriv'd too soon, God wot, by two months, in the Bay of Mara∣caibo, very cautious of being discover'd by the Watch-Isle. The next night they set sail again toward the Land, and the next morning by break of day they found themselves directly over against the Bar of the Lake. For the defence of this Bar, the Spaniards, since their last misfor∣tune, had built a new Fort (if Spanish Forts in the West-Indies may be thought to signifie any thing against Men of Reso∣lution) from whence they spit fire con∣tinually against the Corsairs, while they were putting their Men into Boats to land. But they had as good have spit Sugar-plums; for the Captain landed his Men in spite of their teeths, and in the dark of the night drew his people close to the Castle under the Guns. There∣upon the Spaniards perceiving that they did but waste his Catholick Majesties Powder and Shot to no purpose, forsook the Fort, but left the Devil behind 'em. Here now then understand the Advantage
men have of having Eyes; for had not the Corsairs had their Eyes in their heads, in a short time they had had neither heads nor tails. The Roguy Spaniards had lain a Train-powder and a Match burning, with a design when the Enemy had taken possession of the Castle, to have sent 'em all of an Embassie to the Prince of the Air. But the Match being discover'd, was presently snatch'd away, and so the danger was prevented. There was found in the Castle a great quantity of Powder, which the Spaniards found afterwards was ill bestow'd upon those that made such a bad use of it; together with a great number of Muskets and other military provisions, which prov'd the Spaniards to be great fools, to put Arms into mad mens hands. The Corsairs nail'd all the Ordnances, and demolish'd the Walls of the Fort, wherein you'l say they did wisely. The next day the Ships were order'd to enter the Bay, where the Muskets and Powder were divided for future mis∣chief. Which being done, they im∣barked again, and continu'd their course toward unfortunate Maracaibo. But the Waters being very low, they were con∣strain'd to put themselves into their Ca∣nows and small Boats, in which the next
day they arriv'd before the Town, with no other defence but such small pieces as they could carry in their Boats. Being landed, they ran immediately to the Fort de la Barra, which they found quitted: For all the people were fled into the Woods, leaving the Town and bare Walls at their service, and a few mise∣rable people who had nothing to lofe. They were no sooner enter'd the Town, but they ransackt every corner of it, part∣ly to discover if any Ambushes were laid to entrap them, and partly to see what goods and plunder they could find. But perceiving the Coast clear, they took pos∣session of the Houses, every one to their own liking, for there was room enough and to spare, making use of the Church for their main Guard. The next day they sent a Party of a hundred men to ransack the Woods, who return'd the next day after with several prisoners, and fifty Mules laden with Merchandize, which gave them encouragement to send out still fresh Parties, who never return'd home without new supplies of Wealth and Booty. Thus the Hunters having by this time got into their hands above a hundred of the chiefest Families in the Town, with their goods, resolv'd to romage Gibraltar
in the same manner: For Gibraltar still suffer'd with Maracaibo. And to make their Entrance more easie, they sent some of their prisoners before, to let the Inha∣bitants know what they must expect, if they did not readily surrender, which was nothing but death without mercy. How∣ever, the Gibraltarians would not believe a tittle they said, as thinking them to be persons of more honour than to embrue their hands in innocent blood; neverthe∣less, for fear of the worst, when they saw the Enemy approach, they were as pro∣digal of their Cannon-Bullets, as a Corsair of his pieces of Eight in a Bawdy-house: Which the Captain perceiving, encoura∣ged his followers with a pithy saying, which might have become one of the Kings of Sparta. We must make, quoth he, one meal upon bitter things, before we come to taste the sweetness of the Sugar which this place affords. The next day early in the morning they landed all their men, and by the help of their French Guide, they march'd toward the Town, not the direct way, but athwart the Woods, which way the Spa∣niards never expected them. Which when the Inhabitants saw, out of a deep sense of their afflictions under Lolonnois, and having no assurance that these their
New Guests were endu'd with a grain of more grace, than their former Benefa∣ctors, they fairly resolv'd not to stand to their courtesie, but fled out of the Town with all the speed they could make, car∣rying with them all their Goods and Riches, which was the main thing that the Pirates took amiss at their hands; so that there was not a rational creature left in the City. They left indeed a poor Changeling behind; who though he were examin'd very strictly according to the Military manner, could give no account of the Questions they ask'd him. And yet their Catechism was very short, where the Inhabitants were, and where they had hid their Goods. However, the latter seem'd a very unreasonable Question to ask a fool where wise men had hid their Goods, as if they were such fools to tell an Idiot. The next day they sent out their Par∣ties to hunt for the Inhabitants, who re∣turn'd with a Country Peasant, and two of his Daughters, who frighten'd with the Threats of his Military Confessors, went along with the Hunters to shew them as much as he knew; but before he came, the Birds were flown, so that the Hun∣ters not believing but that the Peasant had abus'd them, notwithstanding all the
Oratory that he us'd to save his life, hung him up upon a Tree. Thus disappointed, they divided them∣selves into several Plantations to romage the Plantations. In their Chace they met a Negro, who being largely promis'd heaps of Gold when they got Mountains, conducted them to a parcel of Spaniards, whom they made prisoners, and so con∣tinuing the Hunt, after eight days ran∣sacking, they return'd with many more Prisoners, and some Mules richly laden. To these Prisoners they were very severe∣ly smart in their Examinations, insomuch that some were catechized so rigorously, till they were past giving an Answer, which was done more like rough Soul∣diers, than prudent men, or Philosophers, because thereby the intent of the Action was lost. Only a Slave there was, who dreading some passages which he had seen with his own Eyes, promis'd to conduct the Captain to a certain River that emptied it self into the Lake where he should find a Ship and four Boats richly laden with Goods belonging to the Inhabitants of Maracaibo. He also discovered where the Governour lay hid, with the greatest part of the women. Thereupon the Captain sent two hundred and fifty men in two great Boats to take care of the Ship, while
he himself more generously with two hundred and fifty men more went to Earth the Fox of a Governour. This Go∣vernour, like a cunning Volpone indeed, was retir'd to a small Island in the middle of the River, where he had built a little Fort as well as he could, to defend him∣self; but having notice, by what unlucky accident he himself could best tell, that the Captain was coming to ferret him out of his Coney-borough, he, as any other animal of far less sense would have done, got out of his reach, to the top of a Hill not far off, to which there was no ascent but one, so narrow, that it was not passable for above one lean man at a time to clamber the ascent. The Cap∣tain spent two days before he could come at this Island, and therefore took it the more unkindly at the Governours hands, that he would not stay for a person that had taken so much trouble to visit him; which made him, as it would have made any body, not a little angry to be so dis∣appointed, but more especially when he heard that the Governour was got into a Castle in the Air, well provided for his defence, where it was impossible to come at him. But a worse mischief be∣fel him than all this; for there had fallen a great Rain, which had wet all his Bag∣gage,
and his provision of Powder; he also lost several of his men in passing a Ri∣ver that was swell'd with the showers, with several Mules laden with Plate and other Merchandize. For the Governour had no Cranes belonging to his Airy Cockloft, to secure the peoples Goods, as he had done their Persons; some women and children which they had taken pri∣soners, were also drown'd, but that was no great matter. At length having waded up to the middle, sometimes whole, some∣times half miles together, the greatest part of the Corsairs came safe home; but the greatest part of the Prisoners, who were women and children, died. Thus after twelve days Hunting they return'd to Gibraltar with a great number of prisoners. Two days after also return'd the two great Boats, with four other Boats, but the rascally covetous Spa∣niards, rather than accommodate Gentle∣men and strangers with what they want∣ed, had unladed the most considerable part of their Wealth, and committed it to the custody of the Earth from whence it first came. However, they were not such Curmudgeons, but that they left something that was very well worth fetching away. Having thus kept possession five weeks,
& play'd whatGambols they thought fit to play, they concluded to depart; however, not till they had set a Ransom upon the Town. To which purpose they let go some of their prisoners to try the Market, who after a few days brought answer that they were forbid by the Governours to ransom their Town. They had as good have told him the Pope had forbid 'em, and all one. Therefore as men deal by Spaniels that cannot find their Masters lost Glove, he bids 'em go again. There∣upon, seeing there was no way but one, they agreed to pay him down five thou∣sand pieces of Eight, and give him for se∣curity for the rest four of their chief In∣habitants, which upon weighty conside∣rations was accepted. Then he delivered all the Freemen prisoners, having first set a Ransom upon every mans head, but he detain'd all the Slaves, generously preser∣ving the discovering Negro, whom the Spaniards begg'd for earnestly: But the Captain would not part with him, left they should offer him to Moloch in his absence. And thus having dispatcht all their business at Gibraltar, they made hast back to Maracaibo, where they had In∣formation, that three Spanish Men of War lay at the mouth of the Lake, to intercept them as they went back; and that the
Castle at the Entrance into the Bay was put into a good posture of Annoyance again, being well provided both with Men and Guns. This Relation made the Captain scratch where it did not itch; for after they had taken all this pains, it would have been a devilish thing to have lost all their labour. Thereupon he first sent one of his Boats to see how things stood at the mouth of the Bay, who the next day brought word, that 'twas nei∣ther better nor worse; that they had viewed the Ships within reach of their Guns, and that they were sure they were Ships, and not flying Horses; of which the biggest was mounted with forty, the second with thirty, and the least with twenty four Guns; a Force sufficient to grind their Fisher-Boats to Mustard, which caus'd a great consternation among the men of valour; for men are but men, and can do no more than they can do. Well, but what shall they do? To wish the Ships at the Devil, was no more than to piss upon 'em. Fight they must, or lose all. Which dismal choice that would have mollified some mens hearts, like an Egg in Vinegar, did but enliven the Cap∣tains courage. Therefore he resolv'd to fight the Spaniard first with his own wea∣pons, that is, with Rodomontado's. To
which purpose he boldly sent a Spaniard to the Admiral of the three Ships, de∣manding of him to pay the Ransom of Maracaibo, or threatning else to reduce it to Powder, to whiten the Spaniards Teeth. The Envoy having delivered his Mes∣sage, returned two days after with a Let∣ter to the Captain, giving him to under∣stand that he was come to dispute his passage out of the Lake, and to pursue him where-ever he fled in those parts, till he had got him into his clutches. How∣ever, if he would meekly restore what he had taken, and calmly dismiss his priso∣ners, he would let him freely pass with∣out molestation. The Captain upon reading the Letter, was plainly convinc'd in his conscience, that the conditions were too hard. However, that he might not wholly depend upon his own Judg∣ment, he resolv'd to take advice, and to that purpose he read the Letter to his As∣sociates, both in French and English; which done, he desired to know how they intended to expound this hard Chap∣ter, either to surrender what they had purchased, or to fight for their Liberty. To which the Souldiers all unanimously reply'd, They would rather lose their Blood than their Booty, without which
their blood signified nothing. At length, up stept one, as if he had been sent from Mahomets Paradise for their relief, who beholding the Captain with a stern coun∣tenance. Captain, said he, take you but care for the rest, and I my self will undertake to destroy the biggest with only twelve men. And the way I will do it, added he, shall be by making a Fireship of that Vessel which we took in the River of Gibraltar. Never did Popish Saint speak such words of comfort from the Clouds, to distressed Pilgrims in the Desert, as this Hero spake to his Companions. The Proposal was accep∣ted, and entertain'd with joy, and the Ship was already burnt in conceit. However to avoid that trouble, if they could avoid it, they concluded to see whether the haughty Spaniard would come to any Accommodation or no? To which purpose, to leave him inexcus'd, if mis∣chief did befall him, the Captain sent him two Ambassadours, with Propositi∣ons to quit Maracaibo without Ransom, and to set at liberty one half of the Slaves, and all the other Prisoners, with∣out paying for their Heads. And 3dly, To send home the Inhabitants of Gibral∣tar, which he had as Hostages for the Contributions behind. But the 40 Gun'd
Admiral rejected their Propositions with disdain, little dreaming what would be the Issue. Threatning withal, That if they did not surrender themselves volun∣tarily in two days, upon the Conditions propos'd in his Letter, that he would come and force 'em to do it. The Captain finding the Admiral so peremptory, prepared all things in a rea∣diness to get out by main force. In the first place he ordered all the Prisoners to be bound to their good behaviour, and well guarded. Then they got all the Tar and Brimstone they could find in the Town to fit up the Fire-ship. Next they contriv'd several inventions, and mixtures of Tar, Powder, and Brimstone, with which they besmear'd several quantities of Palm leaves. They stufft the Fire-ship with Hells Materials, broke open new Port-holes, where instead of Guns, they plac'd several little Drums, of which the Negro's make use. And lastly, They dress'd up the Deck with several pieces of Wood, covered with Monteros, with Muskets fixed as it were in their Arms, and hung about with Bandileers. The Fire-ship thus fitted, they stowed the Men-prisoners in one Boat, & the Women & the richest part of their plunder; in others their more bulky bales of Merchandise.
All things being ready, the Captain ex∣acted an Oath of all his Company, where∣by they swore to defend themselves to the last drop of blood: promising withal more then ordinary shares to such as should most remarkably signalize themselves in that days action. Thus resolv'd, upon the 30 of April, 1669. They set Sail to seek the terrible Spaniards, whom they found riding at an Anchor in the middle of the entry into the Lake. When it grew night, they came to an Anchor, but the next mor∣ning by break of day, they weigh'd again, steering their course directly to the Spani∣ards, who perceiving their motion pre∣par'd to entertain em. But then the Fire-ship Sailing before the rest, fell pre∣sently upon the great Ship, who percei∣ving her to be one of the Devils Imps, a Fire-ship, did all they could to put her by, but she had got such hold already of the unweildy Admiral with her Iron Nails, that there was no getting loose, besides the flame had so suddenly seiz'd the Tim∣ber and Tackling, that all the Stern being in a moment consum'd, the Ship volunta∣rily sunk into the Sea to cool her self. The second Ship seeing the Admiral al∣ready burnt, not by Accident, but by the industry of the Enemy, dreading the
same fate, escap'd under the shot of the Castle, and there very civilly sunk her themselves, to save their Enemies the Trouble. The third having no opportu∣nity to escape, was boarded and taken by the Corsairs. When the first Ship was burnt, some of the Seamen swam to the shore, whom the courteous Corsairs would have taken up, but they would neither ask, nor admit of Quarter: which caus'd the Corsairs out of their generosi∣ty to knock 'em on the head to prevent their being drown'd. The Corsairs, though it was not their customs to sing Te Deums, were not a little glad you may be sure to have tam'd their lofty Antagonist in so short a time, which so exalted their minds, that they present∣ly run ashore, with an intention to take the Castle. That they found very well provided both with Men, and great Guns, against which, they found their Muskets and Fire-balls not sufficient: and there∣fore perceiving that the Spaniards were resolv'd obstinately to make use of their advantages, and considering there was no∣thing to be got but blows, they retir'd to their Ships. The next day the Captain employed his men, to try whether they could reco∣ver any part of the Wealth that was lost
in the two Ships that perish'd. They al∣so took some Prisoners that still swam a∣live upon the water. Among the rest there was a Pilot, who was a Stranger, and belong'd to the least of the two Ships, with whom the Captain had much dis∣course about the number of men in the Ships; from what Port they last set forth? and whether any more Ships were design'd upon that Coast? To which the Pilot gave the Captain such satisfaction, that the Captain us'd him kindly, and retain'd him in his Service. By this Pilot he understood that a cer∣tain Negro had given the Spanish Admiral notice two days before the fight, that the Enemy had prepar d a Fire-ship to burn his Fleet, but that the Admiral would not believe his Intelligence. He also further discover'd, that in the Ship which was sunk, there was above 40000 pieces of Eight, upon which, the Captain order'd one of his Ships to remain there, and watch all opportunities of getting out of the Vessel what Plate they could. In the mean time the Captain return'd to Mara∣caibo, to re-fit the Spanish Vessel which they had taken, which he then chose for himself, giving his own to another of his Commanders. From thence he sent to the Admiral, much more tame now, the
same Message he had sent him in his Pros∣perity, to redeem Maracaibo from fire, for which he demanded 30000 pieces of Eight. The Spaniards considering how unfortunate they had been, and not know∣ing after this loss how to get rid of these Masters of the Sea, at length concluded for 20000 pieces of Eight, and 500 Beeves, for the Corsairs were always great lovers of Fidlers fair. However the Captain would not deliver the Prisoners, till he was clear of the Castle Guns; and so Sail'd away to the Ship which he had left behind, to look after the Plate in the Ship that was burnt. Where he left her, there he found her, together with fifteen thousand pieces of Eight which they had recovered out of the Wreck; besides many other pieces of Plate, as Hilts of Swords, and such other Toys, besides a great number of pieces of Eight that were melted and run together, through the force of the fire. As the Captain suspected, so it was; for the Admiral had a design to have paid his Scores as he passed by the Guns of the Castle, which he could not avoid. There∣upon he told the Prisoners how much it concern'd them to agree with the Gover∣nor to leave him a free passage for his Ships, to which, if he would not agree,
they must expect to be hang'd every Mo∣thers Son. The Prisoners were in a wo∣ful case; however to try the Governors good Nature, they deputed some of their own to represent the condition of them∣selves, their Wives and Children at the Captains disposal, and therefore besought him to let the Captain pass free, as the only means to save their lives. But the Admiral reproaching their Pusillanimity, denied their request, as being bound to maintain the King his Masters Honour. When the poor Prisoners with blee∣ding hearts return'd the Admirals Answer, to which all that the Captain reply'd was, that if the Admiral would not let him go, he would find a means to do it with∣out him; Thereupon he resolv'd to make a present dividend of the Booty, which amounted to the value of 250000 pieces of Eight in Money and Jewels, besides a a vast quantity of Merchandise and Slaves, all which was divided to every Ship or Boat according to their share, as justly, as if Astrea her self had done. And this was the rather done at that place, for fear they might be divided by Storm, and not have an opportunity to do it elsewhere, as also to prevent any of the Commanders from running away with more then be∣longed to their parts.
But now the business was to pass the Castle, and get out of the Lake. To this purpose they bethought themselves of a Stratagem, which was this. The day preceeding the night, that they intended to pass the streight, they cast Anchor in view of the Castle, and then filling their Canows full of men, sent them to the shore, where they lay conceal'd among the Boughs, till the men had hid them∣selves, by laying themselves down in the bottom of the Boat, so that as they re∣turn'd, there appear'd no more to be seen then only two or three that row'd. This the Spaniards seeing several times repea∣ted, assured themselves, that the Captain intended to storm the Castle in the night time, which made the Spaniards remove all their great Guns to the Landward, where they expected to be most briskly assail'd, leaving that Part toward the Sea naked, with little or no defence. Which when the Captain saw had answer'd his ends, in the night time, with wind and tide, and full swell'd Sails, he gave the Castle the go by. Which when the Castillians perceived, they made all the hast they could to remove their Guns again, but by that time the Captain was got almost out of reach; so that all the shot they made, did him very little or no prejudice.
As for the rest of the Fleet which missed the Captain at Savona, they, to the number of four hundred, endur'd much misery, unfortunate in all their Attempts. However, resolving to do something, they chose among themselves one Captain Hansell for their Admiral, who had be∣hav'd himself very Couragiously at the taking of Puerto Velo. He attempted the taking of Comona, upon the Continent of Carucas, threescore Leagues from the West-side of the Island de la Trinidad. There they landed their Men, and kill'd some few Indians stragling near the Coast; but approaching to the Town, the Spani∣ards joyning with the Indians, disputed their entry so obstinately with the forci∣ble arguments of Sword and Musket, that they were forc'd to retreat to their Ships with great loss. At last they arriv'd with empty Pockets at Jamaica, where they were jeer'd by their more fortunate Com∣panions, who cryed to em. Let us see the money you brought from Comona, whether it be as good silver as that which Maracaibo affords.
THE Second Part. CHAP. I. SOon after Captain Morgan arriv'd at Jamaica, where the old trade of Cup∣ping and Canning, and Drabbing, and Di∣cing had gone so briskly forward, that both Officers and Soldiers were reduc'd to their accustom'd state of Indigency, that they were very importunate for new Invasions and Exploits, to satisfy the cra∣ving hunger that began to gnaw their Pockets. By this means the first care of procuring men was soon over. Notice therefore being given of the Design, and the Rendevouze appointed upon the South∣side of the Island of Tortuga, the Sons of Fortune flock'd from all parts to put themselves under the Captains Conduct,
and to be in readiness also against the time appointed, which was the 24th of October, 1670. The Captain failed not to be punctual to his appointment, and came in his own Ship to the Port, called Port Couillon, over against Cow-Island. There they concluded to send four Ships, and one Boat over to the Continent, to rifle some of the Towns and Villages, and get all the Maiz they could gather. To that purpose they set sail for the Continent toward the River de la-Hacha, with a de∣sign to plunder a small Village called Ron∣cheria. Another party was sent to hunt in the Woods, who killed a vast number of Beasts, and salted them. The rest of the Company remain'd in the Ships to clean, and rigg them out to Sea.
CHAP. II. Their Success in the River de la Hacha. AFter this the four Ships, and one Boat steer'd their course within sight of the River de la Hacha. Where an unlucky Calm gave the Inhabitants time to prepare for the Entertainment of the Sea-Hectors, or at least to hide the best of their goods, that they might be in a better readiness to retire, when they found themselves overmatch'd. But such was Fortunes kindness, that what they went to seek, chopp't into their Mouths. For at the same time there happened to be in the River a very considerable Vessel sent from Cartagena to load Maiz, which was just ready to return as the Sea-Hectors came. This Ship they took with a wet finger, with all the Seamen, who in vain endeavour'd to escape. The next morning by break of day they drew near the shore,
and landed their Men, though the Spani∣ards made a stout resistance from a batte∣ry rais'd on that side, where of necessity they were to land. But they were not to be repuls'd by Batteries, that were Batte∣ry proof, so that the Spaniards were forc'd to retreat to a Village, whither the Sea-Hectors pursu'd them. There the Spani∣ards rally'd again, and stood to it like Sons of Priam, but finding the Sons of Hector too hard for 'em, they were forc'd to betake themselves to the Woods. The next day the Sea-Hectors percei∣ving the Spaniards fled, pursu'd as far as possibly they could, and overtaking a Party of unfortunate Diego's, took them all Prisoners. These they Catechized ac∣cording to their wonted mercy, to disco∣ver where they had hid their goods, which brought some that could not endure pain so well as others, to auricular Confession. Insomuch that in 15 days, they had got se∣veral Prisoners, great store of Plate, and moveable Goods, with other things, which they made no scruple to carry away. But not so contented, they dispatch'd some of their Prisoners to barter for Ransom-mony; to which it was answer'd, they had no Plate, but they would give 'em as much Maiz as they could afford; Thereupon they conjobbl'd together for
4000 bushels of Maiz, for sometimes they thought it as convenient to provide for the Gut, as well as for the Pocket. They had been now absent five whole weeks together, which made the Com. in chief almost despair of their return, and to be in some fears lest they should be fallen into the hands of their Friends the Spaniards. But when he saw the Ships return, and one more then had been sent out; there was not only joy in the chief Commanders heart, but the whole Com∣pany with their loud Acclamations gave the Sky to understand their universal glad∣ness, which was much augmented when they found 'em laiden with Maiz, and so many other good things. So that now they began to look upon themselves again as thriving men. After this the Commander in chief di∣vided the Maiz, and the Flesh proportio∣nably to every Ship, and then having ta∣ken a view of every Ship, to see that it was in good order and trim, he steered a∣way for Cape Tiburon, where he met with some other Ships come from Jamaica to join their Forces in this splendid Expe∣dition; so that now the whole Fleet con∣sisted of 37 Ships, mann'd with 2000 fighting men, besides Seamen and Boys. And now wo be to somebody, for great
storms fall heavy. The Admiral was mounted with 22 great Guns, and six small ones, the rest carried some 20, some 18, others 16, and the smallest at least four. It would have made any mans heart ake that had any kindness for the Spanish Dominions, to see such a cloud hang over their heads. And certainly it must be a blessed time in the Infernal Re∣gions, when Hell was so rak'd, and the Devil scumm'd. The Commander in chief finding him∣self furnished with such a considerable Fleet, divided the whole into two Squa∣drons, appointing Officers to each Squa∣dron by itself. And thus you see how Ir∣regularity itself moves upon the hinges of Regularity. This being done, he call'd all his Cap∣tains together, and caus'd them to sign certain Articles of common Agreement in the name of the whole. For himself, that he should have the hundredth part of all that was gotten, to himself alone. That every Captain should draw the shares of eight men for the expences of the Ship, besides his own. That the Chirurgion besides his pay, should have 200 pieces of Eight for his Chest of Medicaments; and that every Carpenter should draw a hun∣dred pieces of Eight, besides his common
Salary. Then for recompences and Pen∣sions for the maim'd, they were advanc'd somewhat higher then before, 1500 pieces of Eight, or 15 Slaves for the loss of both Legs. For the loss of both Hands 1800 pieces of Eight or 18 Slaves. For one Leg 600 pieces of Eight, or 6 Slaves. For a hand, the same. For an Eye a hundred pieces of Eight, or one Slave. For him that signaliz'd himself in any Fight, by ta∣king down the Enemies Colours, and putting up their own, or entring a Fort fore-most, 50 pieces of Eight, and that all extraordinary Salaries and Rewards should be paid out of the first purchase that should be taken. All things thus order'd, three places were propounded to be attack'd, Cartage∣na, Panama, or Santa Cruiz. But the fatal Lot fell upon Panama, as being accounted the richest of the three. But not know∣ing the Avenues to it, they thought it re∣quisite first to take St. Katherines in their way, there to furnish themselves with Guides, in regard there are many Out∣laws in that place, who are very expert in the knowledge of that Countrey.
CHAP. III. The Island of St. Catherine taken. FRom Cape Tiburon the Fleet weighed Anchor the 16 of Decemb. 1670. and four days after arriv'd in sight of St. Ca∣therines, at what time the Commander in chief sent one of his nimblest Vessels to view the entry of the River, as also if there were any Ships there to oppose his landing, or acquaint the Inhabitants with his arrival, and thereby prevent his design. The next morning early the whole Fleet came to an Anchor in a Bay called Augua Grande, near unto the Island where the Spaniard had a Battery mounted with four Pieces of Canon; Captain Morgan having landed his Men, began his March through the Woods, having no other Guides than some of his own men who had been there before, which conducted him to a Fort where the Governour com∣monly kept his residence, but was then quite abandoned; the Spaniards having retired into the lesser Island, which was
so well fortified, that it seemed impreg∣nable. The Spaniards perceiving the Pirates to approach, began to fire most furiously up∣on them, which made them retreat, and take up their rest upon the Grass for that night, being sorely pinch'd with hunger; about midnight, to add to their affliction, it began to Rain as if the Skys were melt∣ed, which continued till next morning; then after two hours it recommenced again anew rather harder than before, which caused them to cease from ad∣vancing towards the Fort whence the Spa∣niards did continually fire at the Pirates, seeing them approach. Cold, hunger and nakedness, did now reduce the Pirates to so great straits, that an old scabb'd Horse, which they found in the fields, was acceptable to them, which they kill'd, and with greediness eated. C. M. knowing how much this tended to the prejudice of his Enterprise, and per∣ceiving his men to talk of venturing to their Ships, resolv'd upon a sudden reme∣dy, which was this; he caus'd a Canow to be rigg'd out in all haste, having Co∣lours of Truce display'd, which he sent to the Governour of the Island with this message, That if he surrendred not him∣self and his men within a few hours into
his hand upon mercy, he might certainly expect to be put to the Sword, without Quarters to any; the Governour terrified with such big words, desires two hours to deliberate, which Captain M. granted; a little after the said Governour sent two Canows, with white Colours, and two Persons to treat with him; the substance of their Commission was, that the Go∣vernour had resolv'd to surrender the Island to C. M. not being sufficiently pro∣vided to defend it, desiring only that (to save his credit) he would be pleased to use the formality of a Stratagem of War, the method of which the Governour him∣self proposed to him; C. M. agreed to every one of these Propositions, where∣upon the Messengers taking their leave, returned to give an account of their Ne∣gotiations to the Governour. Presently after C. M. commanded his whole Fleet immediately to enter the Port, and his men on shoar to be in readi∣ness to assault the Castle of St. Jerom; the Castle taking the Alarum, as was con∣trived betwixt the Governour and C. M. began to fire furiously at the Ships, but without Bullets, as was before agreed; then the Pirates landed, assaulting the lesser Island which they took, with both the Fortresses, forcing the Spaniards in
appearance to flee into the Church for Sanctuary. The Island being taken by this pretended Stratagem, the Souldiers made it their only care to satiate their empty stomachs with the best Victuals they could find; next day they numbred their prisoners, which were found to be four hundred and fifty persons in all, whereof one hundred and ninety were Souldiers belonging to the Garrison; next they took a view of the whole Island, with its Fortresses, which they found to be nine in all, viz. the Forts of St. Jerom, St. Matthew, Santa Teresa, St. Augustine, la Plattaforma de la conceptione, St. Salvador, Plattaforma de Las Artilleros, Santa Cruz; and lastly St. Josephs Fort, all which were indifferently provided with Arms and Ammunition, some of them having twenty great Guns; also in their Store-house were found above thirty thousand pound of Powder, all the Guns were stopp'd and nailed, the Fortresses also demolished, only St. Jerom the Pirates saved to keep their Garrisons in. Captain Morgan enquired if any Ban∣dits were there from Panama, or Puerto Velo; three being found, were brought before him, who being examined, pre∣tended exactly to know all the Avenues of those parts; he asked if they would
guide him to Panama, which if they did, they should have an equal share of what should be pillaged in that expedition; they readily accepted his proffers, promising all obedience to his commands. CHAP. IV. The Castle of Chagre taken. CAp. Mor. having so promising an occa∣sion, thought it not fit to neglect it, whereupon he gave orders that four Ships and one Boat should be provided with all necessaries for taking the Castle of Cha∣gre, seated upon a River of that name; in these Ships he puts 400 men under the command of one Captain Brodely, whose actions of this nature had rendered him famous formerly in those Coasts, this Brodely having received his orders, puts to Sea, and within three days arrives with∣in sight of the said Castle. This Castle is seated upon a high Moun∣tain, having many advantages both from art and nature, for its strength being for∣tified
on all sides with strong Palisado's, on the Land side it hath four strong Bastions, and two towards the Sea, the South-side is unaccessible, by reason of the asperity of the Mountain; the North-side also is en∣compassed with the broad River; at the foot of the Mountain is a strong Fort which commandeth the entry of the Ri∣ver, with several other singular advanta∣ges of a well fortified place. The Pirates came to an Anchor about a League from the Castle, which the Spani∣ards perceiving, began to fire briskly at them with the biggest of their Guns; next morning they landed, and marched through a Wood, resolving to attack the Castle on that side, but the difficulties they met with in their march, as also the Spaniards constant firing from the Castle, made them much to fear the success of that enterprise (for on that side of neces∣sity they must make the assault) however, they resolved rather to hazard all, then give it over. Whereupon they advanced towards the Castle with their Swords in one hand, and Fire-balls in the other; but the Spaniards received them with so much briskness, that after they attempted to scale the walls, they were forced to retreat, and rest themselves until night; then they re∣turned
again to the Assault, and attempted with their Fire-balls to pull down the Pales before the wall; while they were thus disputing the matter with great reso∣lution on both sides, a very remarkable accident happened, which put the Victory in the Pirates hands, for one of them be∣ing shot with an Arrow quite through the body, he with courage pull'd it out at the side of his breast, and wound a little cotton about the head of it, and putting it in his Musket, shot it back again into the Castle, the cotton being kindled by the Powder, set fire to 2 or 3 thatch'd houses that were within the Castle, which not being timely taken notice of, blew up some barrels of Powder, which put the Spaniards into great consternation, not knowing how the fire came, as also not having sufficient water to extinguish it. The Pirates seeing so favourable an op∣portunity, made use of it, setting fire un∣to the Palizadoes, which gave them great advantage, many breaches having there∣by been made among the Pales, which made the earth fall in great heaps into the Ditch, upon which they climbed up, and got over unto the Castle, notwithstan∣ding of much opposition; for they threw down flaming Pots full of combustible matter, by which several were killed.
The fire thus consuming the Palisado,'s the Pirates prosecuted their intention of being Masters of the Castle, when day appear'd, they saw the earth fallen down from the Palisado's to the Ditch, which put them on even ground with them that were within. The Pirates seeing the fire thus to rage, thought it their interest (being in hopes to be Masters of all) to extinguish it, for this end they appointed some of their number to do what they could to extin∣guish it by constant shooting at it, while the rest managed the Assault; about noon the Pirates gained a breach, which the Governor himself manfully defended with 25 men; here was hot work with Muskets, Swords, Pikes and Stones, notwithstan∣ding the Pirates forced their way through all difficulties, till at last they were Ma∣sters of the Castle; the Spaniards who were alive, threw themselves headlong in∣to the Sea, disdaining to ask Quarters for their lives, the Governor retreated unto the Corp du Garde, where he intended to defend himself, but at last was kill'd by a Musket shot. All the men that were found alive, were but 30, whereof 20 were wounded, and this was all that surviv'd of 314, wherewith the Castle was Garrison'd,
them they made Prisoners, compelling them to tell what they knew of their in∣terprises; the Pirats also had a great loss of their men here, for when they came to number them, they found they lost an 100, besides 70 that were wounded. CHAP. V. Captain Morgan cometh to Cha∣gre, and goeth from thence to Pa∣nama. THE Pirates having fully possest them∣selves of the Castle of Chagre, pre∣sently acquainted Captain Morgan with it, by a Messenger, who thereupon resolved in all hast to go thither himself in Person; for this end he caused all the Provision that could be found to be imbarked for the use of Chagre, so having set fire to all the Houses and Forts there, except the Castle of St. Terresa; and carrying all the Prisoners with him, he set Sail for the Ri∣ver Chagre, where he arrived upon the eight day from St. Katherine.
The Fleet were so overcome with Joy, seeing the English Colours upon the Castle, that not minding the entry to the River, they lost four Ships (the Ship wherein the Captain himself was, being one) yet they saved all the men, and most of the Goods; the Captain being with great so∣lemnity brought to the Castle, he com∣manded all the Prisoners to be set to work for repairing of the breaches about the Castle: then they seized upon all the Ships and Canows belonging to the Spaniards, and having put a Garrison of 500 men in the Castle, and 150 more in the Ships within the River, he departed towards Panama, the 18th of August, 1670. taking no victuals in his Ships, hoping to be fur∣nished by the Spaniards. The first day they only failed 6 Leagues, and came to a place called de Los Braccos; here they went on shore to search for Victuals, but nothing could be had, the Spaniards being fled, so that some were forced to dine upon a Pipe of Tobacco. The next day continuing their Journey, they came to a place called Cruz de Juan Calego, here they were forced to leave their Canows, the River being dryed for want of Rain; but their Guides told them that about two Leagues farther they they might continue their Journey by land; hereupon leaving some Companies
aboard to defend the Boats, the next mor∣ning, being the third day, they all went on shore, but they found the way so deep and dirty, that Captain Morgan thought it fit to transport his men in Canows to a place further up the River, called Cedro Bueno; which accordingly he did. The fourth day the greatest part of the Pirates marched by land to discover the Ambuscadoes of the Spaniards, being ex∣treamly pinch'd with hunger. About noon their Guide cryed aloud he had found an Ambuscado; this made the Pirates re∣joyce, hoping there to find some Provisi∣on, but coming to the place, found that all were fled, which disappointment vexed them grievously; there nothing could be found but a few leathern bags, all empty, but their hunger was such, that they fell greedily to eating the leather. Having dispatched this tough feast, and gone a little further, they found another Ambuscado, but as barren as the former, but some of them were so provident as to reserve some pieces of the leather upon which they dined, of this they made their Supper. The fifth day they marched to a place called Barbacoa, but as empty as any of the former, yet having ranged along, they found two sacks of Meal, with two Jars of
Wine, and some fruits called Platanos this treasure Captain Morgan caused to be equally distributed amongst them who were in greatest necessity, which refreshed them, so that they marched now with grea∣ter courage than ever, till night. Continuing their march thus, part of them by land through the Woods, and part by water in the Canows, upon the sixth day at noon they came to a Plantation, where they found a Barn full of Maiz; they fell to eating of it dry, till they could eat no more; then they distributed it in great quantities among themselves, and so con∣tinued their Journey, but a little further discovering an Ambuscado of Indians, whereupon they threw away their Maiz, hoping there to find plenty of all things, but they found themselves much deceived, for all were fled; only on the other side the water they discovered about an 100 Indians in a company, who like Roes run through the Woods till they were out of sight, but some of the Pirates endeavou∣ring to catch them, were killed by their Arrows; not only so, but they houted at them at a distance, crying, ha Perros a la Savana, a la Savana, ha ye Dogs, go to the Plain, go to the Plain, but night com∣ing on, they took up their rest in the Plain, where sleep was not much minded, some beginning to murmur, blaming the Cap∣tains
bad Conduct, others continuing still resolute; one of their Guides also gave them encouragement, telling them that a short time would bring them where there was somewhat to be reaped. Next morning being the seventh day, they all made clean their Arms, fixing their fire-locks; which done, and marching till noon, they discovered much smoak a∣rising at a great distance from them, thi∣ther they marched with all possible speed, promising to themselves plenty of good cheer, but when they arrived at the place, found themselves miserably disappointed, for the Spaniards had set fire every man to his House, carrying all things that were eatable with them, excepting some Dogs and Cats, which the Pirates were glad to feed upon. Yet after a narrow search, they found in the Kings Stables 16 Jarrs of Peru Wine, with a Sack full of Bread, which they no sooner drank of, but they fell sick every man; this made them presently ap∣prehend the Wine had been poisoned, so they gave up themselves all for dead men, which made them take up their rest there for that night: this place is 26 Spanish Leagues from Panama, as also the last place unto which the Boats or Canows can come; which forc'd Captain Morgan
to leave his Canows, and land all his men, though never so weak, but the Canows he sent back again to the place where the Boats were, except one, which he caused to be hidden for carrying of Intelligence, as his affairs required. Upon the eighth day in the morning Captain Morgan sent 200 men before, to discover what Ambuscado's were laid in the way to Panama; so having marched about ten hours to a place called Quebrad∣da Obscura, here they were welcomed with a shower of 3 or 4 thousand Arrows, not knowing whence they came, or who shot them, this put them in a great surprisal, especially not knowing whence they came, but marching a little further, they perceived some Indians fleeing as fast as they could before them, to take the advan∣tage of another post; notwithstanding there remained a whole troop upon the place, designing to fight the Pirates; which they did with great courage, until their Captain fell, who, although he despaired of life, yet would he ask no Quarters, but endeavouring to raise himself, with undaunted courage laid hold of a Javelin, but was presently shot dead with a Pistol. Here eight Pirates were kill'd, and ten wounded, the slain they buried, and so went on a little further, where they disco∣vered
a parcel of Indians at a distance, standing upon the top of a Mountain very nigh unto the way by which they were to pass; they sent 50 of their number to see if they could catch any of them, that they might get intelligence from them, but all in vain, for they betook themselves to their heels, and presently after shewed them∣selves at another place, crying, Ala Sava∣na cornudos Peros Engleses, i.e. to the Plain ye Cuckolds, ye English Dogs; at the place there was a Wood, wherein Captain Morgan suspected the Spaniards had placed an Ambuscado, whereupon he sent 200 men to search it; the Spaniards and In∣dians observing the Pirates to descend the Mountain, did so too, seeming as if they intended to Attack them, but being got once into the Wood, they disappeared, and were seen no more. Night coming on, there fell a great rain, which caused the Pirates march the faster, and seek for shelter to preserve their Arms, but none could be found, for that the Spaniards had set all on fire, only they found some little Hutts for Shep∣herds, which not being capable to hold them all, they put in them a small number of every company, to keep the arms of the rest, and thus they continued till mor∣ning.
Morning being come, they put forward while the fresh air of the morning lasted; after two hours march they discover'd a company of twenty Spaniards, of which they endeavoured to catch some, but could lay hold of none, they suddenly disappea∣ring. At length they came to the top of a high Mountain, whence they discover'd the South-Sea, at which they greatly re∣joyced; having descended the Mountain, they came to a valley, in which were great numbers of Cattle; here now be∣gins a most bloody Massacre amongst these Animals, some killing, another flaying, a third making of fires to roast them, tho very little roasting served them, resemb∣ling rather Canibals eating their raw flesh, then Englishmen.
CHAP. VI. The Spaniards defeated, and the City of Panama taken. THE Pirates having thus satisfied their hunger, they marched forward. C. M. being much vexed, that for nine days time he could get no information of the condition of his Enemies, sent out 50 men to take (if possible) some Priso∣ners, to be informed by them, but could catch none. Within a few hours they came within sight of the Steeple of Panama, which they no sooner saw, but they shouted for joy, as if the Victory were already put into their hands. Thus they pitched their Camp for that night high to the City, waiting with much impatience for the dawning of the day, when they intended to attack the City. The noise of their Drums and Trum∣pets put the City into an Alarum, who thereupon sent out fifty Horse to observe
their motion: Mean while they began to play furiously upon them with their great Guns from the Walls, but with little or no harm to the Pirates, whom they could not conveniently reach. There appeared also to them a Body of two hundred Spa∣niards, at a little distance, who look'd as if they intended to block up all the Pas∣sages, so that none of the Pirates could escape; but they no ways regarding these menaces, open'd every man his Satchel, and began to examine what he had left at noon; and having supp'd as well as they could, laid themselves down upon the Grass, and slept till morning. The day no sooner began to appear, but they draw to Arms, and being drawn up in very good order, marched directly toward the City, but C. M. being advis'd by one of the Guides not to keep the high-way, for fear of Ambuscadoes, chose another way that led thorow the Wood; the Spaniards seeing the Pirates take another way than they expected, were forc'd to leave their Posts, and come out to meet them. The Spanish Forces consisted of two Squadrons, four Regiments of Foot, and a great many wild Bulls driven by Indians and Negroes for their help; which when the Pirates perceiv'd from the top of an Hill, they were much terrified at their
number, and feared the success very much; but reflecting upon their present straits, and that now of necessity they must either conquer, or die, being out of hope to get Quarters from an Enemy whom they had so incensed, they began to encourage one another to stand to the very last man, ra∣ther than now to yield; so they divided themselves into three Battalions, having sent one of two hundred Buccaniers before them: Thus they descended the Hill to∣ward their Enemy, who had taken the advantage of the ground already; as soon as they approached them, the Spaniards gave a shout, crying, Viva el Rei, God save the King; presently after the Horse began to move; the two hundred Buc∣caniers, every one putting one knee to the ground, fir'd full in their face: Thus the work begins fiercely on both sides. The Spaniards acted very gallantly, both Horse and Foot, but the Pirates having got betwixt the Horse and the Foot, for∣ced them to separate much to their pre∣judice; next they essayed to disorder the Pirates, by driving the wild Cattle among their Ranks; but most of them ran away, being frighted with the noise of the Battle, others were shot dead by the Buccaniers. The Spanish Horse began at length to
lose their ground, most of them being kill'd, which the Foot perceiving, threw down their Arms, and betook them to their heels; the Pirates being overwea∣ried, were not able to follow, so that they not being able to flee to the Woods for shelter, hid themselves among the Shrubs, but upon search they were all found and put to death. Some Priests were also brought before C.M. who were all served with the same sauce. They took also a Captain, and carried him before him; him he spared, and made him give a particular account of the Forces of the City; which he did. His Relation made C. M. alter his re∣solution, so that he ordered they should march another way. Thus having rested their weary bones a little, they began cou∣ragiously to march toward the City with full resolution either to conquer, or be conquered; but they met with great dif∣ficulties in their approaching the City, by reason of the Spanish Cannon firing inces∣santly at them, which occasioned great∣loss of their men; notwithstanding they resolutely advanced, no ways deterred by so imminent danger; so that after three hours hot dispute, wherein the Spaniards did indeed play the men, they were forc'd to yield upon mercy.
The Pirates now being Masters of the City, cut them all off that offered in the least to oppose them: They found not so much Riches here as they expected, the best of them having before been trans∣ported to some remoter place for security. Captain Morgan having assembled all his men together, when the fury was over, gave them order, that under the greatest penalties they should tast no Wine, being privately informed the Spaniards had poisoned it. CHAP. VII. The City of Panama set on fire, and the Effects thereof. ALL things being thus put in sub∣jection to the Pirates, and their Guards being set at several quarters of the City, promising to themselves no less than a Paradise there for a while; They were suddenly Alarum'd by a Fire, which appear'd in several places of the City, none knowing how it came; but the wi∣ser sort suspected deeply that C. M. was the Author of it, though upon what mo∣tives,
or for what end he did it, none could guess. All means possible were used by the Spaniards, and some of the Pirates also, for quenching of it, but in vain, for in less then half an hour almost a whole Street was turn'd to ashes. The Houses were all built with Cedar of a magnificent structure, and richly a∣dorned within, although the best of the Furniture was conveyed away before from the Pirates: here were also eight Mo∣nasteries, wherein there was great Riches, which the Monks secur'd from hazard be∣fore the taking of the City. The loss which the Spaniards sustained here was infinite, for besides 7000 dwel∣ling Houses, there were also 200 rich Ware-houses burnt, together with many Negroes that had hid themselves there, al∣so a stately House of the Genoeses, be∣longing to their Trade. This fire con∣tinued the space of four weeks before it was quite extinguished. The Pirates for the most part lodged without the City, and there kept guard, fearing the Spaniards would rally, and to keep their Forces (now much weakned) together, for they knew the Spaniards had a far greater number of men then they had, whom they saw several times in whole Troops cruize too and fro in the
Field, but durst not hazard a Battle; when the Pirates saw no appearance of hazard from the Spaniard, they re-entred the City, and fell to seeking among the Ruines for Plate and Gold, of which they found great quantities hid in Wells and Cisterns, and other such places. Soon after Captain Morgan sent out 300 men in two Troops, to search for the In∣habitants that were fled, who after two days returned, bringing with them 200 Prisoners, men and women; this day also came in a Boat, which was sent into the South-Sea to search, bringing with her three other Boats; but had missed one Gallion much better then all the three, being laden with the Kings Plate, and o∣ther Riches, both Gold, Pearl, Jewels, and other most precious goods; but it being badly provided both of Arms and Victuals, might easily have been taken, had not the Pirates been otherwise taken up with Drinking and Whoring, till she was got out of their reach, yet the next day they sent after her with all speed, but in vain, she having got to some remote shore un∣known to them; but though they missed the Gallion, yet in searching for it, they found several other Boats laden with cost∣ly merchandise, which they seiz'd upon, and brought to Panama.
Where being arrived, they gave an ac∣count of their Adventures to Captain Morgan, who when he heard of the rich Prize that had escap'd (some of the Prisoners putting him in hope to retrieve her) immediately commanded all the Boats that were in the Port with all hast to pursue her, which they did for the space of eight days, but to no purpose; so returning home by the Isles of Tavoga, and Tavogilla, they found a Vessel laden with Cloath, Sugar, Soap, and Bisket, with 20000 pieces of Eight in money, which they seized without the least opposition, together also with a Boat that lay nigh unto this Ship, into which they put part of the Goods that were in the Ship, with some Slaves found upon the Island, with this purchase they return'd to Panama, yet much unsatisfied that the Gallion escap'd. While Captain Morgan was thus busy at Panama, those at Chagre were not idle; for they sent out two Boats to follow their imployment, which happened to meet with a Spanish Ship laden with Victuals, and other Provisions, her they began to chase within sight of the Castle, which they in the Castle perceiving, instantly hung out a Spanish Flag, the poor Spaniard seeing this, thought all was right, so that they run in their Ship just under their
Cannon, where they were presently caught and made Prisoners. This encouraged C. M. to stay the lon∣ger at Panama, where he caused several excursions to be made, sending forth daily Parties of 200 men, and as one Party came back, another of the same number were sent out, by which means he gathered a great deal of Riches; upon a day they happened to find a fellow in a Gentlemans House, who had put on a pair of Taffety Breeches belonging to his Master, with a silver Key hanging at its strings, they put this wretch to exquisite Torments, to make him confess where the Cabinet was to which the Key belonged. Yea, certain it is, they were most cruel to all ranks, even the Religious Persons were forc'd to buy their lives with their Money, the Women also were little bet∣ter used, especially by practising upon their Chastity, their Captain shewing them no good example in this, an instance whereof was a Gentlewoman brought from Tavo∣ga, and Tavogilla, she was Wife to a rich Merchant who at that time was in Peru about the concerns of his Trade. No sooner was this Lady brought before him, than he designed her for his base plea∣sure, giving orders she should be lodged in an apartment by her self, with a Ne∣gro
to attend her; but this civility soon discovered itself to be for a base end, for soon after he came to her Chamber, where he communicated unto her his ardent de∣sire of accomplishing his lust, she with all civility imaginable denied him, upon which he presented her with Pearl and Gold, and other precious things, but with as little success; hereupon, presently alte∣ring his note, he commanded her to be stript of her cloaths, and put her in a dark stinking Cellar, allowing her no more Victuals then might keep her from star∣ving; but he finding that this cruelty might render him odious even to the Pirates themselves, forges an Accusation against her, as if she kept correspondence with his Enemy the Spaniard, pretending this to be the reason of her being so dealt with, yet in a short time she was allowed the same liberty with the rest. About this time there was a Plot dis∣covered in the City, of a considerable num∣ber of Pirats (who wearied of Captain Morgans service) resolved to desert him, and that by taking one of the Ships which were in the Port; resolving to follow their old Trade a while by themselves, and then to return home to Europe; for this end they gathered great store of Pro∣vision, which they hid in some private
place, also some great Guns belonging to the Town, with other necessaries suitable to their design. Certainly their design had taken effect, had not one of their own Comrades be∣trayed them, by discovering the whole to Captain Morgan; who presently caused the Mast of their Ship to be cut down, and burnt, together with all the other Boats that were in the Harbour, after this he sent out many of the Spaniards to the adjoyning Country to seek for mony to redeem themselves, and others their Companions, as well Ecclesiasticks as La∣icks, he caused likewise all the Cannons of the Town to be nail'd, and stop'd up.
CHAP. VIII. Captain Morgan returns to Chagre, and divides the Spoil. CAptain Morgan being now weary of Panama, resolved to leave it, there∣fore he commanded that all things should be put in order for his departure, but ha∣ving notice that the Governor of Panama had laid several Ambuscado's in his way, he sent out a strong Party to search for him, who soon after returned, and assured him there was no appearance of any such thing, for proof of which, they brought with them some Prisoners, who confessed that indeed the Governor did intend to lay Ambuscado's for him in his return, but that he could not put his design in exe∣cution, because such as he design'd to ef∣fect it, would not undertake it, so the de∣sign was laid aside. Upon the 24th of February, 1671. the Pirates left the City of Panama, or rather
the place where it did stand; having la∣den 175 Beasts of Carriage, with Silver, Gold, and other precious Spoils, also car∣ried with them 600 Prisoners; having marched a League from Panama, Captain Morgan drew up his men in Battle Array, in such a form, as that the Prisoners were in the midst surrounded with Pirates on all sides, here nothing could be heard but shrieks and Cries of these poor Creatures, terrified with the thought of being tran∣sported, as also being sorely pinched with extream hunger and thirst; which Captain Morgan made them suffer of purpose, that they might with more earnestness seek for Mony for their Ransom; many of them begged with tears, upon their knees, that he would suffer them to go back to Panama again; but he replied that his business there was to get Mony, and not to hear their cries and lamentations. But the forc'd Lady had some more re∣spect put upon her then the rest, being led by her self betwixt two Pirates. But when she saw that she was like to be car∣ried Captive to a strange land, she was ex∣ceedingly disordered, piercing the skies with her lamentations, also protesting to the Pirates that she had ordered two re∣ligious Persons in whom she confided to go to such a place, where they should find so
much money as her Ransom would amount unto, but instead of bringing it to her, they imployed it some other way, which Captain Morgan hearing, enquired further into it, and finding it to be a truth, imme∣diately released the Lady, but detained the Priests as Prisoners in her place, with∣al using them according to the demerits of their inhumane intreagues. The Pirates being come to a Town called Cruz, seated upon the River Charge, it was ordered, that within three days every prisoner should bring in their Ransom, otherwise to be transported to Jamaica, whereupon some paid their Ran∣som here, and were set at Liberty, others who could procure no money, were de∣tained; from hence they marched upon the fifth of March, carrying away all the spoil of the place, and also some prisoners whom C. M. added to those of Panama, that payed not their Ransom, and caus'd them all to be transported, excepting their religious men, who had cheated the Lady of her Ransom; they were ransomed three days after the imprisonment by some who pitied their case more than they did hers. Now these Gentlemen that were for∣merly so strict in examining of others for their goods, begin to set up the same Disci∣pline
amongst themselves; for about half way to Chagre C. M. caus'd every one in the company to be sworn that they had conceal'd nothing of their purchase; which they willingly did, not standing much up∣on such a trifle as an Oath; but he know∣ing by experience what conscience men of that profession were Masters of, com∣manded every man to be searched, even to the very soles of their shoes; but that this Order might not be ill taken, he agreed that he himself should be searched first, which was accordingly done, then by mutual consent there was one chosen out of every Company to search the rest; some were not well pleased with this in∣vention, yet were forc'd to submit, not being able to resist. This being done, they reimbarked for Chagre upon the ninth of March, where they found all things in good order, except the wounded men, whom they left there, most of which died of their wounds. Having arrived at the Castle of Chagre, C. M. sent to Puerto Velo, demanding a considerable Ransom for the said Castle, threatning otherwise to rase it to the ground, to which they of Puerto Velo an∣swered, that he might do with it as he pleased; as for them, they would not give one farthing for its Ransom; which An∣swer,
though it did vex him, yet he could not help it at that time. But now being out of all hopes of getting any more by that Voyage, they come next to divide the Spoil, which when done, many complained they were wronged, judging Captain Morgan an unfit divisor, being one that always loved to be his own Carver, which made their proportion the smaller, for notwithstanding of their many dangerous Adventures, and rich Prizes, their share of the dividend came to no more then 200 pieces of Eight per man; this unhandsome dealing did very much exasperate them against him, which he perceiving, began to fear the effects of it, therefore thinking it not safe for him to tarry any longer there, he commanded the Ordnance of the Castle to be carried aboard his Ship, then he ordered as much of the walls and edifices to be ruin'd, as the shortness of the time could permit; after which, he went secretly on board his own Ship, not acquainting any of his Companions with his departure, being only followed with three or four Vessels of the whole Fleet, which some suspected to have shar'd with him in the best and greatest part of the Spoil; some of the discontented would willingly be reveng'd upon him, had they not found themselves
too weak, and ill provided even for their intended Voyage to Jamaica, as you shall hear in the sequel. THE Third Part. CHAP. I. Some of the Pirates return to Jamai∣ca, with some things remarkable in their Voyage. CAptain Morgan having thus left his Associates at Chagre, they were in∣deed a lively Portraiture of what atten∣deth wickedness in the end, being brought very low for want, they resolved every man to seek by what means to help him∣self. The party of which we are to speak, they steered their course along the Coast of Costa Rica, intending, if possible, to
purchase some Provision, and to careen their Ship in some secure place, within few days they came to a Port call'd Boca del Toro, where they found abundance of eatable Tortoises. The circumference of the place is about 10 Leagues, being surrounded with little Islands. The Inhabitants of these Islands are wild Indians, who could never be brought under the Spanish Yoak: This people are divided, according to the variety of Idi∣oms of their Language, into several customs and fashions, which occasions much contention and wars amongst them; some of them kept Commerce with the Pirates a long time, giving them a part of the best food, or other Commodities the Country affordeth, in exchange for some Iron Instruments, Beads, or other Toys, which among them were in greater esteem then the preciousest Jewels; but at length they found the Pirates a little too hard for them to deal with, whereupon they gave over any further Trading with them. Here they went ashoar for provision, but to little purpose, nothing being to be had except a few Crocodiles Eggs; wherefore they steered Eastward, where they met with three Boats more of their companions, who were left at Chagre; they told them that their condition was
low for hunger, and that C. M. himself was brought to that pass, that he could afford his men no more allowance than once a day; they hearing this, chang'd their course, and steered Westward, where in a short time they found abundance of Tortoise, so that nothing now was want∣ing to them but fresh Water. This also they knew was to be had in the neigh∣bouring Islands, but thought it unsafe for them to go on shoar, because of the Envy betwixt the Inhabitants and the Pirates; however, as need makes naked men run, so thirst made them rather hazard their lives, than want Water any longer; whereupon they resolved to land all in one Island, which they did; but while some went to range in the Woods, and others to fill their Barrels, suddenly the Indians came upon them; upon which they pre∣sently flee to their Arms, and began brisk∣ly to fire at them, which made them ad∣vance no further, but run away with speed; the Pirates not pursuing them, esteeming their Water more precious than any thing they could promise them∣selves from that attempt; but as they re∣turned back, they found two Indians dead upon the shoar; one of which they un∣derstood to be a Person of Quality by his habit, which was very costly: Among
other things, he wore on his face a planch of massive Gold, which hung down at his Chin, either to cover his Beard, or in∣stead of one. After the Pirates were gone on board, they heard a hideous noise from the shoar, which put them in fear that the Indians had called in their Neighbours to their aid against them; but their fears were ground∣less, for this kind of Indians never goes to Sea, neither give they themselves to build any Vessels for Navigation, not so much as a Fisher-Boat. The Pirates having no further hopes of purchasing any thing thereabout, they re∣solve for Jamaica; being set forth, the Wind blew contrary, which caus'd them to make use of their Oars, till they came nigh the River Chagre; here they spyed a Ship making toward them, as if she in∣tended to board them; they apprehending her to belong to Cartagena, thought she was come to reckon with them for bypast scores; whereupon hoising all their Sails, they ran before the Wind, hoping to escape, or at least to take shelter some∣where; but the other easily getting the Wind of them, stopt their course; yet when she came nigher, they discovered them to be their former Comrades, now in the same case with them. This En∣counter
retarded their Voyage the space of two days, which obliged them to re∣turn to their former station; thence they sailed to a place called Boca dele Dragon, to make provision for their Voyage. Here they found a Creature whom the Spaniards call Manentines, the Duck, a Sea-Cow, because headed like a Cow. They are commonly found in such places under Water, as are full of grass, on which it is supposed they feed, they have no Ears, but in their place, two little holes scarce capable to contain a Bean, nigh unto the neck they have two wings, under which are two udders much like unto the breasts of a Woman, the skin of their back is two inches thick, their belly is every way like a Cows, their manner of ingendring being also the same; they hear so well, that the Fisher-men in taking them, must not make the least noise, not so much as to speak to one another, but must do all by signs. But the Pirates could do no good at this kind of fishing, therefore some went to the Woods to hunt, while others went to catch some other kind of Fish, which they were not long about before they saw two Indians in a Canow upon the Water, who no sooner saw them, but went on shoar, carrying the Canow betwixt them, as if
it were so much Straw; their nimbleness carried them away from the Pirates, so that though they had the Canow with them to impede their motion, yet they ran as if they had not an ounce weight to burden them. The Pirates having left that place in four and twenty hours, arrived at Rio de Zuera, where they found some houses be∣longing to Cartagena, inhabited by the Spaniards, these the Pirates resolved to visit, but found nothing but an empty Habitation, all the Inhabitants being fled with their goods, which forced them to rest satisfied with a certain Fruit, which there is called Platano, of which they filled their Boats, and continued their Voyage, designing to find out some Creek to careen their Ship in, which was become very leaky; at length they came to a place called the Bay of Bleevelt, where one Party fell to careening of the Vessel, while the other went to the Woods for Hunting. Those who went a Hunting, found a great store of Porcupines of a huge big∣ness, also some Pheasants; but their best sport was in shooting at the Monkeys, being of such nimbleness, that they could hardly kill one of them, but did cost them fifteen or sixteen shots: Of these Monkeys
there were an infinite number in this place, where it was pleasant to see the Female dodge along with their little ones upon their backs, just as the Negroes do their Children; if any pass under the Trees where they sit, they will common∣ly squirt their excrements upon their heads and clothes: Also if any of them chance to be wounded, the rest will flock about it, and lay their hand upon the wound to stop the blood; others will ga∣ther Moss that groweth upon the Trees, and thrust it into the wound; yea 'tis said, that some of them will gather some Herbs, and having chewed them after the manner of a Cataplasm, will apply them to the wound. Some days after the coming to that place, some of their Women-slaves being at work in the field nigh to a Wood, were heard to cry out, Indians, Indians, the Pirates immediately ran to their Arms, but when they came to the place, found no body there but only two of the foresaid Slaves dead upon the place, ha∣ving in their bodies an incredible number of Arrows It seems indeed the Indians intended that they should not be put long to endure the pain of their wounds; for one of their Arrows were enough to kill an Elephant, being Eight feet in
length, and bigger than a mans thumb. As to the constitution of this people, they are very strong of body, but when their strength fails them, they have re∣course to their heels; to them they are ex∣ceedingly beholden sometimes, in their greatest extremity, which made the Pi∣rates bestow much of their sweat in vain in pursuing them. The Pirates thought it not safe for them to stay any longer in that place, left they should be served in the same sort as their Slaves were, whereupon leaving it with all the haste they could make, they directed their course towards the Cape of Gratias a Dios, where they had fixed their last and only hope of being supplyed with Provision; neither did they hope in vain, for being arrived there, the people shew∣ed them much kindness, supplying their wants, and providing them with all neces∣saries, but above all, the Women exceed∣ed in kindness, to make themselves go off the better, it being the custom of the Island, that when Pirates arrive there, every one hath the liberty to buy himself an Indian Woman for a knife, or some such trifle; who is obliged to remain in his custody all the time of his staying there, providing him also with all sorts of victuals the Country affordeth.
The Inhabitants are very dextrous at darting with the Javelin, whereby they are very useful to the Pirates for victu∣alling of their Ships with Fishes, one of them being able to provide for a Vessel of an hundred persons, with no other In∣strument than his Javelin. Their Cu∣stoms, Lives and Policy, are worth the mentioning, whereof a word briefly. The circumference of the Island is about thirty Leagues, the number of the Inhabitants exceedeth not 1600. or 1700. yet they live divided in two distinct Provinces, one of which are laborious in cultivating the ground, but the other are so lazy, that they rather lie in the broad fields night and day, than be at the pains to build themselves Huts, much less Houses to dwell in; all their cloaths is an Apron, which being tied to their middle, cometh down so far as to hide the most shameful parts of their body; their weapons are Spears only pointed ei∣ther with Iron, or with the teeth of a Crocodile. As for their Religion, the dimensions of it is easily taken up, yet if they have but little of it, they pretend to as little; they have some notions of a Deity; yea, they are beyond many other Nations in America, for they serve not the Devil as
they do. They commonly feed upon fruits, such as Bananas, Ratioves, Ananas, Potatos, Cozave, and a certain kind of Fish, which they kill with their Darts. They are more curious in their drink, being ve∣ry expert in making some very pleasant Liquors; of which, that which is made of the Platanos is the best; they have another drink called Achioc, which is their com∣monest drink; it hath a most pleasant taste, and is very nourishing. This people are very kind to one ano∣ther, but the way of expressing their kindness, I confess, is peculiar to them∣selves; for when one of them invites his friends to his Hut, when he expects their coming, he anoints his face with a kind of black Tincture, which makes him look as like a Devil as a Man; in this pickle he taketh his Arms, and goeth about two hundred paces from the Cottage, where he attendeth the coming of his Guests; as soon as they draw nigh unto him, he falls upon his face to the ground, where he lieth as dead until the invited friends set him upon his feet; then they go all together into the Cottage, where they perform the same Ceremony, falling upon their faces; but he taketh them by the hand, and lifting them up one by one, cau∣seth them to sit down in order; then goes
the Platanos drink about in whole Bouls, and after it their other Liquors; then they fall to singing and dancing, Men and Women together, till the Feast be ended. The constitution of their Conscience in point of Marriage, is very good, for they marry no Maid without the consent of her Father, the Lover being by him first ex∣amined about several points of Husbandry; if he answer satisfyingly, her Father calleth the Daughter, and causeth her to bring a Calabash full of the foresaid Liquor, whereof he himself drinketh first, then the young Man, and lastly the Maid, and without more ado the Marriage is made; they have indeed an odd way of expressing their love to these Maids; for sometimes to give a proof of their affe∣ction, they pierce and wound their Geni∣tals with the point of a Dart, which how they relish this testimony of love I know not; but I doubt much if our Women in England would thank their Sweethearts for such tokens. As to their lying in, they have no superstitious observing of months, but as soon as the Woman is de∣livered, she goes straight to the next Ri∣ver or Fountain, where she washeth the new born creature from head to foot, then snatching it up, she brings it home, and goes about her labour as before.
When the Husband dieth, here the Wife takes care to bury him with all his Azagayas or Weapons and Jewels which he wore at his Ears, being also obliged to come every day for a whole year to his Grave with Meat and drink. Some write that this custom of carrying meat to the Graves, is observed in all the Caribbees Islands, which they think the Devil comes and carries away; but the truth is, the Pirates most commonly save him a labour in this, as in many other things laid in his name; for knowing that the best of their Fruits, as also of their Liquors, are brought hither; they wait their opportunity, and take all away, and let the poor dead man provide for himself or fast. The Widow having thus compleated her year, she openeth the Grave, & taketh out her Husbands bones, which she care∣fully washeth, drying them in the Sun; this being done, she puts them all in a Satchel, this Satchel for a whole year she is bound to carry all day upon her back, and at night to lie upon it: When this is performed, she hangeth up the Satchel at the door of her house till she marry the second time.
CHAP. II. They arrive at the Island de los Pinos. THE Pirates having provided them∣selves as well as they could at Gratias a Dios, they loosed thence, steering their course towards the Island de los Pinos, where they arrived in fifteen days; finding the Vessel unfit to sail further by reason of its leakiness, they were forc'd here to refit her, which one party undertook to do, while the other was imployed in fishing, in which they had admirable success, so that in seven hours time they took as much Fish as would for once feed a thousand men. They had also in their company some Indians, who were very dextrous at hunting, they provided abundance of wild Cows. This plenty made the Pirates be∣gin to forget their former misery, calling one another Brother, which kindly expres∣sions their former misery had brought to disuse among them. Here they lived very securely, appre∣hending no danger from any creature but the Crocodile, of which there are vast numbers upon this Island; these creatures
when hungry, will assault any man, which one of the Pirates by experience found a truth. This Pirate going into the Wood, having a Negro with him, they lighted upon a place where a Crocodile lay hid, the furious monster with incredible fierce∣ness assaults the Pirate, and fastning his teeth in his legg, threw him to the ground; the Pirate finding himself put to it, and being a strong fellow, recovers his feet; then the combate begins afresh, at length he draws a Knife out of his pocket, with which, with great difficulty, he over∣came the Crocodile, and killed it; he him∣self, what with weariness and loss of blood together, lay also as dead upon the place; the Negro, who fled when the Crocodile appeared, returns now to see what became of him, and finding him in this condition, took him upon his back, and carried him to the Sea side, where his Fellow-Pirates received him into a Ca∣now, and conveyed him on Ship-board. This mischance scarr'd them so as none of them durst look near the Wood without a Guard, yet afterwards being desirous to revenge their fellows misfortune, went in whole Troops to search for Crocodiles in the Woods; but they needed not go so far, for usually they would come in the night-time to the very side of their Ship,
and seem as if they would climb up their Ladder, one of which they seized upon a night, with an Iron hook, who instead of seeking to the bottom, began to mount the Ladder of the Ship, which put the Pi∣rates in a terrible fright, but at length, (with some others of their Instruments) they overcame it. Having refitted themselves with all ne∣cessaries at de los Pinos, they set sail for Ja∣maica, where they found their old Leader in mischief C. M. without so much as one of his old Train with him; he had now a new project in his head of going to the Isle of St. Katherine, to fortifie it, and to make it a common receptacle of Pirates of all sorts, intending to Reign as sole Prince over them. But as he that reckons before his Host, reckons sometimes twice, so it fell out with him; for while he was using all means to persuade people to transport themselves thither, a Man of War from England ar∣rived at Jamaica, who brought Orders from His Majesty to the Governour to ap∣pear at the Court of England there to an∣swer to such Articles as were presented by the Spanish Ambassador against him, for maintaining of Pirates in those parts, to the great loss of the King of Spains Sub∣jects.
This man of War also brought over a new Governour to Jamaica, who when he entred upon his Office, sent about to all the Coasts of Jamaica, acquainting them, that his Majesty intended to main∣tain an entire Friendship with the Catho∣lick King, willing all his Subjects in Ja∣maica so to carry towards the said Kings Subjects upon all occasions, as there may be no ground upon their side of any mis∣understanding betwixt the two Crowns, also that he had strict orders not to permit any Pirate whatsoever to set forth from Jamaica, to commit any hostility or de∣predation upon the Spaniards. This was heavy tidings to the Pirates, for now in appearance their Trade will decay; some of them had intelligence of it while at Sea, which frighted them so, as they durst not look near Jamaica, how∣ever the Boys resolved to make their lives as comfortable as they could, knowing that hanging was the worst that could be expected, and as good (thought they) to be hanged for 20 faults, as for 19; there∣fore they resolved to be doing upon all hazard, so they ransackt a considerable Town in the Isle of Cuba, committing all kind of hostility upon that place, and using the Inhabitants very cruelly, but they knew not how near they were to the scores
end, for shortly after by the vigilancy of the present Governor, the most conside∣rable among them were apprehended and hang'd; the rest not willing to undergo so severe a censure, if they could help it, re∣tired to the Isle of Tortuga, where they joyned with some Frenchmen of the same Profession, with whom they hitherto re∣main, resolving if they can to avoid the English halters at Jamaica, till they have wrought some better for them. CHAP. III. The French are Shipwrackt nigh the Isles of Guadinillas. THE Pirates being arriv'd at Tortuga, are presently employed by the Go∣vernor, for about this time, anno 1673. the war being hot in Europe, betwixt the French and the Dutch, the French in A∣merica resolved to possess themselves of the Isles belonging to the States there, whereupon, getting to the number of 500 Pirates, they put them all into one Ship,
under the Governour of Tortuga, inten∣ding first to take the Isle of Curasao, then to go on as they were encouraged; but this Ship loosing from Tortuga, with a resolu∣tion to join with the rest of the Fleet, was surprized with a violent storm, which in∣creased so upon her, that at length she ran full upon a rock, which split her all to pieces, yet being near land, all the men were saved. They were no sooner come on shore but they were discovered by the Spaniards of Puerto Vico (for so was the place called) who taking them to be French Pirates, ga∣thered together, and marched out against them, yet though finding them without Arms, and crying for Quarters, they ran upon them with unmanly fury, and kill'd most of them, the rest they took, & carried awaywith them; by the way they ask'd them where their Captain was, they answered, that he was drowned in the Shipwrack; though yet he was one of the Prisoners, but he behav'd himself so, that the Spani∣ards took him to be a meer fool, for he kept himself so close to all the actions of a fool, that they did not much notice him, but permitted him to go loose among the rest of the Prisoners, together with a French Surgeon, who had formerly obli∣ged some of the Spaniards, and obtained the same favour.
Monsieur Ogeron (for so was he call'd) having an opportunity, told the Surgeon he resolved to attempt an escape, if possi∣ble; after consultation, they both (getting out by night) fled into a Wood, inten∣ding there to make up something that might serve instead of a boat to transport them, but without any instrument in the world fit for that purpose, except an Hatchet; however they began to cut down such Trees as they thought fit for their purpose; but while they are thus busied at their work, one of them at a great distance discovers a Canow upon the water, steering directly towards them, this frighted them somewhat at first, not knowing but they were Spaniards coming to take them, which made them retire a little, but at last they perceived them to be but two men, who seem'd to be Fish∣ers, whereupon they resolved upon all hazards to seize the Canow, which with small difficulty they did, one of them coming out a little way from the Sea side for fresh water, they knockt down with the Hatchet, the other thinking to escape, made toward the Canow, but was inter∣cepted, and served with the same sauce; then having taken in a little fresh water, they set Sail for Samana, an Island belong∣ing to Hispaniola, where they found some of their own Countrymen.
From thence Monsieur Ogeron went for Tortuga, whereof he was Governor, and in a short time gather'd a considerable Fleet, being resolved either to deliver his fellow-prisoners out of the hands of the cruel Spaniards, or to die in the quarrel, having imbarked his men, he made an ele∣gant speech, exhorting them to acquit themselves valiantly in so honourable a de∣sign, using many forcible arguments to that effect; they upon the other hand promised to stand by him to the last drop of their blood; thus they set Sail for Puerto Vico, where they soon arrived. Being come within sight of the land, they lowr'd their main Sails, that the Spaniards might not discover them at a distance; but they having previous intel∣ligence of their coming, posted several Troops of Horse along the Coast; which Ogeron perceiving, caused to shoot off some of his great Guns, which forc'd them to retire into the Woods, leaving several Companies of Foot in Ambush among the Trees. The French thinking the Fields now clear, began to land very securely, dread∣ing no harm, but they were scarcely all on shore, when falling into this Ambuscade, the Spaniards most furiously assaulted them, cutting them down in great num∣bers,
so that with much ado they escaped into their Ships, leaving the most and best part of their men dead upon the place. The Spaniards having made an end of kil∣ling such as they found half dead already, cut off several of their Legs and Arms, to present them to the Prisoners, for whose sake this enterprize was undertaken. This misfortune added to the affliction of the poor Prisoners, for the Spaniards use them now with more cruelty then ever. Which Jacob Binks, the Dutch Governor in America (being there with some men of War to buy Provision) pitied, insomuch, that at his departure he privately convey∣ed away six of them, which inraged the Spaniards so against the rest, that they presently sent them to the chief City of the Island, there to work their daily tasks with the slaves; from thence they tran∣sported them to Havana, where they were imployed in the same manner as formerly, causing them to work all day, and at night they shut them up in close Prisons, fearing they might escape, as they had good reason to do, if they knew how, afterwards they transported them in small numbers into Spain, where having procured their ransom, they were set at liberty, and shortly after had the fortune to meet all in France.
But their own Country yielding them no such pleasure, especially in the way of their Trade, as America did, they all re∣solve to lay hold upon the first opportuni∣ty of returning thither again; for this end they assisted one another the best way they could, so that in a short time most of the Pirates open'd shop again at Tortuga, their common place of Rendevouze. Having once again nested themselves at Tortuga, they resolve, if possible; to revenge their former misfortunes upon the Spaniards; whereupon they rigged out a new Fleet under the command of one Le sieur Maintenon, a Frenchman; and set Sail for the Island de la Trinidad, which they Attacked, and in short time became Masters of it; not long after they sackt it, putting it to the ransom of 10000 pieces of Eight.
CHAP. IV. The Isle of Cayana taken by the Dutch, and re-taken by the French. HAving hitherto traced the Buccaniers in their various excursions, and ram∣bles, it may not be amiss now a little to view some transactions that past betwixt the French and the Dutch about this time in America. In the year 1676, the States General sent their Vice-Admiral, Jacob Binks to the Island of Cayana, to re-take it from the French, who had wrongfully possest it; he set out upon the 16th of March, with seven Men of War, one Fire-ship, and five Galliots, he arrived at Cayana the fourth of May following, having come to the Port, he immediately landed 900 men, who approaching the Castle, summon'd it to be rendred upon no other terms then discretion, the Governor answer'd he in∣tended no such thing, but intended to de∣fend it to the utmost; whereupon Binks presently ordered his Troops to attack it
on both sides; the Assault was very furi∣ous, both Parties acting most gallantly, the Dutch most couragiously advancing, the French with no less courage defending, till at length being but few in number, and overcome with the multitude of their Enemies, they were forc'd to surrender upon the terms that were first offer'd. In the Castle were found 37 pieces of Can∣non, with some Ammunition and Provisi∣on. The Governor called Monsieur Lesi, together with two Priests, were sent into Holland. 14 men were all that Binks lost in the Assault. The French King understanding this disaster, sent the Count de Estres with a Squadron of Men of War to re-take the Island, who having Sailed as far as the River Capero Vaco, was by a Ship of Nantes (who had been lately upon the place) informed of the present state of the Island, whereby he was enabled to take his own measures as he thought fit; arriving at the Island within three Leagues of the Castle, he landed 800 men, divi∣ding them in two parties, of whom he placed one under the Conduct of the Count de Blinac, the other under Monsieur de Elfanther, leaving Monsieur Gabaret with several Troops on board, with di∣rection to Sail towards the Castle, the
rest marching thither by land. Coming near the place, the Count de Estres sent a Messenger to the Castle, de∣manding in the name of his Master it should be surrendred into his hands, but they fromwithin answered, that they would not render an inch of ground within the Castle, but at the expence of their dea∣rest blood: whereupon the French Assaul∣ted the Castle next night in seven places at once; here was begun a very stout Combat on both sides, the Victory for a long time hovering over their heads, till at last she favouring the French, forced the Dutch to render, though not without much blood on both sides. Within the Castle were found 38 persons dead, and many others wounded, yet the loss of the French was far greater, though they thought fit to conceal it. CHAP. V. The French Fight with the Dutch at Tobago, but are beaten. THis Island of Tobago was first inhabi∣ted by the Prince of Curland, who
establish'd a Colony there, who a while af∣ter, for want of necessary provisions, deser∣ted it, upon which it fell into the hands of some Zealanders, who by the command of the States General, fortified it for their use, having built a stately Castle thereon for its further strength. But now the French having taken Cayana, & ordered their business there, their next project is to take Tobago, whereupon De Estres setting sail from Cayana towards Cardinia, he was informed that Heer Binks with his whole Fleet lay at Tobago; this no ways retarded, but rather hastened his motion thither, where having the ad∣vantage of Wind and Weather, he soon arrived; Binks being inform'd of his ar∣rival, sent his Land-Forces, with some of his Mariners on shoar, to put all things in order for a Siege. Within two days the French came to an Anchor hard by the Island, where they im∣mediately landed all their men, which when Binks perceived, he gave present Or∣ders to demolish all the Houses about the Castle, that the French might not take the advantage of sheltering themselves in them. The next day Monsieur de Estres sent a Drum to demand the Hollanders to surrender the Fort, which was scornfully denied.
The French seeing the Dutch so resolute, and fearing that an assault would tend no∣thing to their honour or advantage, kept close within their Trenches, till the third of March. This fatal day to the French being come, they hoised up their Sails, and with their whole Fleet engaged the Dutch in the Bay, where was begun a most bloody Combate; mean while the French who were on shoar advanced reso∣lutely towards the Castle, and began to storm it very briskly; but the Dutch from within handled them so warmly, as they were forc'd after three several Attacks to retire with the loss of 150 men, and 200 wounded, which with great difficulty they carried off. While the French and Dutch thus en∣tertain one another by Land, the two Fleets continue their Combate most de∣sperately, sinking and killing one another. Thus they continued from morning till night; when Monsieur de Estres lest both the Bay and the Victory to the Hollanders; in this Engagement he lost several brave Ships, among the rest the Ship wherein he himself was, being mounted with twenty seven Guns of a huge bigness, besides se∣veral other smaller ones, was unfortunate∣ly sunk.
CHAP. VI. The French goeth the second time to Tobago, and taketh it. THE shame which Monsieur de Estres conceived by this Defeat (as also finding himself unable at this time to re∣cover his reputation) made him depart thence upon the 18th of March, steering his course homeward, where he arrived upon the 21th of June thereafter. But the French King understanding this shameful foil, commands the same Mon∣sieur de Estres once more to undertake the Enterprize, for repairing his own and his Countrys credit, whereupon he ordered Eight great Men of War to be rigged out in all haste, with Eight other smaller Ships, wherewith de Estres setting Sail upon the third of October, steered his course di∣rectly towards Tobago, where he arrived the seventh of December following, and im∣mediately landed 1500 men, with which they approach within Eight furlongs of the Castle. De Estres went himself in person to
view the Castle, and sent a Messenger to Heer Binks, demanding it to be surrendred to his Master the King of France, which he gallantly refused to do upon any terms; whereupon the next day the French began to advance toward the Castle; the Dutch firing resolutely at them from within, the French began the assault by casting of Fire-balls into the Castle, one of which happened to fall in the way that led to the Magazine-house, where there was a great deal of Powder scattered through the negligence of those that had the care of it, which immediately took fire, and ran as far as the Magazine, where all blew up together by this fatal blow. Binks him∣self, and all his Officers, except one Cap∣tain, perished. The French seeing so fair an opportunity put in their hands, which otherwise they were not like to do, pos∣sest themselves of the Castle, where they found 300 men alive, whom they after∣ward transported to France. Thus meer chance put the Victory in their hands, which if it had not so hap∣pened, they had probably succeeded as badly at this time as formerly.
An Appendix, Containing a Description of Tortuga and Hispaniola, the Residence of the Pirates. HAving already given you some Ac∣count of the Buccaniers, I come now to say somewhat (by way of description) of the places of their abode; for having said so much of the Birds, I hope I shall be excused, if I say something of the Nest al∣so. The common receptacle of these Squires being, Tortuga and Hispaniola, I shall briefly describe them in their order. 1. Tortuga, that spot of Neptune, unto which these Water-padders the Bucca∣niers has been beholden for shelter in their extremity, is situated nigh the Continent of Hispaniola, upon the North side there∣of, in the Latitude of twenty degrees thirty nine minutes; its circumference is sixty eagues, called Tortuga, because in shape it
somewhat resembleth a Sea Tortoise. This Country is full of Rocks, yet abounding with lofty Trees, which grow upon the hardest of these Rocks, twisting their roots about them, not unlike the branching of Ivy against our Walls. The Northern parts are therefore totally uninhabited; the South side which is inhabited, hath only one Port, which hath two several Entries affor∣ding passage unto Ships of seventy Guns. The habitable parts of it are divided into four quarters, the first called the Low Country, because it is nearest the Sea; its chief and only City is Cayona, where the richest Planters of the Island have their abode; the second is called the Middle Plantation, found good only for the culture of Tobacco; the third is called Ringot, not so good as any of the former; the fourth called the Mountain where the first Plantations were made. Its Trees might be very useful, being exceeding tall and straight, especially the yellow Saunder, which the Inhabitants call Lignum de Chandel; here groweth also LignumGuaiacum, to whose vertue many do owe the present use of their Noses; Phy∣sicians extracting from it a Soveraign An∣tidote against the Pox; also Gummi Elemi, and China Roots; it also aboundeth with Aloes, with many other medicinal Herbs.
Its ordinary fruits are Magniot, Potato's, Acajow-Apples, with many others, which for brevity I omit: Here also grow those Trees called Palmitos, from which the In∣habitants draw a certain Juice, which ser∣veth them for Wine. Here also is to be found a huge multi∣tude of wild Boars inhabiting the Rocks and Mountains, which the Inhabitants are forbidden to hunt with Dogs, being re∣served for cases of necessity, as sudden Invasion, or the like, that they may serve them for food if they be put to flee to the Mountains. There resorteth hither huge flocks of wild Pigeons at a certain season of the year, during which season the Inhabi∣tants feed very plentifully upon them; but, which is observable, when this sea∣son is over, they become so lean and bit∣ter, that none can taste them. Upon the Sea Coasts are to be found multitudes of Sea and Land Crabs, with which the Inhabi∣tants feed their Servants and Slaves, but eat not of them themselves, but in cases of necessity, because they are hurtful to the sight. This Island being first discovered by the Spaniards, and possest, was afterward ta∣ken from them by the French, and retaken again by the Spaniards. This Contest
lasted a considerable time, till at length the French prevail'd, and rooted out the Spaniards, making themselves sole Ma∣sters of the Island, which they retain to this day. A Description of Hispaniola. THis famous Island made known at first to the World by the means of Christopher Columbus, in the year 1492. who was sent for that end by the then King of Spain, is situate in the Latitude of seven∣teen degrees and a half; its circumference is three hundred leagues, its length a hun∣dred and fifty, its breadth in some places sixty, in others but thirty; it was called Hispaniola first by Columbus, but now is frequently called St. Domingo, from the chief City of it so called. The City of St. Domingo being chief, is as it were the Store-house of all the other Cities, Towns and Villages, which from hence provide themselves with all their necessaries; it entertaineth no Commerce with the Merchants of any other Nation than its own the Spaniards; the greatest part of its Inhabitants being also rich and substantial Merchants.
The next is St. Tiago, an open place, without either Walls or Castle; most of the Inhabitants are Hunters and Planters, the adjacent Fields being very proper for that use. There is also another City cal∣led Nuestra Sennora de Alta Gratia, where there is the best Chocolate that that Coun∣try affordeth. Westward of St. Domingo is a great Vil∣lage called El Pueblo de-aso, the Inhabitants thereof drive a great Trade with another called San Juan de Goave, which is envi∣roned with Gardens, Woods and Mea∣dows; its Inhabitants are mostly Hunters and Butchers; they are a Mungrel sort of people, Mulatos Misticos and Alcatraces; the first are such as are begotten betwixt White people and Negroes; the second be∣tween Whites and Indians; and the third between Negroes and Indians. These are the chief places possest by the Spaniards in this Island, the rest being all possest by the French. There belongs to it Eighteen Ports for Shipping, four of which are short of none in England; the Country about the Coast is water'd with many excellent Rivers and Brooks, which makes it exceeding pleasant.
Of the Fruits and Trees of Hispaniola. AMong the varieties of Fruits that this Island yieldeth, its Oranges and Le∣mons, both sweet and sowre, are most pleasant. It's true, the Lemons exceeds not an Hens Egg, but this is abundantly compensate by their deliciousness. There are abundance of Palm Trees found here, some of which are two hun∣dred foot high, having no branches but what are upon the very top; every month one of these branches falleth off, and at the same time another sprouteth out; the leaves of this Tree are seven or eight foot in length, and three or four in breadth, with which they cover their houses instead of Tyles: Also they make Buckets of them to carry their Water in. The body of the Tree is so big, that two men can scarcely grasp it in the middle; yet the heart of it is so soft, that if two or three Inches be pared off its outside, the rest may be sliced like new Cheese. The Inhabitants have a way of extracting an excellent Drink from this Tree; for wounding it a little above the Root, they from thence distill a sort of Liquor which
in short time by fermentation becometh as strong as the richest Wine. There are also in this Island beside this Palm, four other sorts, the Latanier Palm, the Prickle Palm, the Rosarick Palm, and the Wine Palm; the Latanier Palm is almost like the Wine Palm, only it is shorter, its leaves are somewhat like Womens Fans, the body is full of prickles, of the length of half a foot; the Prickle Palm is so full of prickles, from the Root to the top, that there is scarce a fingers-breadth free, with which some of the Indians use to torment their prisoners: First, tying them to a Tree, and then taking these thorns, they put them into little pellets of Cotton, which they dip in Oil, and thus stick them in the poor prisoners sides, as thick as the bristles of an Hedge-Hog, then they set them on fire, which if he patiently endure, he is accounted valiant, otherwise not. The Rosarick Palm has this name both from the French and Spa∣niards, because its seed is very fit to make Rosaries or Beads to say Prayers upon. I will not here ask for a Quo Warranto of this practice, but I am sure, if there be any vertue in these Berries, the wild Boars are devouter than any of them, whose con∣stant food they are. This Tree is exceed∣ing tall and straight. The Wine Palm
groweth in Rocky Mountains, and is of an extraordinary shape; for from the Root, to the half of its proportion, it exceeds not three Inches about; but about the two thirds of its height, it's as big as an ordinary Bucket, where it is full of a Juicy Liquor, which being squeezed out, and fermented, becomes a very good Wine; they make Vessels of its leaves, not only to purifie the said Liquor, but al∣so to drink it. It also produceth certain Apricock Trees, whose fruit resembles our Melons, differing nothing in taste from our Apri∣cocks; their stones are bigger than a Hens Egg; the wild Boars are exceeding∣ly fattened with this fruit. The Genips, a Tree, is very common here; it is most like to our Cherry-tree; its fruit is of the bigness of two fists, of an Ash colour; before it ripens, it has a Juice as black as Ink, and fit to be written with, but disappears within nine days; leaving the Paper as white as before. Here also is the Tree called Caremites, very like our Pear-trees, whose fruits are not unlike our Damascene Plums, but black on the inside; its kernels are but three in number at most, of the big∣ness of a Lupine; upon this fruit also the wild Boars feed much.
I must not omit the prodigious number of stately Cedars that grows here, which are much used in building Ships and Ca∣nows, but because the Reader may not know what kind of a thing a Canow is, though often spoken of in this Book, I shall there∣fore in few words describe it: A Canow is like a little Wherry-boat made of one only Tree, without the help of any other Instrument but fire only, which they set to the root of the Tree, governing it with such industry, as nothing is burnt but that that they would have, thus by this only Instrument they put it into such a form, as makes it capable to Sail three or fourscore Leagues without hazard. Here is also Brazile wood in great quan∣tities, it groweth along the Sea-Coasts, especially in two places, Jackmel and Ja∣quina, two commodious Ports of the Island, also the Tree called Mancanilla, or the Dwarf Apple, is found here, whose Fruit is of a most venemous quality, for being eaten by any Person, immediately he changeth colour, and is taken with such a thirst, that no water can quench, and within a little dies perfectly mad. Yea, if a Fish eat of it (as sometimes they do) it is poisonous. There is another sort of Tree growing by the Rivers side, which beareth a cer∣tain
kind of Fruit, not unlike our Bullice, also another Tree called Abelcoses, whose Fruit is of the like colour, but of the big∣ness of Melons, the kernels being as big as Eggs; this Fruit some French of the poo∣rest fort serve themselves with instead of bread. Of the Insects of Hispaniola. AND as to their Flies I shall only speak of three sorts of them that are very troublesome Neighbours, especially to Strangers. The first are call'd Mosquittoes, or Gnatts, they are as big as our common Horse-flies, when they light upon a mans body, they stick there till they have suckt so much of his blood, that they cannot flie, which causeth People to make use of the branches of Trees to fan them away. The second sort is no bigger than a grain of sand, yet exceeding troublesome, and that because of their smallness they can penetrate the finest linnen, as also they make no humming noise as the other kinds do, whereby they are less avoidable. The third sort are about the bigness of our Fleas, and of the same colour, they sting not at all, but yet bite so bitterly, as to
cause little Ulcers upon the flesh, espe∣cially the face, which maketh it swell, so as to render it fearful to look on, they vex people only by day, for when the Sun sets, they go to their rest, and are not heard of till next morning. They have here another Insect, call'd by the Spaniards, Cochinillas, in English, Glow-worms, much like ours in England, only they are somewhat bigger and lon∣ger, but they have one quality which dif∣ferenceth them from all other living Ani∣mals, for they have two little specks in their fore-heads, which by night give so much light, that four or five of them to∣gether, will make one at a distance think it is a burning Candle, yea, they shine so bright, that if one has but three of them by him in the darkest night, he may read any print, though never so small. Here also they are much molested with Grillones or Crickets of an extraordina∣ry bigness in respect of ours, if any Per∣son come near them, they make so much noise, that they are ready to burst. There is likewise a multitude of Rep∣tiles, such as Serpents, Snakes, and the like, but bound up by the Providence of the Almighty, from being hurtful to any other Creatures but Fowls, and the like; yea, they keep them in their Houses for
destroying of Rats and Mice, for they cunningly counterfeit the chirps of these Creatures, and thereby catch them. They have also another kind of Reptile, called Cazadores de Mostas, or Fly-catchers, as harmless as the former, for they live upon no other food then Flies, and their con∣tinual labour is to consume these vexati∣ous Creatures. They have also a multitude of land Tortoises, upon which the Inhabi∣tants commonly feed, and are by them accounted very good food. But there are found in this Island a sort of Spider which is most hideous to be∣hold, they are as big as an Egg, and have feet as long as a Sea-Crab, full of hair, ha∣ving also four black Teeth like a Rabbet, with which they commonly bite very sharply, yet their bites are not venemous. There are also some Scorpions to be found here; yet by experience are found to be no ways venemous, for although they do bite, yet the wounds they make are as easily cured as those that the most innocent instrument makes. But of all the Insects here found, the most famous is the Cayman, which is a kind of a Crocodile, of these some are most terrible to behold, because of their bigness, some of them being threescore and ten foot in length, and twelve in breadth; their cunning also wherewith
they purchase their food, is very remarka∣ble, for placing themselves at the sides of Rivers, especially where their Cattel comes to drink, there they lie like an old Tree without any motion in the least, floating upon the water till they see their Prey, then they with extraordinary fierceness assault it, whether it be Cow or Horse, and dragging it into the water, stifle it; but what is yet more strange, before they go upon such expeditions, they swallow about two hundred weight of Stones, there∣by to make themselves the more heavy for stifling of the Prey, having thus secur'd their Prey, they keep it five or six days under water, as not loving to eat it till it be half rotten, in like manner, if they can lay hold on any hides of Beasts in the field, they drag them to the water, and having kept them there, till they putrify somewhat, then they eat them. One passage worth the noticing, of the sagacity of this Creature, I shall relate, a Spaniard being one day by the River side washing his Net, he no sooner began his work, but a Cayman takes hold of the Tent, pulling it with great violence to the bottom; the man not willing to lose his Tent, if he could help it, pull'd with all his strength; the Cayman seeing this, with incredible fury vaulted out of the
water, and taking hold of the Spaniard, pull'd him into the water, endeavouring with his weight to stifle him, but he chanced to have a knife in his hand, where∣with he scrap't his Tent, with this knife, giving the Cayman several wounds in the belly, at length kill'd him. Their manner of procreating is this, they find out some sandy bank exposed to the Sun, where they lay their Eggs, & cover them with their feet, & so leave them to be hatch'd with the heat of the Sun; when the young ones are out of the shell, if the Mother be near at hand, they run to her, sporting themselves with her, like as Pigs do with their Dame; in this sort of sport they will oftentimes run in and out of their Mothers belly, as Rabbets into their holes, and if any chance to come by while they are thus at their pastime, and throw a stone at them to fright them, then are they sure to make her belly their Sanctuary. Of the Quadruped Animals that are to be found in Hispaniola. THey are much molested with wild Dogs, who are great Enemies to their Cattel, destroying them in great
numbers; they are seen in Woods, and Fields to the number of three or fourscore together, they are so fierce, that they dare assault a whole herd of wild Bores, not leaving them, till they have kill'd two or three of them; he that draws the first blood in this Action, has so much respect put upon him by the rest, that when the Bore is kill'd, all of them lie down upon the grass until he has eaten as much as he can devour, then they fall in for their share, and eat up what remains. The Governor of Tortuga, understan∣ding that these wild Dogs destroyed too many of the Bores, caused great quanti∣ties of Poison to be brought from France to destroy them; he caused also some old Horses to be kill'd, and having with this Poison invenomed the flesh, laid them in the Fields and Woods where the Dogs used to resort, this he did for the space of half a year, in which time there was an incredible number of them destroyed, yet not so many as to make their number seem less, for after all this Industry, they did not seem fewer by one then they were before. These Dogs were brought to this Island at first by the Spaniards, for they finding the Indians to make the Woods their shel∣ter whenever they were pursued, resolved if possible, they should not be secure
there; whereupon they sent over to Spain for Dogs, which were sent to them in vast numbers, with them they would search for, and find out an Indian in the most solitary and intricate thickets, whereby they forc'd them to leave their old Sanctuaries, and to submit to a most cruel Sword; yea, so cruel were these Spaniards to them, that they conceived such horrour of them and their proceedings, that to avoid them, they betook themselves to Caves and Dens, where they died in great numbers; the Spaniards now finding the Indians al∣most quite rooted out of the Land, be∣thought themselves how to dispatch their Dogs also, but this they found not so easy a task, for the Mastives betook themselves to the Woods and Fields, there to hunt for their Prey, till at length they became unacquainted with their former Masters, and so at length quite wild. In this Island also are wild Horses run∣ning up and down the Island in whole herds; they are very ill shap'd, being of low stature, short bodied, long neck'd. The Hunters catch them only for the ad∣vantage they make by their skins, but their wild Cows are much diminished by the constant practice of the Hunters, yet they make considerable profit of them until this day.
Of the Birds that are here found. THE Parrot is a Bird that is known in most places, but owes its original to these parts of the World only, especially in Hispaniola there are very many of them; they build their Nests in holes of Palmito∣trees, which holes, another small Bird cal∣led Carpintero, with great industry does make, God and Nature having so pro∣vided for the Parrot, as not capable of it self to excavate any Wood, by reason of the bluntness and crookedness of its Bill. Pigeons of all sorts are also to be found here, where the Inhabitants observe the same season of eating them with those of Tortuga; little or no difference being found betwixt the Pigeons of the two Islands, only these of Hispaniola are some∣what bigger, and fatter than the other. They have another small Bird here which they call Cabrerus, or Goat-keeper, who feeds for the most part upon Crabbs of the Sea; in this Bird are found seven di∣stinct Gall Bladders, which makes their
flesh so bitter and unsavoury, that none can taste it. Crows and Ravens are to be found here in great numbers, but they make such a hideous noise through the whole Island, that they are more troublesom than use∣ful to the Inhabitants; their ordinary food are wild Doggs, which the Bucca∣niers kill with their Guns, wherewith they are so well acquainted, that they no sooner hear the report of a Fowling-piece in any part of the Island, but they gather from all quarters to that place, expecting there somewhat to feed upon. The Manner of Planting Tobacco. THE Planters began to cultivate this Island in the year 1598. that which they planted first was Tobacco, which prospered admirably, and was also very good, although at first they could plant but little, by reason of the small circum∣ference of the Island, yet were they so much encouraged by their success, that they began to seek out in other places Land fit for this purpose; the first Land they made choice of for this end, was
Call de Sac, lying upon the South of this Island, where by degrees they brought it to such perfection, that now there are above two thousand Planters in those Fields. The manner of planting this (so much us'd) Herb, is, they make certain Beds of Earth in the Fields, about twelve foot square, wherein they sow their Tobacco∣seed, covering it over with Palmito leaves, to defend it from the scorching heat of the Sun; when it grows to any bigness, they transplant it, setting every Plant at the distance of three foot from each other, observing always the fittest season for doing of it, which is from Ja∣nuary till the beginning of April, then they very carefully weed it; for the least Root of any other Herb will stifle it: When it is grown to the height of one foot, they lop off the tops, thereby to hinder the stalks from shooting too much, and that the Plant may receive greater strength from the Earth: When it is fully ripe, they prepare apartments in their houses, which they fill with branches of Trees and Rafters, and upon them they lay their Tobacco to dry; when it is well dryed, they strip off the leaves from the stalks, and make it up into Rolls, having people imployed in this work, and no other, to
whom they give a tenth part for their la∣bour. I might here have given an account of the manner of making Sugar, Indigo and Gimbes; but since these are none of the Commodities of this place, I purposely omit them. FINIS.
