E469B 15623241 104235
An ELEGY upon the Death of that able and faithful Servant of God, Mr. Samuel Sowthen, who died the 2d of July, 1665. COme, pensive Pen, thy mourning drops distil, And let thy sable Tears this Paper fill: Yea, shouldst thou not stay here when this is done, But still proceed to wet more cheeks than one, Thou wouldst companions have; some are opprest With heaviness; sorrow hath fill'd each breast, And streaming Tears (the Indices of Grief) Flow from their Eyes, to give their hearts relief: For SAMUEL SOWTHEN's dead, a man so rare, That few are left that with him might compare. He was that Son of which the Wiseman spake, Pro. 23. 24, 25. From whom his Parents did much Honour take. He was a Husband, and a Parent dear, And to his Brethren bore a love sincere. A Master gentle; his Vicinity Was peaceful, doing no man injury: And to his Friends a faithful Friend indeed, Ready and helpful in a time of need. Courteous and affable, sober, and wise; Safe was his Counsel, worthy his Advise. All his Acquaintance sensibly perceive, That by his absence they a loss receive. So full of Goodness was his Spirit fill'd, That to his Person it did lustre yeeld. As God of this world's Good had giv'n him store, So was he bountiful unto the Poor: Of what God did bestow on him, a part He did bestow on them with chearful heart. But though these things declare a vertuous mind, Yet greater still than these remain behind. For his sublim'st, his highest commendation Ariseth from his careful observation Of those Commands, those Laws, those Statutes all, Which God hath made, and charged great and small To keep inviolable; those kept he Placed before his eyes continuallie: And those he made the Standard of his wayes, Directors of his Actions all his dayes. Those choice Perambulations, which did please His heav'nly mind, were compast-in with these: Wherein he found Paths lovely, large and sweet; Light to his wayes, a Lanthorn to his feet. The Goodness, Mercy, Bounty, and rich Grace Which he found was in God, caus'd him to place His trust in Him alone; his care he cast On Him also, whose care his own surpast. By which means freed from such Anxieties, Disquietness of mind, Perplexities, Which commonly do hinder and annoy Men, when for God their hearts they should imploy. Being free (I say) from these obstructions noted, And from some others too, himself devoted To serve the Lord with all his pow'r and might, Observing what was pleasing in his sight: Whose Dictates and whose Will he would obey, And teach them too, though men in Pow'r said nay. For that which he had heard and seen of God, He could not chuse but spread the same abroad. By painful labour night and day he wrought, And spent himself, that others might be brought Into the Fold of Christ, and there continue Among the number of that blest Retinue; Who wait until he shall again descend In Clouds, as heretofore he did ascend; And that they might be free from spot or stain, Meet to be Kings with Christ, their head, to reign. Such zeal for God did in his breast reside, That when he saw his Laws were nullifi'd, And humane Ordinances plac'd in stead, It to his pious soul much trouble bred. To check which insolency (bold and daring Of God himself) our Sowthen was not sparing, As well by openly declaring, as He by his walking exemplary was: For he well knew that the Prerogative, In Sacred things to be Legislative, Was His alone, whose Wisdom, Goodness, Care, Exceedeth humane skill and judgment far: And for his Church, whate're was necessary. Appointed hath, from which they should not vary; Nor hearken to the voice of any stranger, That tells them in their liberty is danger; Or, that the Way of God in any thing Was ought too strict, or would an evil bring. Wherefore he mightily endeavoured That all might by God's Word alone be led: 'Cause those who do with humane Laws comply, Do in their works God's Soveraignty deny. And though from men he had but small regard, From God he knew he should have great reward. Some said he was too strict, because he could Not yeeld to that which many others would. Let these beware lest they too loose be found, Unstable in their wayes, at heart unsound. For Festus thought Paul did his wits outgo, Acts 26. 24, 25. When what he said was true and sober too. The Jews likewise suppos'd they spake no evil, When they affirm'd the Just-one had a Devil. John 8. 46, 52. Besides, God oftentimes complaining, said, MY Word, MY Law, MY Voice y' have not obey'd: Jer. 9. 13. & 11.8-10. But have, as though my Judgments you forgot, Been doing things Which I Commanded Not. Jer. 7. 31. Isa. 29. 13. Also, your fear to me is taught by Men. These Scripture-sayings, and more like to them, Do mount unto a pregnant Testimony, That no Command, no Law, no Ceremony Ought to be practised, but only those Which God himself did order or impose. And others should, as contrary to him, Be disregarded quite, though ne're so trim; As being a disloyalty to Heav'n, When any Honour unto them is giv'n. Else know I not what such-like sayings mean, Nor what 'tis to be spiritually unclean. But I shall leave these men to stand or fall To their own Lord, who them to count will call, And now again return to him, who is Upon his way unto eternal Bliss. His Spirit and Gift in Prayer did excel, And he accordingly improv'd it well: Ne're saying to this gift of God, Give way Whilst I sometimes by mens assistance pray. This was enough, and better far than Man Could help him to, and do the best he can. But now he's gone, God hath so judg'd it fit, And 'tis our duty humbly to submit. Yet cause the loss is great, his worthy Wife, Who tendred him full dearly in his life, Can scarce be comforted, cause she's alone, And her so much esteemed Friend is gone. His Parents and his Brethrens faces shew Their love to him, as his to them, was true. His Consort's Sister grieves too (for another) Saying he was like Father more than Brother. Also his Christian Friends are much affected, 'Cause such a Member is from them dissected. The World have lost him too, who was a debtor Unto them in such things as were far greater Than this life could afford: and know God useth To take from man that good which he abuseth. Let's all therefore redeem the time mispended, Repecting what shall be when life is ended. But in the midst of grief we comfort have, For he that now is laid into his Grave, With heart believ'd, with mouth he Christ confessed, And died in the Lord, and therefore blessed He is pronounced by the Holy Ghost, 'Cause now with toyl and labour he's not tost; And 'cause his works do follow him, Rev. 14 13. that he May live in Glory to eternitie. FINIS. 51.
