F838 12255770 57443
A Few Sober QUERIES Upon the late Proclamation, For enforcing the Laws against CON∣VENTICLES, &c. and the late VOTE of the House of Com∣mons, for Renewing the said Act for three years more. Proposed to the serious consideration of the Kings Majesty, with his two Houses of Parliament. By one that earnestly desires the Prosperity of ENGLAND. Psal. 2.10. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. London, Printed in the Year, 1668.
A Few Sober QUERIES upon the late PRO∣CLAMATION, For enforcing the Laws against CONVENTICLES, &c. Query I. WHether it was agreeable to the Wisdom of a Parliament, to Petition the Kings Majesty, to issue forth a Procla∣mation to discourage and punish a great part of his Ma∣jesties faithful Subjects, in such a day as this is, when Trading is very low, Money scarce, the Nation very Poor, its Im∣perial City lying in the Dust, and most of the People of the Nati∣on expecting Liberty of Conscience as a Soveraign Remedy for all these Diseases? Query II. Whether it had not been more pleasing to God, and to the generality of this Nation, more for the honour of the King and Parliament, more agreeable to right Policy, and more for the Good and Prosperity of the whole Nation, for the Parlia∣ment to have Petitioned the King, to make good His Declaration from Breda, and to grant his faithful Subjects Liberty to Worship God according to their Consciences? Query III. Whether it was agreeable to true Wisdom and Po∣licy, to pass such a Vote, so suddenly, before the House was full, without any consideration, or considerable Debate, about the Con∣sequences of it; and afterwards to repeat the same Vote (notwith∣standing that it was opposed by Eminent Persons with Unanswer∣able Reasons) upon uncertain Reports of some tumultuous Meet∣ings of the Nonconformists, without examining whether the Reports were true or no; and when those Reports were malitiously sent to the House, and would upon a thorow examination have appeared very false: for those People are, and have been very careful not to abuse the favour they received; and the Body of the Nation knows this is so?
Query IV. Whether if some persons had been tumultuous in their Meetings (as it was reported) it was fit, or agreeable to rules of Prudence, to punish the whole party for it, when the particular Offenders might have been punished; and whereas it might have been more rationally concluded, that those tumults were made by some persons that only pretended to be of that party, or that were instigated to it, by some, on purpose to hinder the hoped for In∣dulgence? Query V. Whether the passing of such a Vote, and the making of such a Petition to the King, upon a few Letters from particular persons, and some flying Reports of the miscarriages of some Non∣conformists, was not more unbecoming the Wisdom of a Parliament, than the proceedings of the Long Parliament against the Bishops, which was done upon Petitions from most Counties in England, and the general complaint of the Nation? Query VI. Whether it was agreeable to the Wisdom and Policy of a Parliament, to pass a Vote to bring in a Bill for renewing of the Act against Conventicles, for three years longer, at a time when the House was engaged in another great Affair, and had ap∣pointed a day for Debating (according to the Kings desire in his Speech) what way was left for uniting the Kings Protestant Subjects? And whereas God never left following the Nation, with some severe Judgments since that Law was first made, until the execution of it was relaxed hath not the Nation sufficiently felt the evil Con∣equences of this th the other Laws against Nonconformists? for what Publick Judgments have we been under, ever since some of them were made? Shall we forget the Plague, Fire, and late War? What decay of Trade hath there been in the Nation? What Dis∣ntents in mens minds? what want of Money? and how have these Laws been made use of by cruel malitious men, to ruine their quiet and peaceable Neighbours! And have we not seen that when these Laws were left unexecuted, Trade revived, and mens minds were more satisfied? And is it agreeable to true Policy, when we have felt the sad effects of a Law, to revive it again, and  when we can expect no better Consequences of it then we had before? Query VII. Whether the noise of the present proceedings against the Noncomformists, and the severity intended, doth not much sad∣den
the hearts of most of the Kings faithful Subjects, and discou∣rage them in their Callings and Tradings, so that their Discourse is of Transplanting themselves, calling in their Debts, putting off their Stocks, contracting their Trades; and whether this will not have a destructive influence upon the Trade of the whole Nation? Query VIII. Whether the Persons against whom this present Severity is to be exercised, and the Laws executed, are not such as deserve their Liberty, and to be favoured in what they differ from the publick Profession, being in their Principles loyal, in their Lives sober and industrious, in number very great multitudes of all sorts, many of them of great Learning and Abilities, fit for Counsel and the managing of great Affairs; of great Reputation at home, and in forreign Nations; of great Relations and Interest in the Nati∣on; of great Courage and Conduct, and able to do the Nation great service; men spread abroad in all parts of the Land, of all Cal∣lings and Trades, industriously contributing to the Publick good, and bearing a very great part of the Taxes, Burdens, and Trade of the Nation; Persons that are earnest with God for the Prosperity of England, and that mourned and prayed under all its Calamities; such as have, and are ready to give sufficient security for their peace∣able living under the present Civil Government; such as are as good Subjects, and have as good an Interest in the Soyle as any Englishmen whatever; such as have been great sufferers in the late Judgements that befel the Nation, and assisted the Nation in all its Publick Concerns, with their Persons and Estates, and have been ready to bear all Publick Charges, Taxes, or Burdens; and have in all their Sufferings quietly submitted to the Penalties of the Law, and not in the least endeavoured to deliver themselves by any indirect means, notwithstanding they have not been (had they not been conscientious persons) without opportunities to do something that way. Are there not many of them that were great Instruments in restoring the King to his Crown, and multitudes that were never concerned in the late Civil War, and all of them, such as have carried themselves quietly and peaceably since his Majesties Restauration, notwithstanding the great discouragments and oppressions that they have lien under? Query IX. Whether it stands with the Interest of the Nation, to persecute and destroy those that are true Protestants, and that
own the same Religion, and Faith (for the substance of it) with all other Protestants in the Nation, and are ready to maintain the truth of the Protestant Religion against all gain-sayers, and have written effectually to that purpose, and whose Interest it is to have that Religion preserved and protected; and who differ from the Publick Profession of the Nation, in that only which they in their Consciences think sinful, and those in Power think Indifferent? Query X. Whether these People concerned in the present se∣verity, are not for their Number, their Principles and Loyalty, their Parts and Wisdom, their Riches and Interest, their Conduct and Reputation, their Industry and manner of Living, as capable to make the Nation prosperous, and to serve the King, if they were favoured, as those that are encouraged by him? Query XI. Whether for Magistrates with external force and penalties to pursue, punish or destroy their Subjects, of the same Religion with themselves, in the substance of it, because they dif∣fer from them in some Observances about it, be not contrary to Christianity and Prudence? The Scripture, that's the Rule of Christianity, hath not one tittle to countenance such a practice, but on the contrary, there are many commands, exhortations, and examples for Liberty, Moderation, and mutual Forbearance in such things: neither was there any such practice as this known for the first 300 years, neither did Christian Emperours practise it be∣fore Antichrist began to get to his Power: And it hath been lately evidently proved, (both by Scripture and Reason) That no Prince nor State, ought by force to compel men, to any part of the Doctrine, Wor∣ship or Discipline of the Gospel. Prudence directs us to a quite contra∣ry practice, to do nothing to disturb and destroy men that are rea∣dy to contribute their utmost assistance for Publick good; to dissatis∣fie the minds of the generality of the Nation, to discourage them in their Callings; to drive them to transplant themselves, and to remove their Stocks to other Nations, and so consequently to im∣poverish the Land: And all this for not agreeing in Opinion with others, about such things wherein the peace and welfare of the Na∣tion is not concerned? Query XII. Whether it is not Gods Prerogative to Rule the Consciences of men, and that it is dangerous for any man, or com∣pany of men, to lord it over the Consciences of others, to impose
any thing upon them in the Worship of God, or to force them to any thing against their Consciences? And whether men in impo∣sing things upon others Consciences, do not make themselves In∣falible, and set themselves in the place of God, and so bring down inevitable Judgements upon their own heads? Query XIII. Whether it had not been more becoming the wis∣dom of the Magistrate, to use means to inform his Subjects in the matters in question, and so deal with them like rational Creatures, not to persecute them with force and corporal Punishments, and so deal with them like Beasts? Query XIV. Whether it had not been more pleasing to God, more for the satisfaction and good of the Nation, more for the ho∣nour of King and Parliament, for the Parliament to have Petition∣ed the King to put all the Penal Laws in execution against common Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, &c. and to have past a Vote, That no common Swearer, Drunkard, Whoremaster, nor Ignorant or Scandalous person, should have any place of Preferment in the Church; and then I believe there had been many Parishes, if not Bishop∣pricks, freed from their present Incumbants. Query XV. Whether there are so many able Preachers setled in the Nation, as that it is fit to exclude so many hundreds of able Preachers, dedicated to that work? and whether mens Souls do not starve in many parts of the Nation, for want of Spiritual food? Query XVI. Whether the Effects of Persecution in all Nati∣ons, where it hath been practised, have not been sad? hath it not brought down Judgments upon those Nations, and proved for the certain impoverishing of them, and hath it not been so in England? And on the contrary, How prosperous have those Nations been that have granted Liberty of Conscience? Query XVII. Whether it is not a great wrong to a State-Re∣ligion, to discover that it cannot be supported but by Persecution? and whether it is not one great Reason why Popery is so generally hated in England, because of the Butcheries they have made among innocent men, and that it is their Principle to persecute and de∣stroy all that differ from them; for though Interest and malice may blind some, yet generally Englishmen hate such kind of proceedings and the Actors of them? Query XVIII. Whether Moderation in a Prince is not that
that endears him to English Subjects? and whether our Clergy do not exceedingly wrong the King and Parliament, by provoking them to persecute People that live quietly and peaceably, and to do that that is disconsonant to the mindes of Englishmen in ge∣neral? Query XIX. Whether the Nations are not so filled with ex∣pectation of Liberty, that what ever is done, if this be not, they will be dissatisfied? and whether if all the Votes of the People of Eng∣land were taken, there would not be a greater number by much for Liberty, than there would be against it? Query XX. Whether the Nonconformists are not dealt with about their Liberty, as the Christians were by the Heathens of old, Condemn∣ed before they are Heard, or their Arguments answered? and whether the common way of proceeding against them, is not to call them, Rogues, Traytors, Schismaticks, Fanaticks; never considering that they are Englishmen, that have as good Interest in the soil as them∣selves, and as capable and ready to do the Nation service; nor ne∣ver answering the Arguments they bring for their Opinions, nor for their Liberty? Query XXI. Whether if the Magistrate must force men in things pertaining to the Worship of God, and unite them in their practice, it were not more agreeable to force those that think the things they practise Indifferent, to leave of the practising of them, than to force those that think them Sinful to practise them. Query XXII. Whether the denying of People Liberty of Con∣science, and the persecuting of them for different Opinions in mat∣ters of Religion, and for not practising contrary to their Consci∣ences, do not justifie the Pope, and Popish Princes, in their Anti∣christian practice, and encourage them in their severity against their Protestant Subjects? Query XXIII. Is it not inconsistent with Reason, to practise a ruining severity towards the Members of the same Society, for things which neither themselves, nor any others are detrimented by; and when the dissent proposed to be persecuted, is unavoide able unto them in whom it is; whereas all Government hath a re∣spect in punishment, to the Wills of the Offenders, and the Safety of others? Query XXIV. Whether the Kings Proclamation, and the House
of Commons Votes for Persecution, do not exceedingly gratify their Enemies abroad, and at home? There's no greater Friend to our neighbouring Nations than Persecution and Uniformity in England. For thereby the Trade of the Nation comes amongst them; the most industrious Tradesmen are driven to them, and much of the Riches and Treasure of the Nation, and abundance of the most di∣ligent hands in England; and so consequently the Nation weak∣ned and impoverished. As to your Enemies at home, they know there is nothing makes more for the settlement of the Government, the honour of the Magistrates, and security of the Publick, than to grant Liberty of Conscience, and therefore this severity pleaseth them. Query XXV. Whether the things for which these men are per∣secuted and ruined, are not so plausible, that all unprejudiced per∣sons will pitty them and joyn with them, seeing that they suffer for worshiping God according to his mind and their Consciences, as they have often declared and proved, and because they will not worship him in a way contrary to his mind and their Consciences, and if they did not do the one, and leave the other undone, they should sin against their Consciences? Query XXVI. Whether the Liberty desired, is not so rational a thing, that no unprejudiced persons, that mind the good of the Nation, can pretend a reason why it should be denied, seeing it is desired only for Protestants, such as own the same Religion, for the substance of it, with all other Protestants in the Nation; and seeing that all that are to have an Interest in it shall give sufficient securi∣ty to the Civil Magistrate for their peaceable living under the Ci∣vil Government; and that they provide their places for Meeting without any publick charge; and that their Meetings are to be open, and under the inspection of the Magistrate, and that any may hear what they preach: Their Preachers expect no publick preferments, and they will be alwayes ready to give an account for what they speak or do: What reason can there be to deny this Liberty? Qu. XXVII. Whether the Effects of this Liberty are likely to be so dangerous that therefore it should be denied? Some say, That many would not go to their Parish Churches; What hurt can this be when they pay their Tythe to the Priest of the Parish, and go where they of the Protestant Principles go? Others say, It would
spread the Non-conformists Opinion. What hurt can there be in that, while it is their opinions, and accordingly they teach men to be loyal subjects to the King of Heaven and Earth, and obedient to all lawful Magistrates on Earth, to live to the glory of God, the benefit of the Publick, and their own good? Others fear that the Nation would see, that there was no necessity for the conformable Mi∣nisters to have such great Revenues. This is no necessary consequence of Liberty, neither would it in the least prejudice the Publick good if their Revenues were lestened, that the Kings Majesty might be able therewith to manage the Publick Affairs of the Nation, with∣out laying such heavy Taxes upon his Subjects; and the Clergy might have more time to follow their Studies. But would not Li∣berty of Conscience, granted to the Kings Protestant Subjects, satisfie the minds of the generality of the Nation, unite them in their indeavours for Publick good, encourage them in their Trades, fill the Nation with the Knowledge of God. And is not this the way to have God to bless us? Qu. XXVIII. Whether the persons gratified by the severity against Nonconformists are so considerable, that the King and Parlia∣ment should wave the Publick good for their sake? For, except∣ing the Clergy, who are there for it but persons that have particu∣lar Interests, or are carrying on some particular Designs, which they fear will be prevented by Liberty; or some persons that will not wave their Particular humours for the Publick good. Are the Clergy so considerable, that, to gratifie their humours, multitudes of Englishmen must be persecuted and ruined, who are faithful Sub∣jects, men industrious in their Callings, contributing greatly in their particular places to the Publick good. Whereas the Clergy that are gratified by the threatned severity, are persons for the generality of them, perfectly lost in their Reputation amongst all sorts of men, even many that are really for Episcopacy; persons much exempted by their Celling and condition from serving the pub ick Interest of the Nation; persons that, though they are the Instigators to this severity, yet cannot answer the Arguments pro∣posed for their Nonconformity; and yet are thus disingenuous to desire to have them persecuted and ruined; persons that for the most part enjoyed places before the Kings Restouration, and were
as conformable to those times as to these; only many were kept off, as being scandalous in their Lives, or ignorant, and a very few went away, as sticking to his Majesties Interest, thinking that the best and surest way to become Bishops; persons that do in no wise advantage the Crown, but get great Revenues from it; per∣sons that never cared to what danger they brought the State, to preserve their own Interest, but would rather ruine the Civil Ma∣gistrate and Interest, than lose any of their vast Power, Dignities and Preferments; persons, that though they pretend great readi∣ness to submit to and carry on his Majesties Interest, and the In∣terest of the whole Nation, yet, whenever they conceive his Majesties Mind, with the Nations Interest, do thwart their parti∣cular Interest, who are more ready to oppose his Majesty than they, as is evident by their carriages of late? Are they not also persons more Hetrodox to the Church of England, for the most part of them, than the Nonconformists? for, are they not Armini∣ans, Pelagians, Socinians, and Erastians? although they have large Consciences to those Articles, some of which are quite contrary to their Principles. Whereas the Nonconformists differ in nothing from the 39 Articles of the Church of England, but in Ceremonies and Discipline. Besides, the most ingenious and learned among the Clergy themselves, are really for Liberty of Conscience. Con∣sider the Premises, and then I hope you will in your Wisdom con∣clude, the persons gratified by this severity, not so considerable, as to ruine the Nation to humour them? Qu. XXIX. Whether the Interest of the Clergy is so conside∣rable as to save the Nation, if all that differ from them were de∣stroyed? I suppose none will imagine. For I verily believe had the King and Parliament thought of an Act to degrade the Bishops, and to add their Land to the Crown, and send able Preachers a∣mongst the People, I suppose there had been Petitions sent to the Magistrates, to beg the furthering of it, from most Counties and Cities in England, they are so generally lost in their Reputations amongst the generality of men. Qu. XXX. Whether if the Supream Magistrates make sinful Laws, the Inferiour are free from guilt in putting them in execu∣tion? Or, whether the Inferiour in executing, are not as guilty as the Superiour in making them?
Qu. XXXI. Whether the King and Parliament, would not do well to consider, how the Apostle Paul cried out (after he was con∣verted) against himself, for Persecuting the Saints, and continually afterwards, preached the Doctrine of Moderation and Liberty? Qu. XXXII. Whether the Jews and Heathens are not more eable in Persecuting the Christians, than our Magistrates in Persecuting the Nonconformists; seeing that Englishmen have had more of the Light of the Gospel than ever they had? Qu. XXXIII. Whether it is not considerable that our Neigh∣bours, the Dutchmen, did not commonly call the Act against Con∣ , when it first came out, A Law against the Christian Reli∣gion, and were thereby the more encouraged to fight with us, as knowing God would not prosper the undertakings of those who had made a Law so dishonouoable to Himself, so destructive to the Gospel and so pernitious to most of the Sober People in the Na∣tion? Qu. XXXIV. Whether the King and Parliament can imagine,  the People concerned in this Severity, will not rather lye in Prison be Banished, or Dye, than leave their Principles and Pra∣ctices and if any should be frighted to a present complyance, whe∣ther they would not come off with greater trouble, and prove great∣er enemies to the Persons enforcing the things aforesaid? Qu. XXXV. Whether these proceedings in persecuting the Noncomformists is not a ready way to spread their Opinions? Will  Voice  of Prisons make as many Proselytes, as out of Pp Englishmen being by Nature very Pittiful; and what comes from men in Affction, seizeth upon them with more advantage? Qu. XXXVI. Whether if you were able to stop the mouthes of all the pree Nonconformists, or put them out of the way; as long as you leave men the enjoyment of the Bible in their Mother∣, of the liberty of their own Understandings, would there  New-Ninconformists daily arise, so long as the Discipline and Government of the Church continues as now it is? Qu. XXXVII. Whether if all the Nonconformists in the Na∣tion were actually destroyed by the present Severity, it would not consequently ruine the whole Nation? Qu. XXXVIII. Whether the Nation be in a condition to spare  great a part of her People as are concerned in the Proclamation?
and whether Publick Taxes can be paid, Offices born, Publick Burdens undergone, when such a great part of the People are ruined and made useless? Qu. XXXIX. Whether the Severity to be exercised will not ruine thousands that are Conformable? For do not some Nonconfor∣mists keep hundreds of People at work that are Conformable, and must be ruined with their Families, if they lose their Employ∣ments; which they are sure to do, if the Severity be exercised to∣ward those that imploy them? Qu. XL. Whether the present severity will not only dissatisfie the Nonconformists, but also great numbers of others in the Nation, their Friends and Relations, Neighbours and Dealers; who have found them just and honest in their places and Callings; who can in no wise be satisfied to see them hal'd to Prison for no other Crime but worshiping God according to their Consciences? Qu. XLI. Whether it is agreeable to Prudence for a Magi∣strate, that hath Subjects of differing judgements, to resolve to have them of one mind; or else to joyn with one party, and to be the declared Enemy and Persecutor of all the rest, and so put them all under Discontent, and then unite them together in such discon∣tent? whereas were they favoured, they might be prudently man∣aged to ballance each other; and so become more safe und useful to a State, than any united party whatever. Qu. XLII. Whether the Nation in respect of its concerns with Forreign States be able to spare such a great part of its People, as are like to be ruined by this Severity? or whether we shall not so weaken our selves, as not be able to keep our League with Holland, nor ballance the Affaires of our more potent Neighbour? Qu. XLIII. Whether the King and Parliament by the present Severity, do not gratifie their Enemies both abroad and at home? and whether there can be a greater Enemy to you, or Friend to our Neighbouring Nations, than Persecution and Ʋniformity in Eng∣land; for thereby the most industrious Tradesmen are driven to them, and much of the Treasure of the nation, and abundance of the most diligent hands in England (as former Persecutions did abun∣dantly manifest;) and so consequently the Nation weakned and im∣poverished? And as to our Enemies at home, they know theres nothing conduceth more for the Settlement of the Government,
the Honour of the Magistrate, and Security of the Publick, than Li∣berty of Conscience; therefore this Severity pleaseth them. Qu. XLIV. Whether the Rebuilding the Imperial City of the Nation, be not of great consequence for the good of the whole Nation; and whether that is probable to be done, when multi∣tudes of persons, highly concerned in the Rebuilding of it, are ta∣ken off from their endeavours, and from laying out their money, by the present Proclamation; many that began to build several Houses, are resolved to give over, seeing they are not like to en∣joy them in quietness. Qu. XLV. Whether this Severity will not consequently de∣stroy the whole Trade of the Nation? For it will not only take off the persons concerned from Trading, but there are many with whom they deal both abroad and at home; some their Creditors, others their Debtors; some imployed by them, others who imploy them: and there will be a great breach made into the Trade of all these. Qu. XLVI. Whether the Saints ought not to continue the As∣semblies of their Worship of God, without, or against the Consent of the Magistrates; they being commanded so to do, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Heb. 10.25. By an Angel from God, Act. 5.20. It was the Apo∣stles practice (who were not rebellious nor seditious) Act. 4.18, 19, 20, 23. & 5.22, 28. And whether the People of God in all Ages did not so? Qu. XLVII. Whether it would not be a noble work, becom∣ing the Wisdom of an English Parliament, when the House are to consider the Latter part of the Kings Speech, To resolve no more to Persecute their Fellow-Subjects, for Circumstances in Worship, but ra∣ther to use their endeavour with his Majesty, for an Act of Indulgence, and free Liberty, for all men to Worship God according to their Consci∣ences; so that mens minds may be satisfied, and each contribute in their several places and stations for the publick good? Qu. XLVIII. Whether a serious Consideration and thorow Debate of these Queries, may not procure the Author a Pardon for Publishing them, and (with the rest of his Majesties loyal Subjects) his Liberty to worship God according to his Conscience? FINIS.
