G203 12846742 94457
THE Grand Inquest, Or a full and perfect ANSVVER To several REASONS. By which it is pretended His ROYAL HIGHNESS THE Duke of York May be proved to be A Roman-Catholick. LONDON, Printed for James Vade at the Cock and Sugar-Loaf, near S. Dunstans Church in Fleet-Street, 1680.
Courteous READER▪ HAving seen a Pamphlet some time since, Entituled, Reasons whereupon the Duke of York may most strong∣ly be reputed, and suspected to be a Pa∣pist: Not knowing, but that it may come into
the hands of some, whom I would not have Poy∣ with those fallacious Arguments; I thought it my Duty to Answer them: That the World may see the Malice and Rage of some Seditious Per∣sons, who, by loading the Duke with Scandalous Aspersions, endeavour to lessen his esteem with the King: And, if that will not do, to brand his Reputation in the opinion of the Credulous Multitude; That they may the sooner introduce their own Max∣imes into the Government; which are not more fatal to the King, than Destructive to his Sub∣jects. Therefore, kind Reader, beware, and think not, whilst these Stigmatize the Duke, they are
Innocent themselves: 'Tis their Guilt makes them endeavour to overthrow the Government; And, they had rather see the Nation Ruined then themselves brought to answer their breach of Laws: And ob∣serve it when you will, Whoever shall go about to Fortify the present Government against Faction, and Rebellion, shall, by the Seditious, be reported to in∣troduce Popery; Or, to be Popishly affected: Knowing, at the same time they do so, they win upon the giddy Vulgar, who have no greater Antipathy then against the Bishop of Rome: And by this Device, commonly, they deliver them∣selves from that Punishment which they ought justly to undergo. And, this, to me, is a better Argument, that the Duke of York is no Papist;
since the Seditious only would have him thought so, then, all the Reasons they have given, can, pro∣bably make him one. Your belief of this will com∣pleat my wishes, which are, that you may be Hap∣py, Farewel.
A full and perfect ANSWER To the REASONS Whereupon the Duke of York MAY Most strongly be reputed, and suspected to be A Papist, &c. Reason 1. BEcause 25 Car. 2. When an Act was made to throw Popish Recusants out of all Offices and places of Trust; The Duke of York
did lay down several great Offices, and Places of Trust; As Lord High Admiral of England; Generalissimo of all his Majesties Forces, both by Sea and Land; Governor of the Cinque-Ports, and divers others; Thereby to avoid the Punishment of that Law against Papists. Answer 1. This Act of 25 Car. 2. doth not reach the Duke of York. For, it was made (as the Reasoner well observes) to throw Po∣pish Recusants out of all Offices, and Places of Trust: And, to displace them from the Hou∣shold, Service, or Employment of His Ma∣jesty; Or, of His Royal Highness the Duke of York; which words, Or of His Royal Highness, the Duke of York, are a plain Ex∣ception of his Person, and, that he is not with∣in the meaning of the aforesaid Act. For the words of the Act bear this Natural Con∣struction, (viz.) That no Person or Persons
whatsoever, are intended to be in any place of Trust, or Service, about the King, or Duke of York, but such, who are well affect∣ed to the Established Government of this Nation. But, admit the Duke had taken the Test, as in the Act mentioned, when he was not obli∣ged to do it: Had he not too officiously de∣clared himself, even in that point, that the Parli∣ament did not think convenient to oblige him? Would not his Adversaries have insinuated into the Vulgar, that what he did, was a force upon him, and not his own inclination? Nay, what should he have gained in the opinion of the People, by passing such a Complement? Are not many in the House of Lords, notwithstan∣ding this Test, traduced for Papists? And, many more to be Popishly affected? Are not those that do not humour them according to their Capricio, called Recusants? And, those who affect coming to Church, called Church-Papists? By this, it is plain, the Duke did not lay down his several great Offices because he was
a Recusant; Or, to avoid the punishment of that Law against Papists; But for some o∣ther Reason, best known to the King and himself: This shall suffice for an answer to the first Reason. Reason 2. In 30 Car. 2. When an Act was made to disable Papists from Sitting in either House of Parliament, there was a Provisoe inserted in that Act, that it should not extend to the Duke of York, on purpose, to save his Right of Sitting in the Lords House: Though he refuseth to take those Oaths which the Protestant Peers ought to do. Answer 2. This Act, nor any thing contained in it, does in the least asperse the Duke of York, as a Papist: For, if, out of respect and kind∣ness,
the Parliament would not reach Him with an Oath, (of which they knew he had no need) but, only inquire into themselves, to find out who were Papists, and who not, by this disabling Act: Was it not necessary that a Provisoe should be inserted into that Act, that it should not extend to the Duke of York? I wonder therefore, with what impu∣dence this should be construed to be done on purpose to save his Right of Sitting in the Lords House, though a Papist; when the words of the Provisoe will bear no such Construction? But rather, value him as a Person of that Ho∣nour, and Generosity, that they could do no less than distinguish him from the rest of his Majesties Subjects: Especially, since he is so nearly related to the Crown; Has so well deserved of the King: And, has been so of∣ten thankt for his good Services, by Them∣selves.
Reason 3. That His Majesty in his Speech on the sixth day of March, in the one and thirtieth Year of His Reign, does give for a Reason, to the Parliament, why he sent his Brother out of England? Because he would leave no man room to say, that he had not removed all causes, which might influence him to Po∣pish Councels. Answer 3. This Reason is not strong enough to make any person suspect the Duke to be a Roman Catholick: For, when his Majesty did comple∣ment his Parliament; and, had acquainted them with what great things he had done for the Uniting of the minds of all his loving Subjects to himself, and one another; by excluding the Popish Lords from their Seats
in Parliament; the Execution of several men upon the account of the Plots; and of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry and Dis∣banding the Army then on foot: at last his Majesty declares Above all, I have com∣manded my Brother to absent himself from me, because, I would not leave the most Malitious Men room to say, I had not re∣moved all causes which could be pretend∣ed, to influence me towards Popish Coun∣cils. Was ever the sence of a King, and of a loving Brother so evilly wrested? For, when his Majesty commands his Brothers ab∣sence, Is it not to stop the mouths of the most Malicious? And, is their spiteful cal∣ling of the Duke Papist; Or, inclining him towards Popish Councils called, by his Maje∣sty, any thing else, than a Pretence? What then shall be said to such Malitious Pretenders? If, even their own requests granted, though never so unreasonable, will not give them satisfaction: It behoves therefore, his Ma∣jesties good Subjects to be more Unanimous and hearty to one another: That so it may
break the hearts of all Malitious Pretenders, who, under the Vizzard of Liberty, Proper∣ty and Religion, Endeavour the Destruction and Ruine of the King and Kingdom. Reason 4. There have been divers Letters read in both Houses of Parliament; and at the secret Commit∣tee of both Houses, from several Cardinals, and others at Rome: And also, from other Popish Bishops, and Agents of the Popes in other Forraign parts, which do apparently shew the great corre∣spondence between the Duke of York and the Pope: How the Pope could not choose but weep for Joy, at the reading of some of the Dukes Letters: What great Satisfaction it was to the Pope to hear the Duke was of the Catholick Religion: That the Pope has granted Briefs to the Duke: And sent him Beads, with ample Indulgences; and much more to this purpose▪
Answer 4. I perceive we are not like to want such Men as William Prynne to search into Princes Cabinets. God forgive them that do it: But, if it fare with them as (in King Charles the First's time) it did, with others, upon that account; I shall not wonder: 'Tis prudence in Princes to keep a correspondence even, a∣mong their Enemies: Must therefore, their Subjects quarrel their proceedings, that know not what it tends to? A Civil Behaviour or Complement is the least that is due to the Turk, or Pope: We are obliged to Trade in those Countries: Yet, we cannot, with safe∣ty, and Security, without a Correspondence: Neither can any Foreign War be Com∣menced without Allyances: And, who are more proper to transact such Affairs, than prime Ministers of State? Those are to be wondred at, who call the Duke Papist: When the Reasons they give for it, are no
more to be valued, than the Rheume that is∣sued from the Popes Eyes, when he read the pretended Letters: The Pope might, pro∣bably, weep, when he heard the Duke was a Papist: It being such a report as for∣merly, ruined the Romanists in England; And brought our most Protestant King Charles the First to the Block: And, under such another pretence against Popery, probably, the Duke may Suffer, though no Papist: The Pope's Joy, may be great, for the Fall of Charles, and James, But his Tears are for his Catho∣licks; who are many times obnoxious to the Law, but must alwayes be the Sacrifice to the unhallowed Fury of Faction, and Fanaticism. In Fine, it is strongly to be believed, that those who will not relinquish their Scisma∣tical Wayes; and, gross Lying: Will not, at last, stick at Perjury, and Subornation: And therefore, no wonder if such simple Pamphlets of Briefs, Beads, and Indulgences, and such Stuff, is part of the Dukes Accu∣sation.
Reason 5. That the whole House of Commons have decla∣red him to be a Papist in their Vote, Sunday April 1679. Wherein it is resolved, Nemine Contradi∣cente, that the Duke of York being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming, such, to the Crown: Has given the greatest countenance and incouragement to the pre∣sent Conspiracy, and Design of the Papists against the King and the Protestant Religion (2) What this Conspiracy is, will appear, by a Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, March 25, 1679. Wherein it is Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, By the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons As∣sembled in Parliament, that, They do declare, They are fully satisfied (by the Proof they have heard) That there, now, is, and, for divers Years last past, hath been, a Horrid and Trasonable Plot and Con∣spiracy, continued, and carried on, by those of the Popish Religion; For the Murthering His Majesties Sacred person, and for Subverting the Protestant
Religion: And, antient, and well Established Go∣vernment of this Realm. Answer 5. It is affirmed, in this fifth Reason, That the House of Commons have declared the Duke of York to be a Papist: I should sooner have believed it, if the King, and House of Lords had concurred with them: Or, rather, if the Duke of York had declared it Himself; But, till then, I must suspend my Belief, what ever is said to the contrary: And it would be prudently done of all Persons, (none having Authority, (as things stand) to inquire into that matter) to do so too; lest they depart with as little satisfaction, of what they came about; as those Doctors who came to Queen Elizabeth, to question her about the Real Presence in the Sacrament: To whom, that Oracle, made this wise Answer.
Christ was the Word that spake it, He took the Bread and brake it, And, what the Word did make it, That I Believe, and take it. Reason 6. That besides all this Proof: And much more to this purpose: It is most notoriously evident, He has for many Years absented Himself from all Protestant Churches, during Religious Worship. Answer 6. Should many Years absence from Church, during Religious Worship, be a Badge of Popery; then all, or, most of the Non-con-formists must go under the same Livery; And, the Duke by that Reason might be esteemed a Phana∣tick, as well as a Papist: Therefore since this
Reason is illegal: And has no force of Ar∣gument in it, I shall pass it by: Only, I shall hint thus much to the Reasoner: That, had he enquired of the Dukes Chaplaines; He would not have been so ignorant of the quali∣ty of that Devotion, and Piety, that the Duke does constantly exert. Reason 7. By the Evidence of Credible Witnesses, He has been seen at Mass, Receiving the Sacrament, and at Confession. Answer 7. The Reasoner would do well to consider that, (according to the measures himself has taken) a man may have been of several O∣pinions: And, after that, be a true Protestant, of the Church of England: But, since all the
foregoing Reasons to prove the Duke a Papist, are only Sophistical, Malitious, and Spiteful, the Reasoners Witnesses to make good his se∣venth, and last Argument, are not to be be∣lieved: For, admit the Duke had been at Mass, &c. If they be honest Papists, 'tis not to be thought they would inform against the Duke: If they are false Knaves, they ought not to be Credible Witnesses: Besides, there is something to be said for Curiosity: The Duke, as other Protestants, may have been at a Quakers, Or, other Fanatick Meeting, or at Mass; must this, therefore render him suspected to be of this or that Opinion? No, I rather think, that those who are true Pro∣testants, according to the Church of England, by hearing, and observing the Errours of the One, and Ridiculousness of the Other, are better confirmed in our Protestant Doctrine: And, further, this Argument is to be looked upon as most fallacious: For, if the Reasoner be un∣able to prove the Duke to be a Papist, by his Witness that he has ready to produce: Yet, he may, by the same Evidence, prove
him to be a Member of the Church of En∣gland; allowing, only, Our Liturgy to be the English Mass, which, to the hot headed Phanatick seems to be as Criminal and Su∣perstitious as the other, so that the Reasoner seems to aim at nothing else, but to make the Duke declare Himself: And therefore, he will call Him Papist, or what he pleases, ra∣ther, than be ignorant of what he so eager∣ly desires to know: And, probably he is so inquisitive, because he would suit his Religi∣on, according to a prospect of the Times, (as 'tis very likely, he has often done here∣tofore) which, this reservedness of the Duke perhaps, may hinder: And, to such nimble Wits, it is a great disgrace, to be outwitted, in paying an early Devotion, to what is like to succeed, be the Doctrine what it will: And, for this cause, perchance the Reasoner may think himself obliged to remain an A∣theist, till he knows better what to trust to: But, now if these Answers shall give him, Or, his Adherers any Satisfaction, I shall be very glad: And, that I may the better se∣cure
them from that wicked Sin of Atheism; I say, that those who will not allow the Duke to be a Protestant do seem (Toge∣ther, with Himself) to condemn His Roy∣al Father, who Educated Him; And also, the Clergy of England, and the whole E∣piscopal Party, who do adhere to him, and think him Innocent of these accusa∣tions: Yet, these have taken the Test. I shall conclude with this serious Ad∣monition to all those who are Traducers of Others, and Disturbers of Govern∣ment, under the Masque of Religion; That, they speedily pull off their viz∣ards, and, really, appear what they pretend to be, Loyal to the King, and mindful of his Countreys good: Otherwise, the time may come, (and, the sooner the better) That their Dis∣guise shall be torn off by the hands of Justice: And, when the People shall see their Wolfish Faces; And, (how
under their Sheeps Cloathing) they have been deluded by them; Then, Then will be the Joyful Day; Then shall Trea∣sons, and Factions Cease; when the Traytors and Seditious shall suffer according to Law. FINIS.
