G255 13364554 99271
A MITE Cast into the TREASURY Of the Famous City of London; BEING A Brief and Methodical DISCOURSE of the Nature, Causes, Symptomes, Remedies and Preservation from the PLAGUE, in this Calamitous Year, 1665. Digested into Aphorismes, by THEOPHILƲS GARENCIERES Doctor in Physick. LONDON Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, 1665.
To the Right Honourable Sir JOHN LAWRENCE Knight, Lord Maior of the City of LONDON: With the Right Worshipfull the ALDERMEN his Brethren. MY LORD, It shall not be said of me, that I wor∣ship the Rising Sunne, for this sheet of Paper cometh to kisse your hands upon your declination. And as for ye, Right Worshipfull, my respect hath been alwayes such to your Ho∣nourable Court in general, and to all the Worthy Mem∣bers of it in particular, that the truth is, I would have done it sooner, but that I expected God Almighty would have been pleased to remember his mercy, and to stay
his avenging hand, and that people would have been more carefull of their own preservation; but seeing the calamity to continue, and the infatuation of the Vulgar to be such still, as to suffer themselves to be de∣luded by every frivolous praescriptions of Physick, and perswasion of ignorant men, I have here undertaken to rectifie their understanding, and to shem them, there is means in Nature both for the Cure, and praeservati∣on from this Disease; and to this purpose I have for∣ced my self to appear upon the Stage, and to do that, which no body hath yet attempted, which is, to give some fea, short and perspicuous rules, whereby every one may know how to cure himself, and his family with a small charge. My Lord, and Right Worshipfull, You shall find nothing but Truth in this Paper, neither would I have been so impudent, as to praefixe so many Honourable Names to a Thing that were illusory, and of this consequence: The only aim I have in it, is the Publick good, and that ye may know I am Your most humble, and affectionate Servant, GARENCIERES.
A Mite cast into the Treasury of the famous City of LONDON, &c. Aphorisme I. THE Plague is an acute, contagious, epidemical and poisonous Feaver, ac∣companied with either a Botch, a Car∣buncle, or Red-spotts, like Flea-bites, vulgarly called the Tokens. II. That it is Acute, is seen by the effects; for it killeth within foure or five days, at the most; it is Contagious, because its poison is easily im∣parted, and communicated from one to another; it is Epi∣demical, because it seazeth upon all kind of people indiffe∣rently; it is Poisonous, because it slighteth all remedies by which other diseases are cured, that proceed either from intempery obstruction, or putrefaction. III. Thoughthe Plague cometh unawares, and seaseth upon a man on a sudden, yet such is the infinite mercy of God, and the providence of Nature, that it giveth alwayes war∣ning enough to any one that will be curious to observe it. IV. The warnings are either a sudden Head-ache, or a Vo∣miting, or a Faintnesse, with a chilnesse, or a loosenesse.
V. Each of these Symptomes sheweth, what part of the bo∣dy hath been first infected; the Head-ache indicates the Braines; the Vomiting the Liver, because of its proximity to the Stomach; the Faintnesse, the Heart; and the Loose∣nesse, the Stomach and the Gutts. VI. When therefore any one upon a sudden, and without evident cause, findeth himself seised with either of these foure Symptomes, let him conclude he is in infected, and fly to remedies without the losse of a moment of time, Nè∣serò sapiant Phryges. VII. The Plague is one of the easiest diseases in the world to be cured, if it be taken within four hours after the first inva∣sion, otherwayes, and for the most part mortal. This is the chief, and principal cause of so many mens losse. If people would observe this rule, I would undertake by the grace of the Almighty, and without bragging (I believe most men that know me, will believe me) to cure nineteen of twenty; and therefore I say, that people perish not so much by the difficulty of the cure, as because God Almigh∣ty hath taken away their judgment, that they should not see, nor believe the means he hath appointed for them: Quos perdere vult Jupiter, priùs dementat. VIII. The causes why so few escape are these. The scarcity of able Physitians willing to attend that disease, the Ineffi∣cacy of common remedies, the want of accommodation, as cloaths, fire, room, dyet, attendants, the wilfullnesse of the patient, his poverty, his neglecting the first invasion, and trifling away the time till it be too late; A vapouring Chy∣mist with his drops, an ignorant Apothecary with his blistering plasters, a wilfull Surgeon, an impudent
Mountebanke, an intruding Gossip, and a carelesse Nurse. IX. Is it not a strange infatuation for people so to flight their lives, as to cast them credulously upon the trial of a drop of I know not what; of a water of I know not whom, and to neg∣lect those remedies, which for the space of 1600 or 1700 years, have been found grounded upon reason, authorised by the best Physitians in all ages, and approved certain by a constant experience? X. Let every one beware of those that set up bills for the cu∣ring of this and other diseases; Good wine needs no bush; the wonders they promise, lay an ambush to your purses, and their care of your health, is lesse then that of your wealth. XI. Let no body think that the causes of the Plague proceed from any Intempery in the elementary qualities of humane bodies, or from any ordinary putrefaction: It is either the immediate will of God, who sendeth us that scourge for the punishment of our sins, as appeareth in the holy Scripture, by the Aegyptians and the Jews; or from a peculiar and mediate disposition, and configuration of the Starrs and Planets. XII. He that shall consider that the seasons of the year are not always equal, but some summers are cool, others hot, others moist, and so of the rest of the seasons; That some years bring forth one kind of vermine, others another; Some a peculiar murrain to horses, others to sheep, which will not hurt mankind; will not deny but that also some diseases may happen to mankind, which will not be hurtful to beasts; and that some position of Planets and Starrs, may bring Warrs, others inundations, others pestilences, &c. which changes are most commonly preceded and forewarned by
some extraordinary Meteor, as this sad Plague hath been by the last unhappy Comet. XIII. If the Starres and Planets being in a benigne position do cheer up and preserve the life of all things, why then being in a malignant aspect, shall they not produce and send forth things that are enemies to our lifes? Therefore let it be con∣cluded, that from whence comes first the safety and preser∣vation of all things, from thence also proceeds their death and destruction. XIV. As there is a peculiar disposition in the heavens, which causeth, and sendeth forth the seeds of Pestilence; so there must also be a special preparation in Countries, and bodies to receive it. Hence it is that some are more apt to receive the infection then others. The causes of both these disposi∣tions, are above the knowledge of humane understanding. XV. This malignant and occult quality of the Plague, lieth chiefly in the spirits, or spiritual parts of the blood; hence it is that the patients are neither thirsty, nor their urine al∣tered, unlesse there be some other distempers joined with it. XVI. In a pestilential constitution of the air, there is scarce any other disease raigneth, but the Plague, or some few others that will turn into it, by reason of the contagion and infecti∣on: therefore most part of the diseases mentioned in the bills of Mortality, as Feavers either simple or spotted, griping of the Gutts, Surfeits, Toothaches, and Wormes in Children, Loosenesse, bloody Fluxes, &c. let them be accounted pesti∣lential, and so be proceeded against accordingly. XVII. This pestilential Feaver being of different nature from all others, and killing only by its malignity, and poisonous qua∣lity,
and not by any preternatural heat, or Intempery; re∣quireth also a peculiar way of cure, which is by cordials, sudorifick Antidotes, all other evacuations, as purging, blee∣ding, vomiting, clystering, &c. either procured by art, or accidentally happening being mortal. The reason of it is, that the intention of Nature for the cure of this disease (as of all others, which proceed from poisonous qualities) is to thrust, and expell the disease from the center to the cir∣cumference, and so to preserve the heart, which is the foun∣tain of life. What can therefore a Physitian (who is but a minister, and servant of Nature) answer for himself, if while she is busied about her work, he goeth by his revulsi∣ons of purging, bleeding, clystering, &c. to disturb her, and take her away from her intention, and so to compell her in a manner, to bring the disease back again from the circum∣ference to the center? Doth not even common experience teach us, that if you broach a barrel of Beer whilest it is working, you destroy the intention of Nature, and the Beer will never be good for any thing? What I say of the Plague, let it be said also of the small pox. XVIII. Therefore assoon as any one findeth himself stricken with any one of the foresaid symptomes, viz. a Head-ake, Vo∣miting, Faintnesse, or loosenesse, (now that the times are contagious) let him presently repair to a clean and warm roome, and let a light fire of wood be kindled in the chim∣ney, to consume and destroy all the infectious vapours, that proceed both from the air, and the infected party. Let the patient be presently put into a warm bed, himself wrap∣ped in a sheet and blanket, having first put off his shirt; that when he cometh to be dried, you may not be put to the trouble of pulling of his we t shirt, then give him one dragme of our Antidote dissolved in four ounces of Carduus posset, and covering him with cloaths very warme all over,
leaving only his respiration free, and putting a warm brick to the soles of his feet, and another to his knees, let him sweat as long as he is able, or at least for the space of three or four houres, and be not afraid he should faint, if he hath breath enough. XIX. If it should happen, as it doth commonly to those that are first taken by a vomiting, that the patient should cast up the Antidote, you must give him another dose, and if he should cast this also, give him a third, and so continue still, till he keepeth it once; for he will never cast it up af∣terwards, and though he should, yet by having taken it so often, some of the qualities of it will remain behind, that will work their effect. XX. Children, that cannot, or will not take the remedy, must be compelled to it by powring it into their throat, with an instrument called by the Greeks , which is a kind of a spoon with a cover having a spout to put into the mouth, and powre it down. XXI. The patient having sweated three or four hours, (the more the better) you must give him a little more breath, and begin to take off the cloaths by degrees, and when you have dried him very well with warme cloths (which all this while must hang by the fire with his shirt) then pull away the wet sheet and blanket from under him, then give him his shirt, and after that drie his head, and take heed by all means, that any cold air should come into the room. After you have dried his head sufficiently, and that the party be∣gins to cool, give him to drink leasurely two ounces of our Cordial water, which is of an admirable vertue in this case, and also in all faintnesses, surfettings and poisons. This will refresh him so speedily and wonderfully, that he will pre∣sently
forget the tiresomnesse of his sweating. XXII. When he is quite cold, give him to eat any thing he hath a mind too, so that it be of good juice, and easie di∣gestion. Let his drink be strong Beer lukewarm, or some generous Claret-Wine; for as we have said before, this Feaver differeth from all others, and whereas in others we substract meat, and strong drink as much as we can, we must in this allow them, it being only a malignant quality, in which good meat and drink cannot hurt, but rather allay it; as also because the patient would not be able to sweat twice a day in this manner (which of necessiry he must do if he will save his life) unlesse his strength be repaired with good nutriment. XXIII. This course of sweating twice a day, must be continued for four days together, or five at the most, in which space of times all the pestilential poison will expire, and if this be carefully done, and attended, there is no Plague so stub∣born of any kind whatsoever, but must yeild. XXIV. Seeing therefore that this way of cure is so easy, so cheap, and so quick: I cannot but wonder at the impudence of many, qui impune ladentes de corio humano, promise the cure with a few Chymical drops, Mineral Bezoart, and such like trumperies, and at the credulity of those that believe them. XXV. But because in reprehending others we our selves should not be found faulty, and thought in this publick calamity to seek our own interrest, by concealing what our Antidote is, we do ingeniously and publickly declare, that it is nothing but the Treacle of Andromachus, vulgarly called Venice Trea∣cle, so much celebrated by Galen, and so much authorised
by the constant experience of all subsequent ages, to which we have added a little of the tincture of Saffron, for their sakes chiefly that have contracted the Plague by a fright, and whom we have alwayes found the hardest to be cured, because of the sudden and deep impression it maketh upon the vitals. Saffron being one of the most noble Cordials, and of the most quick and sudden dilatation. XXVI. This noble remedy, called Venice-Treacle, being taken in time, is the only Antidote against all Plagues, Poisons, bitings, and stingings of venemous Beasts, a present help to the Falling-Sicknesse, and Apoplectical fits, to the Palsy, Tissick, spitting of Blood, Jaundies, Dropsy, Colick, and all kind of Melancholy, the Gout, Madnesse, &c. It pro∣cureth the natural courses in Women, openeth obstructions, expelleth dead children out of the Womb, strengthneth the Braines, the Liver, the Stomack, the Heart, and (in a word) the whole body, and preserveth it from all conta∣gion and putrefaction. XXVII. Our Cordial and miraculous water is thus made. Take of Venice-Treacle one pound, of the roots of Cypress, Tormen∣till, Enula Campana, Dictamnum, of each one ounce, An∣gelica, and Carduus-Benedictus, leaves of each one handfull, of the four Cordial-Flowers, of each a quarter of an ounce, of Saffron a quarter of an ounce, cut the roots and leaves small, and dissolve your Treacle in a pint of Rose-water, then add to all that four quarts and a pint of the best and strongest Claret-Wine you can get. steepall in a vessel close stopped a whole night, in the morning still it in Balneo, and draw two quarts of the first water and keep it for your use; you may draw the rest of the liquour too if you will, but keep it by it self, and sweeten the first pottle of water with half a pound of loaf Sugar, and keep it in a glass well stopped for your use.
XXVIII. Whereas we have said before that the pestilential Feaver was alwaies, or most commonly accompanied with either of these three Symptomes, to wit, a Botch, a Carbuncle, or the Tokens: We say now, that for the Tokens, they require no particular cure, but only the general one of sweating; but the other two must have a peculiar one for themselves, besides that of sweating; and therefore first concerning the Botch. XXIX. A pestilent Botch, is a swelling or tumour growing most commonly in the Emunctories of the bodie, as behind the ears, in the arm-pits, but most frequently in the groin. Its figure in the beginning is oblong, with (as it were) a string or a sinew along in the middle of it, but by degrees it grow∣eth round, and of the breadth of some times 2. or 3. or 4. fingers. The cure of it is first with a Cupping-glass to draw it forth as much as you can, and then bring it to maturitie and suppuration, with either a drawing pultis or plaster. XXX. The pultis is thus made. Take of roots of Cumfrey and Lilies, and of Onions, of each one ounce, of the leaves of sor∣rell one handfull, fry them tender with sweet butter, then stamp them altogether, and add some oil of Lilies, Hoggs grease, Mithridate, and Yest, and make a pultis to be applied warm upon the Botch, and to be renewed once every twelve hours. It will speedily draw forth, maturate, and break the Botch. As for a plaster, you shall find none better then that which is made of equal portions, of Pitch, Galbanum, and Diachylon cum gummi, melted together upon a soft fire. The Botch being broken, the common ointment called Ba∣silicon will suffice for the cure and cicatrization of it, dres∣sing it twice a day, till it be quite whole. XXXI. A pestilential Carbuncle appeareth at first like a tumour
or pustule, as if the flesh had been burnt in that place, and is at first about the bignesse of a pins head, or a little pease, but sometimes groweth to a fearfull bignesse; it is of a round and sharp-pointed figure, and sticketh so fast to the part, where it groweth, that the skin cannot be loosened from the flesh. There is a great heat, burning and pain, as if the part was pricked with needles, with an unsufferable itching. When the tumour groweth bigger, there appeareth in the middle of it a pustule, like those that appear where the flesh hath been burnt; Any body would think there is some matter in it, but when it is open no matter cometh out, but the flesh under looketh black and crustie, as if it had been burnt with a hot Iron. Round about it the flesh is of several colours, as the rain-bow, red, purple, black, and alwaies shining as pitch or seacoles In every Carbuncle there is a feeling as it were, of a great weight, as if the part was crushed with a heavie lump of lead, and tied too hard with a string. Those that go back again into the bodie after they have appeared, or being brought to suppuration do grow drie on a sudden, are mor∣tal. These Carbuncles proceed from an adust▪ cholerick and melancholick blood, and are more frequent in hot Countries, as the botches are in the cold ones. XXXII. The cure of a Carbuncle is to bring it to a softnesse and suppurtion: therefore first take Mallowes and Violet leafs, the roots of Lilies, Linseed in powder, Figgs sliced, Plantain, Hemlock and Housleeke, boil all in a sufficient quantity of running water, and make a fomentation to be used four or five times a day, and after the fomentation apply this pultis lukewarm; Take of Mallowes and Violet leafs, Sorrell, Housleeke, of each two handfulls, fry them in sweet butter, and stamp them afterwards with the yolks of Five Eggs and and four ounces of honie of Roses and make a pultis to be renewed every 12. hours. Pultises in this case are alwayes
to be preferred before plaisters; because plaisters stop the pores of the bodie, and hinder the expiration of the pestilen∣tial venome. XXXIII. Let it be observed for a most material thing, that the pulse in the Plague is always Quick, Small, Obscure and Inter∣mittent. XXXIV. Having now in a few lines expressed the nature and cure of the Plague, and its symptomes, it remaineth also we should give some praeservative against it. Therefore take of Sage, Rue, Angelica, and Carduus Benedictus, of each one good handfull, stamp all, and boil them gently in a close pipkin with three quarts of very good Claret, till it cometh to two, adding to it three penny waight of long pepper, three quar∣ters of an ounce of ginger, half an ounce of nutmeggs beaten in powder; when the liquour is boiled, strain it, and dissolve in it half an ounce of Mithridate, and as much of Venice trea∣cle, and one dragme of good Saffron, and keep it all in a close Glasse for your use. The dose is two spoonfulls in a morn∣ing, fasting one hour after, and then go to breakfast, which is never to be omitted in infectious times. XXXV. The short compasse of two Sheets of Paper admitting no more, I shall conclude, assuring all the Readers, that I have said nothing here, but what is most true, and I am able to justifie by Reason and Experience, as those will find, who shall be pleased to employ me. From my House in Clerkenwell Close, near the Church, the 14. day of Septemb. 1665. GAKENCIERES. FINIS.
