G221 12251644 57131
A DESCRIPTION Of the New WORLD. OR, America Islands and Continent: and by what people those Regions are now inhabited. And what places are there desolate and without Inhabitants. And the Bays, Rivers, Capes, Forts, Cities and their Latitudes, the Seas on their Coasts: the Trade, Winds, the North-west Passage, and the Commerce of the English Nation, as they were all in the Year 1649. Faithfully de∣scribed for information of such of his Coun∣trey as desire Intelligence of these perticulars. By George Gardyner of Peck∣ham, in the County of Surrey Esq. LONDON. Printed for Robert Leybourn, and are to be sold by Thomas Pirrepoint, at the Sun in S. Pauls Churchyard, 1651.
To the right honorable Sir Henry Vane, junior. SIR, SInce God hath made You emi∣nent in doing great services to your Countrey, and appoin∣ted you of that Councill which the Parliament hath
lately established, to con∣trive the Weal of our Na∣tion, upon their excellent instructions. This discourse having relation to divers of them, I crave leave to direct it to You. And if it be too low for your Thoughts, you have good∣nesse enough to afford mee a favourable construction. Sir, The greatest Princes in the East, receive no Re∣quest without a Present. I have no other to you, but
to desire you would favou∣rably receive this, and rec∣kon me among the number of Your Devoted Servants, George Gardyner,
Errata. PAge 5. line 6. for Scotia read Socatra p. 26. l. 2. power. r. rover ibid. l. 6. for Cameron r. come on p. 32. l. 4. r. Continent for Cō. tinems p. 39. l. 3. put in is washed at flouds p. 35. l. 13. r. bold for cold p. 61. l. 13. r. Tortuga for Tortaga p. 62. l. 9. r. its for it is p. 87. l. 5. r. clear for clean p. 101. l. 14. r. far-forfurze p. 116. l. 9. r. wels for willow trees. p. 118. l. 5. r. Nicaragua for Nicurayna p. 123, l. 2. . Verauga for Carauga p. 133. l. 8. r. Cco for Coco, and so where ever you come p. 143. l. . r. Limets for Climats ibid. l. ult. read Painters for Planters p. 145. l. 14. r. principall for principals p. 146. l. 2. r. Darian for Darion p. 148. l. 3. r. Phillip for hilip.
To the English Nation. IN this unquiet age, I conceive, there is no∣thing so pertinent to a mans felicity, next to the enjoying of happy places, as to know where they are. And to think our neigh∣bouring Regions of Europe receive a greater share of prosperity than we in England, is (without doubt) a great mistake. Neither doth any part of the old World make such promises to all sorts of men as doth the New World, commonly called America. For he that shall desire to advance himself by his labour, will finde many places
where he may do it with much qui∣etnesse. He that shall desire to en∣joy much land, and live in a Civil Government under others, may finde places enough for him to pitch upon. He that shall desire to command a Countrey him∣self, and get into possession of it, without difficulty, wil finde many Islands fit for his turn, that are fruitfull and desolate, wanting In∣habitants, which at small charge may be transported thither. He that shall desire to be possest of great rich mines of gold and silver, and precious stones, and large Do∣minions, and withall hath but for∣titude, courage, and a reasonable English Gentlemans Estate, may by an ordinary Providence over him, attain to these great matters. And that man that shall have store of Commodities lie by him, which he cannot vent, although they are necessary for mans accomodation,
will finde here places, that he may exchange them at, to his great ad∣vantage. But if the Decipherers of this Orbe had been as cautious in set∣ting down truths, as they have been prolixious in impertinencies, our Nation would certainly ere this have made greater advantages upon those Regions. For, my part, as I am an English man, so I desire that name and people may grow great and famous and extend their authority and name beyond either Roman, Greci∣an, Assyrian or Persian Nations. And if from this discourse they may draw any thing that may prove for their Honour or Profit, I have my aim. And I shall assure them, I have related nothing but what my own knowledg or good intelligence perswades me is cer∣tainly true, which my future acti∣ons with Gods leave shall declare.
I have been plain in discourse of the Forreign Commerce of our Nation. All which I intended in a larger Volumn, but the Flemmings and Irish taking me in my com∣ming from those remote parts of America, took from me that grea∣ter relation, which I intended in∣stead of this Epitomie from thence, which I present with a resolution to submit to that common censure all Book-makers must undergo, but with confidence I have in this sub∣scribed my self READER, Thy humble Servant, GEORGE GARDYNER
The Contents of the Book. CHAP. 1. OF the Commerce of the English Na∣tion Pag. 1 The generall description of America, or the New World chap. 2 p. 31 Of Gold, Silver, Quick-silver, Em∣raulds, and Pearl chap. 3 p. 39 Of the Island of New found Land chap. 4 p. 45 Martins Vineyard chap. 5 p. 47 Long Island chap. 6 p. 48 The Bermudas, or Somers Islands chap. 7 p. 50 Of the Islands of Lucaos, or Bahama chap. 8 p. 52 Of Hispaniola chap. 9 p. 57 Of the Island of Cuba chap. 10 p. 62 Jamico Island chap. 11 p. 66
The Island of Saint John De Portrico chap. 12 p. 67 Sancta Crux, the Virgins, Virgin Gorda, Blances, Anagada, Sombrito chap. 13. p. 69 Angula chap. 14 p. 71 Saint Martins chap. 15 ibid. Eustas chap. 16 p. 72 Saint Bartholomew chap. 17 ibid. Saint Christophers chap. 18 p. 73 Nivis, or the Snowes Barbada and Re∣douda chap. 19 p. 74 Monserat chap. 20 p. 75 Antego, Margelante, Dominica, Matini∣na, Santalusa, Gardelupa, Dodos sanctos Deseada chap. 21 ibid. The Burbudos chap. 22 p. 77 Trinidado chap. 23 p. 79 Margreata, Tortuga, Gardiner, Caracute, Cubava and Tamasca chap. 24 p. 80 Of the North-west Passage, and the Lands called Nova Britania, or Nova Framuncia chap. 25 p. 83 New England chap. 26 p. 90 New Hollaud chap. 27 p. 93 The Swedes Plantation chap. 28 p. 94 Virginia chap. 29 p. 95 Maryland chap. 30 p. 102▪ Old Virginia chap. 31 p. 104
Florida chap. 32 p. 105 Of New Spain chap. 33 p. 107 The Councill of New Galisia chap. 34 p. 109 Gutamalia Kingdome chap. 35 p. 110 Of Panuco chap. 36 p. 111 The Province of Talascalia, or Angels chap. 37 p. 113 Youcatan Province chap. 38 p. 116 The Province of Honduras chap. 39 p. 118 Of the Province of Nicaragua chap. 40 p. 120 The Province of Castorica chap. 41 p. 123 The Province of Varagua chap. 42 p. 124 Of the Province of Ciblioa chap. 43 p. 126 Nevv Biskay chap. 44 p. 127 Chiamerla chap. 45 p. 128 Culiacan chap. 46 p. 129 Sacetas chap. 47 p. 130 Xalisco chap. 48 p. 131 Guadalaiara chap. 49 ibid. Mechocan chap. 50 p. 133 Of the Province of Mexico chap. 51 p. 135 Guaxcaca chap. 52 p. 137 Soconusco chap. 53 p. 139 Gutamalia chap. 54. p. 140 Chiapa chap. 54 p. 143
Verapas chap. 55 p. 144 Of Panama chap. 56 p. 145 Carthegna Province chap. 57 p 149 The Kingdome of Granado chap. 58 p. 151 The Province of Sancta Martha chap. 59 p. 154 Venesiula chap. 60 p. 156 Guana chap. 61 p. 158 The Land of Brazil chap. 62 p. 160 Of the Provinces of the River Plate chap. 63 p. 164 Of the Coast between the River of Plate and the Straight of Magellan chap. 64 p. 167 The Straight of Magellan chap. 65 p. 168 Chillia chap. 66 p. 171 The Councill of Charcas chap. 67 p. 173 The Kingdome of Peru chap. 68 p. 176 Quito Kingdome chap. 69 p. 182 Popyan chap. 70 p. 185
A DESCRIPTION of the New World. CHAP. I. Of the Commerce of the English Nation. THe Navigation and Commerce of the En∣glish Nation, is so pro∣portioned, that upon the division of the world, it may properly be said, that it is traded
by four severall parts. The grea∣test of which is America, the next in account is Asia, the third Africa▪ and the least Europe, in which is out native Countrey, it being a Westwardly part of this Division. From whence there arises to mee these Questions. The first, whether the trade be equally divided according to the quality of the places traded with. The second, whether the losse to some of these places be not grea∣ter then the gains. The third, whether the trade of the Common-wealth may not be increased. The fourth, how it hath been hindred, and what is the let in the grants of it. The fifth, whether there may not be a course taken to quicken the trade and encourage Adventu∣rers.
To answer the first. We finde that in Asia, there are six most patent Emperours, which a the Emperour of Tartaria, of Japan, of China, of Turkey, of Per∣sia, and of the Mgals or Mogores. The Tartar, hath few or no Ports, the Persian not many, all the est have store of Ports, and rich Cities, on them, fit for Com∣merce and prade. And it hath been affirmed by the Natives of those part, that were well acquainted with the East Indies, that in India major, which is from Mallabar to Chescoram, there are 13 King∣domes, 1700 Islands, desolate and un-inhabited. And in India mi∣nor, which is from Siambi, to Mur∣fili, there are eight Kingdomes be∣side many Islands. And the Com∣modities of these parts are of the best sort, and probably by the great
quantities that have been yearly carried thither from Europe, there is more silver then in all the other parts of the world. And although there is this great¦nesse yet we send yearly, but a few ships which belong to the East In∣dia, and Turkish Company. The trade of America is much greater, although it be but with our own Nation, which are seated in New-England, Virginia, Barba∣dos, Christophers, Antego, Santey, Crus, Meaguis, Mferat, and Bar∣moudas, what else of that Orbe is in the hands of Spaniards Portu∣gals, and Dutch in any considera∣ble place, cannot be traded with by the English, Africa almost an I∣land joyning to Asia by that nar∣row Isthmus, part of Arabia Deserta neer cut asunder by the Red and Mediterranean Seas, hath for its coasts on the Mediterranean Sea▪ Egypt, Barbary, and a part of Mau∣ritania,
on the North sea the King∣dom of Morocco, Fesse, Tombuto, the large Regions of Giney, Conge, and Empire of Monomotapa, and from the Cape of Bona Speranza, unto the Iland of Scotia, the King∣dom of Armeto, Mosambique, Qui∣lioa, Melinde, Magadoxo, Badivis, Ethiopia, and part of Egypt, and from thence alongst the Red Sea, Seila, Adel, and the Empire of Prester John. And all these Countries have many Rivers and Ports, and great store of people living on them. And we trade onely to Alexandria, in Egypt, Morocco, Fesse and Giney, and there but little neither, all the other places being left, as terrain∣cognita. The trade of Europe, doth justly challenge a greater Commerce then any of the other parts have, although it be the least. On this consideration, the Ports are neer
adjacent, the people more ingeni∣ous in procuring Merchandize, and and their Comodities more in use with us, and ours more wanting with them, as our broad Cloth, &c. And from these considerations, I conclude, that unlesse in Europe, there is no equality in the trade of our Nation with the other parts of the World. The second Question. Whether the losse be not grea∣ter then the gaines o some of these places. As the end of all trade and mens carnall thoughts are commonly for silver and gold, so that Countrey that hath most of it is accounted the richest. And indeed it is almost all things, for he that hath enough of that, cannot lack any worldly thing that can be had.
Upon which, I conceive, that the principall ayme of all forreign trade should be to bring much of it in, and carry little of it out of our Countrey, and that Commerce that doth not is managed to the disadvantage of our Nation, and ought to be rejected. And upon examination it will be found, that the greatest trade which we drive in Asia, which is to the East Indies, either by the way of Bagdet, Caro, and the red Seas, or Cape of Bona Speranza, is with ready money. I can with confidence say, it may be managed so to the advan∣tage of our Nation, that we may have their Commodity for ours, and their Ports better traded. And whereas it hath been the practise of our people to carry much money thither, we may now fetch it home again. And the trade of America is pre∣judiciall,
very dishonest, and high∣ly dishonourable to our Nation. It is prejudiciall, in that it carrieth a∣way daily such men as might serve their Country, either in fighting to defend it at home, or else a∣broad. 'Tis dishonourable, in that we are upbraided by all other Nations that know that trade for selling our own Countreymen for the Com∣modities of those places. And, I affirm, that I have been told by the Dutch and others, that we English were worse than the Turks, for that they sold strangers onely, and we sold our own Countreymen. And it is well known, that people in au∣thority, and some that professe much to Christianity of those parts, will hang a man for selling or ta∣king away an Indian that worship∣eth the Devill, when at the same time they allow others, and will themselves buy of their own Na∣tion,
which have most barbarously been stolne out of their Countrey. And 'tis dishonest, if murther be so, for when they have by Spi∣rits or lying tales, forced them aboard the ships, in their transpor∣tation onely, there is yearly many starved to death, those that remain are sold to those that wil give most for them; some for fourteen years, others for ten, and lesse, but the least four: and it were better for them to serve fourteen years with the Turks, then four in the Planta∣tions with most of the Masters in those places, especially in Virginia, for besides, their being back-beaten and belly-beaten, it is three to one if they live out their servitude, by reason of the unwholsomenesse of the Countreys. In which disasters that happen to our Nation, I cannot but con∣dole their misfortunes, as if we of all Europe were of the seed of
Cham, when the Spaniard at the same time managed their businesse so well, that scarcely will one of them serve in the Indies, except it be the Viceroy, or some great Per∣sonage, and I know that Nation in nothing exceeds us, but in their keeping together as one people. The third Question. Is whether the trade of England may not be increased. It is not hard to imagine, when we see the greatnesse of Asia, and Africa, and the little Commerce that we have with them, that it may well be increased. And although the trade of Europe be much grea∣ter the rest, yet doth it want much of that exactnesse which we may have in it. For where  we gain in some parts, and lose in others, it is possible to assure the Land, to gain in all and lose in none.
The fourth Question. Is, how it hath been hindred, and what is the let in the growth of it? The people generally suppose 'tis the danger of the seas, and the little security in the parts abroad, for the Merchants Goods and ships. In answer, I affirm, the trade of the Hollanders never flourished so as in time of War, and their ene∣mies were more strong at Sea then ours, upon which we may conclude, it is not that that is the true cause. Wherefore, I finde these other causes to be the obstruction in the trade. The first is, the Companies of our Nation, which fort of peo∣ple I account a benefit of a losse, according as they are established and managed, in which the Com∣panies of England have been de∣fective, which appeareth in the
generall damages which themselves and Adventurers have had with them, and few publick memorials they have erected at home or abroad that hath appeared a publick good, but divers acts have seemed the contrary. And on particulars we finde, there are five Companies that are well in years amongst us, the other which was of later establishment, which really was the best (the Giney Company) is dissolved. And to omit the general damage that all the Inland Companies do to our Nation, which is from my purpose now to treat of, the five Companies of exportation are: first, the Cloth Company that trade into Holland, Hamborough, the Bal∣tick Seas, and elsewhere, with all the white Clothes exported the Kingdome. The second is the East India Company, the third the Turkey,
the fourth the Muscovia, the fifth the Company of Greenland, alias Grinland. Of which, I conceive, the Cloth Company to be the greatest Monopoly, for this cause. Besides the ingrossing of the commodity of white Cloth to themselves, which is a great barre to the pri∣viledge of the Nation. The car∣rying of them out of the Laud, is a pernicious thing to five sorts of men, Merchants, Seamen, Cloth∣dressers, Sheare-men and Diers, which last people receive the grea∣test damage, although they were accounted anciently the Staple-ma∣nufacture of our Nation. The pre∣judice to the Cloth-dressers and Diers, appears in the carrying away from them forty Clothes white more then are worked at home, by which it appears, that where there is one imploy'd now in that course, there might be forty, if it were ma∣naged at home.
And all that ever I heard that the Company could say for themselvs is▪ that the trade of making white Cloth would be spoiled, for the Dutch and Poles if they could not have it white would forbear buy∣ing of it. But I am sure the Mer∣chants buy it beyond the ses for their profit▪ and not to▪ se their Country-men at worke, or else they differ much from them of the Company. And if they want it to▪ trade with▪ they will have it as well drest by us▪ as their ow Na∣tion; but if they be obstinate and will not buy it, we shall gaine and not lose, for our Sea-men and Merchants that make short Voy∣ages with small profit will the vent it to those parts which now have it at the second hand from them, that buy it white from us▪ and so the Merchants will make two profits in stead of one; and the Sea-men longer Voyages.
The East-India Company come home to this question in that it hath lost many advantagious places there, and impoverished many that adventured with them, giving them after fifteen or sixteen yeares forbearance of their money in∣stead of 70li▪ yearly, which the Dutch give most yeares to their Adventurers▪ 70li▪ for their princi∣pall▪ And the Dutch, lately to re∣new their Lease, which not long since was neer expired, being but for 21 yeares at the first, com∣pounded with the States Generall to have it renewed for so much longer for the summe of eight hundred thousand pound paid to them▪ and five hundred thousand to the West-India▪ Company, which the States owed the said West-India Company. And whereas the Dutch Com∣pany hath whole Countries, divers Islands▪ Cities, Castles, Forts, &c.
and all taken in by the sword, to the contrary, our men hath lost mo∣ney, lost time, which was consider∣able in those actions, and divers Countries which they never got but were delivered by the Natives, such was Pulway, Pullerroon, Lan∣tor, Rosingen, Wayer, Timor, Tiadore, Ternat, and the Castle of Amboyna, where the Dutch committed the greatest murther that of late yeares hath been heard of upon our Nati∣on, by racking, torturing by fire, and water, throwing in dungeons, and their easing themselves on them untill their bodies became blistered, then drawing them forth, and be∣heading some, sawing a-sunder o∣thers, at other times their cruelty hath been after the same manner▪ and this accompanied with revil∣ling of our Nation; which things are in perticular related by them that escaped from those miseries, recording before the Tribunall of
the late King, their sufferings, and his dishonour which he heard with as much parience, as the losse of the English at the Isle of Ree. I know not the hearts of other men, but my minde is, that all men that acknow∣ledge a Government, and subscribe to maintaine it, ought to be pro∣tected as well abroad as at home. There is difference between the bloud of Peace and War, as David saith, and this was not as the rest, of Rochell, and the Isle of Ree, but by the snare that Joab smote Ama∣sa. And upon discourse, it will be found, that act is justified by that people to this day. The cause of the Dutches flou∣rishing, our Companies say, was there stock exceeding the English▪ But it will appear, upon examina∣tion, that the English Company had sixteene hundred thousand pounds▪ under writ for, when the Dutch had but eight.
The Turkey Company is little before it in goodnesse, although men have not so eminently suffe∣red, yet some have been inslaved by the Turks of Barbary. But the great prejudice (as the case now standeth) without alteration in all the Companies, is the ingrossing the trade of his dominions to them∣selves, which might serve them∣selves, and divers others. For the Ports of the Grand Seignour are many; the chief being Constanti∣nople, there are on the coasts of the seas in his Territories, the Provin∣ces of Arcadia, Accea, Poliponesus, Epirus, part of Dalmatis, the Island of the Archipelagus and Cyprus, in the Mediterranean Sea on the coast of the Begler-Begship of Cairo, the Provinces of Troas, the fair scitua∣ted Town of Symrna, then Aleppo, the Ports of Jewry, and Aegypt, the trade of the great City of Grand Cairo, where there might be more
Commerce onely, then we have now in all the Turkish Empire. The Muscovia Company is alike prejudiciall, in monopolizing the trade of that large Empire, which trade is not valuable in relation to the Ports, for that of Saint Michael the Archangel is the principall, and almost onely Port in his Do∣minions, but when you are within the land, there are most large Terri∣tories to trade with, as the Com∣merce of the black. Seas, which may conveniently be entred by the river Volga, and so traded, which the Grand Seignour prohibits by way of Constantinople, and the peace which the Muscovite hath for the most part with the Tartar, and many Tartars stil resident in Musco, by whom, were it a generall Trade, divers men likely would for their profit get Commerce with that Na∣tion, which would make way for a farther trade, even to the Cathai∣ans, and China's.
The Greenland Company hath as great a share in oppression as the rest, although it is not so eminent in fame, and in this it exceedeth, that whereas the other Compa∣nies are a hindrance to such Mer∣chants as might trade (were it not for their Patent) into those Coun∣tries of their divisions, this I say, is not onely a Barre to those that would trade to Greenland, but hath so much power, as to hinder other Merchants from importing into the Land the Commodities they have from Greenland. So that those that buy that usefull Com∣modity, must give their rates for it. And although it be in others a fault to bring it from neerer places to hinder the trade to Greenland, yet 'tis reported, they are not bound by this Law, being forced for want of sufficient from Greenland to supply the English at second hand. Now, as it is clear by this I have
said, that these Companies are a great hinderance to the Com∣merce of our Nation. There is also another, which the Merchants complain of, and that is the Dutch Nation, that daily so insinuate into the trade of all places where ever they are admitted, to the putting by of the English. And were it not that we sell our Conntreymen for the Commodity of the English Plantations, I am fully perswaded, within a few years, we should be forced to have what comes from thence at a second hand from the Dutch: which in reason seems strange, considering they export nothing but what they import, and we export much which we need not import, & how those that have it at a second hand, should sell a thing cheaper then him that hath it at the first, seems irrationall, yet they will do it, which is done by our ir∣regularity in trade, and the Mer∣chants
that are the great Complay∣nants, are the chief causers of their own hinderance. But upon Examination, it will be found, that the principall Com∣merce of the whole World is in hands of the English, and the U∣nited Provinces. And what we lose they get. And as it is their great care, by all means, to increase their own Commerce, though with the ruine of ours, so, I conceive, it is honest and honourable, to endea∣vour our own good, although by their hurt. The fifth Question Is, Whether there may not be a course taken to quicken the trade and Commerce of the English Nation? As I apprehend the Companies to be a great cause of hinderance in our trade, with the ill managing of
the generall trade of our Nation, so I think these things I have offered, doe in part demonstrate it. Where∣fore, I conceive, that if they were taken away, with some irregularity in trade, our Nation would not be found wanting, either in inclination to trade, or abilities for trade to ad∣vance our Commerce to what height we please. And because there may arise an Objection against the overthrow of Companies, in regard we see the Hollanders have a very flourishing trade in the World, although it be managed by more Companies then we have. I shall to that and the second hinderance which is the trade of the Netherlands, affirme, the first con∣stitution of Companies were, or ought to have been established to keep up a trade subject to alterati∣on, without fortification, and strength of shipping, for to those
places that give us an equall en∣gagement by oath of Princes, Em∣bassadours and Agents constantly Leger to see right, and performance of Articles, there is no need of Companies, or else, why are they not in Europe? And where there is this ful assurance 'tis contrary to all sence, that there should be a mono∣poly of the trade, and where it is not assured this way, or by Forts, we lie at the mercy of those Princes we trade with, that permit us but for their profit, and no longer, I con∣ceive, it is madnesse without assu∣rance of fortification, to assure Mer∣chants goods and ships to have any Commerce with such men or Countreys. And it was for this reason, that the Companies of En∣gland, were first erected. For it was proposed that private men ma∣king a voyage, and according to the losse or gain of that continue or forsake the trade, and although it
were profitable; yet want of abili∣ty or will would hinder them from gaining that assurance for the fu∣ture; which a joynt stock well ma∣naged would do. And although the Hollanders come far short of that perfection in trade which they might have, yet are they in this ve∣ry circumspect. For the Compa∣nies of Holland, do not only forti∣fie in most places, where they come; but gain whole Regions and Pro∣vinces, which is still managed to the advantage and honour of their Common-wealth▪ But our Com∣panies have so much swerved from this intention of their first consti∣tuting, that whereas the Dutch keep the East India Provinces in awe, we are miserable slaves to them. For if a Prince of India, loseth on the seas by Piracy of En∣glish or any other people of Europe, what they have in their Countrey of the English Merchants wil sure∣ly,
make good their losse. Or in case an English power, or French, &c▪ saying, he were English, should come into the Red Seas, and take ships bound for any Turkish Port, or Cameron land, and desire trade, & be surprized, and getting free, revenge themselves on the goods and per∣sons of the Arabs or Turkes, the En∣glish Merchants in Turkey under the Command of the Grand Seig∣nour, would surely pay for it in their persons and goods. The Greenland Company was first established to bring in the whole Commerce of the Whale∣fishing into England, and with much honesty might they have barred others from comming thi∣ther, in regard, the English were the first Discoverers of it, but in∣stead of going before others, we come behinde them, and far-short of the Dutch, which appoint us their leavings, instead of taking ours.
The Dutch which is a second hinderance to us in our Commerce, overtop us very strangely, if wee seriously consider the people, and their Country, which is compre∣hended within the title of the Uni∣ted Provinces. In which lyeth on∣ly Zealand, Holland, Frisland, U∣trick, and these Provinces they have entirely, the biggest of them no greater then Kent. They have a little part of East Flanders, Brabant, and a good part of Gelderland, which places doth not afford them common necessaries, for they have most of their flesh from Emden, Holsten and Westphalia, their Corn from the Countreys on the Baltick seas, for their housing and ship∣ping, their Timber and Iron from Norway, Germany, and Lukeland, their Hemp, Pitch, and Tar, as we from Muscovia, or the Baltick Seas. And for commodities of exporta∣tion to maintain the great trade,
they have at Sea, their land is as barren and deficient, so that their trade consists meerly in what they get from one Nation, and sell to another. And upon a true exami∣nation it wil be found, what they have gotten from us in the East In∣dies, and in or about our Country, is the foundation of all their staple manufacture. And to come to some perticulars, we find that the Spices of the East Indies, the Herrings they have on our Coasts, and our white Cloth which they dresse and die, is the ve∣ry ground of all their Commerce, all which comes to them for little, or at least, no visible payment. For we get nothing for our Herrings nor for the Spices, they have from those places, which formerly were ours, and though they speak of their paying for them to some of our Nation, yet it is not visible to us. And the white Cloth, they
have at the third part they make of it. And although with these, and the other Commodities of our Countrey, as Stockings, course Cloth, Stuffs, &c. they make the most of their trades, yet for those they buy from us, they have with∣out any just exception. Although it were necessary, we did make the best use of our native Commodi∣ties, which we misse as much of, as if we had never known the way of adventuring from our own Coun∣trey. And now I have said this, it is likely, that there are many will affirm, that they knew as much be∣fore, as I relate, but the remedy is not amply proposed. But I to ex∣cuse my self, say, that I have been often in discourse of this subject, and have not heard as much as I here shew to you. And the great Physicians say, it is harder to finde out the disease,
then to prescribe a remedy. And since I have done that, I conceive, I ought to be silent, yet with an in∣tent to shew my self as forward in prescribing a remedy, as I have been in informing of this subtle di∣sease: And in order to that, if it shal be required by those, who sit at the helme of our Affairs, I shall un∣doubtedly bring to their knowledg a man that will shew himself most expert in serving his Country this way. And when the trade of our Nation shall be regulated to such exactnesse, as may procure a gene∣rall profit and honour to our Nati∣on; it will peradventure appear as small and ordinary a matter as the Navigation of America, which is now a thing of little difficulty, but was formerly accompted an impos∣sibility to the disparagement of for∣mer ages, and amazement of the present.
CHAP. 2. The generall description of America, or the new World. THis great part of the globe was unknown unto the Europeans untill the year of our Redemption 1492. At which time it was disco∣vered by Christopher Columbus, a Genowes, in the behalf of Ferdinand King of Castel, and Leon in Spain, that to this day, enjoys the greatest and richest part of it. And especi∣ally those golden and fruitfull Re∣gions, that are between the Tro∣picks, which is commonly called the West Indies. And what there is unpossest of him and the Natives, and in the hands of English, Dutch
or French is not considerable to the rest. This title of America, compre∣hends as well Islands, as Conti∣nents, the Islands for the most part lieth in the Seas on this side the Continent. The other of the West side are few and small, the Seas that compasse this Continent on the East side, are commonly called the North Seas; On the West side the South Seas, which lieth be∣tween it and Asia, and on the North end it hideth it selfe under the Pole; and to the South of the straight of Magellan, the North and South Seas meet together, and di∣vide it from the South Pole. The Continent of America in seven degrees of North Latitude, is very narrow from sea to sea, that is to say, from Porto Bello to Pana∣ma eight leagues, a rough & rocky passage, from whence both North and South, the Land groweth ex∣ceeding
broad to the North be∣yond knowledg, and to the South, one thousand leagues, as 'tis guest. It containeth divers Regions and Provinces, in which are compre∣hended some good and wholsome places, other bad and unwholsome, and as there is indifferents, so there is extreams. And as the best places are with∣in the Tropicks, so the more north or south you goe, the more barren and cold you finde the Climates, even to unsufferable extremities. The passage and course of say∣ling to the most parts of America, is by the wind that bloweth a gen∣tle gale, constantly between the Tropicks east, or east South-east, not much wavering unlesse by a Tornado or Hericano. The Natives of America, at this day are of three sorts; The first, that live the most civilly, are them that live within the govern∣ment
of the Spaniards, after the same manner that they do, in appa∣rell, building, trades and Religion. The second sort, are those that live under the contribution of the Eng∣lish, Portugals, Dutch, French, &c. And these keep still their an∣cient Customes, Religions, and Manners: and these I say are di∣vided under severall Governours, or Kings, and live in Towns, some of which are paled round, contein∣ing houses covered with Mats, their frames of Arbour works, the best are made more substantiall of great Poles and mats, covered with the bark of trees, their food is what the Woods, Seas and Rivers af∣fords naturally, and their bread of that grain we call Virginia wheat, and of this their wives plant about their Towns, whom they accu∣stome also to do their other house∣hold work, the men spending their time in hunting and fishing, being
attended by the boys, whom they breed up to this kind of life with themselves. And this way of li∣ving runs throughout all America, North and South, for this sort of people. The third kind of Indians which are on the land, they call in the Spa∣nish Dominions (where there is the most of them) Chickameckians, and in the Islands Canables. In which sort of people, the Craibey Islands do so abound, that they prove bad neighbours to the Eng∣lish and French, that are there seated, as those in the land are to the Spaniards. And these Indians live upon what they get from the strangers that are neer them, & the other more civil Indians: and some of them are so inhumane, that they will eat mans flesh. Their common food is what they get by hunting and fishing. And such of them that have Islands, and Provinces to
themselves, live in such kind o habitation (as I have said, the se¦cond sort of Indians do.) The Re¦ligion of all of them, that are no made Spanish Christians, is to wor¦ship stones, beasts, or fowls, an serpents, but generally the Devill whom they much fear, and there¦fore worship. Their Priests are conjurers an witches and in those arts can do ve¦ry strange things. The statures of the Natives dif¦fer as with us in Europe, but thei complexions generally are tawn and swarthy, as also their skins Although in divers places, I sup¦pose, they would be otherwise, did they not anoint their flesh with oiles and grease, and bask them¦selves in the Sun and winde, agains which they have little or no de¦fence, going almost all naked, ex¦cepting amongst those Civill Indi∣ans with the Spaniards.
Their naturall weapons, are ge∣nerally Batoos, Bowes and Ar∣rows. Their Bows are made of some bending wood, their Arrows of Canes and Reeds, headed with fishes bones, and flints, with which they are excellent marksmen. The heads of divers they poyson to do the more mischief. There are na∣turall to these parts which are wild in the Woods, divers kinds of Beasts and Fowles, many of which are not elsewhere in the world to be found, as also many fruits not known amongst us. Amongst the Plantations, there is not any thing wanting that is to be had in Europe; and much more, which is naturall to those parts, but the substance of flesh, fish, and fruits is not so substantiall as that of Europe, and not any thing com∣parable with that in England: which is the cause that they are much easier of digestion, and cau∣seth
a more constant appetite then we have with us. The treasures that are yearly drawn from the bowels of the Spa∣nish Regions, are infinitely great. And in the subjection of any other Prince or people of Europe, there is neither Mine of Gold, Silver, Quick-silver, Emraulds, or Beads of Pearl, all which are in great plenty in the Spanish Dominions. And in regard I shall in my relati∣ons, speak of many Countreys, that are plentifull of these riches, I shall here describe how they are obtained.
CHAP. 3. Of Gold, Silver, Quick∣silver, Emraulds, and Pearl. THe gold is engendred in the Mountains, from whence by rains and flouds into the Plains, and rivers, where for the most part they find it. That of the plains, is in veines of hard earth that con∣teineth part pure grains of gold like pompeon-seeds, which is the best, but the most that is got in the In∣dies, is in the Rivers, where it is found mixed with the sand in pou∣der, even as the sand it self. They separate it from the earth, and sand, by washing in a bowle of the fashion of a Barbers bason. Where
they finde it in hard veines, they break them with the Hammers, and make them fit to wash: first, putting the earth or sand into the bason, and receiving water into one side of it, turn it out at the other, untill they have washed out the earth from the gold, which as the heavier substance remains behind at the bottome of the bowle. The silver Mine is found in the earth in veines or branches, much like the Tinne or Cole in Eng∣land, and is worked almost in the same manner under the ground. The way of separating the silver from the drosse, is first to take the oare, and break it in Hammer-mils, and grind it to powder, then sift it through a Copper searse, and put it into a furnace, under which they make a fire by degrees, mixing with every fifty quarts of pouder five of salt, and stirring it, together with quick-silver, which they squeeze
through a piece of holland upon the said pouder and salt, and when they finde the quick-silver, suffi∣ciently incorporate with the silver, then they put it altogether in a Cauldron, in which there is water, and a wheel, that going round, turneth out the earth and drosse with the water, the quick-silver, and silver, as the more heavy sub∣stance remains behind, which they take from the Cauldron, and wash it after the manner of gold, till they finde it clean from all drosse, and filth, and then putting it into a cloth, they strain forcibly from it some quick-silver, the remainder being as a leafe of silver. And to separate the silver from the quick-silver, they put it into a violent fire, and cover it with an earthen pot of the fashion of a su∣gar loa, which is also covered with coals, and kept very hot, and from a hole in the said pot, to which is
fashioned a pipe, like the pipe of a Limbeck, they receive the quick∣silver, which evacuates by the same pipe, leaving the silver of the same form it was put in, but wanting much of the bignesse and waight. The Quick-silver and Vermilli∣on, is found together in Rocks, or very hard earth. That part that is found to contein the quick-silver, they break to pieces, and putting it into earthen fire-pots well luted, they set it on a violent fire (made in the Indies of straw, which they find to be excellent for that work) whatof it evacuateth out of the pot, goeth up, till meeting nothing to receive it, it falleth down cold, in the same manner we have it. The remainner in the pot, being suffici∣ently separated from the drosse and earth, the fire is taken away, and when it is throughly cold, they open the pot, and poure out the Quick-silver. into leather baggs,
which keepeth it best, conveighing it where they please in them. Those that open these pots, and stirreth the silver and it together, in refi∣ning the silver, swallow a pellet of gold, that lying in the stomack, draweth the Quick-silver, which in time getteth into their bodies, from whence it goeth out with the said pellet in excrement. And if the pot be not throughly cold, when 'tis open; it is two to one, if they lose not their teeth or hair, dis-figure their noses and faces, and many times utterly spoile them∣selves. Wherefore, they are very cautious in this action. The Emraulds are in great a∣bundance in divers parts of the Spanish Countreys, they get them in veines of stone, that is almost like chrystal, some as big as a hazel nut, and of severall colours, as whitish, green and white, and the most perfect absolute green.
The Pearls are found in greatest plenty in the North seas, and they are roundest and most orient, al∣though there are great store at the Island of Pearls in the South Seas, which is some 25 miles from Pana∣ma. In the North seas, where I say are the best; the principall fish∣ing for them is at the River of Ha∣ca, which runneth between the Pro∣vince of Sancta, Martha and Car∣thagena, and also at the Islands of Margreata, and Cumana. They are found in Oyster-shels of the colour of heaven, fastned to gravell or Rocks, six, nine, and twelve fa∣thome under water, and brought from thence by Negro slaves, which are so expert in diving, that some of them will continue half an hour under water.
CHAP. 4. Of the Island of New found Land. IN order to a perticular descri∣ption of this new World, I shall first speak of the Islands, of which the most Septentrionall, is New∣found land, which stretcheth north and south, from 46 degrees and a half, to 50 and a half of latitude. The Natives of this place are few, and savage, neither is there any thing in this Countrey to invite a Plantation, it is so Rockie, and bar∣ren. But for the commoditie of fish, which are taken on the Coast in great plenty, there are some men that do endure the heat of Summer, and cold in Winter, both
which come in extreams, some are French, but the most English, in whose hand lieth the supream pow∣er, the plenty of fish (wch sort is wel known in England, by the name of New-found land fish) inviteth ma∣ny ships thither, whose lading is procured sometimes by themselves, but for the most part by the dwel∣lers in the place. This Island lyeth at the mouth of the River Canida, distant from the Continent at the North end neer half a league, and the South west point is about a league from Cape Briton, and by the one of these ways, you passe to the River Canida.
CHAP. 5. Martins Vineyard. THe next Island that is seated is Martins Vineyard. It is a small Island on the coast of New England, and the Governour is appointed by the Councill of Boston, the chief government, in New England; It is 20 miles long, and 10 broad: And upon it are forty English fa∣milies, with divers peaceable Indi∣ans, that live by hunting and fish∣ing. The soil is rocky, but affordeth some English grain, and Virginia Corn. They have no Commerce, but with the Indians of the Mayn, for skins of Bever, &c. And some little Corn they send to Boston. There is great plenty of Fish on
the Coast, which they procure the Indians to catch them at an easie rate. CHAP. 6. Long Island SOuth west of Martins Vineyard, lieth Long Island. It is in length sixty English miles, and fifteen in breadth. The North east end is seated by some English, which have been thrust from New Eng∣land for their Judgement. The most of them holding the Christi∣an tenent of confession before Bap∣tisme. At the South West end, there are some few Dutch and En∣glish. This Island is a fruitfull soil for English grain and Milet, and of a good air. The Seas about it are well stored with Fish, and the
woods, with Deer and Turkeys, and it hath many quiet Indians, that live by hunting and fishing. The Dutch Plantation layeth claim to this Island, so doth the South Government of New Eng∣land, but at present, the Inhabitants live without duty to either. There are divers other Islands on this Coast, but not any seated, or considerable to a Plantation. The principall on the Coast of New England, are in the Naragan∣set, and Masysis Bayes, and neer the Swedes Plantation. Some few in Delaware Bay. And Smiths Island at the North Cape of Virginia; and from the Cape Charls, which is the South Cape of the Chesapeak Bay in Virginia, till you come to Cape Hatrask, are no Islands. This Cape is a point of an Iland in 36 degrees, and from thence till you come to the point of St. He∣lena, which is in 32 degrees, all the
coast along are broken Islands un∣inhabited, the best is within Cape Hatrask in the same height. It is called Roanock, and is of 18 miles compasse to the South-ward of the mouth of the River Occam in old Virginia. It is bad coming to it by reason of the shelves of Cape Ha∣trask, which lyeth far out at Sea, by which Cape, he that will go to the said Island must passe. CHAP. 7. The Bermudas, or So∣mers Islands. THis Island lyeth distant from the Main 200 leagues, in 33 degrees, and 20 minutes. It is 20 miles long, and something more then two miles in breadth. And
temperate in relation to heat and cold, but violent in the blustring winds, which often haunteth their coasts, but a most wholsome place to live in, and wel replenished with our Nation, that live there with∣out want, for there is store of Milet or Virginia Corn, and Potatoes, di∣vers sorts of fruits, as Muskmelons, Water-melons, Figs, Plants, Pa∣pans, Limons, Oranges & Limes: Plenty of flesh, as Turkeys, Hens, Pork and Beef, and on the Coast much Fish. The Commodity they yearly export, is some Tobacco of the worst sort, Beef, and Pork. The Spanish wracks that often happens on their Coast, furnisheth them with pieces of eight. And the best sort have their Negro Slaves to work for them. This Iland is almost surrounded with rocks and shelves, but on the South-side is an open road, and to∣ward the East end a good harbour,
hard to hit, without an Islande▪ for Pilot. When you first mark the Island, it appears as a Rock in the Sea, going almost right up a a great way from the water, and i hath a delightfull aspect, but 'ti little better then a Rock, there be∣ing but two foot of mould on the greatest part of it, under which, there is a kind of hard substance, much like pumistone. CHAP. 8. Of the Islands of Luca∣os, or Bahama. THese Islands are South-west from the Barmuda's, and to the North of Portorico, Hispaniola and Cuba, the most eminent is Lucayo∣neque in 27 degrees. It hath almost
to the West the Island of Bahama. From whence the channell of Ba∣hama between Florida, and the Sholdes de los Mimbres taketh name. The current of this channell, sea∣teth so hard to the North, that although Winds be prosperous, the Ships cannot enter it, and if it be crosse, they will go with the current. Next to Bahama, is a small Isle surrounded with the shelves of Bimny. There is like wise the Island of Abacoa, of 12 Leagues long, another called Yuma, of 20 Leagues, and eight in breadth, in 24 degrees and a halfe. Yuemeata is in 23 degrees and a half, 15 Leagues in length, and North, from Hispaniola, lieth Sa∣mana, 7 Leagues each way. And between Yuemeata and Guanema lieth Yabaque of 10 Leagues in 22 degrees and a half.
The Miara Parvos are three smal Islands that by triangle, and are compassed with shelves. South from Yuemeata, is Maga∣guana, of 20 leagues in length, and the halfe in breadth in 23 degrees, Quaqua of 10 leagues in 20 degrees and a half. North from Quaqua are the Cacos, of five leagues, in 21 degrees. The Island of Mackre stands in 20 degrees, and is com∣passed with shelues. And in 20 de∣grees lieth the shelves of Abreo, of 15 leagues long, but East from Mackre. On these Islands are no Inhabi∣tants, those that did live there were a harmless simple people, and there∣fore the easier taken and carried a∣way by the Spaniards that have made them so desolate, many of them seem of a good mould, and the Latitude promiseth much ferti∣lity. The arie is certainly good and wholsome, and not so extream hot,
as other parts of that height. There is scarcely any beast on them save a Cony, that hath a taile like a Rat, but Pigeons and Brids in great numbers; most of them of greenish colour. There is the Gumme Benjamin of the best and worst sort, Guacom, and Sasaprila, and Sasafras, and on some of them red wood and Am∣ber-greece. The English Sea-men are little acquainted with these I∣slands although they saile round them yearely. And since I petiti∣oned for them, which was six years ago, and my absence hindred my prosecution: Captain Sail and others have obtained a Patent, ma∣king thither on the coast of an Island, which he called Illutheria; his ship was wrackt, but the people of the ship all saved, but recovered the shoare with few necessaries, I saw him after his escape from thence in a small boat of 3 Tuns
recovering Virginia, where he pro∣cured a Pinnace of near 25 Tuns, with which he carried relief to those he left in the Island. But I under∣stand by a Master of a Bark, that went from New England, that on a division was among them, they were leaving the Island. In my discourse with the said Sail, I un∣derstod that none of his company knew the place they intended, or were ever there, when they under∣took the voyage. The coasts of most of them are dangerous, and bad to make, and that ship that shall be neer, or amongst them must keep the lead always going, but with a wary Pilot, and care in giving the Islands a fair birth, they are easily recovered. The Spaniards know this place well, and have a yearly trade thi∣ther for the aforesaid Commodi∣ties, and amongst the Islands are wracks of divers of their ships.
CHAP. 9. Of Hispaniola. SOuth of the Lucayos lyeth the Islands of Barlevento, which are not onely the best of America, but almost beyond compare, were they as well furnished with people, as they are with necessaries to main∣tain them. They be in the hand of the Spaniard, almost without peo∣ple. For Hispaniola, that is the chief, and in 18, 19, 20 degrees, and 150 leagues East and West, hath but one City, no Town nor Village, but what is inhabited by Negro's, that are servants to the Spaniards. Here is a perpetuall Summer, the Winter being but the rain that falleth. This Land is exceeding plea∣sant,
and hath divers Vallies, one being so great, as to reach from the one side of the Island to other, that hath many golden rivers issuing in∣to it, which Vallies are always stock∣ed with multitudes of wilde kine, goats, hogs, shag-hair'd sheep and horses, amongst which, as their deadly enemy, are many wild dogs, that are bred of such as have been lost a hunting, and run away from the Spaniards: the woods have abundance of Oranges, Limons, Limes, Cotton-wool and Plantens, and many green Birds. The commodities the Spaniards yearly export from thence is Gin∣ger, Sugar, Cotton-wool, Cassia, Fistula, Sasaprila, and Lignum vi∣tae; with Tallow, and a hundred thousand hides, which are yearly gotten of those wild cattell, which are the largest of the world. There are divers Rivers that af∣ford gold, and some Mines which
are not now worked, great plenty of Copper and other minerall. The City where the Spaniards dwel, is called Santo Domingo, it standeth on the South side of the Island neer the East end, on the West-side, the River Osama in 19 degrees and a half, fairly built with stone, and walled about with a Castle on the said River, between the Town and the Sea. Here are resident the Supream Council of the Islands, the Officers of the goods and royall treasure, a Mint∣house, and the Cathedrall, that hath for sufferance the Bishoprick, of Cuba Portrico, Fenescula, and the Abbotship of Jamecca. Here are also Monasteries of Franciscans, Do∣minicans, and Mercenaries; and two Nunneries, a Grammar-school, and an Hospitall. The people in this City, live in great pleasure, enjoying, beside the foresaid plenty of flesh, many ex∣cellent
fruits all the year long, as Bonanoes, Pine-apples, Custard-ap∣ples, Plantens, Papans, Musk-me∣lons, Water-melons, and many o∣ther fruits and hearbs, store of Tur∣keys, and Poultrey. And their bread they make of the oot Yuca, called Cascaby, but they have plenty of Milet and Potatoes. On the Coasts, are first the point of Nisao, ten leagues to the West of Santo Domingo, and eigh∣teen leagues, further is the Port O∣coa, which is a Bay, where the fleets of Nova Hispani take refreshing, when they do not anchor in the nooke of Sepesepin, which is neer unto it, or in another called the Fair Haven, two leagues before you come to Ocoa. And 20 leagues be∣yond Ocoa is the Port of Asua. And 30 leagues more Westwardly there is a large point right against the Island of Bola, which lieth five leagues from the Coast.
The most Westerly point, is cal∣led Cape Tibron. It hath an Island three leagues from it West called Caprio, and sailing along the Coast you will see an Island called Camito, and further in the nooke of Yagua∣na there is an Island called Guanabo, of eight leagues long. Of the North side of the Island the most Westwardly Cape and Port is Saint Nicol, as from whence North-east and by East, lyeth the Island of Tortaga, neer the Coast of Hispaniola, it is of five leagues length, and governed by a French∣man. And further along the Coast is Montey Cristey, the West Cape of the Port of Nativedad, to the East of which there is a great Bay called Port Real. This Island is so full of Harbours, as he that will coast it, cannot well misse of one where he pleaseth, most of which afford refreshing of fresh meat and good water. In many parts of this
Island, especially on the North side are English men always lying to kil Cattle, for their hides onely, they live in Tents, ten, and twenty in a company, and have Shallops to at∣tend them, to conveigh them away when they please, most commonly to Turtagues which is their head Quarter, for it is neer lying. CHAP. 10. Of the Island of Cuba. THis Island lyeth West from Hispaniola, and is 200 leagues long East and West, the broadest part not 45. What Hispa∣niola affordeth is here in good plenty, but the Land neither so pleasant nor wholsome. The gold of this Island is not so good in his allay, as that of Hispaniola,
but Copper is here in greater quan∣tity. It hath two remarkable things, the one is a Valley of 20 leagues, that within the earth hath stones as round as a bullet, and from hence the Spaniards may furnish them∣selves with shot of all sizes. The other is a fountain of a kind of pitch which runneth continually. All the Natives here, as well as at Hispaniolia, are destroyed by the Spaniards, but in both places they have store of Negro servants: their delicatest fare in this Island is Patridges, which are in great abun∣dance. Over all the Island, the Spaniards breed them up tame, and esteem them the sweetest eatable flesh in the World. It hath two fair Towns, the best, which is of greatest resort, is the Town of Havana, that lyeth on the North-coast in 22 degrees: It hath neer 900 housholds, there is resident in it the Governour of
Cuba, a Cathedrall with Monaste∣ries of Dominicans, Franciscans, and one of Nuns. In this Haven all the Spanish ships of the Indies, meet together, and return to Spain: the Town is rich but unfortified to the land, but the harbour is strong∣ly secured by two Castles, that lye a little within the mouth of it. This harbour is counted an ex∣ceeding good one for security of Ships, but on the South-east part of the Island, there is the harbour or port of Saint James, which for greatnesse and goodnesse, is estee∣ned one of the best in the World. It lyeth 40 leagues from Cape Tibron, in Hispaniola, in 20 degrees. It hath the City of Saint James standing on the side of it, two miles from the Sea. This City is of 300 houses, but of small Commerce. It hath a Monastery of Franciscan Friars, and nothing else remarkable. To the West of
it 25 leagues, lyeth the port of Spirito sancto, and further West lyeth the Queens gardens, which is a shelf of Sholds and Islands, and 20 leagues further the port of Tri∣nitie, in 21 degrees and 30 leagues still westwardly the Cape of the Crosse, and 10 further the gulfe of Xaqua, between which and Cape Anthony, which is the Westerliest point of Cuba, there are many small Islands and Sholds along the coast. The North coast is a cold coast, and hath many good har∣bours, besides that of the Havana, the next in account to it is Saint Jaquis, which is 8 leagues east from the said Haven, and not farre di∣stant from the Island, called the Kings Gardens From this City of Saint Jaques, the Bishop hath his title.
CHAP. 11. Jamico Island. THis, Island lyeth twenty leagues from Cuba full South in 17 degrees and a half of latitude East and West it is fifty leagues, North and South, in the broadest place 20. It hath the fruits and Cattle of Hispaniola, but no Mines of gold or copper. It is very plentifull of Milet and Swine, but more subject to Turnados and He∣ricanos then any of the other Islands. Here the inhabitants live in a plentifull manner; and have on the North side of the Island, the City of Sivil, fairly built, it hath a Governour and an Abbot, a Mo∣nastery of Franciscan Friars, who have their cloyster Nuns.
The Westwardliest Cape of the Island is called Morauta, and from thence along the North coast 10 leagues distant lyeth the port of Jauca. And ten leagues forward the port of Melila, and ten leagues further standeth the port of Sivil, from whence the Coast windeth to Cabo Dilfalcon. West from Ja∣meco are the Islands of Curymanos. And of the South Coast five leagues lyeth the Hermingo's which are dangerous shelves. CHAP 12. The Island of Saint John De Portrico. THis Island lyeth from the His∣paniola 15 leagues. It is 45 leagues East and West, and North
and South 23. It aboundeth in all Hispaniola hath, and it is the first place the Spaniards have in the Indies. And the City of Portrico, which standeth on the North east part of the Island, is strongly for∣tified, and naturally well scituated for defence in 18 degrees of Lati∣tude: it hath a Governour, a Bish∣op, and his Cathedrall, and Offi∣cers of the Kings treasures, with two Monasteries of Friars. And 30 leagues to the West of this Town standeth the Village of As∣ricebo. And 33 leagues South-west from Portrico, standeth the Town of Saint Jerman, tis on the West∣end of the Island. The North Coast is foul and shelvie, but East from Portrico is the River of Luysa and Canoba. And the furthest west on the South Coast is Caprio, and West from it at Sea 5 leagues ly∣eth the Island of Mona, a small Island, and as far north to other
little Islands. And the Natives here and at Jameca, have been to∣tally destroyed by the Spaniards, so that at this day there is not one to be found. CHAP. 13. Sancta Crux, the Vir∣gins, Virgin Gorda, Blances, Anagada, Sombrito. EAst from Portrico, lye the Ca∣ribeys, which by the Spaniards are called the Wether Islands: the natives are men-eaters, and a very warlike couragious people. The most Westerly is Sancta Crux, it yeth in 16 degrees and a half, and  sixteen leagues in length: it is in
the hand of the English, but few live there. The plague that hath been so hot in these Ilands, begun at this, as men report, although the other hath been since as sickly, I suppose it is the cause, it is no better seated, for undoubtedly this is the best Iland, and the largest the English possesse in the Indies, and neerest adjoyning to the Spa∣niard, which might be made (if it were well managed) a great advan∣tage: it is capable of the same fruits, roots and seeds Hispaniola hath, and Sugar-canes, and lyeth neer adjoyning to the Virgins, which are a little Iland compassed with shelves neer eight or ten more the greatest of ten leagues, with Virgin, Gorda, and the Blancos, or white Ilands. And West from Virgin Gorda, lieth Anagada, which is seven leagues long in 18 degrees and a half, and compassed with shelves. And neer to it lyeth Som∣brito,
another small Ile. These are all inhabited with Canibles, ex∣cept Sancta Crux, whether some∣times they come a roving also. CHAP. 14. Angula. ANgula is the next which hath ten leagues of length, and is in 18 degrees. It hath some few Eng∣lish on it with excellent Salt-pits, and a good Road for Ships. CHAP. 15. Saint Martins. SAint Martins lyeth in 17 degrees, and a half, of fifteen leagues long,
now possest by the Dutch, being lately forsaken by the Spaniards, that had a Castle in it, garison'd by souldiers. It is compass'd with smal Ilets, and hath good plenty of Salt. CHAP. 16. Eustas. IT is commonly call'd Stasies, and seated by Flushingers of Zealand, as the principal Owners: it hath 10 leagues in length, and maketh good West India Tobacco. CHAP. 17. Saint Bartholomew. THis Island is full of Caniballs, and hath 10 leagues of length.
CHAP. 18. Saint Christophers. SAint Christophers is of ten leagues in length, and seated by English and French, each having a Governour of their own Nation. There is a kind of equality in their strengths, for what the English want of the French number, they make good by their English spirits, which doe not degenerate with the Climate. This Island is so popu∣lous, that ground can hardly be ob∣teined. The French and English are in∣termixed so together, that with much difficulty could either hinder a secret designe though there is con∣stant gaurds upon each others Borders.
They make some Sugar in this Island, some Indico, and Cotton∣wooll, but most Tobacco. CHAP 19. Nivis, or the Snowes Barbada and Redou∣da. THe English that seat it call it Neavis. It is of five leagues in length, lying within a league of St. Christophers. Here is the best Su∣gar of the Caribey Islands, some In∣dico, bnt little Cotton or Tobacco. It is an aguish Country and un∣wholsome, but by the good Go∣vernment that hath been amongst them, the people live the happiest of all the Caribey Islands. And in 17 degrees lyeth the
Barbada and Redouda, each of five leagues, and in the hands of the Canibals. CHAP. 20. Monserat. MOnserat is seated by Irish, of five leagues neere the Re∣douda. The Inhabitants plant most Tobacco and some Indico. CHAP. 21. Antego, Margelante, Dominica, Matinina Santalusa, Gardelupa, Dodos sanctos, Deseada. ANtego lyeth between 14 and 15 degrees. It hath a good
air, and is planted by the English with Tobacco, Indico, Cotton∣wool, and Sugar. It lyeth ueer unto Gardelupia, and Dodos Sanctos on which there lives some French with the Canibals, which are in great numbers on these two Ilands. The Deseada is six leagues to the Gardelupia in 14 degrees and a half, seated by the Canibals Margalante, is five leagues from Dominique, and seated by the Canibals, with French amongst them. Dominica lyeth in 13 degrees, and is 12 leagues in length. It hath good Roads, and watting places, but in danger of the Canibals, that are the Lords of this Iland, with whom the French live in peaceable manner. And neer Dominica, is Matinina and Sancta Lusia, which is 14 degres 20 minutes, and both possest by Canibals.
CHAP. 22. The Burbudos. THis Iland is commonly called the Barbados, but the ancient name is the Burbudos to the Seacors of the Indies or Carera de las Indies. It is a Lee Island as those of Barle∣vento, & the Caribes are to weather of the Starbord bow. It lyeth in 13 degrees 30 minutes, and tho∣roughly inhabited with English, and Negroes their servants. This Iland flourisheth so much, that it hath more people and Commerce then all the Ilands of the Indies: Their principall Commodity is Sugar of the worst sort, Indico and some Cotton-wool and little To∣bacco. Here are pieces of eight in greatest plenty of any English
Plantation in America. in so much that of late they buy and sell most small matters for ready money: it is strong in men, but no fortificati∣on yet perfected, and not easily brought under by a common way of war. There are store of Oxen and Kine in this Plantation, as also Swine which they keep up in pends, & horses, but by reason of the great number of inhabitants and occasion for Beasts of draught and burthen, cattell is a good commodity, so is all kind of provision, and it yeildeth the best return. It hath divers fruits and poultrey: and as there is a greater trade here then in the rest of the Islands, yet in regard the sellers are, well matched by the buyers, I conceive it the worst Plantation to goe to either to live or make a Voyage and returne. For what is here, is as well in the rest of the Islands, and much more conveniency to plant, for here they
have too many people, and in them there is too few, and in most of them ground enough. CHAP. 23. Trinidado. ANd more southwardly are the rest of these Lee Ilands, of which the greatest is the Trinidado, in eight degrees of North Latitude: it hath fifty leagues East and West, and almost 30 in breadth: the air is here very pestiferous, which makes that this is the unwholsomest Iland in the whole Indies, but many Indi∣ans that being bred to it, live there without much sicknesse: it hath a Colony of Spaniards seated in a Town called Saint Joseph, where is resident a Governour, and a∣bout 200 Spaniards with the help
of the Indians make much of that tobacco, which is sold in Spain, for Spanish tobacco, to the English, and others. The most Orientall part of it is the point De la Jaleria, from whence du North lyeth the small Iland of Tobago, compassed with Ilets: in the South-side is the round point Andrada, and on the West-side the gulf of Paria, which lyeth between it and the firm land: to the North are Saint Vincents and Granado, two little Ilands. CHAP. 24. Margreata, Tortuga, Gardiner, Caracute, Cubava, & Tamasca. TWenty leagues West from Trinidado lieth Margreata: it
is 16 leagues East and West, and the half in breadth: it hath but little water, yet plentifull of pasture, and many Cattle, with two Spa∣nish towns, which standeth neer the Sea: it hath a Fortresse to defend it, and a good harbour, which is be∣fore the Town: in this Fortresse, resides the Governour, and treasure for the King of Spains customes, of Pearl, which is worth at the least fifty thousand pounds yearly. And two leagues from this town within the land is the other, whose inhabitants are most Plan∣ters, but that on the Sea is possest by Merchants, & divers for pearls, which are in good plenty on this coast. And the Ile Cabagua, a league off at sea from whence every Sa∣turday at night, the Pearl fishers return to Margareta. To the East of Cubagua, are Losfralos, which is four little Ilands close aboard the shore. And to the East are the Witnesces, and West
lyeth Tortuga, and farther West lyeth the Ile of Gardiner: it is ten leagues long, and by it Curaco: in which the Dutch have a Fort and some souldiers: neer unto which is another Iland called Curacute of 14 leagues in length. And north from Curacute is the Iland of Aruba: in which two last mentioned, there are some peaceable Indians, that speak Spanish. From the Trinidado along the Coast, there are few Ilands, save those that are at the mouth of the River Amisons and Oroinoque, which are low and flat, and on the violent risings of the Rivers commonly overflown, which makes the inhabi∣tants provide them lodgings in the trees, which are there very great: these Indians have their Canoes to attend them, by which they passe not only to their neighbours, but fish, and go to the land at pleasure. Furthermore on the Land of Bra∣zil, there are some small Ilands,
the most remarkable is the Tameri∣ca: it is inhabited by the Portugals, it hath a fair town on the South∣side; and a harbour, with store of Red wood. CHAP. 25. Of the North-west pas∣sage, and the Lands cal∣led Nova Britania, or Nova Framuncia. THat which is most remarkable in this north part of America, is the straight of the north west passage, which is generally talked of, and indeed is nothing but a nar∣row difficult passage to Buttons Bay, the entrance being properly called Hudsons Straight, in regard of his first finding it: the mouth of this
straight lyeth in 62 degrees, and because of the impossibility of this Mathematicall story, I shall say, there is certainly no such Straight, as this which they call Anian, or the north-west passage: it hath been so thorowly searched into by our Nation that can give no incourage∣mēt to a farther trial, save that story men tel of a Manuscript in Portugall, shewed to one of our Merchants of the passage that way, of a Portu∣gall ship of the Phiipinus droven from thence by foule weather, through this straight to Portugall, but to men that know the distance between that streight, and those Ilands, it would seem the most ri∣diculous story in the World, be∣side the falsity of the Informers: the Greeks relation being a far bet∣ter story, for he saith in regard he was taken by Squire Candis in the South-sea, and lost all he had, to procure some relief in his old age, he would advise the English a spee∣dier
way to the East-Indies then they now took. And this intelli∣gence he giveth after he is retired to his Native Country, to repose from his troublesome way of ad∣venturing to Sea. From whence we may easily guesse, for the bad turn our Nation did him, he would not wish us a good one, but the scope of his intelligence being but to have a bill of exchange to receive money, as he pretended to come into England. But how likely it was, that he would leave those rich parts of America, which he lived in with the Spaniards to re∣tire to his own Nation, and from thence to undertake a Voyage for us to the worst place in the World, a rationall man cannot apprehend. But were there such a passage, it would much more concern the Por¦tugals, and the Spaniards, then it doth the English, for their trade is to the north part of the East Indies,
and ours to the south: theirs to the Moluccos, Philipinaes, Japan, and China, whereas we seldome passe beyond Bantam in Java, but were there a passage that way, yet it were not to be chosen before the other, for could a man sail in a strait line: first, from England to the straight, and then from the straight to the East Indies, it would prove a farther way than the o∣ther by the Cape of Bonaspei. But those that know any thing of those seas, know that the sea course to any part of north America is as low as 23, 24, 25, or 30 the highest. For the wind which bloweth in the south sea east and west, as well as in the north, that is to say, for the most part west without the Tro∣picks, and almost constantly East within them. Wherefore you must go out of your way aswell from the north part of America, to the East-Indies,
as from England to this supposed Straight: and there is as much dif∣ference in relation to pleasantnesse in voyages, as between summer and winter. For when you are clean of the Bay of Biscai in all the voy∣age, by the Cape you find no cold weather till you return to the same place again, but to the contrary, is so cold & icy about the Straight in the middle of Summer, that there is no making way without much difficulty and trouble. And in the south sea, where the Sun keeps the same course as in the north in June, Sir Francis Drake in compassing the world found so much cold in thirty eight degrees north latitude, that he was forced into a southerly course. And this makes a strong proba∣bility that there is no sea to the north of America, but that the land of this New world reacheth by the north parts; even to the northward∣ly
Provinces of the Empire of Ja∣pan, or Tartaria. For I finde that the winds that blow West and north-west in England being sea winds are not so cold, as those that come east and north-east, which are land-winds. Which I appre∣hend the onely cause of difference in the temperature of the air with us, and the north parts of America. For New England that lyeth in 41 & 42 is much colder in the winter then the most northwardly parts of England, which are in 56. And those parts of America, that are in that height are cold, almost the whole year through, as the un∣dertakers in the north passage plain∣ly prove, and this is caused cer∣tainly by the land-wind, which that height for the most part blow∣eth west, and northwardly, which is so much more colder, in regard it cometh from those vast Regions that are far thicker and untill'd
& uninhabited with wood swamps, and such moist crudities, as are not in Europe. On the land of the north-side Hudsons Straight, there hath been seen some of the wild Natives, but how they live is a kind of miracle. And from the south of this Strait, till you come to New England is but one Plantation, which is at the Fort of Kebeck, on the north-west side the River Canada, 100 leagues from the Island Antecostey, that lieth at the mouth of the said Ri∣ver. The French drive a great trade with the Natives for Bever∣skins in exchange of hatchets, knives, penny looking-glasses, bels, beads, and such toys. There are good store of the Na∣tives in these parts all alongst the Coast, and are willing to exchange such Commodities as they have, for such truck as the French bring them, although it is to be done
with much care to prevent their treachery. CHAP. 26. New England. THe Plantations of the North Government of New England, beginneth about 44 degrees, and the coast is indifferently seated with English, almost as southwardly as 41. This Countrey at first was laid out in severall proportions to divers Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, each having within his circuit a severall power. But at this day, it hath but three divisions onely, that is to say: the north and his bounds, the middle and the south; the north Government is the worst, and hath fewest peo∣ple: the middle Government is
that of Boston, which is the best, and hath most inhabitants. The south is the Government of New Plimouth, in which is the best ground: the north Government hath scarce a Town worthy the name of a Village; but the middle hath many Towns and Villages. The principall is Boston fairly built, the great street is neer half a mile long, full of wel-furnished shops of Merchandize of all sorts. Here is esident a Councill, and the Go∣vernour, which is yearly chosen from amongst them: this town hath a good Port, called the Bay of Boston, with many ships, which s secured with a Castle, guarded with Souldiers and Ordnance. Neer Boston lyeth Charles Town, and five miles into the Countrey s the town of Cambridge, that hath University with many Students. The south Government is that of New Plimouth, that hath the
name from the town, which is a indifferent Market town. The land of all this Region generally barren and rocky, but th care of the inhabitants supplyet the naturall defects of the Coun¦try, from the proceed of the Com¦modities it affordeth, which is Pi¦staves, Clabbord, Fish, Englis grain, and fruits, with the buildin of Ships, which they often sell  other parts, and iron works; wi these they drive a trade to mo parts of Europe, especially to Spai the Canary and Caribey Island it is a wholsome air, and the Eng¦lish people are well-colour'd, an have many children which thri well in that Countrey. They pu¦nish sin as severely as the Jews d in old time, but not with so good warrant. And they have broug the Indians into great awe, but n to any Gospell knowledge.
CHAP. 27. New Holland. TO the southwest of New Eng∣land, lyeth the Dutch Planta∣ion. It hath good ground, and good ayr, but few of that Nation nhabiting there, which maketh hat there is few Plantations in the and, and but one Village, whose nhabitants are part English, and art Dutch. Here is resident the he Governour appointed by the est India Company. This Vil∣age lyeth on Hudsons River in 40 nd a half, three miles within the outh of the River, and almost yning to a Fort that hath Guns, ut they are unmounted. There is e Fort of Orange, 30 miles up the d River, and there is a Mill to
saw boards for the Colony: the have here indifferent plenty o English and Indian Corn, but th best profit is the trade with th natives for Bever, and other skins Those that trade here pay 16 i the hundred Custome to the West India Company of Holland. Thes Dutch are mischievous neighbours for with their Indian trade they supply the natives with Guns and Ammunition, which in time may prove their own confusion, and doth already prejudice their neigh∣bours. CHAP. 28. The Swedes Plantation. THe Swedes are seated between the Dutch and Virginia, in a Village by a fort which lyeth eight
miles within Delaware River. On the north side the said River, they are few in number, and their prin∣cipall businesse is their commerce with the Indians, for they have lit∣tle or no Cattle. They furnish the Indians with Guns and weapons as the Dutch do, and once in a year have commonly a supply and re∣lief from Swethland, by a ship that fetcheth their Skins and other Truck. CHAP. 29. Virginia. Virginia is to the southward of the Swedes, and the north Cape of the great Bay that leadeth to Virginia, and Maryland lyeth distant from the Swedes Fort neer 130 English miles: this Bay is 240
miles up navigable for the biggest ships, it lyeth almost north and south, and it receiveth divers Ri∣vers, which issueth into it from the west and east; those on the west∣side are both the biggest and most: those on the east-side are not many nor great. This coast is also a flat coast as is New Holland, and the Swedes. The English are seated on the east-side the Bay, from the said point called Cape Charles, and by the Creeks and Bay-side 30 miles up the Bay. Without the said Cape are certain Islands called Smith's Islands, which are broken low grounds, unfit for habitation. On the west-side the Bay, within Cape Henry 8 miles lieth the water, call'd Lin-Haven, which issueth there into the Bay: it hath divers Branches, on which there are Plantations e∣ven to the head of most of them. And between the said Haven, and James River, which is distant 12
miles is two small Creeks that are indifferently seated, but on the side of the great Bay, there is no Plan∣tation between the Cape and James River, which is distant from  20 miles: this River floweth more then 120 miles, and almost so far Navigable for good ships. It  Shelvie and dangerous without  good Pilot: it receiveth divers Rivers and Creeks on the East-side: the most eminent is the Elizabeth River, which issueth into the great River within eight miles of the ndy point, that is the first point of the South-side the great River, and over against Point Comfort and, by which you must keep ose aboard, by reason the River  there onely to be entred, four iles higher then Elizabeth River,  Nawcimond River, which two are e principall; and on the West-side e most eminent, and best is Chick∣money, whose mouth is 10 miles
beyond James Town: this ma River, as also the Rivers and Cree that run into it, are seated by t water-side, onely by reason of t conveniency of carriage. And between point Comfort and York, there is a small River, ca¦led the Pecoson River, which is se¦ted, and then a little further Y River, which is a fair River, a navigable 20 miles for ships. T River is seated neer fifty miles  but on the East-side better than  the West. And the other Riv which run into the Bay betw this and Maryland, are Payankat and to Pahanoc, and the great Ri of Patowmek are unseated with a but the Natives. Here is go plenty of Millet, but not mu English grain. For which this R¦gion is not so naturall as New Eng¦land or New Holland, for the cr within a year or two will dege¦rate. Their onely commodity
Tobacco, which I think to be more aturall to the Countrey then any other thing. The best sort is the weet sented, which is not inferiour  the Spanish: Cattle are of the me price here as in England and ew England, and by reason there e no Markets, and little money  buy them, fresh meat is very arcely eaten. The Virginia pro∣rb is, That hogs and women thrive ell amongst them. But the later (I ink) are indifferently subject to  fae of those men that go there which is much sicknesse or death. or the air is exceeding unwhol∣me, insomuch as one of three rcely liveth the first year at this e; though formerly they re∣rt, the mortality hath stretcht  the taking away of eleven of elve. The reason of this is not e latitude, for that is 37 degrees, d a half. In which lyeth many cellent wholsome Countreys,
but I conceive it to be the chang¦blenesse of the weather, which  mighty extream in heat and co and as various as the wind bo Winter and Summer. The ne cause is the Swamps, standing-¦ters and Marishes, and mighty sto of Rivers, and low lying of t land. There is two other pernicio companions that haunt the Engl inhabitants, the one is the disea called the Country Duties, whi they originally caught of the In¦ans, and the cure is the same th use in England for the French Po it being almost alike. The other  the Rattle-snake, so called, for t rattle in her taile, whose bitin are present death. And this v mine in the Summer is so stirri that they are in the fields, woo and commonly in their houses,  their great anoyance, yet this mo¦tality doh rather harden the pe¦ples hearts, then bring them
God, for I think they are the far∣est from conscience and morall onesty, of any such number to∣gether in the world. And for want f administration of Justice, there e many have left the place, and e gone to Maryland, which lyeth  the Bay. The Virginia bread  commonly of Millet, called oane. And if the servants have ough of that, their complaint il procure no remedy. The Rivers d Creeks afford much fish in ummer, and furze in the woods, ood store of Deer and Turkeys  Winter, and fowl by the water∣de in divers places, and yet is pro∣sion so scarce that they are all e year furnished with fish and ase, and bisket from New Eng∣nd. The great resort of shipping  in winter, for then is the Tobac∣ struck into cask, and fit for le. This Countrey is for the most
part plain, with few hils, and we it not so woody, probably not alt¦gether so unwholsome. It is without any Minerall, sa Iron, Stone, which is in great ple¦ty. In divers parts of the Cou¦trey, the natives are under contr¦bution of the Governour, and pa him great tributes of skins, and  them with good priviledges ov the English, which in time ma prove a third Massacre. CHAP. 30. Maryland. THis Province is divided fro Virginia by the great Riv Patomuk. It lying on the Nort¦side the said River, and West-si of the great Virginia Bay. It  more wholsome then the parts
Vrginia now seated, and better r English grain. The English in∣bitants are few, and those of fferent Religions; for some a∣ongst them are Papists, but most otestants. There hath always en toleration in Religion, and is  this present. The natives of this place have ver been treacherous to the Eng∣, but doth them good service in eir grounds, cattle, and hogs. any of their children being bred  amongst them: they live here in ater plenty than at Virginia, as ving more range of the woods, d fewer neighbours with Indian oodsmen to kill them meat. Those that are come from Vir∣ginia, are seated on the River Bolus,  next to the River Patomuk up  Bay, and by such as are draw∣g thither from New England, and ily go from Virginia, it is likely  be a flourishing Countrey.
CHAP. 31. Old Virginia. SOuth frō this Uirginia, lieth  Province, known by the na of Old Uirginia, it is remarka for Cape Hatrask, that lyeth neer 36 degrees. From which Ca far out at sea is flat shelvy groun The Cape is a point of a brok Island, and hath between it a the main Roanock Island to t South of the River Ockam, whi there issueth into the Sea. T River is deep within and broa but so shallow at the mouth, that Pinnace can hardly enter it at hi water, otherwise it were conve¦ent for a Plantation. For it is fa beyond Uirginia in all respects, any Land we possesse in the Ma
The Indians of this River pay con∣tribution to the Governour of Uir∣ginia. And along this coast till you come to Florida, is no Plantation, nor inhabitants but the natives. CHAP. 32. Florida. THis Province begins in 34 de∣grees, and hath on the East∣coast before you come to the Cape of Florida, two Forts, in which are Spanish Garrisons. The first and most northerly is the Fort of Saint Mark, within the point of Saint Helena, in 32 degrees and a half distant from the Havena Incuba 100 leagues. The other is called Saint Augustine, which is the prin∣cipall, because the Haven is good, and neer the Channell of Bahama, in 29 degrees 40 minutes.
The point of Canes in 28 which hath to the South the river Ages, and at the Cape of Florida, are ma∣ny little Islands called the Martors, and these Islands reach from the said Cape within a league, and a half of Cuba. The head of the Mar∣tors to the East hath an Island of 14 leagues but very narrow. The out-most eastern point lyeth in 24 degrees and a half, and from the Cape of Florida to the Goverment of Pancuco along the Coast of the Sea, is 300 leagues, which Seas are called the Gulf of New Spain. In all this Coast there is no Town nor Plantation, and few Indians, by reason the Spaniards have taken them away to other parts. There hath not been worked Mines ei∣ther of gold or silver in this Flori∣da. Neither have the Spaniard any Commodity from them save In∣dians. This Gulf of New Spain, or Mexico hath two entrances; the
one is between Youcatan and Cuba, where the stream commeth fiercely in, the other is between Cuba, and the Cape of Florida, where it run∣neth more violently out. CHAP 33. Of New Spain. BEsides this Province of Florida, the King of Spain in this nor∣thern America, hath three great Kingdomes. The first and princi∣pall is the Kingdom of New Spain, the second is the Kingdome of Ga∣lisia, the third the Kingdom of Gutemalia, and the Province of Varagua, that adjoyneth to the Straight of Dearian, and is properly of the Councill of Panama. The Kingdom of Spain hath in it a Vice∣roy and Councill, intituled the
Viceroy of Mexico. And within his Government the Province and Bishoprick of Mexico, that of Tlas∣cala, Guaxaca, Mechoan, Chiapa, Yucatan, and Panuco. The Indirns of this Kingdome are of two sorts; the Chickamecans, which are a sort of rogues, that live much after the manner of Toreges, or ancient Irish, by robbing and spoiling passengers on the way: Towns and Villages. And the other live even as decent∣ly as the Spaniard, and are of all trades and vocations, as they are, of sharp wits, and of great agility of body, as appeareth by their extra∣ordinary feats of activity on the Rope, and tumblings. This King∣dome is a high Countrey, for the most part of it, and for riches, plea∣santnesse, and wholsomnesse, ac∣counted one of the best in the world, as lacking nothing naturally that is to be had, excepting wine and oil, which they might also
have, but that it is forbidden, to plant Vineyards, or Olive yards by the King of Spain, and it hath di∣vers things not elswhere to be had both of Trees, Herbs and Drugs. CHAP 34. The Councill of New Galisia. THis Kingdome of New Gali∣sia, hath no Viceroy, but is go∣verned by a Councill, whose bounds is parted from New Spain at the Port of Nativity on the South Sea, to the North, North∣west, and North-east. It hath no bounds, but may inlarge their ter∣ritories, as they see occasion on the Indians. It hath already these Provinces. The first Guadalaiaca,
Xalisco, Sacaticas, Chiamerla, Cu∣liacan, New Biscai, and Sivaloa. And this Kingdome is not much inferiour to New Spain, and it hath the same sorts of Indians. CHAP. 35. Gutamalia Kingdome. THis Kingdome of Gutamalia is governed as the other by a Council, without a Viceroy, and is the southwardliest Region of this North America, and hath within its bounds the Provinces of Guta∣malia, from whence the Kingdome taketh name. Soconusco, Chiapa, Suchitepeque, Verapas, Honduaras, and Cacos. Saint Saviour, and Saint Michael, Nievaraqua, Chuluteca, Taquesgalpa, and Costarica, or the rich Coast. The Indians in these
Provinces are more warlike than the rest, and have more unwilling∣ly submitted to the Spanish yoake, and therefore they have had almost continuall wars, the most of the Indians living till very lately after the manner of the Chickamecians; though many of them are docible as the Indians of Mexico. This is a rich wholsome Kingdome, not in∣feriour to Galisia, but rather ex∣ceeds it. But when I come to each perticular Province, I shall name them as they adjoyn on the Coast of the Sea. CHAP. 36. Of Panuco. THis Province is neer adjoyning to Florida, and parted from it by the River of Palms, which ly∣eth
in 28 degrees of North Lati∣tude. That part of it that lyeth next to Mexico, is the best, and hath the greatest plenty of victuals, with som gold: the other side, which is next Florida, is poor and barren. This Province hath three Spa∣nish Towns: Panuco, in something more then 23 degrees. It is distant from Mexico 65 leagues, neere a Ri∣ver, whose entrance is a haven: it is governed by a chief Justice, provi∣ded by the Viceroy of New Spain. The Village of Saint James, of the Valea, 20 leagnes to the West of Panuco. The Village of Saint Lucas, 8 leagues from Panuco, to the North∣east, neer to the Sea. There is no River nor Haven in this Coast but Panuco, and Palmes which are not very good, and not many Indians.
CHAP. 37. he Province of Talas∣calia, or Angels. THe next to Panuco, on the  coast of the North Sea lyeth s Province of Talascalia or Lo∣els; with in its government are r Spanish Cities. The best is sangels, seated by a River that neth into the South Sea. It deth off the side of a long Plain  from Mexico 22 leagues, and taineth neer 3000 housholds, in  streets, governed by a chief tice, and in it are resident the hedrall, with Monasteries of minick, Augustine, Franciscan, mersed, and Carmelite Friars, h one of Nuns, and a Colledge
of more than five hundred Indi Children to be instructed in t Spanish Religion and Languag And north of the Angels is the C¦ty of Talascalia, in more than  degrees of height with two tho sand five hundred houses▪ in whi is a fair Cloyster of Francisc Friars. In the Province of Losangles, t City of Guaxaca, is the third, which are three Monasteries Friars, and two of Nuns all ve rich. This town is pleasant and o wholsome aire, and not far fro the River of Alurado, The City of Vera Crux is  English mile from the Sea, i leagues from the Port of Sai John Delua▪ of four hundred Spa¦nish housholds, besides Indians.  it resides the Kings treasurer for t Customes. This Province hath abundan of Flax, wheat, sugar and ging
diversity of hearbs, and fruits, a∣bundance of cattle, hogs and hor∣ses, many silver mines, 200 chief Indian towns, and at least 40 Mo∣nasteries of Friars. The Harbours and Ports are on the North Sea, the best of which is Saint John De Lua, which is made by a small Island, whose bank is kept up by a wall, in which are Iron and Brasse rings, whereby Cables they more fast their ships. This Island hath on it a Castle, which commandeth the Harbour, that is entred by two Channels; the one to the North is the slat, the other is called the Galisian Chan∣nell. Here the ships bound for No∣va Hispania, and Mexico unlade, and to the North of this Port on the coast of this Province is the ri∣ver Sempoalia, and upward the ri∣ver of Casons, and neer the govern∣ment of Panuco, Fuspea, and Ta∣magua, and to the South of the
said Saint John Delva, is first the river of Almerica, and further South, the river of Alvarado. CHAP. 38. Youcatan Province. THe North part of this Pro∣vince adjoyneth to the South of Talascalia. It is a pen-insula, and in compasse 150 leagues. The tem∣perature is hot and moist, it hath no river, but is full of good wil∣lows. It is a woody Country, nor will it bear English grain, neither hath it gold or other minerall. But it hath many inhabitants, that are of the civillest sort of In∣dians, in New Spain, and great plenty of Millet, Swine, all sorts of cattle, horses, and much poul∣trey, much Cotton, Bombast,
and Ashurs. The Inhabitants are healthy, and live to great age. There are four Spanish towns, the City of Meridia, is in the midst of the Province in 20 degrees. In it are resident the Governour, the Officers of the Revenue, and royall Treasure, and Cathedral Suffragan to Mexico, with one Monastery of Franciscan Friars. The village of Valiodalid is 31 leagues from Meri∣dia to the South; and neer the coast of the Honduras is Salimanca, a fair town. And on the north coast the village of Saint Franciscus of Campeach, in 20 degrees, fifty leagues from Meridia. It is a reaso∣nable good Haven, but of little depth, on the coast of this Pro∣vince are many Rocks, Flats and Isles, that there is scarcely any say∣ling within foure leagues of the shore, on which there is the greatest Flouds and Ebs of any part of New Spain.
CHAP. 39. The Province of Honduras. THis Province of the Honduras adjoyneth unto the South part of Yucatan, his coast stretcheth a∣long the north Sea as far as Nicu∣rayna, which is neer 150 leagues. It is a hilly Countrey, plentifull of all sorts of Cattle, and store of Wheat, and Mines of Gold and Silver: it hath six Spanish towns and many peaceable Indians. The City of Valiodalid, standeth in 16 degrees, 40 leagues from the north Sea. Here is resident the Governour, a Cathedrall and a Monastery of Lamersed. The Ci∣ty of Adios, is 30 leagues from Va∣liodalid,
to the West the village of Saint Petro, is 11 leagues from the Port of Cavalos, where the Officers oyall are resident, because the Port of Cavalos is sickly, to which he Ships come. This Port of Ca∣valos, is in 15 degrees on the North Sea, there are few in it besides Blackamores, and some factors, by eason of the unwholsomnesse of he place. The City of Truxcillio, is 64 leagues from the Cavalos, to the North-east a league from the north Sea. The village of Saint George is populous of Indians, and rich in gold. The Septentrionall point of this coast is the Cape of Eburus, in 16 degrees east, off which 20 leagues lyeth the River of Pitch, and a little further Riobaxco, and beyond it the River of Balahama, and in 14 degrees and a half lyeth the River Salt, and after that the Cape of the three points, and from
North the Island of Utilia, and to the North-east Hellen and Lyvanai▪ and in 14 degrees the Cape o Thanks be to God. And north from thence the three Islands called, Take away Sleep. CHAP. 40. Of the Province of Nicaragua. NIcaragua lyeth next to the South-side of Honduras: it is a plentifull Countrey of Coco, Cot∣ton-wool, Millet, Cattle, and much gold. It hath five Spanish towns, & abundance of peaceable Indians, which are most expert in the Spa∣nish tongue. The first and principall town
is Saint James, 12 leagues from the South sea, at the head of the lake, Nicaragua, where the Governour is resident, the royall Officers and Cathedrall, with five Monasteries of Lamersed, and many peaceable Indians. The City of Granado, standeth on the Borders of this great lake, neer which is a famous Volcan, that burns perpetually; casting forth fire and smoak. A Friar ima∣gined there was much gold in it, because it never consumed the land about it, wherefore he caused a Caldron to be fastned to a huge chain, and let it into the furnace. But the violence of the fire soon consumed it, and with all the Fri∣ars hopes. This great lake of Ni∣caragua, is full of Islands, and by a kind of River hath an issue into the north Sea, which river or passage it navigable for great vessels. And the head of this lake is within five
leagues of the South Sea, and good ground to be cut, by which it were easie (if the Spaniard so pleased) to have passage from the South Seas to the north Sea. At the head of the said lake, the village of Nalio, standeth in 11 degrees and a half on the South coast, and is the best Port on that coast. On the north Seas (for this pro∣vince reacheth from the North to the South seas) is first the river of Gare, that divideth Nicvaragua, from Honduras, south of it the Ri∣ver Wipre, next the Port of Saint John, which is the voiding River, that comes from the great lake, that hath a great Island lying in the mouth of it. In the south sea it hath the Nalio, the Port of Saint James, and the Port of Paria, and Nicoya, and on the coast the Island of Chora, Saint Mary, and Saint Mark.
CHAP. 41. The Province of Castorica. THis Province lyeth between Nickuragua, and Caragua, be∣tween which it hath 90 leagues in length. It is a good land and very fruitfull in Millet, Wheat, Flax, and Sugar, plenty of Mines both of gold and silver, and it hath two Spanish Towns: the first and best is Curtago, the other Mendoco. It hath two Ports, one on the south sea, the other on the North.
CHAP. 42. The Province of Varagua. THis Province lyeth between Costarica, and Panama, adjoy∣ning on the south part to the Strait of Dariana. The northerliest is in 11 degrees, it hath East and West 50 leagues, and in breadth 25, and is washed as Costarica, with the north and south seas. It is a Moun∣tainous Countrey full of bushes, without pasture or cattle, wheat or barley, but it hath some Miller, but full of rich mines of Gold. The Indians are few, and they be in continuall wars with the Spa∣niards. It hath the City of Concep∣tion 40 leagues from Nombre Dd'ios,
where the Governour and Officers are resident. The village of Trinity, six leagues to the East of the Con∣ception, neer the River of Bethelem, And three leagues from the North sea, the City of Santey Fei, standeth 12 leagues from the Conception, to the south. In it are Melting-houses, and Deputy Officers. The City of Charles neer the coast of the south sea, 50 leagues from Santey Fei. At the end of this Varagua be∣ginneth the southern America. And therefore I shall return back to the other parts of this north America, which is not yet discovered.
CHAP. 43. Of the Province of Ciblioa. THis Province of Ciblioa is the most northerly Province that the Spaniards possesse in America. It hath but one Spanish Town, but many well built Cities of In∣dians. The Spanish town is called Saint John of Ciblioa. It hath a strong Garrison of Spaniards and Mexican Indians. The fairest Indian Town is Quibra, that hath also a Spanish Garrison. This Town is in 40 de∣grees, and distant from Cibiloa 200 leagues, from whence it lieth due north. This Region is apt for English
grain, and produceth all sorts of our hearbs and fruits. Here are store of all sorts of our Cattle, and the Oxe of the Countrey, which hath a bunch of flesh on his back of the bignesse of a mans head, and his hair is shaggy and long, his horns smaller than our Kines horns, but his body much bigger: this is an Inland Province, and lyeth from the sea many leagues. CHAP. 44. New Biskay. THis Province lyeth on the south-west of Cibola: it hath store of provision and cattle, and divers mines of silver. It hath two fair Spanish Towns, that is to say, Sancta Barbola, and the Baro of
Saint John, with divers peaceable Indians. It is an Inland Province, but of much Commerce, by reason of the silver-mines. CHAP. 45. Chiamerla. THis Province lyeth in more then two and twenty degrees of height. It is ten leagues broad, and something more in length: it lyeth along the south sea, but hath no Ports of name. It hath a town of Spaniards, call'd Saint Sebastian. It hath many rich silver Mines, and sufficient of Cattle, and all sorts of Grain and Fruits.
CHAP. 46. Culiacan. THis Province is the most nor∣therly Province the Spaniards possesse on the coast of the south sea. It is west of Chiametla: there are much cattle, seeds and fruits of England; it hath two Spanish towns: one is called the Virgins, by which there are some silver mines; the other the village of Saint Michael; this is a small Pro∣vince, and hath no eminent port on the sea.
CHAP. 47. Sacetas. SAcetas lyeth south-east from Biscai. It is very wholsome in some parts of it, and as sickly and unwholsome in other parts, which causes that in some places there is much want, and in other places as much plenty. But to amend all de∣fects, there are in most places rich silver mines. It hath three Spanish towns, the best is Erena, the se∣cond Nombre d'Dios▪ and the worst Durangi: the Chickmeacan Indians do much annoy these parts, but there are great numbers of Civill Indians that live in peaceable man∣ner.
CHAP. 48. Xalisco. THis Province hath the City  of Compostella, neer the south in 21 degrees, nineteen minutes: re is the village of the Purifica∣ south-west from Gudleria, 30 gues: this land is hot and sickly, hath mines of gold and silver, d store of provisions, and ex∣ent horses, that are well bred any service. CHAP. 49. Guadalaiara. Uadalaiara is the best of all the Provinces of the Kingdome
of New Galisia, and the most s¦therly: it hath all sorts of gra hearbs and fruits of New Sp and plenty of kine, horses,  swine; it is a wholsome good  and hath many silver mines:  chief City and Head of the Ki¦dome is Guadalaira in 20 degr Heere resideth the Councell,  officers of the goods and ro treasure, a Cathedrall, two ¦nasteris of Friars, and one Nuns. And 30 leagues from Guadal is the village of Saint Mary, and nother called the Holy Ghost:  Province is much troubled  the Chickemecan Indians, but  many well governed Civill Ind that live orderly, and very richl
CHAP. 50. Mechocan. THis Province lyeth between the Province of Mexico, and e Kingdome of the New Galisia, hath in breadth by the coast of e south sea 80 leagues, and 60 ithin land. Here are many good ines, and it is a fruitfull land, and ath much Wheat, Millet, Coco, l sorts of Spanish fruits, Cotton∣wool, the rich drug of Cocheneel, ore of cattle and fish, and the In∣dians are industrious, and given to abour: the chief City is Mechoa∣n: it stands in 18 degrees 15 mi∣nutes and 47 leagues from Mexico. The City of Pascurio, standeth seven leagues to the east of Mecho∣can: it hath the Cathedrall, and
two Monasteries of Augustine and Franciscan Friars. And 35 leagu from Pascurio north-east is the vil¦lage of Saint Michael, in a roug Country. The next is the Vil¦lage of Salya, then the Village o Saint Phillip. The village of Sackatula, is 4 leagues south west from Mechoacan neer the south sea in 18 degrees, 9 leagues from Mexico. And the village of Colina in 1 degrees 20 minutes. On the coas of the south sea neer the confine of Galisia the Port of Natividad▪ is in 19 degrees, and from this por they make their navigation to the Philipin'as in East-India. Besides these towns rehearsed, which are possest by Spaniards, there are 94 head-towns for Indi∣ans, with schools of Doctrine for Indian children, and 130 ordinary towns.
CHAP. 51. Of the Province of Mexico. THis province falleth between Mechoacan and Talascalia, it hath in length north and south 130 leaugues, and in breadth 18. The chief City and Head of ew Spain is seated in this pro∣ince called Mexico. It is an inland ity lying in 19 degrees and a half,  the midst of two great lakes, at compasse it about, the one is lt, the other fresh: the fresh voy∣eth into the salt, each of five leagues in breadth, and eight in ength, and both are in compasse 3 leagues. There are three Causways by
which they go into the City, the shortest of half a league long, the longest a league and half, the other a league: it hath neer 70 thousand houses, the most of Spaniards built with brick fair and high. And here resideth the Viceroy of New Spain and Councill, the Inquisition office and Judges, the Officers of the Revenues, and royall treasure, a founding house and a mint house, with the Archiepiscopall, Metro∣politan, and Monasteries of Fran∣ciscan, Dominican, and Austin Fri∣ars, the company of Jesus el Car∣men Lamersed, the Bare foot and Trinity Friars, 10 Monasteries of Nuns, one Colledg of Indian chil∣dren, and the retired from the world, and repenting whores, a University, and divers Hospitals. In this province are reckoned to be six hundred thousand tribu∣tary Indians, one hundred and fifty Monasteries, with multitude of
schools to teach Indians Children, and many gold and silver mines, infinite plenty of all sorts of cattle, and sheep, grain, hearbs and fruits, and what else is necessary for the delight of man in an abundant manner, with the rich Cocheneel. The Coast of this province rea∣cheth to the south sea, on which there is an excellent port called Aquepulco, in 17 degrees, six leagues from the river Lopes, and eight leagues more west is the Sitalia, and four leagues further the River Metla. CHAP. 52. Guaxcaca. GUaxcaca Province, commeth to the Coast of the south sea, and it lyeth between Mexico and
Gutamalia province along the Coast of the south sea one hundred leagues: it hath 5 Spanish towns, the chief of which is Antiquera; in it are resident the Governour of the Province, a Cathedrall, many Monasteries of Friars. It is distant from Mexico eight leagues, from whence it lyeth south west. The next to it is Sapolecai, the third Saint Jago de Nexapa, the fourth the Village of the Holy Ghost: this province hath store of gold, and silver mines, and one of Chrystal, Boreal, much Coco, Cot∣ton-wool, Wheat, and Millet, and Cocheneel, plenty of all sorts of cattle and swine, and not one River in the Countrey but yieldeth gold. There are 350 head-towns of In∣dians, and 120 Monasteries of Fri∣ars, and many of Nuns, and schools of Indian Children to be instructed in the Spanish language, and pope∣ry, and three hundred thousand
tributary Indians. In this province is the Valley from whence Ferdi∣nando Cortez the first Conque∣ror had his title of Marquesse of the valley. The ports on the south sea are the Haven of Guatulaco, in 15 de∣grees and a half: it is great, good, and much frequented. The port of Tecoantepequa, neer the other, which is but reasonable good, but it hath a great town, standing on it, from whence they make great fishings, especially for shrimps, with which they trade the inland Countreys. CHAP. 53. Soconusco. THis is the westerliest province of the Kingdom of Gutamalia,
joyneth to the province of Guax∣caca, from whence it lyeth on the south sea east, south-east 34 leagues and far into the land. It is plentiful of Wheat, Coco, Millet, and Cat∣tle. It hath but one Spanish town, which is called Guearettan, where the Governour is resident. And in her Coast are the Rivers Coatan, in her west border, east of which is Gapernacalte, and east south-east Colata. CHAP. 54. Gutamalia. THe province of Guattamall, is the head of the Kingdome of Gutamalia, it joyneth to the pro∣vince of Soconusco, and on the south sea, it stretcheth 70 leagues, the Countrey is of a good tempera∣ture,
and plentifull of Cotton∣wool, Wheat, Millet and Cattell, and other Seeds and Fruits, the Winds and Rains in October are ve∣ry furious. It hath five Spanish towns be∣sides many Iudian towns and villa∣ges. The head City is Saint James of Gutamalia, in which the Coun∣cill is resident. It lyeth in 24 de∣grees and a half, and of above a thousand Spanish housholds, and here are the Kings Officers of the goods and royall treasure, a melting house and a Cathedrall, which is Suffragan unto Mexco, a Monastery of Dominicans, Franciscans, Mer∣cenarians, Augustines, Jesuits, and two of Nuns, with an Hospitall or Colledg. This City is furnished with all sorts of provisions, and daities, and standeth exceeding pleasantly on the side of a large plain, neer a burning mountain. And 40 leagues
from Saint James is the City of Saint Saviour the village of Trinity, sixty and four leagues from the port of Axavatla. It is a chief Commissioner-ship, with the title of His Majestie in a plentifull soil. It is a place of great traffick. And the port Atouch, for the ships of Peru and New Spain. And 62 leagues from Saint James is the village of Saint Michael, the Haven of this town is called the Bay Sonseca, which is distant from the town two leagues. This province hath abundance of gold, some silver, store of balm, and liquid amber, Copal, Suchicopal excellent liquours, and the Gumme animi, with Beasts that breed the Bezar stone. But the Volcans here are very noysome to those that lie neer them, for they often burst forth casting out fire-stones and ashes. And here are more of those Volcans or fire-pits than in all India besides.
CHAP 54. Chiapa. THis province is an Inland pro∣vince, it is Mediterranean to Soconusco, Mexico, Tabasco, and Ve∣rapas, and in length 40 leagues, and something lesse in breadth. It hath store of Wheat, Millet, and other grain and seeds, much cattle, but few sheep. It hath but one town of Spaniards, which is called the Ci∣ty royall, 70 leagues from Saint James of Gutermalia, to the north east, which is governed by an or∣dinary Justice, and in it is resident, the Cathedrall: two Monasteries of Dominicke Friars, and one of Nuns. There are many Indian towns in her climates, and the na∣tives are excellent Planters, and
Musitians. This City royall is in 18 degrees and a half, built round and of a marvellous scituation, six∣ty leagues from the north sea, and as far from the south. CHAP. 55. Verapas. THis also is an In-land pro∣vince of Gutemalia, and is Mediterranean to Chiapa, Youcatan, Honduras, and Gutamalia of 30 leagues over, it is a moist countrey, and hath plenty of Millet and Wheat, Cotton-wool, Coco, and much of that sort of fowls, whose feathers make the rare coloured Indian pictures, and this is a great Merchandize amongst them. The Spaniards have onely one small town, with a Monastery of Friars,
and one school to instruct the In∣dian children. The Governour is a chief Justice: Between this pro∣vince and the south America, is the Provinces of Costarica, Hondu∣ras, Varagua, and Mearagua, which joyneth to Gutemalia, on the coast of the South-sea. And thus have you the northern America. Here a Map. CHAP. 56, Of Panama. PAnama hath a Council that hath for Jurisdiction, no more than the province of Panama, & the ele∣ction of the Governour of Varagua, n regard they are appointed princi∣pals of the Navigation for the dis∣patch of Peru, & ordering the King of Spains treasure, which is yearly
transported to Porto Belio, over the strait of Darion, and from thence to Spain. It adjoyneth on Cartha∣gena, and Popian, to the south▪east and south-west. The chief City is Panama, seated on the south sea in 9 degrees north Latitude, consist∣ing of 700 housholds: the most part of the inhabitants are Mer∣chants. Here is also resident the Councill, and Officers of the roy∣all treasure, Monasteries of Domi∣nican, Franciscan, and Lamersed, and Augustine Friars; with two of Nuns, and a Cathedrall. The Ha∣ven is indifferent good, but the ships come not within a league of the town, the biggest ships not fur∣ther than Perua, three leagues of the town, at which place they lie dry at low water. The air at Panama is extream unwholsome, and the place very sickly, but it is mended and made durable, for the profit is brought in by the vast summes yearly
brought there to carry to Spain, of which the Inhabitants get part. The Village of Nata, lyeth on the south sea west from Panama, 30 leagues, it hath a reasonable port. On the North sea, there is the own of Nombred' Dios, it hath a good port, but the place is so un∣wholsome, that the trade of Mer∣handize is removed from thence o the City of Saint hilip, the arbour is called the port Obelo, in which the Spanish ships, do unlade hose Merchandizes, that are to be āsported to Panama & so to Peru, nd receiveth in such goods as are return'd, to be transported to Spian. To secure the entrance into this arbour, are two strong Castles, between the City and the sea, and third neer the town. And on this coast are reckoned, first the bay of arabaco, neer the confines of Va∣qua, to the east of it, the River of Trinity, the Conception and
Bethelem, an Island, and the rive of Caugre, up which river fro Saint Chilip, they transport the Merchandize bound for Peru, un¦to the house of the Croses, which is at the head of the said River and from thence to Panama, which i distant from the said house five leagues. And 12 leagues to the west from Nombre d'Dios, is the port of Long gote, and in 9 degrees the port  Hians, the port of the Aventure i six, Porto Belio in five, and again it the Island of the Lookings, an the Bastemontos. And two leagu from Nombre d'Dios, the river  Sardinilia, and the Isle of Sardini and the river of Millet, and the rive of Snakes, and in the gulf of Cura the town of Saint Mary. On th south coast the Cape of Saint Mar and point of war. And towar Panama, the gulf of Paris, when stands Nata, the point of Chiam
the river of Chepo, and the Balsa,  the inward part of the gulf of Saint Michael, north from the sand of pearl. CHAP. 57, Carthegna Province. THis Countrey lyeth on the north sea, and is parted from the province of Panama, by the river of Darian, from whence unto the river Magdalen, is 80 leagues. The land is mountainons and hilly, full of high trees; this Region is fruitfull in some places, and in o∣ther some as barren. The seed of England will grow but in few parts of this Countrey, but here are ma∣ny cattle▪ horses and swine. The temperature of this Coun∣trey is hot and very rainy, neither
is there mines worked either of gold or silver, but much rozen and liquors, which they have from trees, and Sanguis Dragnis. The City of Cartagena, standeth neer the sea two leagues west from point Canta, in ten degrees of height. It hath more then six hundred hous∣holds, and in it is resident the Go∣vernour, the King of Spains offi∣cers of the royall treasure, and the Cathedrall Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Granado, with Monaste∣ries of Dominick, and Franciscan, Friars. The scituation is plain, and almost an Island, on the north side compasseth it, and to the land an arm of the sea, which reacheth to the Lake of Canapote. At the en∣trance of the Haven, there is an Island without Inhabitants. The village of Saint James of Tolu, is two leagues from Cartagena south∣west the village of Saint Margito, and 30 leagues from Cartagena, to
the south the village of Sancta Crux, is 70 leagues from Cartagena by the sea and great river of Mag∣dalen, and twenty from Sancta Martha, six from the sea, where the Marchandizes that are bound to the Kingdome of Granado are delivered out of the ships, and from thence are transported up the Ri∣ver in Canowes. CHAP▪ 58. The Kingdome of Granado. THis Kingdome lyeth from the sea, adjoyning on the south part of Cartagena. It is a very rich Countey in Mines of Emraulds, gold, steel, and copper, store of pastures, with all sorts of cattle,
wheat, Millet, fruits, and hearbs. The Indians are great traders, and able men of body, ingenious in the sciences of the Spaniards. The Mer∣chandize commeth up the the river Magdalen, on which this land ly∣eth. Their chief City is Sancta Fee, seated on the bottome of a hill, in four degrees to the North of the Equinoctiall Line of more than six hundred housholds. In which is resident in behalf of the King of Spain, a Councill for managing of the affaires of the Kingdome, the Officers of the royall treasure, a melting house, and a Cathedrall Metropolitan, two Monasteries of Friars, and in her borders more than fifty thousand tributary Indi∣ans. The City of Tocampa standeth on the river Cati, which runneth into Magdalen. This City hath also many Indians tributary, so hath all the other Spanish towns, which are
first Saint Michael, then the City of Trinity, 20 leagues from Sancta Fee north-west, the town of Palms, fifteen leagues from Sancta Fee west north-west. And the City of Tunis north-east from Sancta Fee 22 leagues: it stands upon a hill of an extraordinary scituation. Here is a great garrison of souldiers, and the best market in all the Realm. Here is also the City of Meridia, the City of Victorey, the village of Saint Christopher, the City Bales, and the City of Marequeata, all Spa∣nish Cities, with many hundred large towns and villages of Indians. Through this Region they passe from Cartagena by land to Peru, commonly by post, but not other∣wise, by reason that it is fifteen hundred leagues from Cartagena to Cosco. This Region cannot be entred by land from Cartagena, by reason of the great waters and mountains that are in the way,
wherefore they passe up the river Magdalen, with Merchandize from the Custome-house of Malamba, on the said River, from whence to the first landing in the King∣dome of Granada is one hundred and fifty miles. CHAP. 59. The Province of Sancta Martha. THis Province of Martha, lyeth between Cartagena, and the River Hacha, on the North sea. It is a plentifull Countrey of Millet, Potatocs, much gold, Emraulds, and other rich stones, and copper, and hath five Spanish towns, the City of Sancta Martha, in ten de∣grees of North latitude, where is
resident the Spanish Governour, the King of Spains Officers of his treasure, and a Cathedral Suffragan to that of Granado. The City of Tenerif standeth on the river Mag∣dalen, which parteth this Province from Cartagena. The village of Palms, is two leagues from this river, twenty to the south of Te∣nerif, the City of Losreas is 30 leagues from the river Hacha. On the coast of this Government is the river Biaba, Piaras, Aguamur, and Sancta Martha. The Indians of this province are commonly in war, which is a hinderance to the Spaniards quiet enjoying the riches. It exceedeth in stones of such va∣lue and quantity, as is not elswhere to be found in India.
CHAP. 60. Venesiula. THe Province of Venesiula, ly∣eth on the North Sea, part∣ed from Sancta Martha, by the River of Hacha, on the east is the province of Suava, or New An∣delosia, as the Spaniards call it. The coast of the sea is neer 130 leagues of length. In this land are veins of gold, of more than two and twenty Carracts and a half. It is plentifull of wheat and other seeds, for there are two harvests in a year. It hath abundance of all kind of cattle, great and small, Cotton and Sasa∣prila. The City of Coro standeth in 11 degrees in a good air, the Governour for the King of Spain resideth here. It hath also a mel∣ting-house,
and Cathedrall with Monasteries. The City of the Lady of Car∣valteda, on the sea coast 8 leagues from Coro, with a bad haven. Saint James is within the land three leagues to the south of Car∣velteda. The new Valentia is sixty leagues from Coro, and seven from the Port of Brubufa Xeres 15 leagues south from Valentia. The new Si∣gonia is 20 leagues to the south of Xeres. The City of Tacuio, stan∣deth ten leagues from Segavia, south-west Truxcillio, eight leagues from Coro south and by east. On this coast, the principall river is the river Hacha, which parts this pro∣vince from Sancta Martha, neer the mouth is a rich Town and Beads of pearl of the best in India.
CHAP. 61. Guana. THis Region comprehendeth all the land that lyeth between the province of Venesula and Bra∣zil, which beginneth at twodegrees of south latitude; this land is more famous for report, than for any certain knowledge of the riches thereof, for at this day, there is no more than one Spanish Town cal∣led Codoa, which lyeth on the sea coast from Trinidado. The Spani∣ards are neer it, and have better op∣portunities to know the riches of it than any other. But the Indians which are in great part fled from the Spanish Countreys, are so much their enemies, as not to per∣mit them to come amongst them
without wars, which is a great hin∣derance to the Spaniards underta∣kings. But although this Countrey promiseth much, in truth to this day there are no mines found and worked either of gold or silver, al∣though it is very probable by the Latitude, that it doth abound in both. The rivers are many and great, that issue into the sea frō this coast, of which the most famous are the rivers Orinoque, or Orileania, which entreth into the sea with sixteen mouths. The best enterance is by the Branch du West from Trinidado The river of Amasions is more sou∣therly, and issueth into the sea un∣der the line. The mouth or en∣trance of this river is more shallow then Orinoque, neither is it so well known, although the English and Dutch have traded up them both with the Indians for these commo∣dities naturall to the Countrey,
Bees wax; Cotton-wool, Cassia Fistula, Bolearmoniack, Teralemna, and divers other drugs, and wood fit for Dyers, and some Balsomes. The people love our Nation above any other, and would be glad to assist us on any design. The air in this Countrey is in some places ex∣tream hot and moist, in other pla∣ces constantly hot and dry, and in other some very temperate all the year long. CHAP. 62. The Land of Brazil. THis Province beginneth where Guana endeth, at two degrees of south latitude, where there is a point called the Cape of Snakes, from whence it lyeth along the Coast of the north sea to 25 de∣grees,
and on the back side west, lyeth the provinces of the river of Plate. The air is the whole year through very hot, the winter which is our summer, distinguished only with the rain that falleth at that season. Here are many venemous worms and great serpents, tis plentifull of pastures, cattle and horses, little Millet and no English grain, where∣fore their bread is Casabi or Pota∣toes, which are in good Plenty. There are great shews of silver and gold, but none gotten, nor mines certainly known. The chief com∣modity is Sugar, Cotton-wool, Bombast, and Brazil-wood. It hath neer the sea coast about 20 Portu∣gall towns, many Ingeniowes, or Sugar works: the first town of the Countrey is called Tamerico, and 5 leagues to the south of that Far∣nambuck or Rescif, then All Saints 100 leagues from Farnambuck in
14 degrees 40 minutes. The town of the Sure haven in 16 degrees and a half: the Holy Ghost in 20▪ There is another town on the rive Generio, in 23 degrees neer which they cut much Brasel-wood. There are on the coast eight or ten ports, more principall than the rest, which are the river Saint Dominick north∣east off Farnambuck, by the Cap of Saint Augustine, which standeth in 9 degres. The Island of Tameric before rehearsed, the river of Saint Francis in 10 degrees and a half. It is very great. The bay of All Saints is 3 leagues and 13 up into the land. The river of Trinidado, and the river of Canamon in 13 de∣greees and a half. The river of Beads in 14 degrees and a half, and the river of the Virgins in 16, and Portesceurae in 17. The river of Parague, in 20: neer the town of Sanctus Spiritus, and in 23 degrees Cold Cape beyond Saint Vincent.
This province hath been in diffe∣rence between the Portugeses, and West India Company of Holland, and as the Dutch got great footing there without right, so the Por∣tugals, since their falling from Spain have surprized them again, and recovered them by the same slight they got the East Indies from us, but not with such vile murthers, as they committed on the Eng∣lish. They have now the town of Re∣sif, onely which not long since was neer lost.
CHAP. 63. Of the Provinces of the River Plate. THe provinces of Plate, take name from the river on which they lye, the passage to them is up the said river, but they are almost on the back of Brazil. They are large and far wholsomer then Bra∣zil, plenty of Sugar, Ginger, Wine, Wheat, Millet, all sorts of English fruits, store of Cattle, Swine, and Horses, but no mines that are wor∣ked. They are subjected by the Spaniards, and united to the Coun∣cill of Peru, on the south sea for neernesse of lying to that King∣dome, there is a common passage from these provinces thither by
land over the mountains, the most of the land is indifferently inhabi∣ted. This province hath three Spa∣nish Cities, the best is the City of Ascension. It lyeth in 23 degrees and a half of south latitude west from Brazil, and east from Peru, 300 leagues up the River of Plate on the North-side. In it is resident the Spanish Governout, the Offi∣cers royall, and a Cathedrall, Suffra∣gan to the Archbishop of Lima, in Peru. The next is the City royall, distant from the Ascension eighty leagues north-east. The City of Bucnos ayres standeth on the River Plate, one hundred leagues from the mouth of the same. These provinces are full of In∣dians, and Mistisos which are Spa∣niards children begotten on Indi∣an women. On this coast between the Brazil and the mouth of the River Plate, is the port of Saint
Vincent in 33 degrees against Bece∣na Burgo a small Island, and six leagues to the south the River Ubay the port and Island Dela Canana in 35 degrees, and forward the river De la Barca. And 20 leagues from thence the port of Roderico, and in 29 degrees the Island of Catalina And five leagues to the south Close Haven. And fifteen leagues fur∣ther another river called Traquean. And in 32 degrees the Bay of Saint George. And in 35 degrees the Cape of Saint Mary at the entring into the River Plate. The south Cape is called Cape Blanke, and the mouth of this River of Plate, is thirty over and a great way up it, ten leagues in breadth with many Islands, and divers great Rivers issuing into it.
CHAP. 64. Of the Coast between the River of Plate and the Strait of Magelan. FRom the mouth of this River, the strait lyeth southwest, and is distant thence 400 leagues. It hath on the said coast: first the point of Saint Helena in 37 degrees, the point of Francis in 38: the Ri∣ver of Canobi in 45. And to the south the Isle of Ducks. And in 47 the River of Seriani, and in 49 the Port of Saint Julian, the River of Sancta Crux in 50. And 12 leagues before you come to the strait of Ilefonsus. But the land possest with no other but the Natives, which are a Gyantly people.
CHAP. 65. The Straight of Magellan. THis straight is famous for the trouble some passage of Drake, Candish, and Haukins, three Eng∣lish men Generals, each in a seve∣rall Fleet: Drake and Candish be∣ing the first that sailed along the coast of Peru, and so to the East Indies, and came home by the Cape of Bona Sperantia, Circum-naviga∣ting the Globe. The last being much over-matched was taken by the Spaniards on the coast of Peru, and convayed from thence priso∣ner to Spain. From whence with much difficulty he obtained his freedome, although solemn En∣gagements
passed from the Gene∣rall his taker for his freedome. The entrance into this strait is in 52 degrees, and the comming out into the south sea the same height. It is an extream difficult passage by reason of the meeting of the north and south seas in the chan∣nell, driving each other back▪ pre∣vailing as they are favoured by the wind, which commonly bloweth there exceeding boysterously and cold. There are divers caves and bays in it, but no incouragement for a sea-man to adventure that way. The Inhabitants on this strait are few, and extream savage, nei∣ther is this passage any more in use: for those that will go by the south of America to the East Indies, or into the south sea to any part of the west coast of America, have a more convenient passage south of this strait in an open sea. The en∣trance
into it is called Lamear, but the sea was discovered by Sir Fran∣cis Drake, and Sir Richard Haukins both which were driven back by foul weather into those seas after they had passed the strait. On the coast of the south sea, which lyeth between the strait and Chilli, there are no inhabitants save the wild Natives, but it hath the Bay of horses in 52 degrees, and the Bay of Saint John in 50. The Cape of Saint Francis in 51. And 18 leagues before you come to Port Hearnan the Bay of Galago in 48 degrees 40 minutes, and north of it the Bay of Kings, and the Isle of Catilina, then the Cape of Saint Andrew in 42 degrees where Chilla beginneth.
CHAP. 66. Chillia. THis coast reacheth to 28 de∣grees of south latitude. This Region is wholsome above all other in the Indies, being of an excellent temperature, as neither too hot nor too cold. It is abundantly rich in gold and silver mines, and all sorts of cattle & grain, fruits & excellent pleasant wine. The Countrey men are strong and valiant beyond com∣pare, which the Spaniards know to their great cost, for they could ne∣ver totally subdue this Nation. The Spaniards had formerly 12 Spanish towns in this Province, the most south was the City of Chillon in an Island of fifty leagues long, that almost joyneth to the firm
land, which beareth the name of this whole Countrey, this town had in it a Monastery of Friars; and to the north of this town 41 leagues, the City of Osornio seven leagues from the sea, with two Monasteries of Friars, and one of Nuns. The City of Valdiva two leagues within the mouth of the River Valdiva in 40 degrees. It had three Monasteries of Friars, and one of Nuns. The City Imperiall in 39 degrees of height 3 leagues from the sea: in it was resident the Cathedrall, and two Monasteries of Friars. The City of Conception lyeth in 37 degrees neer the sea. And there did reside the Gover∣nour of the Countrey. The har∣bour is good, and made by an Island which lyeth before a nook in the land. The Port of Quoquim∣bo, is a good harbour, and standeth in 32 degrees. The town of Lasera∣na, is next to Peru. It lyeth plea∣santly
by the Valley of Quoquimbo. In this place it rains but thrice a year: this Countrey is neer 300 leagues by the sea, but not above twenty into the land, where lye the Andes, which are mighty great mountains, that run through the southern America, even from the strait of Magellan to Sancta Martha Of the Spanish towns in Chilla, there is recovered by the Natives, and by them quite destroyed the City of Conception, Chillon, Osor∣nio, Valdivia, and Imperiall. CHAP. 67. The Councill of Charcas. THe bounds of this Councill stretcheth from Chilia to Peru,
it hath abundance of cattle of all kinds, great shag-haired sheep big∣ger then goats that carry great bur∣thens on their backs, store of corn of all sorts, fruits and wine, much gold, and the greatest mines of sil∣ver in the world. There are few Spanish towns; and but one port, in regard the Spaniards get neer the Hill of Potosi, to the City Im∣periall, which lyeth in 19 degrees of latitude far from the sea, and de∣livereth that which is exported, and receiveth the Marchandize im∣ported at the City of Arica. The City of Imperiall, is ex∣ceeding populous of Spaniards and Indians, and it standeth neer the Hill of Potosi, which is much to be admired for the great quantities of silver is drawn from thence, and exceeding deep caves in the earth, from whence they fetch it, that are so intricate and far in the earth, that those that go in take the Po∣pish
Sacraments, the danger of death is so great. This mountain is as it were pointed at by a black cloud that perpetually hangeth o∣ver it. The land about it is most extream barren, yet the great quan∣tity of silver that is there causeth that all sorts of variety is there in great plenty, although at a dear rate. And towards the Port of A∣rica, are the mines of Porco, which are more ancient and very great, but harder to work. The Indians live in the best pla∣ces for cattle, corn, wine, and fruits being tributary to the Spaniards, that in behalf of the King of Spain are Lords of these great riches.
CHAP. 68. The Kingdom of Peru. THis Kingdome is governed by a Councill and Viceroy. It hath to the North the Councill of Quipo, on the south Charcas, and to the west the south sea, and to the east without limits. This King∣dome is well peopled with Civill orderly Indians, that are in great subjection to the Spaniards. Peru doth abound in all sorts of fruits, seed, cattle, horses, sheep, swine, rich mines of gold, silver, quick-sil∣ver, plentifull of wine, oil, and su∣gar. The Andes run through this Province within ten leagues of the sea. In all which coasts it never rai∣neth, but on the said hils it raineth continually, and beyond as in o∣ther
Regions. The plains between the sea, and the said Hils, have few or no rivers, but the industrie of the Inhabitants draw in trenches, (which are artificially made) the water either from those few rivers, or from the side of the said Andes, which maketh that the said plain is mightily populous, fruitfull and pleasant even as a garden. The City of Lema is neer the south sea in 12 degrees of south la∣latitude, on the side of a rich and pleasant valley. It consisteth of 4000 houses. On the east-side of it runneth a fair river, by which the Citizens have Gardens with most excellent fruits. And this is the sole place in the world that is without thunder and lightning, which ne∣ver happen here, neither is there plague or pestilence, but the inhabi∣tants enjoy perpetually a clear and fair sky. It is the seat of the Vice∣roy
aud Councill, and Assem∣bly of Chief Justices, the Officers of the King of Spains revenue, the chief seat of the Inquisition, a Uni∣versity with schools of divers Indi∣ans, languages, five Monasteries of Friars, and one of Jesuits, ao which is the Port of this City is two leagues from it. It is great and good. The village of Arneado is in the valley of Chianeai ten leagues from Lima, neer a good Haven in 9 degrees. The City of Truxcilo, stands in seven degrees and a half neer the sea, with Monasteries of Dominican, Franciscan, and Mercenaries, and Officers royall for these bounds. The port is two leagues of the City in a Bay not very good for ships. The City of Saint John is seated in a most plentifull place, and the Indian inhabitants are the fairest and most wel-favoured people in the Indies. The City Guanang is to the south
Lema. It hath Monasteries of Do∣minican, Franciscan, and Mercena∣ries, and one of Nuns, and the best houses of any City in Peru of Brick and Stone. It standeth in a tempe∣rate place, and is very healthy. The City of Cosco, is the head City of Peru, by a title that it hath from the Kings of Spain. It lyeth in 13 degrees and a half south of the Equinoctiall. It is a very great City, and hath four great streets that go to the four parts of the world. It hath many Monasteries and Nunneries, with a Cathedrall, and divers schools of Indian Chil∣dren. The City of Ariquipa is in 16 degrees on the sea side. It is a rich nd flourishing place, and in a wholesome Climate: the other Cities of Spaniards are Inland, but hese rehearsed are the most emi∣ent. The inconveniency of this Countrey is the great Earth∣quakes,
that often happen especially about Jma. There are three won∣derfull springs of water in this Countrey, a water that turneth so soon as it is stopt to stone. If a man or beast drink of it, it turneth to a stone in his body, and killeth him: with this they make stones of what fashion they please, and make their houses: there is another water that springeth far within land, that being setled turneth to pure white salt: the other is two spouts of water, by each other, the one hot, the other cold. The remarkablest ports, Ilands and points on this coast are the Ilands of Lobos in 7 degrees: the one is four leagues from the coast, the other more; and forward to the south west the Ile of Saint Rock, and further the port of Abrago ten leagues to the north of Truxcili in 7 degrees and a half: the port o Santa in nine degrees, and five
leagues more south port Farwell, and six from it Casama, and eight leagues further the port of Gurmay, and twenty leagues to the south the Baranca and Potquaria, where there is a great salt pit. And a little more south the Ile of Lema, at the entry of the port of Cala, and twenty leagues more south the point of Guareo. And in 15 degrees the point Chuca, and forward the point of Saint Laurence, neer the River Ariquipa. And then the River of Nombre d'Dios, where Peru endeth, and the Councill of Charchas beginneth.
CHAP. 69. Quito Kingdome. THis Kingdome is governed by a Councill, whole bounds ly∣eth between Peru and Panama. It hath two mighty Countreys or Provinces within his circuit, that is to say, first Quito, and then Po∣pyan. Quito lyeth between Peru and Popyan on the south sea, and far in∣to the land under the Equinoctiall line: and contrary to the opinion of the Ancients, it is a most whole∣some temperate Countrey, and ra∣ther cold than hot in most parts of it. In those places where the snowes continue all the year, it rai∣neth from October to March, which they call winter: this province is rich in Mines of Emraulds, and
gold, silver and quick-silver, plen∣tifull of English grain and cattle, horse and swine. This Region is happy in the temperature of the air, there being neither extream cold nor heat, as lying Equinocti∣all to these Extreams, and which is most delightfull to mans nature always, a cleer skie. The Spanish towns are the City of Saint Francis, 60 leagues from the south sea, and half a league to the north of the Equinoctiall: in it are resident the Councill, the Officers of the Spa∣nish Kings Revenues, and a Ca∣thedrall with three Monasteries. The town of Bamba lyeth south∣west from Quito, on a river of that name. It is possest by Spani∣ards and Indians, which are ex∣tream rich insheep above any town of India. The City of Loxein standeth in the way from Quito to Cosco: there are many other Spa∣nish Inland towns which are great
& good, of which I have no certain knowledg, but of most conse∣quence to a Navigator, is the port towns: the best of which is Poyta in five degrees. It is a good and great harbour. The City of Saint James of Aquil standeth not far from the sea. It hath a good port on a river that runneth fair by the City fit for vessels of great burthen. The City of Porto Vivegio stan∣deth on the sea neer the borders of Peru, the Indians of this place have red warts that sometimes grow on their Noses and Foreheads, Cheeks and Chins, which eateth as a ring∣worm with us, but far more to the dis-figuring the face, and in extre∣mity of pain. The river and port of Tombes is in 4 degrees, and south of it the Ile of Pana, the port of Calaio in two degrees height south latitude, by which standeth the Ile of Plata,
and one degree to the south of the Equinoctiall, the Bay of This province hath formerly had great Gyants living there, as appeareth by the great bones often found, and pieces of teeth, which have weighed fourteen ounces. Neer the said point of Helena, there are veins of Tar, which run∣neth out of the earth, with which they commonly cank their ships. CHAP. 70 Popyan. THis province lyeth between Quito and Panama, the grea∣test part of it is In-land, yet doth it for a good way lye on the south sea. The eastern part bordereth on the Kingdome of Granado and Cartagena.
The temperature of ayr is very different in this place, for here are some places indifferent temperate and cool, other places are violent hot and sickly. This province hath some Indians peaceable, other some extraordinary savage, insomuch that about the Village of Arma, and Canarna, they eat not onely those that they take in war, cutting off slivers eating one part, while the other liveth, but sell their Chil∣dren, and the Sons their Fathers and Mothers to the Butchers that keep shambles of mans flesh. This Countrey is exceeding rich in gold mines, which maketh that the Spaniards endure the o∣ther inconveniences of the Coun∣trey with great patience. The principall Spanish City in this Goverment is Popyan, which lyeth far from the sea, two de∣grees to the north of the Equino∣ctiall. It hath the Leivtenant Go∣vernour
resident in it, a Cathedrall with Monasteries of Friars: the City of Cali standeth in 4 degrees 20 leagues from the sea: the Go∣vernour is resident in it, and the Officers of the King of Spains trea∣sure, a melting house and two Mo∣nasteries. The Port of Bonaventure lyeth in 3 degrees and a half north of the line: this is a place of good re∣sort of Merchants, and hath a good port and a fair Custome-house. The Village of Sancta Fee, on the River of Cavaca. The Village of Arma, borders on Granada, neer which lyeth the Vil∣lage of Canarman. On the sea coast is the Cape of Corientes in 5 degrees to the north of the line. The River Solines in four degrees, and south ten leagues, the River of Saint John in two degrees: and little more south the River of Saint Lucas, and further south the Port of the Crosse, FINIS.
November 18. 1650. Imprimatur Nathanael Brent.
