H1307 12861377 94677
Loyalties Severe SUMMONS TO THE BAR of CONSCIENCE: OR, A Seasonable and Timely CALL TO THE People of England, UPON THE, Present Iuncture of Affairs. BEING An EPITOME of the several Praeliminaries, or Gradual Steps the Late Times took to Their (never-to-be forgotten) RUINE, by Their Civil Dissentions, through a needless Fear of the Subverting, Losing, and Destroying of Religion, Liberty of the Subject, and Priviledges of Parliament. With a COLLATTERAL COMPENDIUM of Our Own, Exactly and Impartially drawn; Our Follies and Extravagances Disclosed, and laid Open. Together, With such Favourable Admonitions, and Time∣ly Remedies, as will ('tis hoped) Administer towards the Uniting Our Divisions. Composing Our Differences, and Healing Our Breaches. In Two Parts. Discipulus prioris posterior Dies. Hor. By Robert Hearne, Gent. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn; And are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, 1681.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, AND MY MOST NOBLE LORD, John Lord Frescheville, Baron of Stayeley, &c. My Lord, WHEN I consider upon what Treacherous Ground Our present State does stand, through needless Fears, unnecessary Jealousies, and hot-brain'd Reflections, I think it my Duty, and every Good Christian's to call out vigorously for a helping Hand: And, To whom should we call, but to those Men, who have shewn Themselves serviceable on the like Occasion? To those Men, who have ventured their Lives and Fortunes, to stem the Tide of Insulting Danger, which Our Enemies drove forwards; whereof Your Lordship is undeniably One of the most Eminent? Upon this Score it is, that I dare Affix so noble a Frontispiece to my VVeak Endeavours: Upon this Score it is, I challenge so Honou∣rable a Patron as Your Lordship, who is a Known Example, and an Admired Encourager of Those, who are truly Loyal to their King, and Sincere Lovers of their Country: Of which Number, I profess my Self One; and therefore, am the Bolder to enter into Your Honor's Presence, to implore Your Favourable Protection. It was the Saying of a Learned Politician, and a much Esteemed Author; That to write of Modern Times (or Men,) is a trou∣blesome Business: All Men (sayes he) commit Errors; few, having committed Them, will hear of it. Present Actions are not with Safety related, nor are they listned unto without Danger.
Well may they be Reverenced, never Censured. VVho puts them in Print, seeks after an uncertain Glory, and exposes Him∣self to a certain Danger. VVho leaves it to be done by Po∣sterity, reaps no other Fruit of his Present Labours, than the mear Contemplation of a future, imaginary, fruitless Glory, &c. BUT with his Leave; If every Private Man, is a Member of the whole Body Politick, and consequently must bear a Share in the Publick Good or Ill, as every Part in the Indisposition of the Body Natural is sensibly touch't; I say, It is the Indispensible Duty of every Private Per∣son, to endeavour the Healing Publick Breaches, the Composing Diffe∣rences, and Removing all Mis-understandings, which might disturb the Peace of the Government, and obstruct the Common Wellfare: Though with this Restriction, That he shall not pretend either to Instruct his Prince; or, by prying into His Councel, betray the Failures, or derogate from His Authority-Poyal. My Lord, I HAVE Compiled this Short Essay, as a small Echantil∣lon of my Love and Zeal for my Country's Good and Peace; and have compared Times past with the Times present, the several Revolutions of Our Present Affairs, with the sad Cata∣strophe's Forty Years since; and, as near as may be, taken an Impartial View of the various Methods, which led us to our Then Ruine; and, Similibus juxta se positis, Surveyed our Own: And, I think, we may say with the Heathen-Poet, Etas parenturn pejor Avis. This little Piece I have thrown amongst many Others into the Pub∣lick Treasury, under Your Noble Protection, as a small Acknowledgment likewise of Your Lordship's former Favours, which You were pleased to Confer upon me: Begging Your Lordship's Pardon for This Presumption of Him, who is ever obliged to Stile Him∣self, My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Obedient and De∣voted Servant, ROBERT HEARNE.
Loyalties severe Summons TO THE Bar of Conscience: OR, A Seasonable & Timely Call TO THE People of England, UPON THE Present Juncture of Affairs. The First Part. HAVING Acted a long and tedious Part in this World; seen, and been engaged in Various, and Bloody Scenes; and being even grown Gray upon the Stage, I thought I might be Excuse∣able, and that it would not be improper for me, if I undertook to Acquaint the World with the several Transactions I have had Prospects of in my time; a Map of which, I suppose will not be altogether Unseasonable in this juncture; seeing the same Methods and Measures are taken and followed, that brought upon Us the late Troubles; and in all Appearance the same or worse Tra∣gedies are going to be Played over again. Wherefore I think it is the Duty of every True and Loyal English-Man, to warn, and put his Fellow-Subjects in mind of the Desolations, and Calamities the Na∣tion Groaned under, in the late Civil Wars; that We may so Re∣gulate all our Actions and Resolutions, as that they may only tend to Union amongst Our selves, and Obedience and Loyalty to Our PRINCE. THE Devastations and Ruins, the Effusion of Humane Blood, and all the other sad Consequences of Domestick Broiles, are, alas! so well, and sensibly known by this Nation, that it is altogether un∣necessary to descant upon them; and therefore, I shall Content my self with Tracing along the Pretexts, and Steps that engaged, and led Us to Our Ruin and Desolation. This perhaps is but too Seasonable at this time, when all seems ready for a general Combusti∣on; and that the Storm is seen coming on with that Rage and Fury,
that whosoever shall be any wayes Instrumental towards his Coun∣tries avoiding  will have highly Obliged the whole Kingdom. And I am apt to believe the World will easily pardon a Relation of this Nature, if it may in any wise Contribute towards the Pre∣venting of Future Evils: For if a Man, who has been in the most terrible Tempest that even was known, wherein the most part of his Dearest Friends, and Nearest Relations have lost both their Estates and Lives, and all have been in the extreamest Danger; nay, wherein the Captain himself Suffered, the utmost Rigours of Fate, was brought to an unparalelled Tragical End, and the rest of the Ship only Saved, as it were by a Miracle, and by the greatest Providence of GOD: I say, if such a Man, who shall have escaped all these extremities, shall come and tell me, That he sees the Storm gathering in the same Corner or Point, Blown by the same Winds, and Hurried on with the same Fury; and that I shall be inevitably Lost if I continue to Steer on my Course: I shall be so far from being displeased with him, that on the con∣trary, I shall Value at that Rate the Obligations I have to him, as to think my self never capable of equalling them with Acknow∣ledgements. I must Confess it would be a Vanity in me to Ima∣gine, that this Essay or Compendium can have so great, and good an Effect; yet I promise my self it may be of some use, and per∣haps a Means towards the Reconciling Our Differences, and the making up Our Breaches, which, who ever brings to pass, raises to himself immortal Monuments of Honour; and renders Us as Neces∣sary, and Helpful to Our Friends, and as Dreadful, and Formida∣ble to Our Enemies, as We have been of late Neglected, and De∣spised by both the One and the Other. I SHALL begin first with the Introduction to the late King's Mise∣ries and Necessities, which was the War the Parliament had engaged His Father in, with the House of Austria, for the Rry of the Palatinate; and which was left Him as a Heavy Incumbrance and Mortgage upon an Estate; and finding His Exthequer Empty, and His Revenues spent and drained, He was forced to take such Cour∣ses, and Stoop to such Things, as He would not have done in ano∣ther Occasion. His Necessities were still increased by the War, He was not long after Engaged in, for the Defence, and in the Be∣half of the Huguenots of France; wherein having failed of those timely and seasonable Succours from His Parliament, as He might Reasonably have promised Himself, in a juncture when so great a Part, and Branch of the Protestant Communion, as was that of France, lay at Stake: He failed of that good Success, that a more ready and willing Relief might perhaps have procured. The Factions now begin, and the publick Mi∣nisters Cen∣sur'd. This Furnished the Male-contents, and the Promoters of Sedition, with Pretexts of Censoring, and Blaming the Conduct of those at the Helm, of De∣manding the Heads of some of the Ministers in Favour, and the Removeal of Others from all Charges and Places of Trust. THIS Bustle was Attended with loud Cryes, The Bishops for introducing Popery. and Detestations of Popery; and several were Accused of being Promoters, and A∣bettors of it. The Bishops, and others of the Clergy of the Church
of England, were not free from this Aspersion; but were said to be of the Party, and joyned their Endeavours with those, who had a mind, and designed to set up the Roman Catholick Religion in this Kingdom. This helped to nourish, and spread abroad Jealousies and Distrusts, occasioned Distractions and Consternations, and gave deep Root to Dissention and Rebellion. But these Promoters of Mischief did not content themselves with Stigmatizing the Clergy, and the Chief Ministers of State; for they endeavoured to insinuate into the People underhand, that the Crown it self was Popishly Affected; The Crown it self Popishly Affected. and that it did favour, and encourage the Growth of that Religion; That it Aimed at Arbitrary Government; Arbitrary Go∣vernment, &c. and that the Subjects were to be Deprived of their Priviledges. The House of Commons Daily found out New Grievances, drew up Remonstrances, Priviledges of Parliament Cryed out for. and Cryed out against most of the Actions of the King and his Ministers, as con∣trary to the priviledges of Parliament. But notwithstanding all these Artifices, and Contrivances to set the Nation on a Pare, they would never have Gained their point, had they not found the Scots Aim∣ing the same way; being willing to be Instruments for the putting in Execution their Execrable Designs: Whereupon they Invited them underhand into England. The Scots Rebel. The Scots (a Hungry, and Poor Nation, ever ready to be upon the Wing on such Occasions;) Accepted the Offer, came in Swarmes, full of Hopes, and with fair prospects of Riches and Booty: The King Raises an Army to Oppose them. They Seized upon the best Towns of the more Northern Parts of England. But the King having drawn a Considerable Army together, Marched to York to Oppose them; and his Forces being much more Considerable than the Scots, would certainly have Routed them, had they not Tampered, and Insinuated into the English, that their Ruine would be certainly attended, or followed by the Oppression of them themselves; and they once Subdued, the King would be enabled to use His Eng∣lish Subjects as he thought fit; by which Intelligence and Correspon∣dence it was Evident, that the English had no mind to Fight, though their Army was much Stronger than the Scots; A Treaty held. whereupon by the Mediation of some Persons, a Treaty of Peace was begun, and soon Finished; Wherein it was agreed, that His Majesty should Pub∣lish a Declaration; whereby all should be confirmed that His Com∣missioners had promised in His Name, that a General Assembly and Parliament be Held at Edenburgh in a short time. And Lastly, that upon Disbanding their Forces, Dissolving their Counsels, and Restoring the King to His Forts and Castles, &c. The King was to Recal His Fleet and Forces, and make Restitution of their Goods, since the Breach. NOW, that which made the Scots so ready to undertake this Expedition, was not only a prospect of Gain and Plunder; but the Fears they were in, of losing their Darling, Presbitery, made them take Arms, and Spirited them into this Rebellion: The King en∣deavours to in∣troduce the Li∣turgy into the Kirk of Scot∣land. For the King in Pursuance of His Father's Design of Establishing the Common-Prayer in Scotland, as it was in England, did Endeavour to introduce the Liturgy into practice in that Kingdom. But the Nobility and Gen∣try, having since the first Reformation of Scotland from Popery, thrown
out the Bishops, and shared their Estates among them, by the Insti∣gation of John Knox the great Presbyterian, John Knox a great Pres∣byterian. were afraid that if they were again Re-established, and Recovered their former Power and Reverence; they would likewise quickly find the means of procu∣ring again their Antient Estates and Revenues. For the preventing of which, they thereupon spread abroad Discontents and Fears, fo∣ment Jealousies and Distractions, and Engage the Clergy on their side; who were generally inclined to Knox's Discipline, and the Sove∣raignty which they had for some time enjoyed under the Go∣vernment of Presbitery; The Lyturgy, and Episcopal Government Termed Pope∣ry. the Clergy Influence the People, and Ter∣rify them with the Danger of Popery (for so they Termed the Li∣turgy, and the Government by Bishops.) By these means and pre∣texts, they allured the People into a Rebellion, notwithstanding all the Care that was taken by those at the Helm, to prevent it; and the Confederates entred into a Solemn League and Covenant, The Solemn League and Co∣venant. and oblig'd themselves to a Mutual Defence against all persons whatsoe∣ver, not excepting the King himself; and then they begun an Actu∣al War; An Actual War follows. Raised Men and Money, Seized His Majesties Armes, Ma∣gazines, Castles, Forts, and Walled Towns; and all this was done for Conscience Sake. But to avoid becoming Horrible, and Abomina∣ble in the Eyes of all the World, by being called Traitors and Re∣bels, Tho Varnished with a preten∣ded Design for Petitioning, &c they Varnished, and Termed all these Preparations and Paces towards a Rebellion, a Design of Petitioning their Soveraign. But the King not able to bear His being Affronted at this Rate, does likewise Arm to Defend His Crown, The King Raises an Army to go against the Scots. and the Lives, and Estates of His Subjects here; and Recover the Rights and Prerogatives they had Usurped in that Kingdom. But notwithstanding the Justice of His Cause, and the Gallantry, and Vigour of His Army; when He came in Sight of the Enemy, He was moved out of a Compassion, and a Desire to Save so many Lives, both of His Loyal, and Rebel∣lious Subjects, A Treaty is held a Second time. to Condescend to a Treaty; which He was likewise perswaded to, by some of the English Nobility, that were Secret Friends to the Scots. DURING this Treaty, the Factious Spirits of the Two Nations, had by Feeling one anothers Pulses, found their Tempers to be so alike, and their Inclinations so sutable, that they easily, and quickly a∣greed of the Measures for a future Correspondence; and of the means of putting in Execution their Designs: Which however would have been impossible for them to have Effected, had they had the least Sense of Religion, Loyalty, Honour, and Honesty. But the Scots had no sooner seen the English Army Disbanded, and the People Dissa∣tisfied with the Ill Success of that Expedition, than that (having Broken almost as soon as Signed, The Pacifica∣tion broken, and the Scots Raise another Army. every Article of that Pacificati∣on) they Raised a New Army to Petition withal; which they were Invited to, by their Brethren or Presbyterian Party here; who En∣couraged them to this Invasion, by assuring them, That the King was not in a Capacity to make Head against them, nor could be without Calling a Parliament, wherein they would be sure to find so many Friends in Both Houses, that nothing should be done there, to their Disadvantage: Which proved but too True; for the King
having Summoned a Parliament, and proposed to them the Raising of Money, for the suppressing the Insolence of the Scots; some of the Members began to Question the Grounds, and Justice of the War, which they were Resolved to be Satisfied in, before Moneys should be Raised. In short, the Scottish Party had that Influence in this Parliament, as to put it to Question, Whether the Grievan∣ces of the People, or the King's Supply should first be Considered? And tho the King told that Parliament; That if they would Supply Him so, as to Suppress the Insolence of the Scots, He would Acquit His Claim to Ship-Money, and give Satisfaction to their Just Demands: They growing still more sensible by these Proposals of the Neces∣sities the King was in, instead of making such Returns as so Gra∣cious an Offer merited: Voted, 1. The Clearing the property of the Subject. 2. The Establishing the True Religion. And 3. The Priviled∣ges of Parliament: and then fell into such Extravagances, that the Privy-Council Advised their Dissolving; The Parlia∣ment's Dissol∣ved. being assured the Heats of the House of Commons were so great, that they intended that very Day to have Voted against the War with Scotland; where∣by the King would have been in a worse Condition, than before their Sitting. Yet though the City of London refused to lend Mo∣ney to the King; the Gentry contributed indifferently freely, so that with their Assistance He raised a Second Army; A Second Ar∣my raised by the King. and having with much Difficulty, and the great Murmuring of the Presbyte∣rian Party, drawn them together as far as York; He designed to have Marched in person to the Borders of Scotland: But the ill suc∣cess My Lord Conoway had, broke all His Measures, for Lesley had no sooner forced His passage over the River Tine, and faced New-Castle, where the King had reposited His Magazine of Arms, and Ammunition, and His Stores of Provision for His Army; but that the Gates were opened to them, they having more Friends than Enemies in the Town. The Scots Declaration. Hereupon the Scots declare the Intention of the Army to be, Not to lay down Armes, till the Reformed Religi∣on was setled in both Nations upon sure Grounds; and the Causes, and Abettors of their present Troubles (that is Arch-Bishop Laud, and the Earl of Strafford) were brought to publick Justice in Parliament. Whereupon Twelve English Peers Petitioned the King for the Sit∣ting of the Parliament; Some Lords, and the City, &c. do Petition for the sitting of the Parliament. and the City of London, and several other parts of the Kingdom did the like; all centring in this, that No∣thing else could relieve the pressures of the Nation. And now the King condescends to their Desires, and Summoned a Parliament, A Parlia∣ment's called. which instead of redressing Grievances, defending Liberty, Property, and Laws, Trampled all things both Civil and Sacred under their Feet, and the People found at length, that instead of the Arbitrary Govern∣ment, they had been so much afraid of, they had brought upon themselves the Rankest Tyranny. THIS Parliament was no sooner met, than that they fell to Im∣peaching the Earl of Strafford, Arch-Bishop Laud, The Earl of Strafford, and Arch-Bishop Laud im∣peach't with se∣veral others. several of the Jud∣ges, and other Ministers of State. But tho the Earl had been fore∣warned of their Designs against Him; yet relying upon His Great Innocence, and His Courage rendring Him uncapable of Fear, He
could not be perswaded to with-draw till the Storm was over, least His Flight might be interpreted as Guilt, and should blast His Sovereign's, as well as His own Reputation. Upon this Impeachment He is Sequestred from the House of Lords; and likewise, His Friend Sir George Ratcliffe is sent for out of Ireland, by a Ser∣jeant at Arms: In the mean time the Bishop of Lincolne, who was Prisoner in the Tower, is Released, who had been Committed there for some dishonourable Speeches that He had spoken of the King; and having endeavoured by some indirect means to Appear Innocent; He had been therefore Sentenced Ten Thousand Pounds Fine to the King, Imprisonment in the Tower during Pleasure, to be suspended Ab Officiis & Beneficiis, from His Bishoprick, and the Profits thereof, and to be referred to the High Commission Court, as to what con∣cerned them. And likewise, Mr. Pryn, Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bast∣nick, who had received a very just Censure for Writing against the Bishops, and their Government (they being all Three Sentenced to pay Five Thousand Pounds apiece Fine to the King, to lose their Ears in the Pillory, and to be Imprisoned; which they accordingly Suf∣fered) were now brought in great Triumph to London; and De∣cember the Third, they presented their Petition against their Prose∣cutors. THEN the Commons fell to Voting Ship-Money, with the Opi∣nion of the Judges thereupon, to be Illegal, who with Noy (then esteemed the Oracle of the Law) had assured the King of the Le∣gality of it; and a Charge of High-Treason was ordered to be drawn up against Eight of them; and they resolved to begin with the Lord-Keeper Finch. Petitions from the City against Church Disci∣pline and Cere∣monies, &c. About that time an Alderman, and some Hun∣dreds of Citizens presented a Petition, Subscribed by Fifteen Thou∣sand Hands, against Church-Discipline, and Ceremonies; and a while after the House of Commons Voted, That the Clergy in a Synod or Convocation, The Com∣mons Vote thereupon have no Power to make Canons or Laws without Par∣liaments; and that the Canons are against the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, the King's Prerogative, the Property of the Subject, the Right of Parliaments, and tend to Faction and Sedition. And hereupon a Charge was ordered to be drawn up against Arch-Bishop Laud, as the Principal framer of those Canons, and o∣ther Delinquencies; which Impeachment was seconded by another from the Scotch Commissioners; Arch-Bishop Land im∣peach't, and sent to the Black-Rod. upon which, He was Committed to the Black-Rod; and Ten Weeks after, Voted Guilty of High-Trea∣son, and sent to the Tower: The Scots likewise, prefer a Charge against the Earl of Strafford then in Custody, demanding Justice against them both, Five Articles against Sir George Rat∣cliffe. as the great Incendiaries, and Disturbers, both of Church and State; and Sir George Ratcliffe (the Earl's Bosom Friend) had Articles also drawn against Him to this purpose: THAT He had Conspired with the Earl, 1. to bring Ireland under an Arbitrary Government, and to Subvert the Fundamental Laws, and to bring an Army from Ireland to subdue the Subjects of England. That He perswaded the Earl to use Regal Power, and to deprive the Subjects of their Liberties and Properties. 2. That He countenanced Pa∣pists, 3. and built Monasteries, to alienate the Affections of the Irish from
the English. That He withdrew the Subjects of Scotland from their King: And Lastly, That to preserve Himself, and the Earl of Strafford, 4. He laboured to Subvert the Liberties, 5. and Priviledges of Parliament in Ireland. THE Lord Keeper Finch was the next Person designed to be Censured; Lord-Keeper Finch Voted a Traitor. and notwithstanding a Speech He made in His own Vindication, He was Voted a Traitor upon several accounts; but foreseeing the Storm, to avoid the Danger, He withdrew Beyond-Sea. THE House of Commons, having by these means removed their Enemies, were preparing a Bill for a Triennial Parliament; Petitions pro∣cured for a Tri∣ennial-Parlia∣ment. to pro∣mote which, they procured Petitions to come from several Places, One whereof was Subscribed with Eight Hundred Hands, aiming principally to destroy Episcopacy; which the King took Notice of: One with 800. Hands. and calling Both Houses together, tells them, Of their Slowness, and the Charge of Two Armies in the Kingdom; and that he would Have them avoid Two Rocks, the One about the Hierarchy of the Bishops, which He was willing to Reform, but not alter; the Other concerning Frequent Parliaments, which He liked well, but not to give His Power to Sheriffs and Constables; and upon their Remon∣strances against the Toleration of Papists; the King assured them, The King pro∣tests an Aver∣sion to Popery. that the increase of Popery and Papists was extreamly against His Mind; and that He would use all possible means for the Restrai∣ning of it. DURING the Five Months the Scots had Quartered in England, a Cessation having been Concluded at Rippon; yet the full Paci∣fication was reserved for London, and the Commissioners of both Par∣ties, fat there to hear the Demands of the Scots, and to make An∣swer thereunto. The Scotch Armies great Charge 514128. l 9. s Whereupon the Scots presented the great account of their Charges, which was Five Hundred Fourteen Thousand, One Hundred Twenty Eight Pounds Nine Shillings, besides the Loss of their Nation, which was Four Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds. This Reckoning startled the English Commissioners, The Loss of Scotlands Charges 440000. till the Scots told them, they did not give in that Account as expecting a Total Re∣paration of their Charges and Losses; but were content to bear a part of it, hoping for the rest from the Justice, and Kindness of England. These Demands met with some Oppositions: However, Moneys were raised at the present, from the City of London, for the supply of both the Northern Armies, as the Parliament had done once before. MUCH about this time, Four Members of the House of Commons delivered a Message to the Lords, of a Popish Design of levying an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men in Lancashire, and Eight Thousand in Ireland; and that the main Promoters thereof, were the Earls of Strafford and Worcester. THEN they fell to Accuse Sir Robert Berkly (One of the Jud∣ges about Ship-Money) of High-Treason; Sir Robert Berkley ac∣cused of High∣Treason. The Act pas∣sed for a Tri∣ennial-Parlia∣ment. and Committed him Pri∣soner to the Black-Rod. About the same time the King passed that Act for a Triennial Parliament; and that they might know how much He valued this great Favour, He told the Two Houses, That
hitherto they had gone on in those things which concerned themselves, and now He expected they should proceed upon what concerned Him. THE King likewise signed then the Bill of Subsidies; The Bill of Subsidies like∣wise passed. which so generally pleased them, that Sir Edward Littleton Lord-Keeper, was ordered to return the Humble Thanks of both Houses, to His Ma∣jesty at White-Hall. Arch-Bishop Land Commit∣ted to the Tower for High-Trea∣son. Presently after, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury having been Accused of High-Treason by the Commons, was Com∣mitted to the Tower: and now Episcopacy it self was called in Que∣stion, and notwithstanding several learned and weighty Speeches were made in the Defence of it; The Bishops outed from Par∣liament-Power, Judicial or Temporal. the Commons Voted, that No Bi∣shop should have any Vote in Parliament, nor any judicial Power in the Star-Chamber, nor be concerned in any Temporal Matters. THEN began the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, which after it had lasted some Weeks; The Earl of Straffords Trial. and all the Evidence against Him not amounting to so much as to be Legally capable to take away His Life (had they gone the antient Legal way to work of Trying Peers) His Enemies be-thought themselves of a New Expedient to take off His Head, despairing of ever effecting their Designs as long as He assisted at the Helm; they had therefore procured the Par∣liament of Ireland, to Prosecute Him there also, as Guilty of High∣Treason. Whereupon a Bill was brought into the House of Com∣mons, to attaint Him of Accumulative High-Treason; and tho it passed that House with a kind of surprize, yet it so opened the Eyes of several, who before had been His violent Enemies, that they became His Advocates, tho this made them lose that Kindness, E∣steem and Favour, which that House, and the People before had had for them. And the Lords considering how much it concerned them, and their Posterity; and that it might come to be their Own Case, were not generally so Zealous and eager for a President, that might be of such dangerous Consequence: But the Factious Spirits (know∣ing that as long as His Head was upon His Shoulders, it would be impossible for them to Compass their Designs) procured, and stirred up the Rabble in a most insolent and tumultuary manner, The Rabbles Tumult, and Madness a∣gainst the Earl, &c. to come down to the Parliament Houses, and Cry for Justice. It was in vain for the Lords to Complain of the Force that was offered, and the violation of the Freedom of Parliament: The Commons took no Notice of it; insomuch, that the Mobile being hereby encou∣raged, proceeded to that point of Insolence, as to post up such Members of the House of Commons, as had Voted against the Bill of Attainder; and Stigmatizing them with the Name of Straffordians, as they did likewise to the Lords, who had done the same, threat∣ning, that these, and All other Enemies of the Common-Wealth should Perish with Him; bawling out, Justice and Execution; nay, One of the Rabble was heard to say, If we have not the Lieute∣nant's Life, we will have the King's. The Lords being thus Ter∣rified, absented themselves from the House, insomuch, that there was not half the Number when the Bill passed; and of those then present, but Seven more for it, than those that were against it. The King used His utmost endeavours to overcome the Difficul∣ties of signing the Bill: But at length (through the importunities
of those who were continually telling him, how requisite it was for Him to please the People, and perpetually Alarmed Him with the Apprehensions of an eminent Rebellion; but most especially by the generous Request of the Earl Himself, who thus concluded in a Letter to the King; (Sir, The Earl of Strafford's Letter to the King. To set Your Majesties Conscience at Liberty, I do most humbly beseech You, for the preventing of such Mis∣chiefs, as may happen by Your Refusal to pass the Bill; by this means to remove (Praised be God, I cannot say this Accursed, but) this Unfortunate thing, forth of the way, towards that blessed Agreement which God I trust shall for ever Establish between You and Your Subjects. My Con∣sent herein shall more acquit You to God, than all the World can do besides; to a willing Man there is no Injury done. I say, The Bill pas∣sed by Com∣mission. principal∣ly by this Generous Request, His Majesty was prevailed upon to pass it by Commission; and therein to do an Action contrary to the Sen∣timents of His own Conscience; and which, as Himself tells Us, Lay heavy upon Him to His last Breath. HE gave likewise at the same time another Commission to seve∣ral Lords, to pass another Bill for continuing the Parliament, A Bill passed for the Parlia∣ments sitting, during their own Pleasure. during the pleasure of both Houses; which Act of His, was the main Foun∣dation of our Subsequent Ruine, and the Chief Engine the Male∣contents made use of, to bring upon the Kingdom, those Desola∣tions and Horrous that so long Afflicted it; tho He designed it, as a Means to Re-instate Himself in the Affections of His People; and to remove the very Root of all those Fears and Jealousies, which are so uneasy both to Prince and People. But what were the Re∣turns they made to all these Unparalelled Acts of Grace, and Con∣descentions to please His People: they made Great Vows indeed, and Protestations of their Loyalty, Duty, and Sincerity of their Inten∣tions, for the Good of the King and Kingdom; and that their main Aim was to render Him the Most Glorious Prince that ever sat up∣on the English Throne; but how different their Designs were from their Words, the Sequel made but too Apparent. THE Fall of that Great Man the Earl of Strafford, so startled se∣veral other of the Principal Officers of State, Many princi∣pal Officers re∣sign their Pla∣ces upon the Earl of Straf∣ford's Death. that many of them re∣signed their Places: About the same time, some Discontents arose between the Parliament, and the English Army in the North, but a while after, both Armies were Disbanded. The payment of Ton∣nage and Poundage, had been much Questioned since 1628. But now the King, at the request of the Commons; was content to re∣linguish His Right to it; and afterwards passed a Bill for Pole-Mo∣ney, and two others for putting down the Star-Chamber, and High-Commission-Courts. And Four Dayes after, the English, and Scoth Armies were Disbanded, the King went towards Scotland, not∣withstanding all the endeavours, and allegations of the Presbyterian Faction in England to hinder that Journey: But seeing the King resolute to keep His Word with the Scots, being unwilling to dis∣oblige them, who seemed Zealous for His Majesties Presence among them; they used their utmost Efforts to obtain a Vice-Roy (a Crea∣ture of their own) who in the King's absence, might give the Royal-Assent to such Acts as they had then in Hand: But upon His Ma∣jesties
Assurances that His stay there should be very short; this hopeful Project was strangled in the Birth. THE King was received in Scotland with great Testimonies of Affection by that Nation, His Majesty goes for Scot∣land. and Conferred several Places of Honour and Power upon divers of them; confirming likewise, the Treaty between the two Nations by Act of Parliament, assenting to what∣ever they offered; and indeed, passed so many Acts of unparalelled Bounty, Grace, and Condescention, as extorted from them the Revi∣val, and Confirmation of an Act of their Parliament, which they caused to be solemnly published throughout the Realm, The Scots Parliament publish a Loyal Act. That it should be damnable, and detestable Treason in the highest Degree, for any of the Scots Nation conjunctly or singly to levy Arms, or any Military For∣ces, upon any Pretext whatsoever without the King's Royal Commission. But the Presbyterians, as if their Tenets, and Consciences were fuller of Abominations, than the Romanists and Jesuits, did with as little Tenderness of Conscience, not long after violate this promise, as if no such thing had ever been made; and have made it appear to all the World, that No Laws, not even of their own making, have any Obligation or Power over them, to restrain them from a tempting opportunity to Rebel. DURING His Majesties abode in Scotland, The Rebellion in Ireland. there broke out in Ireland, a most horrible and notorious Rebellion; and which was managed with such Secresy, that it was not discovered till the Night before it was to have been put in Execution; The great Massacre of 200000. which was in divers Places carried on with such Fury, that Two Hundred Thousand English Men, Women, and Children, were in a short time bar∣barously Murdered by all manner of most Cruel Torments that their Devilish Minds could invent. Many were the Conjectures about the Occasion of this Conspiracy; but tho the Parliament endea∣voured all they could to asperse the Reputation, and blast the Ho∣nour of His Sacred Majesty, and to that intent charged Him with that Rebellion; whereas indeed, they themselves had principally occasioned that Rebellion, by opposing, and refusing to Consent to the Transportation of those Forces, which His Majesty had Gran∣ted to the King of Spain. For at the Disbanding of the Irish Army, He had engaged the Word and Honour of a King to the Three Spanish Ambassadours, here then at this Court, that they should have the Liberty to Transport such Troops of the Irish Nation, as were willing to take Service under their Master; and accordingly they Contracted not only with the Officers and Souldiers; but had advanced Money, and hired Ships for their Transportation. But this being represented to the Parliament, tho the Lords seemed in∣cmable to comply with it; yet the Commons, who industriously opposed whatever His Majesty pretended to do without their Ad∣vice, absolutely refused to give their Consent; and framed I know not what Chimaera's of danger; and in Fine, positively prohibited The passing of any English or Irish into the Service of any Forreign Prince. FROM hence it came to pass, that many of those People be∣ing of Desperate Fortunes, fell into Desperate Designs; and being
Animated and Spirited, both by their Religion, and the Traditional Animosity against the English, and more especially the Scots, whom they consider as Invaders, Robbers, and Incroachers of their Antient, and Native Right; they were easily perswaded, and drawn into a Conspiracy, rather than starve. Whereas had the Parliament given them leave to have spent their ill humours, and lives in Forreign Wars, they might probably have prevented whole Rivers of Blood, that was inhumanely spilt, and have saved all that Treasure that was expended in reducing that Kingdom from one Rebellion to a∣nother. BUT by this means the Male-contents here at Home got this advantage by that Rebellion, which they had been long Aiming at, as to Arm all their Factions, The Factions seize on the Guards, &c. during the King's Absence in Scotland. and in His Majesties absence to do all the Acts of Soveraign Authority. And now they took actually the Guards into their Service, which they had Voted for before, and appointed Officers to Command them; and to Exercise, and Discipline the Raw and unexpert Militia of the Countries about Lon∣don, without so much as giving the least Notice of all this to His Majesty, or expecting His Royal-Assent. THE King being in Scotland, when He first received an account of all that had happened in Ireland, Sir James Stuart sent for Ireland. dispatched Sir James Stuart with Instructions to the Lords of the Privy-Councel there; and sent them by Him all the Money His present Stores would supply. He likewise moved the Parliament of Scotland, as being the nearest for their Assistance; but they Excused it, because Ireland was a Dependant of the Crown of England: but if the State of England would use any of their Men for that Service, they would make propositions in order to it. THE King finding His stay to be longer than He thought, left the whole business of Ireland to the Parliament, which without staying for His leave, they had took to Themselves; and had in∣deed declared a speedy and vigorous Assistance, and Voted Fifty Thousand Pounds for a present supply. About which time, the King returned out of Scotland; The King Re∣turns to Lon∣don from Scot∣land. and was Entertained and Feasted at London, and from thence Conducted to White-Hall: After which, the King Treated several of the Brincipal Citizens at Hampton-Court, where divers of the Aldermen had the Honour of Knight-Hood. THEN the King Summons both Houses together, and tells them, A Parliament is called. That He had staid in Scotland longer than He expected; yet not Fruitlesly, for He had given full Satisfaction to that Nation; but cannot choose but take notice of, and wonder at the unex∣pected Distractions He finds at Home; and then recommends to them the State of Ireland: Next He publishes a Proclamition for Obedience to the Laws; and first, concerning Religion, and the per∣formance of Divine Service, without innovation or abolishing of Rites and Ceremonies. About Two Months after which, His Majesty makes another Speech to them, and Conjures them by all that is Dear to Him or Them, to hasten the Business of Ireland. But notwithstanding this, and all the Noise and Out cry that was made of the Cruelties of the Irish Rebellion, they prepared their Succours
but very slowly; and tho His Majesty pressed them with repeated instances to assist vigorously the Protestant Party against the Popish Rebels; The Irish Re∣bellion laid up∣on the King. yet they used their endeavours to place the Odium of that Conspiracy to the King's account; insomuch, that one of their Members said in a Formal Speech at a Conference with the Lords, That several who had passed into Ireland by His Majesties immediate warrant, were at the Head of the Rebellion; which Speech, the House of Commons ordered to be Printed; and tho His Majesty cleared Himself of the Scandal, yet instead of obtaining a Reparation, they publickly justified the Member (who was Pym) for what He had spoken. Besides, instead of taking into Consideration the bleeding Condition of Ireland, notwithstanding all the indefatigable Zeal and Pains His Majesty had taken to preserve the Protestant Religion, and the Peace of the Kingdom; they welcomed Him presently after His Return from Scotland with a large Remonstrance, The Parlia∣ments Remon∣strance. wherein they en∣deavoured to make appear, that there was a Design on Foot, to introduce to this Kingdom, Popery and Arbitrary Government; and laid all the Misfortunes of the Reign, to the Crowns Account, not∣withstanding they themselves had occasioned them; and His Ma∣jesty having made a Gracious Answer to their Petition, that was as a Prologue to their Remonstrance, He issued out a Declaration to His Subjects by way of Answer to the Remonstrance; The King's Answer. the Sum of which was, That He thought He had given sufficient Satisfaction to His Peoples Fears and Jealousies, concerning Religion, Liberty, and Civil Interests, by the Bills which He had passed this Par∣liament; desiring that Misunderstandings might be removed on ei∣ther side; and that the bleeding Condition of Ireland might per∣swade them to Unity, for the Relief of that Unhappy Kingdom. BUT instead of Complying with His Majesty, who offered to raise Ten Thousand Volunteers for Ireland, if the Commons would undertake to Pay them; and issued out a Proclamation against the Irish, declaring, Those that were in Arms, with all their Adherents, and Abettors, The Apprenti∣ces Rife, and go to White-Hall and Westmin∣ster. to be Rebels and Traitors: They Caused the Appren∣tices of London to go in an Insolent, Tumultuous, Riotous manner to White-Hall and Westminster; and the King being informed, That One of the Lords, and Five of the House of Commons had Corre∣spondence with the Scots, and Countenanced the late City Tumults; He thereupon ordered, The King's Order. their Trunks, Studies, and Chambers to be Sealed up, and their Persons Seized; the former of which was done, but they kept too good Intelligence about His Majesty to be Sur∣prized; and having timely Notice, they absented themselves from the House; The Com∣mons Vote a∣gainst the put∣ting it in Exe∣cution. whereupon the Commons Voted the same day, That if any Persons shall attempt to Seize the Persons, or Papers of any Parliament Men, such Members shall require the Aid of the Constable to Secure such Persons, till further order of the House; and that it is Lawful for any Person to Assist the said Members; and that the said Members may stand upon their Guard, and make Resistance according to the Protestation for Defence of Priviledges of Parliament.
HEREUPON the King charges the Lord Kimbolton, and the Five Members with several Articles; and acquaints Both Houses, The Lord Kim∣bolton, and five Members Impeached of High-Treason by the King. That He did intend to prosecute them for High-Treason; and requi∣red, That their Persons might be Secured. The Day after, the King went to the House of Commons; and sitting in the Speaker's-Chair, He viewed the House round, and perceived the Birds He aimed at were flown; for having Warning, they had with-drawn into Lon∣don: Whereupon He tells them, That He came to look for those Five Members, whom He had Accused of High-Treason, and was re∣solved to have them where-ever He found them; and expected to have them sent to Him, as soon as they should come to the House: But would not have them think, that this Act of His was any Violation of Parliament. THOUGH the King took only the Palsgrave with Him, The King's coming in per∣son to the House of Commons, is Voted a Breach of their Privi∣ledge, and Scan∣dals raised, &c. and the Gentlemen of His Ordinary Retinue; Yet this Act of the King's, was so highly resented by the House, that the next Day the Com∣mons voted it a Breach of Priviledge; and Scandals were raised in the City, that He intended Violence against the House of Commons, and came thither with Force to Murther several Members; and used Threatning Speeches against the Parliament: With which the City was so possessed, that unusual Guards and Watches were set, as if some desperate Assault were to be made upon the City. And then the Houses publish a Declaration; that whosoever shall Arrest any Member of Parliament by Warrant from the King only, is guilty of the Breach of Priviledges of Parliament: And likewise, That all those who attended the King when He came to demand the Five Mem∣bers, were guilty of a Traiterous Designe against the King and Par∣liament; That the Proclamation for Apprehending and Imprisoning the said Members, was False, Scandalous, and Illegal; and not of Va∣lidity enough to hinder them from Attending the House: And that the Publishing of the several Articles of High-Treason, was a Breach of Priviledge; wherefore they intreat His Majesty to discover the Names of those Informers, and Evil Counsellors; declaring all such Persons, to be Publick Enemies to the State. AND now, what they had been so long aiming at, came to pass; for Petitions came crowding from all Parts, to put the King∣dome in a Posture of Defence, (as they termed the Arming of Their Party, and Dis-arming all Those whose Loyalty obliged them to ad∣here to the King.) And though His Majesty, before this unlucky Accident happened, out of a Transcendant Goodness, The Earl of Warwick made Vice-Ad∣miral in the Room of Sir John Pen∣nington. Sir Thomas Glemham Re∣moved, & Sir John Hotham made Gover∣nour of Hull. upon their Desires, dis-placed Two Lieutenants of the Tower, committed the Fleet to the Earl of Warwick, as Vice-Admiral, removing Sir John Pennington; and put out Sir Thomas Glemham from the Government of Hull, and put it into the Hands of Sir John Hotham; who both unfortunately to himself, and the whole Kingdom, made His Ma∣jesty an ill Requital for His Trust: But still this was not Satisfa∣ctory; and though He had granted them all they could have de∣fired, they would hardly have been contented. AND now, such Tumults and Numbers of the Rabble, dayly flocked to Westminster and Whitehal; and being Countenanced by
the Impeached Members, and their Adherents, grew so Insolent, that the King doubting of their Intentions, The Tumults, & Illegal Pro∣ceedings of the Commons, make the King retire to Ham∣pton-Court. thought fit to with∣draw to Hampton-Court, taking with Him the Queen, Prince, and Duke of York; where His Retinue and Guards was soon considera∣bly Augmented by the Accession of the Gentry from all Parts. THE next Day, the Five Members were Conducted in Tryumph to Westminster, The 5. Mem∣bers brought to the Parlia∣ment in Great Tryumph, &c. by great Numbers of the Citizens and Seamen, with Hundreds of Boats and Barges, with Guns in them; shouting, hollow∣ing, and Insulting, as they passed by White-hall; and at Westminster, welcomed them with an Harangue, as if they came from perform∣ing some Glorious Action, in the Service of the Nation. AND now the Commons move the Lords to joyn with them to Petition the King to leave the Militia at their Disposal; The Com∣mons petition for the Militia, and Tower, to be put into then Hands, &c. as like∣wise, the Command of the Tower: But they not Complying, the House of Commons, singly of themselves, request the King, To put Them into the Hands of the Parliament; but the King not think∣ing fit to part with the Main Support of His Throne, did however make them such Gracious Replyes, as would have satisfyed all reaso∣nable Men. THERE was a Rumour, that the Parliament designed to Impeach the Queen of High-Treason; The Queen goes for Hol∣land upon a de∣signed Impeach∣ment. whereupon She provides against the Danger, and prevails with the King, That She might accompany Her Eldest Daughter, the Princess of Orange into Holland; and the King, seeing Things grow worse and worse, consented to it, and Attended them to the Sea-side, and saw them go on Board for Hol∣land; and having ordered the Prince to wait His Returns at Green∣wich, did thereby prevent His Surprize, which, had the King staid a Quarter of an Hour longer, had been effected; they having de∣signed Him for an Hostage and Security, against all Cross Events. THE Parliament having again Petitioned for the Militia, The King's Answer to the Common's Pe∣tition. the King sends them an Answer; That He is willing to condescend to all the Proposals concerning the Militia of the Counties, and the Persons mentioned; but not of London, and other Corporations; whose Govern∣ment, in that Particular, He thought it neither Justice, nor Policy, to alter; but would not consent to Divest Himself of the Power of the County-Militia, for an Indefinite Time, but for some Limited Space. THIS Answer not being Satisfactory, and the Breach growing day∣ly wider, He Removes from London to Theobalds, Royston, &c. the King thought it not safe to stay in These Parts; but Removed to Theobalds, Royston, and so to York. But on His Way, He received a Petition, demanding the Militia more resolutely than before; affirming, That in Case of Denyal, the Imminent Dangers would constrain them to dispose of it by Authority of Parliament; desiring also, That He would make His Abode near London, and the Parliament, The King's absolute Refusal to their Second Petition for the Militia. The Parlia∣ment's Publick Declaration hereupon. and continue the Prince at some of His Houses near the City, for the better carrying on of Affairs, and preventing the People's Jealousies and Fears: All which not being then fit to be granted, and therefore refused, they presently order, That the Kingdome be put into a Posture of Defence, in such a Way as was agreed upon by the Parliament, and a Committee to prepare a publick Declaration
from these Two Heads: 1. 1. The Just Causes of the Fears and Jea∣lousies given to the Parliament. 2. 2. To consider of all Matters arising from His Majesty's Message, and what was fit to be done. IN the mean time, the Bishops were so threatned and terrifyed by the Tumults and Rabble, that Twelve of Them absented themselves from the House; Protesting against all Laws, Orders, Votes, The Bishop's Protestation. Resolu∣tions, and Determinations, as in Themselves, Null, and of Non-effect; which had Passed, or should Pass, during their forced Absence: desiring their Protestation might be Registred by the Clerk of the House of Lords. But immediately after, at a Conference between Both Houses, it was agreed, That this Protestation of the Twelve Bishops, did extend to the deep intrenching upon the Fundamental Privileges, and Being of Parliaments; and presently after, They are Ac∣cused of High∣Treason, seized, and Ten of them Committed. they were Accused of High-Treason, seized, and brought on their Knees at the Bar of the House of Peers: Ten of them were Committed to the Tower; and the Other Two, in regard of their Age, to the Black-Rod. NOW the Parliament proceed to make Great Preparations both by Sea and Land; and ordered the Admiral of England, The Parlia∣ment now makes great Preparations both by Sea and Land. Pamphlets dis∣pers'd. to Rigg the King's Ships, and fit them to Sea; and likewise, all Masters, and Owners of Ships, were perswaded to do the like. The Beacons were repaired; Sea-Marks set up; and extraordinary Posting up and down with Pacquets; Pamphlets flew abroad; and all the Other sad Prognosticks of a Civil War, did appear. THUS did Our late Execrable Troubles begin, That were atten∣ded with all the Calamities of Domestick Broyls; the Parliament every Day pretending to entertain New Jealousies, and Suspicions of the King's Actions, that so they might have a Pretext to Arm their Party: which having done, and provided Moneys for the De∣fraying the Expences of the War, they unmasked Themselves; and the King, and all the Good People of the Nation began to discover, That all their Assurances of making His Majesty the Most Glorious Prince, that ever swayed the English Scepter, was no otherwise to be understood, than that they designed to Crown Him with the Crown of Martyrdom; and that all the Out-cry they had made, and the Fears and Jealousies they had spread abroad of the Loss of their Priviledges, and the danger that Religion, Liberty, and Pro∣perty were in, was like Pick-pockets; who bawl out, and accuse Passers by of Picking their Pockets, that so they might get a Crowd together, and really deprive Them of what they had falsly accu∣sed Others of; who not discovering the Cheat till it was too late, and that all was gone, had nothing left them but Regret, for ha∣ving been drawn into their Own, and their Friends Ruine and De∣struction. AND now, being come so far, as to have a full, but sad View of all those Devastations and Horrours, of those Torrents of Blood, and Mountains of Carkasses, which are the usual Effects, nay, ine∣vitable Consequences of a Civil War; I must beg Leave to re∣tire from so Deplorable and Dreadful a Prospect, and give you a short Account of the Crew that occasioned all these Desolations
and Miseries, and from whence they sucked their Poysonous Prin∣ciples, with which they infected the whole State. DURING the Reign of Queen Mary, The Rise of the Presbyte∣rians. several of the Reformed, flying the Persecutions of Her Government, retired to Geneva; where sucking in Doctrine and Principles that were no wayes conformable nor consistent with Monarchy, at their return Home under Queen Elizabeth, they spoke even with Adoration of the Dis∣cipline of that Place; assuring and perswading People, that It, and only It was what was taught and directed by our Saviour, and His Disciples, and practised in the Primitive Times; accusing all o∣thers of Impurity, Superstition, and Popery. THE Iesuits quickly took notice of these Weeds in Prote∣stanisme, Taken Notice of by the Je∣suits. and took great Care to humour and cultivate them; ho∣ping that They One Day might cause such a Breach in Our Church, as that they might enter through it, and compleat Our Ruin. And indeed, these People what by the Forced Modesty, and Austerity of their Lives, what by the Novelty of their Doctrine, and their be∣ing opposed by Publick Authority, that was no wayes consistent with their Tenets, they came at first to be Pittyed, and then to be Loved and Admired by the Common People. THUS growing (at length) to be very numerous, that ever-to∣be-admired Princess Queen Elizabeth, Queen Eliza∣beth's Care to depress them. thought fit to hinder this Contagion from spreading; and by the Advice of Her Parliament, as well as Her Council, enacted very severe Laws against them, and put several of them to Death, as Disturbers of the Peace both of Church and State. And though they expected more Favour under the Reign of King Iames; King James did the like. yet that Wise Prince thought fit to curb their Zeal, and bridle their Invading Humour: Notwithstan∣ding, having once allowed them a Conference, and taking upon Himself to be the Arbitrator, it rendered them so Insolent and Con∣fident, and brought their Party into such Repute, that towards the Latter End of His Reign, they began to have great Influence in the House of Commons; which they dayly augmented, and encrea∣sed by their seeming Abhorrence of Popery and Superstition; But with ever∣to-be-lamented Methods. till at length, by their Arts and Practices, they brought into Ruin and Destruction that Prince and Government, they all along preten∣ded their whole Design was to Defend, Support, and Maintain; and under the Cloak of Religion, let in all Manger of Impiety, A∣theism, and Superstition. THE Great Influences the Doctrines of these Men have had amongst the Factious Parties of this Kingdom of late Times too, since the Happy Restauration of His Sacred Majesty, to the great Disturbance of the Publick Peace, to the Dis-uniting the Members of the Church of England, and raising Schism and Divisions in the Com∣munities of Men in Matters of Religion, to the utter Subversion of Religion it self; nay, Morality too: I say, of the Truth of This, we have daily Demonstrations and Experiences of. The Iesuits of Geneva, and Those of St. Omers, I dare affirm, in their Dam∣nable Tenets, with relation to Monarchy and Episcopacy, bear a∣like
Proposition; and consequently, Publick Peace must be a Thorn in their Side too. Tho I believe verily, That the Presbyterian is but an Instrument in the Roman Catholicks Hands, to work the Destruction of this Nation; because, they know, there's no Sect bears a greater Sway, nor admits of a greater Acceptance a∣mongst the Credulous Vulgars, than This. How under This Cloak (Religion) they have walked for these several Years, and made it their Stalking-Horse, to perpetrate their Designes, we all know; and therefore, I shall enter upon the Second Part of This Dis∣course, and trace along our present Troubles and Distractions; be∣ginning with Religion. Loyalties severe Summons TO THE Bar of Conscience: OR, A Seasonable & Timely Call TO THE People of England, UPON THE Present Juncture of Affairs. The Second Part. BUT before we enter upon Generals, I shall a little come to Particulars, and by this Means lay before you more plainly, how exactly Men endeavour in These Times, to follow the Cop∣py which have been drawn by Men of alike Principles and Dispositions, in the Late Times. AND Here we must observe, how like Serpents the Subtle En∣gineers, and Framers of the Late Common-Wealth wrought them∣selves
in to the Accomplishing their Damned Designs, and Unpa∣rallel'd Contrivances. They no sooner found the Late King redu∣ced to urgent Necessities, and pressing Occasions for Supplyes to His Exchecquer and Treasury, which were Drained and Exhausted by a long involved War abroad; but it is as soon taken Notice of by the Factious Parties at Home, who promised to themselves now a fit Opportunity to broach their Villanies, and begin those Accursed Designs against the King and Government; which they afterwards perpetrated, and brought to pass. They begin then to hang Tall, and stand off from any Propositions the King made for Supplyes of Money; and therefore, without He would be brought to those Concessions, and comply with such unreasonable Demands, which they would, and did make, no Money was to be had. THE King being of a Good, Pacifick, and Generous Nature, and knowing the Pressures and Necessities, which then incumbred Him for a Supply, was forced to condescend to such Gracious Un∣parallel'd Acts, which helped to pull down that fair and splendid Structure of the Government, which His Royal Predecessors, Queen Elizabeth, and His Father King James had built: Of which I have spoken more at large before. THESE Acts and Concessions of the King, they managed to that Degree, that at length the Scots influenc'd Here by some Lea∣ding Parties in England, enter upon a strange Way of forcing His Concessions, by Raising an Army, under the Notion of Petitioning their King, &c. NOW, let us behold, how nearly we endeavour to follow these Ieroboams, and how close the Shadow follows our Heels. In the Year 1679. The Damnable Popish Plot Discovered in England. not long after the Discovery of the Hellish Popish Plot, which had put England into a Great Combustion and Disor∣der, and that now the Minds of Men were possest with Dread and Horror, and an Universal Jealousie and Fear of what would be the Event of so strange and Surprizing an Alarum, distracted almost even the most sober Brains: The Scots (who are a People ever ready to lay hold of any Opportunity to Rebel; and knowing This a fit Time to blow up that Fire into a Flame, which the Papists and Jesuits had kindled) they presently begin to enter upon their Old Theme of Protesting against the Church Government, Episco∣pacy, The Scots Re∣bellion. nay, Monarchy too; and Raise a Considerable Army, to further their Execrable Designs. BUT before this, to shew their Antipathy, and inveterate Ab∣horrence against Bishops, (which is a Natural Disposition they suck't from the Breasts of the Presbyterian Parents, (as is before taken Notice of) and now 'twas never to be Eradicated out of the Flesh of their Posterity) they Assassinate, and Kill that Reverend Prelate, the Arch Bishop of St. Andrews, The Reverend Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews killed. one of His Majesty's most honourable Privy-Councel, by Stabbing him in his own Coach, in the Sight of the Sun, dragging him out upon the Ground, hewing and butchering him, as the Cruel, Blood-Thirsty Dutch did the De witts in Holland, leaving his Body as one Wound. Oh crudelis Rabies Populi!
BUT this was but a small Prologue to their designed Black Cragedy; the Death of one Great Person could not satisfy their Bloody Intents; but now, Fury drives them on to destroy all that oppose them, and a Body of Men was got together on the Twen∣ty-Nineth of Mar, 1679. to the Number of Eighty, The Rebels burn several Acts of Parlia∣ment. well Mounted and Armed, and came as far as Rugland, proclaimed the Covenant, burnt several Acts of Parliament, viz. 1. 1. The Act concerning the King's Supremacy. 2. 2. The Rescissory Act. 3. 3. The Act for Establishing Episcopacy. And, 4. 4. The Act appointing the Anniversary of the Twenty-Nineth of May. —And that done, affixed a certain Scandalous and Traiterous Paper, or Declaration, upon the Market-Cross and intended to have done the like at Glasgow, but were prevented by the King's Forces there. The Rebel's Declaration designed to be put up at Glasgow, (but was actually put up at Rugland) was in these Words following: AS the Lord hath been pleased still to keep and preserve His Interest in the Land, The Scot's Declaration put upon the Mar∣ket-Cross at Rugland. by the Testimony of some Faithful Witnesses from the Beginning: So in our Dayes, some have not been wanting, who thro the greatest Hazards have added their Testimonies to those who are gone before them, by suffering Death, Banishment, Torturings, Finings, Imprisonments, Forfeitures, &c. flowing from cruel, and perfidi∣ous Adversaries to the Church, and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Land. Therefore, We owning the Interest of Christ, according to the Word of the Lord, and the National and Solemn League and Covenaut, desire to add our Testimonies of the Worthies that have gone before, (tho Unworthy, yet ho∣ping as true Members of the Church of Christ in Scotland) and that against all Things that have been done prejudicial to His Interest, from the Beginning of the Work of Reformation in Scotland; especially, from the Year 1648. to the Year 1660. against these following Acts: As, 1. 1. The Act of Supremacy. 2. 2. The Declaration whereby the Covenants were condemned. 3. 3. The Act for Eversion of the Established Government of the Church, and for Establishing of Prelacy, and for outing of Christ's Ministers, who could not conform thereto, by an Act Rescissory of all Acts of Parliament, and Assemblies, for Establishing of the Government of the Church of Scotland, according to the Word. As likewise, 4. That Act of Councel at Glasgow, 4. putting that Act Rescissory in Execution; where, at one time, were violently cast out above Three Hundred Ministers, with∣out all Legal Procedure.
Likewise, 5. 5. The Act appointing a Holy Anniversary-Day to be kept upon the Twenty-Nineth of May, for giving Thanks for the Upsetting an Usurping Power, de∣stroying the Interest of the Church in the Land; which is to set up the Creature to be Worship't, in the Room of our Great Redeemer, and to consent to the assuming the Power that is proper to the Lord a∣lone, for the Appointing of Ordinances in His Church; as particularly, the Government thereof, and the Keeping of Holy-Dayes, and all other Sinful and Un∣lawful Acts emitted and executed by them. And for Confirmation of This our Testimony, We do here∣by this Day, being the Twenty-Nineth of May, 1679. publickly burn them at the Cross of Glasgow most justly, as they perfi∣diously and blasphemously had burnt our Holy Covenants thro several Cities of the Covenanted Kingdoms. We judge, none will take Exception at our not Subscribing this our Testimony, be∣ing so solemnly gone about: for we are ready alwayes to do it, if judged necessary, with all the Faithful, Suffering Brethren in the Land. The Effect the Declaration bad. THIS gained a great Addition to their Number, and every day Fresh Rabbles came, and Listed themselves under their Rebellious Banner; so that, within few Dayes, their Body became considera∣ble, amounting to Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand Men. But, as in the thickest Brambles there are to be found some Roses; so, in this Country, the King found some Loyal Hearts, who endeavou∣red to quell their Insolence: For, on the Eight of May, (Five Dayes after the Murther of the Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews) Captain Gra∣ham of Claver-house, Capt. Gra∣ham's Rencoun∣ter with the Re∣bels. upon notice he had of a great Number of Men, who were gathered together upon Lowdon-Hill, marched thither with his Troop, and a Company of Dragoons, and found there Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand Men well Armed, and in good Order: The Foot commanded by one Weir, and the Horse by Robert Hamilton, one Patton, Balfour, and Hackston, (the Two last being the Murthe∣rers of the Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews.) The Revels upon Captain Graham's Approach, sent out Two Parties to skirmish with him, which he beat into their main Body. Then they advanced with their whole Force upon him, who after a considerable Slaughter of the Revels, and the Loss of his Cornet, Two Brigadiers, about Eight Horse, and Twenty Dragoons, (his own Horse being killed under him, and mounting another) being so much over-power'd in number, he made his Retreat to Glasgow, being in his way forced to Fight his Passage through the Towns-Men of Streven, who were got together to oppose it, leaving Ten or Twelve of them dead upon the Place. THE Revels had the Confidence to attack the City of Glasgow, The City of Glasgow At∣tacked. at Two several Times; but all the Streets were so Barricadoed by the Lord Rosse, and the Souldiers put into so good a Posture, that the Revels were beat off with a Considerable Loss, besides many Prisoners that were taken.
THE Council, the City of Edinborough, several Noble Men, and Persons of Quality, use their utmost endeavours to suppress these Rebels; amongst which, the Son of the Lord Rosse, The Son of the Lord Rosse his Skirmish with the Rebels. having only with him Forty Horse, and a Company of Dragoons, total∣ly defeats a party of Three Hundred Horse and Foot of the Rebels, leaving Sixty Six Dead upon the Place, taking Ten Prisoners, the rest being scattered. As likewise, The Lord Murray's Stu∣ward puts to the rout a 100. the Lord Murray's Deputy-Stu∣ward in Downe, assembling the Vassals, and Tenants of His Lord∣ships Stewardry, upon an Alarm of One Hundred Rebels on Horse∣back, coming from Fisse, to joyn with their main Body, pursues them Sixteen Miles through the Mountains; and at last, coming up to them, Killed several of them, took Forty Prisoners (amongst which, was one Henderson, one of the Murtherers of the Arch-Bi∣shop of Saint Andrews) and forced them to scatter, and fly into the adjacent Woods and Moors. Of which, The Lord El∣phingston took 30. Prisoners. the Lord Elphingston having notice, with some Gentlemen under his Command; pur∣sued them, killed some, and took above Thirty more Prisoners; and amongst these, Two of the name of Balfour, and one Hamilton of Kinkel (Three more of the Murtherers of the said Arch-Bi∣shop.) THE Gentlemen of Stratherne fell upon another Party coming from Fiffe; of which, they killed some, and took above Forty, The Gentle∣men of Stra∣therne's Re∣encounter with them. and carried them Prisoners to Pearth. THUS these Bebels met with great Opposition from all parts; They meet with extraordi∣nary Supplies, upon extraordi∣nary Opposition. but still like the Serpent Hydra, they had fresh Supplies, and their Numbers grew great. This allaruming the King and Parliament here, they presently resolve to dispatch with all Expedition ima∣ginable, a considerable Force against them, consisting of a Body of Ten Thousand Men, under the Conduct of the Illustrious James Duke of Monmouth, The Duke of Monmouth goes for Scot∣land. a person of whose Prudence, Courage, and Fidelity, we have had large Demonstrations and Proofs. The Duke with this Body of Men, all Loyal brave Spirits, and couragious resolute Lads, sets out for Scotland, And His Grace arrived at Edinborough, the 18th. of June, 79. by Post; and parting the 19th. following, joyned the King's Forces at Black∣burne; Major Ogle∣thorpe causes a Party or Two of the Rebels to retire. and that Evening sent out Major Oglethorpe with a De∣tachment of Horse, and Dragoons, who Met with a Party or Two of the Rebels, who presently retired. The next day, June 20th. His Grace decamped with His Army, and advanced within Six Miles of Hamilton, whither the Rebels were retreated; The Duke ad∣vances towards Hamilton. having en∣camped their Foot in the Little Park there, and Posted their Horse along the River, being 6. or 7000. strong, besides one Robert Stewart, Brother to the Earl of Galioway, and two or three more came in to them. JUNE the 22d. the Duke drew up His Majesties Forces at Both∣well-Bridge, which the Rebels lying on the other side had barrica∣doed. Here a Paper is brought to the Lord General by one of the David Hume. The Message of the Rebels. Rebels representing, That they would lay down their Arms up∣on no other Terms, than those exprest in their Declaration; to
which, The Duke's Answer. His Grace gave Answer, That those were destructive to the King's Authority, and contrary to the Fundamental Laws, and Consti∣tutions of this Kingdom; and that they were to expect no other Arti∣cles from him, but to lay down their Armes, and render themselves to the King's Mercy. With this Answer they return, desiring some time to consider, which His Grace granted them. About half an hour after, the Rebels sent a Paper by a Drummer, representing, That they were informed, Their 2d. Mes∣sage. That His Grace came from England with Terms to be offered to them, that they desired to know what He had to propose, that they might advise whether the Terms were such they could accept of. Upon which, His Grace sent them word, That their Answer did not satisfie Him; His Graces Answer. and that since they trifled, he would receive no more Messages from them. In the mean time, Our Canon, with some Horse and Foot, was brought down from the Body of the Army, and posted not far from the Bridge. The particular Account of the Fight being by me, I shall Re∣late it here as I have it Word for Word. THe Duke having put himself in the posture above-said, A Relation of the Fight in Scotland. com∣manded the Canon to Fire; which it no sooner begun to do, but the Rebels, who were drawn up on the other side, upon a rising Ground near the Bridge, threw themselves upon the Ground to avoid the Shot. Those that were posted upon the Bridge, Fired at first pretty briskly, but after Five or Six Shot of Canon, they all ran away, they upon the rising beginning first. Our Men immediately seized the Bridge, threw into the River their Barricadoes of Stones, Cart-Wheeles, and the like; took a piece of Canon they had, and followed them up the Hill; but their Number being very small, the Rebels rallied, and faced them, but had not the Courage to come down upon them; Our Men came down again to the Bridge, and one Shot more of Canon made the Rebels flye to their upper Line, where they stood again. In the mean time my Lord General passed the Army over the Bridge, and drew up upon the Rising, which took up some time; and be∣fore we were quite in order, the Rebels advanced upon Us, and to appearance, in very good Order. When they approach't, they espied Our Canon at Our Head, and thereupon immediately shif∣ted their Order, and opened in the middle, thinking, it seems We were obliged to Shoot strait forward; but Our Canon being turned upon them as they then stood, and discharged Three or Four times, they begun to Run again; their Commander Robert Hamilton, being one of the first, and our Dragoons, and the High∣landers advancing upon them, it was a perfect Rout; and they fled all wayes, Our Men pursuing them. Of the Rebels there were Seven or Eight Hundred killed, and Eleven or Twelve Hun∣dred taken, which were afterwards brought prisoners to Edin∣borough. THE Lord General behaved himself with extraordinary Con∣duct and Bravery, and all the Officers, Gentlemen, and Souldiers,
carried themselves with great Chearfulness and Resolution: But a∣bove all, the Mercy of Almighty God was most signal in that, tho the Rebels were near Seven Thousand; Yet were they totally de∣feated without any loss to His Majesties Forces, save of Two or Three private Sentinals Killed, and some few Wounded. THUS was extinguisht that furious Flame of Rebellion, fed by Presbyterian Doctrines and Zeal, to the destroying of so many poor Souls, who obstinately refused the Mercy of their Prince, and Dyed Martyrs (as they call them) for the Doctrine of King-killing. I pray God divert them from such like Practices for the future, and make them know, That without Honouring the King, we do not Fear God. NOW to proceed to a Second Remark, which is, Episcopacy spoken against. the great Hatred these sort of Men, have had, and now have against Epis∣copacy, as well as Monarchy. For as in those late Times, the Bi∣shops were ever an Eye-sore to the Scots, and the Presbyterian Faction here; and therefore, the Church of England in its Govern∣ment, Liturgy, Common-Prayer, and Ceremonies, was termed direct Popery, and could not be entertain'd as any thing else; and there∣fore, to throw down this Rome, as they called it, destroy the Mem∣bers of this Church, and, at the last, the Head too, was what was suitable to a Good Conscience, and consistent with the Liberty of the Subject, and the Protestant (alias Presbyterian) Religion. So now a∣dayes Men are so bold to call it the like, and will not stick to say the King is a Papist; and the Professors of this our Religion of the Church of England, Romish, or Popishly affected. Nay, it is publickly asserted, That there is not one Bishop in England, who was advanced to their Episcopal Dignity by any Protestant, but Popish Hand. And therefore, say they, They must needs have a great relish of that Leaven. And as the Parliament in those times, began to throw their Bolts at the Bishops, and to shew their Dis∣like to that Reverend Apostolical Order, and to that Authority, and Honour which is due to them, and their Right of Sitting in that August-Assembly; they Vote, That no Bishop should have any Vote in Parliament, nor any Judicial-power in the Star-Chamber, nor be concerned in any Temporal Matters, &c. So of late, in the Tryal of the Earl of Danby; the Commons in Parliament Vote the Bi∣shops useless; nay,
The Bishops Right of Sitting in capital Cau∣ses Disputed. disown their Right of Sitting there upon Ca∣pital Causes, &c. They Dispute their Right of Sitting at that time, and at all times of Session; and divers Papers flew about, concer∣ning the Right of the Lords Spiritual, to Sit in the Lords House, or Vote in matters Judicial; and others, è contra, were disperst abroad, to the vilifying their Reverence, and beating down their undoubted pretensions. But the Wisdom, and Prudence of Our Gracious Sove∣reign, knowing well enough (by sad Experience) That they were Treading in the same Steps with their Old Fathers, who began at the Church, in order to the better subverting the State, put an end to the Session. After which, we have but little News of them; the Anti-Episcopates or Presbyters, holding their Fingers intheir Mouths, and standing as mute as Metamorphosed Niobes. SINCE the Mutterers against Episcopacy were thus silenced, the Clergy have been pretty quiet, tho sometimes we meet with a little Piece or two of Controversial Points, thrown into their Clo∣sets, or sent to them by the New found way of Dispatch; and that's the most they can do now. They would have their Old Darling bear sway, and would be dancing to Westminster, to the Assembly of Grave Divines; of which, some Hugh Peters or Faringdon may be President; I should say, Moderator: But here's the Plague, They have no long Triennial, nor meet with such Concessions (tho in∣deed, they have had too many very gracious and great ones of late, which have been too much abused, as we shall take Notice of hereafter) as their Fore-Fathes did; nor have they a Durante Voluptate Parliament, else you would find they would do glorious Things, for the Good People of the Land, and the Lord's Cause. In Truth, had these great Antagonists of the Bishops, but what they Merit, for either their scandalous stigmatizing them in private, in their Conversations, as well as in exposing them to the World, with their spiteful Censures, the Punishment which their Patrons Pryn, and Burton, and Bastwick Suffered in the late Times, is too great a Favour, and too mild a Resentment. AND now I must hasten to Generals, only I cannot choose but take Notice, That these Times, or the Men of them, as if they were driven by the pure Dictates of a sincere Conscience; or else that they held it as an Article of their Faith, should think, That within Forty Years, by a necessary Consequence, the same, or like Occurrences must needs happen to a Nation; and therefore, if they acted never so contrary to God's Word, Nature, nay, Common Honesty; still it must be look't upon, as flowing from the su∣pream Cause, or those concurrent hidden Causes, which usually attend the Revolutions of States. However it be, This I must needs confess, No one Evil comes alone: The late King's time, tho atten∣ded with continual Vicissitudes, and repeated Troubles; yet we find still some dreadful Additional Circumstance or other, to befall them to hasten their way to Ruine. THE Scotch Rebellion, His losing His Priviledges dayly, His publick Ministers impeach'd, His legal Proceeding censured, thwar∣ted, His Honour beginning to dwindle, His Majesty exclipsed, His Subjects here at Home Mutinous, and Seditious; but to add to these, a cursed, hellish Rebellion in Ireland breaks forth to the Massacring above Two Hundred Thousand of His Subjects in one Night. Now, do we but look upon our Times, We have through the unspeakable Bounty of a Gracious GOD, Para'el. a hellish, Popish Plot, which terrified, and frightned every poor Soul of this Our Eng∣lish Nation, Discovered to Us, by those who were to be the Exe∣cutioners of Our Ruine; the Grandees, and Pillars of the Govern∣ment are taken into Custody, as Accessories to this execrable De∣sign of destroying Prince and People; several others have been taken and Suffered: The People have been disquieted, and disturbed
at such a Surprize; The Government aspersed by Incendiaries; Loyalty despised; Laws contemned; Authority neglected; Magi∣stracy villifyed, &c. And, to augment the Obscurity of those dark Clouds, which hang over our Heads, and threatned Subversion of Monarchy, Religion, and All; A Plot in Ire∣land discoverd. a Cursed Irish Plot too is Discove∣red, broached and fomented by the same Ministers, whom the Pope and the Devil had employed in that profound Mystery of Iniquity, The English Plot. Upon the Miraculous Discovery of which. His Majesty was pleased to take all the Care He could, for the through detecting This Damnable Plot; and Proclamations and Warrants are issued out for the Apprehending the Conspirators: upon the putting in Execution of which, several betake themselves to Flight, leave their Country, and get into Forreign Parts: Some are taken Prisoners; amongst which, was those Two notorious Traitors, Plunket and Fitz-harris ta∣ken. the Titular Primate of Ireland, Plunket; (One whose Hands were im∣brued in the late Bloody Massacre There: So that, we see, the Old Saying true; Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit Odorem Testa diu) and one Fitz-barris; both which were lately Tryed, Con∣victed, and Executed: And Others come in, and take hold of the Mercy of their Prince; and, as far as they were knowing, give their several Evidences concerning this Hellish Designe; Which was for the Murthering His Majesty's Person, The Designe of the Plot in Ireland. the Destroying and Subverting the True Protestant Religion, the Deposing His Ma∣jesty from the Crown and Government of that Kingdome, and the Establishing of the Roman Catholick Religion there, &c. Thus, as the Wise-man sayes; There shall no Reward be to the Evil Man; the Candle of the wicked shall be put out. My Son, Fear thou the Lord, and the King, and medle not with them that are given to Change: For their Calamity shall rise suddenly; and, Who knoweth the Ruin of them? AND Lastly, As in those Times the Press was open to receive the Dictates of every Male-content, to the Aspersion of the King, and His, Ministers, and the Censuring and Exposing the Government: So, in these Times, we see the like; every Day affording us fresh Pacquets: But of This, more here-after. I will therefore desist the Tracing thus Particulars, and do what I promised before I entred upon this Digression, viz. Lay down in Impartial, General Terms, The Present State of this poor Nation, through the needless Fear of Popery, Arbitrary Government, and the Subversion of our Religion, Laws, and Liverties: I shall begin then with Reli∣gion. THERE is no Stuff so proper to make a Cloak on, Religion, as Re∣ligion; nothing so Profitable, nor indeed so Fashionable: It is a Livery, How under∣stood now. wherein a Wise Man may easily serve Two Masters, God, and the World; and make a gainful and advantageous Service by Either: For when once a Man hath got a Publick Opinion of a Holy and Regular Life, the Good∣ness
and Sincerity of his Conscience is cryed up to that height, that his Trade will lack no Custome, his wares want no Price, his Words need Credit, or his Actions, (tho never so Enormous and Immoral) be destitute of Praise and Applause. In Summer this keeps him cool, in Winter warm; and hides the Nasty Bag of all his beloved Secret Lusts. Under this Cloak, he walks in Publickly fairly with Applause, and in Private sin securely without Offence, and officiate Wisely without Discovery, &c. AT a Fast, I cry Geneva; at a Feast, I cry Rome. Under this Cloak, I compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; and no soon∣er made, but He Makes me. I most frequent Schismatical Lectures, which I find most Profitable; from whence, learning to Divulge and Maintain New Doctrines, they maintain me in Suppers Thrice a Week. Charity I hold as an Extraordinary Duty; therefore, not Ordinarily to be performed, &c. Thus our Great Religiosi understands Religion, but as a Trick they make use of to advance their Inte∣rests, and Improve their Advantage. In fine, 'Tis Religion, which hath been the sole pretended Directrix to the Commission of the most Nefarious Conspiracies, and Damnable Contrivances, which have for several Years distracted the Peace and Order of the Go∣vernment of the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The sad Effects of it in those Late Times of Rebellion here in Forty-One, we have (as is before said) to our Sorrow felt; and those direful Consequences of Ruin and Destruction of our King and King∣dom, (brooded and hatch't under her Wings now in these present Times,) [Which would have inevitably followed the Damnable Designs of the Wicked Conspirators of the Hellish Popish Plots, had it not pleased the Omnipotent Power to infatuate their In∣tentions, and disclose their Diabolical Secrets;] I say, These Two sad and notorious Instances, are sufficient to convince any Reasonable Man, how far Religion has blind-folded, and carryed Men on thro the most uncouth, and execrable Designs to destroy both Prince and People. 'Twas under her Banner the Boid Regicides flou∣rish't their Colours over the Murthered Body of His Late Sacred Majesty, whom they durst not to have approach't when Living: 'Twas under her Banner the Audacious Heroes of the Romish Party, were now Marching on, armed with Fury, Violence, Ra∣pine, Murther, and Destruction, ready upon a Minutes Call, to Mas∣sacre Prince and People, without Distinction of Sex or Family. As if the Gospel of Peace, which was first Planted by the Author of Peace, was to be Propagated by His Ministers by the Sword. OH the Blindness, and wilful Obstinacy of Man! Oh the Pro∣clivity of the depraved Humane Nature, to Errors and Abuses! How is it that Thou, Religion, art thus mistaken? How is it Thy Dictates, and Sacred Rites are thus mis-construed, and mis-applyed? Dost Thou Teach Men such Horrid and Abominable Doctrines; . That, to Propagate their Empire, and extend their Dominions, Sub∣jects should be absolved from Obedience to their Lawful Sovereign Princes, impowering them to Depose Them, or pull Them down from their Thrones, take the Crown from their Heads; and at last,
their Heads from their Bodies? Dost Thou warrant Disorders, Di∣stractions, and Discords in the Socieries or Communities of Men, to the utter Subversion of Governments, Laws, and Liberties, and to the totall Ruin of Kingdoms? Dost Thou lead Men to Contrive the most Execrable Designes, to hatch Treasons, and to lay Plots and Con∣spiracies; to Endeavour (nay, Perpetrate) Assassinations: Nay, if they fail in These, to kick at Authority, and contemn the Laws, asperse the Governor, and vilifie the Government? Are those Thy Precepts? — No, no, not at all; nor in any wise consisting with My Nature, as I am Profess'd by the Church of England. Indeed, Rome and Geneva may understand Me so, and the World has felt they do ever understand Me so. The Religion of the Church of England. As I am Profess'd by the Church of England, I command Her Preachers to endeavour to implant Virtue in Mens Minds; To let Her Doctrine (as it truly and purely is) be Undefiled, Orthodox, and Evangelical; Teaching Piety, or our Duty towards God, Justice or Love towards those in Society with us; and primarily, towards His Vicegerent, our Lawful King and Governour; and Sobriety, or Love to our own Persons, in living in the Practice of those Excellent Virtues of Temperance and So∣berness; which tends so much to the Glory of God, and our own Comfort and Happiness. Have not we then, who have the Church of England for our Mother, great Cause to bless God, for those dai∣ly Influences of Divine Love and Comfort, which we receive from Her? That nothing but the Pure and Uncorrupt Milk of Sincere Piety, and True Religion may be suck't from Her Immaculate Breasts! But Alas! What the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Arch-Bishop Laud said in his Speech upon the Scaffold before his Death, speaking of the Church of England, may be too aptly (the more is our Shame) applyed to Her at this Time. This poor Church of England, (said that Reverend Prelate) has Flourish't, and been a Shel∣ter to other Neighbouring Churches, when Storms have driven upon them; but Alas! now it is in a Storm it Self; and God knows, whe∣ther, or how it shall get out: And, which is worse than a Storm from without, it is become like an Oak cleft to Shivers with Wedges made out of its own Body; and that in every Cleft, Prophaneness and Irre∣ligion is creeping in a-pace; Lib. 2. de Vi∣tae Contem. cap. 4. while (as Prosper saith) Men that in∣troduce Prophaneness, are cloak't with a Name of Imaginary Religi∣on. For we have, in a manner, almost lost the Substance, and dwell much (nay, too much a great deal) in Opinion; and that Church, which all the Jesuits Machinations in these parts of Christendome could not Ruin, is now fallen into a great deal of Danger, by Her Own. BUT, hold! Consider, Is it Religion alone, that hath thus di∣stracted Men's Brains? or is it Mistaken zeal, that drives Men in∣to these Madnesses? Is there nothing else in the Grass, that lyes Latitant, and pricks us, and makes us so uneasy? Yes, I fear there is a Ser∣pent that stings us, and makes us kick at Authority, called (as heretofore) Liberty of the Subject: 'Tis this wounds our Stomacks, Liberty of the Subject. and without a little Aqua Tetramagogicon, or an Indubitable As∣surance of its being Preserved, we cannot be at ease. God God!
Is there any People or Nation in Europe, ever Bless'd with Greater Freedoms, and more Undisturbed Libertyes, than this Kingdom of England? Or, Is there found from the One Part of the World to the Other, one People bless'd with such a Land. A Land, whose Constitutions make the Best of Governments, which Government is strengthned with the Best of Laws, which Laws are Executed by the Best of Princes; whose Prince, whose Laws, whose Go∣vernment, makes Us the Happiest of all Subjects, makes Us the Happiest of all People. And what a late Learned Writer said, spea∣king in the Praise of a Land, and the Admirable Blessings of it, may be said of England; and I shall apply it, according to his Words: A Land (sayes he) of Strength, England de∣scribed as it now flourishes. of Plenty, and of Peace; where every Soul may sit beneath his Vine, unfrighted at the Horrid Language of the Hoarse Trumpet, unstartled at the Warlike Sum∣mons of the Roaring Canons: A Land, whose Beauty hath sur∣priz'd the Ambitious Hearts of Forreign Princes, and taught them by their Martial Oratory, to make their vain Attempts. A Land, whose Strength reads Vanity in the deceived Hopes of Conque∣rors, and crowns their Enterprizes with a Shameful Over-throw. A Land, whose Native Plenty makes her the World's Exchange; supplying Others, able to subsist without Supply from Forreign Kingdoms: In it Self, Happy; and Abroad, Honourable. A Land, that hath no Vanity; but, what's the sweetest of all Bles∣sings, Peace and Plenty; that hath no Misery, but is propa∣gated from that Blindness, which cannot see Her own Felicity. A Land, that flows with Milk and Honey; and, in brief, wants nothing to deserve the Title of a Paradise. The Curb of Spain, The Pride of Germany, the Aid of Belgia, the Scourge of France, the Empress of the World, and Queen of Nations. In fine, Eng∣land is the Envy of all Nations, the Ambition of all Princes, the Terror of all Enemies, and the Security of all Neighbouring States. —Thus far I follow the Steps of my Learned Author in this Encomium, of the Land whereof we were both Oh Fortund∣ts nimium, sua si bona norint Anglos! Natives. BUT Alas! I find at the Bottom of the Role, a Blot or Blur, which (as it were) oblitterates part of the Account; for all these Blessings and Happinesses are but as so many Steps towards her Woe, or as so many Gaps to let in Pride, Ambition, &c. as Foxes and Wild-Boars, to eat up, and tread down these her Flowers: For Alas! She renders her Self miserable, by Not being Compact within her Self in Unity, but is apt and prone to Civil and Intestine Broyls! Did Her Children but cherish Brotherly Love and Charity, Ʋnion the best Antidore against Evils. and en∣deavour the maintaining a good and right Understanding one with another, and not suffer every Private Man's Interest, to disturb Pub∣lick Peace, Utility, and Order, the Devil himself, nor the Pope, and all his Instruments, can, or will ever harm or molest us. But that's the Colliquintida, that alwayes spoyls our Pot: We are apt to carp at every thing that suits not with our crooked Desires: We cannot endure any thing that touches us near, but we stile it Arbitrary, or that it sinells rank of Popishly-Affectedness; and then Authority
is contemned, and every Non-sensical, and half-witted Upstart, who is but just got out of Busby's Hands, must appear in Print, in a Se∣ditious Libel, against the King and Government. THE Splendor of that Fire which burns our Neighbours, deceives the Eye; It seems Fair, because it Shines: It seems Good, because it gives Light: The Harm thereof is not felt, till Loss be occasioned thereby. Who is there that's unsensible, or have not heard of the late Troubles in England? What Ruin, what Confusion, what Mise∣ries, what Destruction they brought us into? when the Son killed the Father, and the Father the Son; when all Order both of Nature and Government was broken to pieces, when Liberty and Pro∣perty, their Meums and Tuums; nay, Religion too, (the Chief Cause of so much Effusion of Innocent Blood) were totally Sub∣verted, and (quasi) Annihilated: And all upon Pretence of Arbitra∣ry Government, and a Needless Fear of Introducing Popery. Have not our Father's Blood been spilt in this Cause, and cryes un∣to us from the Earth; My Sons, Give not your selves to Change? Prov. 24.2. And yet, Will we be running down the same Precipice to Destruction? And, Will no Perswasive Arguments, and Amicable Suggestions and Perswasions Impede your Hot Careere, and turn you (like Ba∣laam) from Disobeying the Commands of the Great Iehovah? But you will continue your Old Thesis, Id factum juvat, quod fieri non licet? 'TIS true, there ought a Remedy be had for appearing Dangers; The Danger of too much Haste. but I do not commend the Repairing of past Errors, caused by De∣lay, with New and Greater, caused by Impatience. Injuries recei∣ved, tend to the Ruin of Men; who with the Zeal of Honour, do not accompany wisdom; they run upon Revenge for past Wrongs, and throw themselves headlong upon New Miseries: They would a∣mend One Error, and produce a Thousand. Too much Haste is as much before Time, as too much Delay is out of Time. Errors of Im∣patience, are worse than Errors of Delay; for it is better to shun Precipices, than run upon Them: If they be not hindered, they are Retarded. Wisdome is the Daughter of Cold, Violence of Heat: Things which have not been done in Times past, may be well ef∣fected in Times to come. Occasions are never wanting to Men, but Men are wanting to Occasions: They may be expected, they ought not to be prevented. Generous Spirits address themselves to endure present Injuries, out of hope of Future Revenge: They reserve their Anger to Vindicate Offences, not to Evaporate Passion. A Disease that has been long growing, is not presently eradicated; but deserves the longer Time, and the greater Industry to Cure it. Difficulties ought not alwayes to be thrust at in Desperate Cases; it is better to com∣mit them into the Hands of Fortune, than to seek to Remedy them. Where we cannot help our selves, to be busie, can work no other Effect, than hinder the Effects of a Cause Superior to our selves. That (as I said before) which hath wrought it self into us by little and little, must be wrought out by little and little. SINCE the First Discovery of this Late Hellish Popish Plot, What Prudent Means, and Well-weighed Methods have been used to
prevent the Designs, and Dash the Hopes of those Damnable Conspi∣tors; there is not any reasonable, sober Man, but will aver, He is sensible of. Almighty God, as the Prime Agent towards Our De∣liverance, was pleased first to Detect their execrable Treasons and Machinations, and to strike the Rock, to send forth Streams to save our drooping, and Fainting Land; or made those who were the Great Sauls, Mr. Oaes, and Mr. , &c. in threatning the Destruction of Our Church and State, to become the most Eminent Pauls, in the preser∣ving them. And these He placed as most Exquisite Instruments, in the Hands of His Sacred Majesty, His Vicegerent, to work out those Means which might procure Our Peace and Well-fare, and remove those Obstacles which impeded that Good, which His Royal Bounty, and Gracious Love, ever wisht His Subjects should en∣joy. THE Consternation, and affright a thing of so important a Na∣ture, (as a Plot) put the whole Nation into, was not, nor is easily to be removed, especially discovered, in a time when England was the Sole Seat of Peace and Tranquility; and when at the same time, all Her Neighbours were in the greatest Conflagration of War and De∣solation. The sudden Amazement which such a surprize put Us in, possest Us then with a Diffidence, and Distrust of our Best Friends; neither could we think our selves Secure of the Government we lived under, either in its Power or Authority. We presently suspect the Incredulity of Our Prince, in being not easily induced to Believe a Plot, might proceed from some more than Ordinary Cause; and therefore, we imagined the Court-Air smelt rank; and thus trusting our Senses, The Duke of York im∣peach't. we ran briskly on our Pursuit, and found the Duke in the Quarry! The Duke in the Plot? The Duke in the Plot? Is presently the wondring Interrogatory of every Body: What! He that was the Alumna, the Joy of all true English Hearts, the Heir Apparent to the Crown of the Three Kingdoms? And the En∣deared Brother of Our Sovereign Lord? HERE the Scene begins to alter, and Revenge and Odium sits Regent on every Brow; and like Amnon's Hatred to His Sister Ta∣mar, it became greater, and more inveterate, than the Love they before bare to him. For now every Pen is employed in beating down His Pretentions to the Crown, and proposing the Reasonable∣ness, nay, Undeniable Necessity, there is for the Exclusion of Him, as a Papist from the Succession. AND here all Our Miseries began, Our Fears and Jealousies of Introducing Popery, Arbitrary Government, and utter Subversion of Our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, drives Us to distrust Our Prince and His Council; and nothing will serve our Turns, but we are ready to Affront Authority, asperse His Ministers, and Contemn His Sovereignty; and all this (like the Antient Turnus) for the Li∣berty of the Subject, and the Maintaining the Protestant Reli∣gion! GOOD GOD! Was there ever Prince more sincere in His Professions, and more real and direct in His Promises, than Our Prince hath been? Was there ever Prince shewed a more Vigilant
Care, and Indefatigable Diligence, in endeavouring the Finding out those nefarious Contrivers of the Popish Plot? Hath He not given the greatest Incouragement imaginable to the Discoverers of the Plot, and Promoted their Care in finding out those Hell-bred Con∣spirators to bring them to Condigne Punishment? Hath He not taken the Strictest Care in the World, that the Laws be duely put in Execution; and that Delinquents escape not unpunisht? Did He Judges re∣moved, and new Ones Chosen. Did He not Purge the Courts of publick Justice, by removing those Magi∣strates and Judges, whom He thought Male-affected; and fill'd up their Rooms with others? Did He not charge them to Officiat Wise∣ly, and Discharge their Duties in their several Stations Honestly, for the Good of their King and Country? And hath not this His Princely Care had this Effect, That the Prisons were filled with Po∣pish Recusants, Priests and Jesuits; and many of them brought to Condigne Punishment? Nay, Hath He not shewn how far He de∣sires the Plotters in the Tower, might be brought to their Try∣als; and the Law takes its force upon them, The Lord Stafford Exe∣cuted. by the Execution of the Lord Stafford? And lastly, is it not His daily Protestation, That upon His Kingly Word, the Maintaining the Protestant Religion, as it is Establish't by Law, the Rights and Liberties of the Subject of England, &c. is, and shall ever be His Study, De∣sire, and Care? What would Subjects wish for? or, What can Prince promise, or do more? WHY? All this is Nihil ad rem; a Man cannot be in Three several Companies, but we shall hear some one (more cen∣sorious than the rest) which pretend to avouch it as the much re∣ceived Opinion, That notwithstanding all This, Latet Anguis sub Herba; The King inclines to that Religion He so much Persecutes, or pretends to do: When on the contrary, We shall see how Causeless our Fears are in this matter, if we will but look back on that memorable Act of 25. Ch. cap. 2d. For preventing of Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants. Whereby a Papist was disenabled holding any Office or Employment; tho but of so small an advantage or interest as a Noble a Year. And it likewise ran in such general Terms, that it Reserved no one person, but reach't even to some about Him, of whose fidelity, and sincere Love to His Per∣son and Government, He had undeniable proofs, and unquestionable Demonstrations: Which methinks should be sufficient to be-lye those Rascals, who are so bold as to say, That He leaned (in the least) that Way, since if it be examined by any Man of Sence and Reason, it cannot but be concluded, that a Prince, in whose Power the refusing a Law is, would ever pass one, to the utter subverting the Intendments and Designs of a Party, whose Practises He fa∣voured, and meant to forward their Interests. Nay, it ran not on∣ly to Offices and Imployments, but to the Disinheriting those Peers, who professed the Romish Religion, from taking their Seats in Par∣liament. AND further to satisfy Us, let Us but look back on His Gra∣cious Speech to the Parliament, 1679. March 6.
I HAVE done (sayes He) many Great Things already, Vide, The late Journals of the House of Commons. as the Ex∣clusion of the Popish Lords, from their Seats in Parliament, the Execution of several Men, both upon the Score of the Plot, and the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey; and it is apparent that I have not been Idle in Prosecuting the Discovery of Both, as much fur∣ther, as hath been possible for me in so short a time. And above all, I have commanded My Brother to absent himself from Me, because I would not leave the most Malicious Men room to say, I had not re∣moved all Causes, which could be pretended to influence me towards Po∣pish Councils. Why? All This doth not satisfie, as long as Mordecai sits in the King's Gate. The Fear of a Popish Successor possesses our Minds; and we shall still be restless, Vide, That Ʋnknown-Peer's Speech, Printed Janu∣ary last. till the Duke is Excluded. Let the King's Treasury fill it self, and let Tangier take ca5re for it self; We must be assured the King is our own, and that the Duke shall not succeed Him; and then we shall see Golden Dayes, and eve∣ry ones Purse shall be open. Pamphlet upon Pamphlet, Libel upon Libel, are disperst on that Subject; and the Streets are filled with the Horrid Noise of the Bawling Vender, who makes the Streets Ring with his Foul-Mouth, belching out, Great News of His Royal-Highness the Duke of York; whose Name's Too Sacred, and of a Higher Veneration than to be mentioned by every Scoundrel, Dung∣hill fellow. AND to make their Malice appear the more Laudable, a Pam∣phlet must be Published, The Character of a Popish Successor is Published. Intituled, The Character of a Popish Suc∣cessor, and what England may expect from such a One, stufft up with all the Arguments and Reasons Malice could invent or suggest, to Asperse His Person, to Thwart His Pretentions, or render his Ligiti∣mate Succeeding in the Throne of these Three Kingdoms, to be the only Thing inconsistent, with the Safety and Liberty of the Subject, the Continuance of the Protestant Religion, and the Priviledges of Parliament. And therefore, in all hast to avoid all these Evils which our Fears and Jealousies of a Popish Successor do at present af∣fright Us with: The Duke must be Excluded, and then all will be well. THIS Pamphlet has been the Work of Two Pens to Answer, which has made our ingenious Author to annex his Answers to them both, and stile it now Compleat: 'Tis pitty his to be admi∣red Wit should be employed to such despicable Ends. Every Sen∣tence of it being the very Quintessence of Malice, and the Superlative Degree of Boldness and Impudence. I shall only add these few words, which I leave to your Consideration. THAT tho 'tis true, the Soul of every Man (as well Prince as Subject) is in the Hand, or at the Dispose of the Supream Power, God; and both Lyable to a Minutes Summons: yet let me tell you, according to the Natural Conclusions of Humane Understandings, if we examine how little the Disproportion of Age is betwixt the King, and the Duke His Brother; and what Hopeful Appearances there are,
in the Air, Health, and Briskness of the King, above that Proclivity to In∣dispositions which alwayes attend His Royal-Highness; we must needs con∣clude, That our Fears are but Chymaeraes, meer Phantasmes; or at least, that we would shelter our Sinister Intentions under such a Specious pretence, as the Possibility of being Subjugated to the proposed imminent Servitude a Popish Successor would inevitably bring along with Him. BUT what should I further dispute, or endeavour to heap up Argu∣ments to deter Men from such hot brain'd, and Unwarrantable Designs; it is done already, but Yesterday, to my Hand, and that too by the Best of Men: The King; who has endeavoured to allay the Heat, the Fear of a Po∣pish Successor puts Us in, by telling Us in His Well weighed Gracious Speech to Our last Parliament; That to remove all reasonable Fears that may anise from the possibility of a Popish Successor's coming to the Crown; if means could be found that in such a Case, the Administration of the Government might remain in Protestant Hands, He should be ready to hearken to any such Expe∣dient, by which the Religion might be preserved, and the Monarchy not de∣stroyed. Surely this is a Thrice welcome News; and what will quell that passion which was so predominant, and spreading against the Duke of York, and will silence Our Pen-men or Pamphletteers, who upon every turn, were alwayes ready to furnish the World with their Bombast, under this Noti∣on, No Popery, No Slavery; or by endeavouring to possess the Mobile, or Vulgars, with a Fear that Servitude would be the genuine Concomitant of a Popish Successor, or King here; and therefore, they should Arm them∣selves against such a Danger, and still keep to their old Maxime, Libertas optima rerum; The Liberty of the Subject should be their Helmet, tho 'twas (as in the late Rebellion) to the Warring against their Prince, De∣posing Him, nay Murthering Him too. ALAS! These bold Proselytes of the Recorded Brutus, I dare believe do not understand what Liberty means (I mean with relation to Govern∣ment) but only have heard how great sway this Thundering Noun car∣Liberty. ries amidst the giddy Crowd, who need no other Bait to be thrown a∣mong them, than the name of Liberty. Now if by Liberty be intended, What it is. a Power of doing what one will, it will turn then to Licentiousness; 1. and that Government which has most thereof, will be worst. If thereby be meant, a Power of doing what is convenient, 2. it needs not be parted from Principa∣lity or Monarchy; under which, what is convenient hath no less place, than under a Common-Wealth. 3. And if thereby be understood a Power of Commanding others, 'tis so much less for the Common People which obey, by how much their Servitude is extended to a number of Masters: But 'tis but a Chimaera, which Men fain unto themselves to bring their Wits to pass, and oftentimes to Sweeten the Beginnings of a Bitter-Servitude. For my part, I shall not endeavour further to define what Liberty is, the un∣disturbed Fruition, and the sweet Benefit redounding to Us all from it, are Sufficient to ease me of that task; no Nation in the whole Universe having the like, as England. How far the Needless Fear of losing this Li∣berty, carried Us in the late times of Rebellion, even to the utter Ruine of Families, Estates, and Lives; nay, at last, of that Liberty too, I have be∣fore shewed. And therefore, I shall conclude this Point, with shewing what sorts of Men Our Great Libellers and Pamphletteers are, The Character of a Pamphlet∣teer. according to the Character a Great Prince gave one of His Grandees, who ran in the same Seditious Road. THEY are those (sayes he) who Term themselves Free, and are
so indeed, in as much as they are not subject to Reason; A People, who see nothing but Faults, because they seek after nothing else; They blame the Sun, because it offends their Eyes; and know not that the fault is in their Eyes, not in the Sun. A Wicked Generation, whose Fame lyes only in Defamation, their Praise in Blaming, their Greatness in De∣traction. They speak, and write what ever comes next, so it be bad enough. Under a False shew of Liberty, they would endeavor to Con∣found the True One, and then to oppress it must follow: They have no Means to raise themselves, but by taking from others; and so, that they may appear Great, like Women, they care not whither it be by Flesh, or a Chopine. This Kind, are the most pernicious to the whole World, would sow Confusion, make Princes become Tyrants, raise Discords in Senates, and fill Cities with Calumnies; and Finally, with Dead Men. I SHOULD say something too, before I make an end of these Con∣siderations, Priviledge of Parliament. concerning the Priviledges of Parliament, so much talk't of, and so little understood. The Maintaining of the Priviledges which be∣long to that August Assembly, is of so necessary and weighty a Consequence, that without that, the Liberty we have been talking of, together with the Re∣ligion, and Laws could not subsist. But however it is to be understood, when they are Kept within their due Banks, and are Guided by the Law of which they with the King, are the Fathers; and when they encroach not upon the Dignity and Prerogatives of the Crown: They are the Great Horologe, by which is seen how Regular the Motions of the whole Nati∣on go; but if the Master-workman finds any Deficiency, or Irregular Move∣ments; 'tis in His Power alone, to Take it to peices, and Correct it. Par∣liaments were ever held extream Necessary, and of Great Use in this Land, and rendred Us ever the more Formidable, esteemed, and reverenced Abroad, by how much they Adhered to their Head, the KING. We have, 'tis true, of late within these few Years seen more Change of Parliaments, since espe∣cially the Discovery of the Popish Plot, 77. and 78. than since the Happy Restauration of His Majesty; the Reasons induced His Majesty to proceed so with them in their so Frequent Dissolutions, is not for every person to enquire after, neither shall I for my part pretend to search into, much less discover: I am only like an Honest Man, and Loyal Subject, to acquiesce in the Pleasure of my Prince; and not to censure the Autho∣rity and Reasonableness of His Proceedings in the least particular. THE most admirable, and Princely Speech, which His Majesty was Graciously pleased to make to the Parliament at Oxford, will satisfy any reasonable or judicious Person, by what Measures He has still proceeded, and what Resentments He has been obliged to make of all their Proceedings; which in the Second Word of His said Speech, He stiles Unwarrantable; tho He professes notwithstanding all, He is not out of Love with Parlia∣ments, and never will, as long as they take their Measures by the Law, To let that be the Rule, by which they Act, as it is His; and that then what∣ever they should offer, should meet with His Gracious Acceptance. IF a Rider put a rough Bit into a Horses Mouth, which will not be Governed, no Man blames Him for severity, they blame the Horse ra∣ther, because he will not be Ruled; and yet Men are apt to call the Prince Cruel, who would curb the Senate; and call not the Senate Head-strong, who will not obey the Prince. A Senate, or Parliament may Vote Redres∣ses for Grievances, suffered by the People, whose Representatives they are,
but it is in the Prince alone to make those Votes Valid, or of Force; and therefore, without His Stamp or Royal Assent, no Vote or Resolve can pass currant made by them. 'Tis their Priviledge to offer Expedients, but it is the King's Prerogative to assent to, or except against them. TO proceed according to the Fundamental Laws of the Land, in redres∣sing, or at least, indeavouring to redress those Grievances which render the Subject Male-content, and uneasy; and by this means to Accomodate, and Silence any Misunder standings or Murmurs, may be conceived against the Government; and thus procure publick Peace, Trahquility, and Order: I say, for this end likewise, were Parliaments constituted, and thought necessary for the State. But all This they were Priviliedged to do, with a Restriction, so long as the Honour, Dignity, and Safety of the Crown was their first, and immediate Regard and Care, as I said before. A Parlia∣ment is the Magnum Anglie Concilium, The Great Council of the Land, called together by the King, as the proper, and most genuine Means for the Consulting or advising of, and providing against publick Evils (wherein e∣very private Man is concerned) and in order to the Administring neces∣sary Remedies. And therefore, to pretend that their Priviledges enable them to Act contrary to what their Head the King shall propose to them, to∣wards the Regulating Misunderstandings, Composing Differences; and the Se∣curing Peace and Order, is (if it may be so said) a Casting off that Supream Power, which gave them those Priviledges; and a Breach of the King's Prerogative. And if once Regal Prerdgative is invaded, the Regal Power will be in great Danger. (This we have lately had notorious Te∣stimonies of, and I hope, and pray we may never see the like again.) THE last Dissolution of the Parliament met at Oxford, perhaps doth, and may Amuse the World exceedingly, and drive them into a profound Admiration: Unde hoc? Whence proceeded His Majesties Displeasure? But the Papers called Intelligences, pretended to satisfy Us with a great deal, and every Coffes-House Whisper'd out Reasons, or at least Suspicions, and Surmises upon it. For my part, I do, and shall ever continue my Reso∣lution in this particular, which I mentioned but a little before, That I think it mine, and every Honest Man, and Loyal Subject's Duty to Acqui∣esce in the Pleasure of my Prince, and not to Censure the Authority or Rea∣sonableness of His Proceedings in the least (I mean, so far as my Consci∣ence shall give me leave.) I shall not therefore any further dilate on this point, but Conclude with the saying of a Wife States-Man, viz. Many things (sayes He) in the world resemble Smoak; their Beginning is but small, their End great: And many things resemble the Wind, whose Reginning is Boisterous, and End Weak. He saves himself from the former, who suffers them not to Increase: from the latter, He who suffers them to Blow over. Progress of Time, may be expected in the One, where the Other ought to be Smother'd in the Cradle. HAVING thus far run thro Our proposed Parallel under those Three Heads of Religion, Liberty, and Priviledges of Parliament; and there∣in shewn how dangerous they are to a Common-Wealth, when mis-un∣derstood, and mis-applyed. (As GOD knows they have been too much of late here in England; the more is the pitty, and Our shame) I shall therefore in this place look back on the large Concessions, and bountiful Condescentions of the late King, which was so much abused, and made as so many Helps towards the subsequent Evils, and Ruine to this poor Kingdome of England; and see how Our Times have met with the like, and what unsutable Returns have been made to the Royal Grace and Fa∣vour.
THE pressing Necessities for Supplies of Money to the empty drain'd Coffers of the Royal Treasury, thro a long War (which I have spoken of before) coming in a Time, when the Subject's Purse was full; and that now the Parliament, City, and the Disaffected Parties, knew well enough was a fit time to perpetrate their Designs, to bring the KING to their Beck, to make Him condescend to what Terms they pleased; Which to avoid Repetition of, I desire the Impartial Reader to consider in the Beginning of this Discourse. Where you see after that they had brought the KING to do what they demanded, they at last, to compleat all, perswade the People that the KING meant to introduce Popery, Arbitrary-Government, destroy the Protestant Religion, and the Liber∣ty of the Subject, The unwar∣rantable Practi∣ces of the Par∣liament. 1640, 41. &c. This nettles the Giddy Crowd, and induces them to believe, that whatsoever the Parliament did, was for their Good, and according to Conscience, and the like: They forget their King's Gracious Concessions and Graunts; they stop their Ears to His crying Wants, turn their Backs to His friendly and just Demands, neglect His Autho∣rity, despise His Dignity, contemn His Administration of the Government, thwart His just and lawful Proceedings; and thus Topsy turvy, per fas ne∣fasque, No King, no Laws, no Religion (I mean of the Church of Eng∣land) In exitium rount. NOW in brief, His now Ma∣jesties Conces∣sions. Let Us examine Our own Times, and here We shall find Mercy, Bounty, and Liberality, still swaying the Scepter of these King∣domes. We see His Sacred Majesty was no sooner sat Him in His Throne, and had graspt the Scepter in His Hand; but He as soon begins to dis∣play the Influences of His Royal Bounty and Mercy, by the Act of Obli∣vion; The Act of O∣blivion Gran∣ted. whereby every Individual Person, who had been Actors on that late Bloody Stage of Rebellion and Treason, (the Cruel and Blood-Thirsty Regicides, or those who were the Unjust Judges and Murtherers of His Father of Blessed Memory only exempted) from the Beginning of the Ci∣vil-War, unto His Happy Restauration, the New Epocha of our English Nation, that Annus Restauratae Libertatis. Nay, to dispossess those, who Held their Estates in Capite of the Fears of the just Demands and Pretentions, so long a time's Killing and Slaying, had given Him upon their Tenures, and Knight Service; What vast Sums were coming to Him from the Court of Wards and Liveries, &c. which, unless He remitted, would render the Act of Oblivion, in effect no Pardon, since it gave not their Estates with their Lives: His Majesty was Graciously pleased to prevent those Fears by Act of Parliament, The Act of Parliament, 12 Ch. 2. ca. 24. 12 Ch. 2. cap. 24. depriving Himself of the Richest Jewel of His Crown, a Prerogative so truly Royal, and so hugely advantagi∣ous, That in the Judgement of the Learned in the Law, The People of England were never truly Free till then. WHEN thro repeated Affronts, War with Holland. Calumnies, and Injuries, He was forced to make War with the Hollanders, for His own Honour: We no sooner find Him informed, That it was prejudicial to His People, but He shuffles up a Peace upon very hard Terms for Himself; when had He stood off but a little while (the State of His Enemies being such) He might have made what Conditions He would. Peace made Nay further, To shew His Love to His Good Subjects, when He entred into a War for Injuries offered to them, Vide, The Ar∣ticles of Peace in Aug. 1667. and those 1674. no Considerations, neither Plague, nor Fire, (which had then impoverisht the Land, by the Loss of so much People and Money) would induce Him to a Peace, till ample Satisfaction made. WHEN He had upon Advice Granted a Tolleration of Religion, and
was satisfied afterwards by the Parliament of the Dangerous Consequen∣ces of such a Liberty; He immediately is induced to Recall it, and did so. The Act for Toleration of Religion made. Did He not consent to all such Laws as were offered Him by His Par∣liament, for the Securing Us against Popery, Recolled. and particularly for the Qualifying, and Distingutshing all Persons in Office, or Place of Trust? An Act against. Popery or Popish Recu∣sants, 25 Ch. 2. cap. 2. Which was that Great and memorable Act; of which, I have spoken of before, in another place. WHEN that Hellish Design of the Papish Party was happily Dis∣covered, How Wisely and Prudently, did His Majesty be-have Himself, in a Matter of so great an Importance and Surprize? A Parliament called upon the Discovery of the Plot. He presently Sum∣mons a Parliament; and till they could come together, He uses all the Means possible for the Searching into, and Discovering further the Plot, and the Hell-bred Instruments of it; to Seize their Persons and Papers, and then layes the Whole before them, giving them this Assurance; His Majestes Speech. That He would be alwayes ready to Assist them in the Inquiry into the Plot, in any thing where His Concurrence was necessary, and accordingly as they desired, by several Proclamations Assisting them; by some, Commanding the Absence of Papists; by others, Inquiring after Blood, with most bountiful Promises of Pardon and Recompence; Searching all Counties, Securing all Ports to pre∣vent any Flight from, and looking into the very Prisons, to bring all Male∣factors to Justice. His Bounty to the Discoverers of the Plot. For the Encouragement of those who came in upon His Proclamation, He gave them large Allowances, Guards to there Per∣sons, &c. And this was duly paid, at a time when He might have been well excused, when His Coffers were empty, and His own Faithful m∣nial Servants went un-paid; which was somewhat hard, especially when there are some, whose whole Subsistence for themselves and Families, de∣pends on their In-come from His Majesties Service. Those who were Im∣prisoned, and after a long time expect their Trial; and therefore, Addres∣sed themselves unto Him, by their humble Petitions; He returned them no other Answer, Than that They should receive Iustice in parliament. Of this I have spoken of already in another place. WHEN the parliament had judged it necessary to have a War with the French, All Trade is forbidden for Three Years; by which, War with the French. He depri∣ved Himself of a great part; nay a very considerable part of His Reve∣nue; and which, proved a very Disadvantageous Act to Himself, tho by the Intent of the Act, it was designed for the French. THE French having been so Victorious in the Low-Countries, That it was much feared, the Spanish Netherlands would have been quite lost; and that now the parliament judged it necessary to Raise an Army to go a∣gainst them: The KING is ready to Grant it, and a most Incomparable Body of Men are Raised, and Mustered in the Spring; An Army rai∣sed for Flan∣ders. and e're they could be Ship't for Flanders, they must be Disbanded in July following; and in this likewise, He complied, Disbanded. and as far as the Money allowed for that purpose, they were Disbanded: Thus, will we have an Army? we have one. Will we have none? He Disbands it to gratify Us. But one Thing I shall here take Notice of, which is the Great Gare His Majesty took, The King's Care of the Ar∣my. That not one Person from the Officer Chief, to the very meanest Souldier throughout the whole Army, should be a Roman Catholick; and therefore, every Individual Person must take the Blessed Sacrament and Test, the Daths of Megrance and Supremacy, e're they were Listed into His Mi∣litia to Fight under His Banner; by which Method, many Relinquish't, and left the Field (when every particular Name was to be Book't) and
would not take it, as is well known: Nay, when the time of their Dis∣banding came, every Man whose Name was found in the Books, Inter Pro∣testantes, his Pay was Deposited to a Farthing, and he Discharged; none else. AND because the best Security of a Nation are good and wholesome Lawes, Never resu∣sed an Ʋseful Bill at any time. There hath not One Useful Bill been offered to Him, but what He hath readily accepted and past. AND yet what unsuitable Returns has He had for all these, and ma∣ny more (which I could not com-premise within this narrow Compass) His Princely Gracious Concessions, Vide, The Journals of the House of Commons. and most Affectionate Condescentions. His Gracious Speeches at the Openings of Our late Short-Liv'd-Parlia∣ments, shew His Resentments of their Proceedings; and how just He is in them; therefore I omit particulars. His last Speech to the Parliament at Oxford, sufficiently Evidences how great Reason He had to Act, as He did in their so frequent Dissolutions. Nay, since that likewise, as a∣nother great Instance of His Love to His Loyal, and Good Subjects, He has publish't His Reasons that led Him to it, The King pub∣lish't a Decla∣ration. which hath infinitely satis∣fied the Subject; the several Addresses from every of the respective Coun∣ties, Shires, Burroughs, &c. giving some ground to believe. Which I hope are as real in Fact, as they are in Words; and if so, England will still be happy, notwithstanding all the Machinations and Plots of Pope or Jesuit, Phanatick or French, being United within our selves, with the Bonds of Peace, with a Fear of God, Honour of His Vice-gerent Our Soveraign Charles Out King, a Reverence for His Councels, especially His Great Council the Parliament: and an Awe, and Obedience to His Ministers, and a Brotherly Love and Charity one towards another. Praying, That God would bless His Majesty with Peace, and Length of Dayes, and the Royal-Family; and That God would ever so Direct all the Consultations of His Great Councils, the fu∣ture Parliaments; that they may tend to the Glory of His Name, the Good of His Church, and the Safety, Honour, and Wellfare of their King and Coun∣try. To which, Let every true Son of the Church of England, say alwayes, Amen.
THE CONCLUSION. THUS (Dear Countrymen) I have endeavoured to lay before you, a plain and impartial Relation of the present Condition and State of Affairs, as they now stand in this Juncture of Time; and what Measures, and Steps we take, to hasten that Ruine which hangs over Our Heads; and which will inevitably fall upon Us, if we do not endeavour with the utmost Diligence and Industry, Christian Prudence, and our Happiness, and Peace oblige Us to. I have shewed you in the Opening of this Discourse, what Measures our Fathers took in the late Rebellion, towards that Ruine and Destruction, which they brought upon themselves, and their Posterity. How furiously Blind Zeal hurried them upon, and and Mistaken Liberty plunged them in Blood and Misery! How great a sway Parliaments bore (under the Notion of Priviledge) amongst the unruly Multitude, even to the disowning the Regal Power; nay, Depo∣sing Our Prince; and at last, to bring Him to the Block! I have also shewed you how little the Dissimilitude is, betwixt our, and their Pro∣ceedings, and how near we Tread in their Foot-steps: I pray God divert Us from such like Practises. WE Read of Romulus (that Famous Founder of Rome) when the Sabins had Waged War against Him, and had got by Stratagem into the City, and had possest themselves of the Capitol; and joyning Battle, had Slain a great Leader and Captain of the Romans, named Hostilius; and by this means had caused them to Retreat, and give Back: Romulus Born along by them that Fled, made a stand at last upon the Palatine-Hill, and seeing the great Success the Sabines had, and that now the Honour of the Romans was dwindling; He Vows a Temple to Iupiter, and there prays to him for Victory: But to shew, that Man's Industry was to go along in Concur∣rence with the Divine Power; Romulus is not wanting in his own En∣deavours, by his personal Courage and prudent Conduct, like a Valiant Captain, and brave Leader; and thus at last obtained Victory. An Ex∣ample of a Heathen: Alas! for Us Christians! 'Tis this alone which can save Us, I mean a Recourse to the Divine Power, to implore its om∣nipotent Goodness, to Dispel those dark Gloomy Clouds, which hover over our Heads, and threaten Ruine and Misery. To do which, I am con∣fident, nay assur'd, our Church hath no way been backwards, both by Her dayly Summons and Calls, and by the Preaching of Her Learned, Pi∣ous Ministry: The Church Doors are alwayes open, and as it were by their Dumb Signs invite Us to enter there, and Commune with our God by Prayer, to intreat His Removal of His Iudgments from Us. But A∣las! In vain do Men call to Heaven; many do Invoke it, and yet do Hin∣der it; they require help from Heaven, and do Abandon themselves; and by their Deeds contrarying their Words, they shew not to Desire what they have intreated, and to have Intreated, that they might not be heard. This is a Truth too palpable, God knows, and too notorious among Us now a-dayes! We have a great many pretended Israelites, but few Is∣raelites indeed.
AY, but say the People, if we are like to have bad Times; and if E∣vils are like to come upon Us, and Desolation and Ruine threaten Us, The Fault lyes not at our Doors, nor are our Miscarriges the occasion; but it is the Male-Administration of those at the Helm, from whose Influences alone we receive or Good, or Detriment, which brings upon Us, those Mis∣chiefs that press the Nation. And thus like the Milesian Phylosopher [Thales] who gazing up to behold the Stars, and consider their Aspects, and neg∣lecting the Way wherein he walked (thro his Intention, or serious Con∣templation) fell into a Pit or Lake; and there ended his Life, and Speculation together. Would Men but look into themselves, and exa∣mine the Private Closets of their own Hearts; they will there find Work enough, and sufficient Reason for wondring Contemplation, when their Con∣sciences stand ready to Salute them with Nathan's Parable, Thou art the Man, Or 'tis for thy Sins that the Land Mourneth, that the Angel of God stands with his Sword drawn in his Hand, ready to Cut it off in the midst it 'its Sins, and leave no place for Reconciliation. BUT Alas! Men now a-days are grown to that Degree of Impiety, that they are ready to Murther a Man for telling them the Truth. To be sure if the Blasting a Man's Credit be a means to Ruine him, they will not stick to do that; and tho a near and intimate Friend with all the Mildness, and Complacency in the World, indeavour to insinuate a Sense of their miserable, and deplorable Estate, by all the methods Chri∣stian Piety and Charity can suggest; yet if he touch them too hard upon the Wounded Part, they are apt presently to throw back his Admoniti∣ons in his Face; and with the ungodly Man the Psalmist speaks of, Tush say they, what? Tellest thou me of Conscience, or a Pious Life. They are good Trades for a Leaden Spirit that can stand bent to every Frown, and wants the Brains to make a higher Fortune, or Courage to atcheive that Ho∣nour which might Write their Names in the Chronicles of Fame. Pish, sayes he, Civil Honesty is but a fair pretence for him that has no Wit to play the Knave, and makes a Man capable of a little higher Stile than Fool. Come, come, if my Conscience check me, I'le correct my sawcy Conscience, till she stand as mute as Metamorphosed Niobe, I'le fear nei∣ther the Frowns of Princes, nor the Mighty Hand of various Fortune: I'le pass my slow-paced Time in Melancholy-Charming Mirth, and take the Advantage of my Youthful Dayes; I'le Banish Care to The Dead Sea of Phlegmatick Old Age. A Deep Sigh shall be High-Treason, and a Solemn Look adjudged a Crime too great for Pardon. And thus they go on in Sinning, having as the Apostle sayes, Seared their Consciences with a Hot-Iron. IF a Pious Minister Preaching in the Church, touch them to the quick, by laying open the ugliness of Sin, and the dismal Consequences of it, and the Judgments which will inevitably fall upon Sinners, Reprobate and Obstinate; and perhaps occasionally Harangues against particular Sins; of which, they are too much inclined, and prone to; They hear Him whilst they are in the Church seemingly with great Attention, tho they are impatient to be Dismist, that they might be at their venting their opprobrious Censures of his Person and Doctrine; and no sooner have they reach't their Houses, but as soon as sat, presently have at the Par∣son, or as they usually stile him Mr. Doctor, sayes One, His words con∣duce not at all to Edification, nor are the Motions of his Heart Sanctified. He Adores Great Ones for Preferment, and speaks too partially of Authority. A
sober Language in his mouth, but the poyson of Aspes is under his Tongue. Ah, cryes a Second, He feares God for his own ends. He can hear an Oath from his Superiour, without reproving him, and sad Cursings without Rebuke. He paints Devotion upon his Face, whilest Pride is stampt upon his Heart. 'Tis in∣deed true, sayes the Third, He is quick-sighted to the Infirmities of the Saints, and in his heart rejoyceth at our failings. His studied Prayers shew him to be a high Malignant, and his Jesu-worship concludes him Popishly affected. He cryes up Learning, and the Book of Common-Prayer, but sayes nothing of Reformation. He cringes, and makes an Idol of the Name of Jesus, and leans wholly to a Church-Government, not honouring a Preaching Ministry. He places Sanctity in the Walls of a Steeple-house, and adores the Sacrament with a Popish-Knee. Ah! sighs a Fourth, Have we not a great deal of reason to separate from these Men, and turn, and absent our selves from their Congregations; Ah! tis a great Mercy, and Unspeakable Goodness of the Lord, That he hath called us unto Him, to know the Church of God in Truth, and hath given us a Sin-killing, Heart-hea∣ling, Soul-convincing, laborious Ministry, to teach us the Wayes of Righteousness, and hath separated us from these Idolatrous Worshippers, these Sons of Belial, and Children of Darkness, &c. Thus they asperse the Ministry, and endeavour to draw an Odium upon the Clergy, which is the readiest means to induce men to have a low re∣gard of Religion it self; for (as a wise Writer of late times said) when once the Dispensers of Religion fall into Contempt, it must be a strong Arm, and more than that of Flesh, that can bear up Religion it self, and keep that from falling too. [I hope, and pray with a Reverend Prelate in a late learned Sermon upon this Subject, That God will not remove our Candlestick from among us, as he threatned the Church of Ephesus; tho 'tis too much to be feared, our Impenitency, and the disregard we have of Gods Ministers, and the Diversity of Sects and Opinions amongst us, may be sufficient enough to occasion it. What Judgments the Angel denounced against those Four Churches in the Revelations, Chap. 2. I desire every Son and Daughter of our Church to consider; Read the Severals, and I doubt not but you'll soon find, how little a Disproportion there is betwixt Us and Them: Tho I fear the last (viz. Thyatira) may be too much our lively Image.] The several Schismes, Sects, and Divisions, which have been broach∣ed, fomented, and continued about Religion in this Kingdom of England, have been (as I said before) the immediate Reasons, that brought men to have a low regard of Religion it self, and the Causes of the great Decay of Christian Piety in the Land. We may attribute what we will to the State, and say what we please of the Government; when it is the Immo∣rality and Vice of the Cymes, which makes the Almighty angry with us, and threaten to cut us off. And now Impiety & Irreligion rides Tryumphant, & Immorality sways its Scepter in the Hearts of men; and therefore, let the Charmer charm never so wisely, men lend but Adders Cares, and will not regard. And therefore, Admonitions are but vain, and Advice but Bubbles, Correption and Rebuke pisht at, and reckoned but as Childish Flattery, or painted Mask; Nothing can be then expected but such like Reparties; which I will take from the to-be-admired Vide, Qua∣le's Boaner∣ges, and Bar∣nabas. Boanerges, and so conclude. Tell not me of Hell, Devills, or damned Souls, to enforce me from those Pleasures which they nick-name Sin. 'Tis true, I have not led my life ac∣cording to the Pharisaical Square of the Opinions of God's Ministers, nei∣ther
have I found Judgments according to their Prophecies; whereby I must conclude, that God is wonderfully merciful, or they wonderfully mista∣ken: How often have they thundered Torment against my Voluptuous life? and yet I feel no pain. How bitterly have they threatned shame against the Vaunts of the Vain-glorious? Yet find they honour. How fiercely have they preach't destruction against my Cruelty! And yet I live. What Plagues against my Swearing? Yet not infected. What Diseases against my Drun∣kenness? And yet sound. What danger against Procrastination? Yet how often hath God been found upon the Death-bead. What Damnation to Hy∣pocrites? Yet who more safe? What Stripes to the Ignorant? Yet who more Scot-free? What Poverty to the Sloathful? Yet they prosper. What Falls to the Proud? Yet stand they surest. What Curses to the Covetous? Yet who richer. What Judgment to the Lascivious? Yet who more plea∣sure? What Vengeance to the Prophane, the Censorious, the Revengeful? Yet none live more unscourged. Who deeper Branded than the Lyar? Yet who more Favoured? Who more threatned than the Presumptuous? Yet who less punish'd? Thus they run thro a Catalogue of the several Kinds of Enormous Sins, which are most predominant in our depraved Natures, and believe not what the Church doth pronounce on each of them, but as Bugbeares; and therefore, say they, thus we are fool'd, and kept in awe by the strict fancies of these Pulpit-men, whose Opinions have no Ground, but what they gain from Popularity. But let these bold blustring Sinners but read the fifth Chap∣ter of Isaiahs Prophecy, and there they will find the miserable Woes entai∣led on the Wicked; as likewise, Jer. 4. Deut. 29.2 Chron. 34. Perhaps, I have played the Divine too long, and have tired you with these sad Reflections; I shall therefore enlarge no further, but only add one word by way of Admonition, and conclude. Let not, O England, an impro∣vident Carelesness cast out all Fear of approaching Danger. Hast thou not for these many years nuzzled in the Bosome of Habitual Peace, when thy Neighbours were in the Flames of War. Be not deceived, a long Peace makes a Bloody War, and the Abuse of continued Mercies makes a sharp Judgment. The stalled Oxe that wallows in his plenty, and waxes wan∣ton in his Ease, is not far from slaughter. Didst thou not laugh Invasion to scorn, and was not affrighted at Conspiracies. Didst thou want good Laws, or did those Laws want Execution? Didst thou not stand the Glo∣ry of the World, and the Envy of all Nations? Did not thy Prophets give lawful warning, and like true Baptists preach Repentance? How hast thou lived, that now these Prophecies are fulfilled, and that now thou be∣holdest the Vialls of thy angry God ready to be powred forth? Didst thou think that Pride could not demolish the Towers that defend thee? Nor drunkenness dry up the Sea that Walls thee? Nor the Flames of Lust dis∣solve the Ord'nance that protects thee. O England, Since mercies could not allure thee, let these threatning Judgments now at length enforce thee to a true Repentance. Quench the Firebrand which thou hast kindled. Turn thy Mirth to true Mourning, and thy Feasts of Joy to Humiliation; and pray with thy Church, That from all Sedition, privy Conspiracy, and Rebellion, from all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schisme, from Hardness of Heart, and Contempt of His Word and Commandments; God would deliver us. Amen. FINIS.
THE POST-SCRIPT. SINCE the Composing the foregoing Discourse, the Parliament of Scotland was Convogued; where the Duke of York sat Commissioner, impoured to touch those Acts with the Royal Scepter, which passed there, Voted by men of unbyast Principles, and Loyal Intentions. No sooner do we find them pla∣ced in their Seats, but satissyed with the Royal Pleasure in the Commissioner, and undisturbed with the daily Murmurings about Exclusion, Exclusion; the English-man's Character of a Popish Successor, no way sympathizing with Their Loyal Minds. They presently Vote the publication of those Memorable Acts for the Lineal Legal Succession in That (and consequently This) Kingdom. Oh Brave Scots! Now you have quitted your selves like Men, and have shewed this to be the Year of Regeneration, and (consequently) Salvation. Now you shame our Pretended Loyallists, who make the world believe that their Zeal and Devotion for the Royal Family deserves Admiration, and merits the name of Unparalle'd, when (the Curtaine drawn) it is Squint-eyed and byast. Now it is that you have played the true antient Scot, not filled with Anti-monarchy and Rebellion, or influenced by the Factious Spirits of Disaffected English, nor moved with the malicious Thunder-bolt of Seditious and Rebellious Meroz; but a Legal Succession, according to the Proximity of Blood, the Liberty and Freedom of The true Kirk of God, as now established, is and shall be your Uninterrupted Resolve. What doth, or will this do, but eternize your Names, and make you memorable in the Chronicles of Fame. Now you have quitted your selves like true Israelites, and the God of Israel prosper all your Consultations. AH! But Brother, and Fellow-Subject (sayes the Scot to the English-Man) Yee make Mickle to dee with yee'r Evidences, &c. we Hang them Here, as fast as they come in. The Dee'l is in yee for Plotting and Swearing. In Troth, a Man cannot Live with yee for Evidencing, wee'se not come among yee. Yee speak Treason, and yee'll not be Tryed, but when, and whare, and by what Jury yee please. But yee'r Protestant-Joyner, Colledge, has found, That the Law will have its Force; and that tho London could afford him an Ignoramus-Jury, Oxford would not. Veritas est magna, & praevalebit. Truth will prevail, Peace must be maintained, and Offenders punish't, In∣cendiaries must be suppressed, and Murmurers silenced. Whatever the Reve∣rend Evidence could deposite in Verbo sacerdotis, to invalidate the King's Evidence, and to wash off the Ethiopian Blackness of Treason and Villany; he still found, That Verbum Justiciae & Veritatis, foyled him; and that he ought not, as he had set His Hand to the Plough, to look back. Methinks, the Consideration of His Life and Being (as one told him) should have Taught Him, That to say his Prayers Hebrew-fashion, was unbecoming His Coat. In Troth, Yee are all Mad; and what shall I say; Yee'll ne're leave Plotting, till yee're all Potted. But look upon the fore-going Discourse, and yee'le find neces∣sary Cures to Heal this Plotting-Itch.
