H1735B 99825827 30218
A SHORT VIEW OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF King Charles, (The second MONARCH OF GREAT BRITAIN) From his Birth to his Burial. Tacit. Hist. Lib. I. Alii diutius imperium tenuerunt, Nemo tam fortiter reliquit. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1658.
A SHORT VIEW OF THE Life and Reign of KING CHARLES. (The second Monarch of Great BRITAIN) from his Birth to his Burial. OUr Chronicles tell us of a Man in Queen Elizabeth's time that wrote the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Pater-noster, the Queens Name, and the year of our Lord within the compasse of a Peny; and gave the Queen a paire of Spectacles of such an Artificiall making, that by
the help thereof she did plainly and di∣stinctly discern every Letter. The contracting of the Life and Reign of King Charles in so narrow a compasse as I have limited to my self, may seem to be a work of no lesse difficulty. And yet I hope to do it in such a plain and perspicuous manner, that every one who runs may read it without the help of any such Spectacles as our Chronicles speak of. To Brevity I am injoyned, and it must be my businesse to avoid all Ob∣scurity; though I am conscious to my self, that I shall draw this Picture with too much shadow. But I take the Pen∣cil into my hand, and thus form my lines. 1600. CHARLES, the third Son of James the sixth King of the Scots, and of Anne his Wife, Daughter of Frede∣rick the second, and Sister of Christiern the fourth, Kings of Denmark, was born at Dunfermeling (one of the principall towns of Fife) in Scotland, on the nine∣teenth
day of November Anno 1600. derived by a long descent of Royall An∣cestors from Malcolm Conmor King of the Scots, and the Lady Margaret his Wife, Sister and sole Heir of Edgar A∣theling, the last surviving Prince of the English Saxons. So that his Title had been good to the Crown of England, though he had borrowed no part of his Claim from the Norman Conquerour. Which I observe the better to en∣counter the extravagant follies of some men in the book called Antinormanisme, and some other Pamphlets of that time: in which it is affirmed that this King had no other Right to the Crown, then what he claimed from that Conquest; and therefore that the English Nation having got the better of him by the Sword, might lawfully free themselves from that subjection, which by no other Title then the Sword of the Normans had been laid upon them. At his first coming into the world he was so weak and unlike to live, that his
Christening was dispatcht in haste, with∣out attending the performance of those solemnities which are accustomably used at the Baptisme of such Princely infants. And as the name of Henry was given to the Prince, his Elder Brother, with re∣ference to Henry Lord Darnlie, the Fa∣ther of King James by Mary Queen of Scots; so was this younger Son called Charles, in relation to Charles Earle of Lenox, the younger Brother of that Hen∣ry, and by consequence Uncle to King James. 1602. Having received some measure of strength, he was at the Age of two years created Duke of Albany, Mar∣quesse of Ormond, Earle of Rosse, and Baron of Ardmanock; of which four Ti∣tles the two first and the last are wholly at the Kings disposing, to be bestowed on whom he pleaseth. But the Earldom of Rosse falling unto the Crown in the time of King James the third, was so setled in the Crown by Act of Parlia∣ment,
that it is not lawfull for the King to sell, alienate, or dispose the same un∣to any other, then to the second Son of Scotland. 1603. On the 26. of March next following, Anno 1603. King James had news by Sir Robert Cary, one of the younger Sons of the Lord Hunsdon (who had stole a posting journey thither) that Queen Elizabeth was dead, contrary to the o∣pinion of many of his Scottish Courti∣ers; who being wearied with the te∣diousnesse of their expectation, did believe at last, that it should never be acknowledged by the Lords of Eng∣land that the Queen was dead, as long as there was any old woman of that Nation left, to weare good Clothes, and take the name of Queen upon her. For bringing which news the Duke of Albany (as if he were more concerned in it then all the rest of the Kings Children, as indeed he was) was afterwards committed to the Governance of Sir Roberts Lady, and he
himself from that time forwards of prin∣cipall esteem and place about him. This news being seconded by that of the Proclaiming of King James, for her true and lawfull Successor in the Impe∣riall Crown of this Realm, the King prepared himself for England. At what time (as I have been told by some Per∣sons of Quality) a certain Laird of the Highlands, though of very great Age, came to his Court, to take his leave of him, whom he found accompanied with all his Children, the young Duke be∣ing then held in his Nurses Armes. His Addresse unto the King consisted of Prayers for his long life and Prospe∣rity; and those Prayers intermixt with some desires, that in the midst of the Felicities and Glories of the English Court, he would not be unmindfull of his Native Countrey. Which having said, without taking any great notice of the Prince, he applyed himself whol∣ly to the Duke, whose hands he kist with such an Ardency of Affection,
as if he meant they should grow for e∣ver to his lips. And when the King told him, that he had mistook himself in his Addresses to the infant, as not being his eldest Son, and Prince of Scotland; he answered, that he knew well enough what he did, and that it was this Child in whom his Name and Memory was to be perpetuated to succeeding Ages, with other Speeches of like nature. Which being then either unregarded, or imputed unto age and dotage, were call∣ed to mind after the death of Prince Hen∣ry, and then believed to have something in them of a Prophetical spirit. 1603. But to proceed. On the fifth day of April in the year 1603. King James be∣gan his journey for England, and in the end of May, the Queen accompanied with Prince Henry, and the Lady Eliza∣beth, set forwards also; finding at Ber∣wick a Noble Train of Lords and Ladies sent thither from the Court to attend her coming, and wait upon her in her journey.
1604. The next year order was given for bringing the young Duke to the Court of England. But before such as had the Charge of him could begin their jour∣ney, the young Duke was taken with a feaver. Which being signified to the King, he sent thither Doctor Atkins one of his Physicians, who in six weeks restored him to such a degree of health as made him fit to be removed to a Warmer Aire, and a more comfortable Climate. On the sixteenth of July this Remove began, which brought him by short and easie stages in the first week of October, to Windsor Castle, where the King then was, by whom he was committed to the Governance of the Lady Cary, as before is said. And not long after, for his better welcom into England, he was on the sixth day of January next following (common∣ly called Twelfth-day) invested solemnly with the title of Duke of York by cincture
of a Sword, imposition of a Cap and Coronet of Gold upon his Head, and by delivering unto him a Verge of Gold; himself with ten others of eminent No∣bility, having been made Knights of the Bath (with all the accustomed Cere∣monies) the day before. 1606. In the sixth year of his Age, he was taken from the charge of his Women (though not from the Motherly super∣inspection of the Lady Cary) and com∣mitted to the Pedagogy of Master Tho∣mas Murray, a Scot by Nation; suffici∣ently qualified for that service, but o∣therwise ill Principled in the Rites and Ceremonies in which the Church of England differed from the Kirke of Scot∣land. 1610. Under this Tutor the young Duke advanced exceedingly in the way of good Letters; the weaknesse of his lo∣wer parts, which made him unapt for Exercises and feats of Activity, ren∣dring
him more retired and studious, and more intent upon his Book then he had been otherwise. Which Prince Hen∣ry taking notice of, as he, the young Duke, Dr. Abbot then newly made Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, with many of the Nobility, were waiting in the Privie-Chamber for the Kings coming out; the Prince (to put a jest upon him) took the Arch-Bishops Square-cap out of his hand, and put it on his Brothers head, telling him that if he continued a good boy, and followed his Book, he would make him one day Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury. Which the child took in such disdain, that he threw the Cap upon the ground, and trampled it under his feet, not being without much difficulty and some force taken off from that eager∣nesse. This, though at first it was not other∣wise beheld then as an Act of Childish passion, yet when his Brother Prince Henry dyed, and that he was Heir ap∣parent to the Crown, it was taken up by many zealous Church-men for some
ill Presage unto the Hierarchy of Bi∣shops, the overthrow whereof by his Act and Power did seem to be foresi∣gnified by it. But in that their fears were groundlesse, and their conjectures no better grounded then their fears, there never being a more gracious Patron to the Church, nor a more resolute Cham∣pion in behalf of the Hierarchy then he proved to be▪ What is presaged (if there were any presaging in it) in reference to the Archbishops Person, may be shewen hereafter. 1611, 1612. In the eleventh year of his Age, he was made Knight of the most noble Or∣der of the Garter, and on the sixth day of November, Anno 1612. he lost his Bro∣ther Prince Henry, whom he immediate∣ly succeeded in the Dukedome of Corn∣wall, with all the Royalties, Rents, Pro∣fits, and Commodities of it; according to the entail which was made thereof by King Edward the third, when he confer∣red it upon Edward the black Prince, his eldest Son.
The first solemn Act which he appea∣red in after this change of his condition, was at the Funerall of Prince Henry on the 7. of Decem. following, at which he attended as chief Mourner. And on the 14 of February then next ensuing, being Sunday, and St. Valentines day, he per∣formed the Office of a Brideman (a Pa∣ranymph the Grecians call him) to the Princesse Elizabeth his Sister, married upon that day to Frederick the Fifth, Prince Elector Palatine: A marriage which drew him afterwards into many cares and great expences, of which more hereafter. In his Childhood he was noted to be very wilful, somewhat inclining to a per∣versenesse of disposition, which might proceed from that retiredness which the imperfection of his Speech, not fitting him for publick discourse, and the weak∣ness of his limbs and joynts (as unfit for Action) made him most delight in.
But now being grown both in years, and state, he began to shake off that re∣tirednesse, and betake himself to all man∣ner of man-like exercises; such as were Vaulting, riding great Horses, running at the ring, shooting in crosse bowes, Mus∣kets, and sometimes in great Pieces of Ordnance, in which he became so per∣fect, that he was thought to be the best Marks-man, and the most comely man∣nager of a great Horse of any one in all three Kingdoms. And as he shaked off this retirednesse, so he corrected in him∣self the Peccancy of that humour which had grown up with it; there being no man to be found of an evener temper, more pliant to good Counsel, or lesse wedded then he was to his own opinion. 1616. On the third of November, Anno 1616. He was at White-hall (with all the accu∣stomed Solemnities) created Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester and Flint, and put into the actuall possession of all the Re∣galities, Profits, and Commodities be∣longing to them; his Houshould being then formed and constituted, and all the officers of State, which belong unto him, appointed to their severall places.
And now it was expected that he should break out into more glory then he had done formerly, and take upon him as the Heir of so great an Empire. But considering very wisely that the forward and enterprizing nature of his Brother Prince Henry, the popularity which he affected, and the great resort of young Noble-men continually unto his Court, had been displeasing to his Fa∣ther; resolved to keep himself at a close ward, and not to seem so great as he was, that when time served, he might appear greater then he seemed to be. Old Princes do not love to have their eldest Sons too active, and to tread too close upon their heels; and therefore many times do enterpose the power of a favo∣rite to keep them at the greater distance. A policy much used by King James in the whole course of his Government, who for that cause in the life-time of Prince Henry, took Sir Robert Carr in∣to his most especiall favour, whom he first made Gentleman of his Bed-cham∣ber, and on the twenty fifth of March
Anno 1611. Created Viscount Rochester, and the same year made Knight of the Garter also, conferring on him all the power and trust he was capable of; that by the greatnesse of the one he might keep down the daring nature and confi∣dent Spirit of the other. Prince Charles understood this well e∣nough, and carried himself with so much prudence, that he disputed not the power of his Fathers favourites, suf∣fering all Honour, Offices, and o∣ther matters at the Court to be carried by them as best pleased the King. Which though it was generally ascribed unto Pusillanimity, and the defect of Spirit in him, yet was it look'd upon as an Act of the greatest wisedom by more know∣ing men. For had he any wayes crost the designs and Councels either of Carr then Earl of Sommerset, or of the Duke of Buckingham, his Fathers favourites (who at that time did much out-shine him) he had not only incurred the Kings dis∣pleasure, but of necessity must have di∣vided the Court, and by consequence
the Kingdom also into severall factions, each labouring to advance their own, though to the Ruine and Destruction of the publick Peace. Onely to take off somewhat of the imputation, he made so much use of his power and interesse with the King, as to prefer three of his servants unto Ti∣tles of Honour, Anno 1621. viz. Sir Ro∣bert Cary Chamberlain of his Houshold, to the Title of Lord Cary of Lepington; Sir Thomas Howard, second Son to the Earl of Suffolk, and Master of his Horse, to the Honour of Viscount Andover, and Lord Howard of Charlton; and Sir John Vaughan Controller of his Houshold, to the Honour of Lord Vaughan of Molin∣gar in the Realm of Ireland. 1618. On the eighteenth day of November Anno 1618. There appeared a great bla∣zing Star, the fore-runner of many woful events in these parts of Christendom. But the first sad effect thereof which we found in England, was the death of Queen Anne, which hapned on Tuesday
the second of March next following. A losse which the Prince bare with great e∣quanimity, or evennesse of Spirit; nei∣ther banishing all shews of grief with a Stoical Apathie, nor spending his time in too much womanish lamentation. At the Funerall of this great Queen, he was principall Mourner, and it became him so to be; she having always been to him a tender and indulgent Mother, expres∣sing more affection to him then to all the rest of her Children. 1619. Not long after the death of the Queen, King James fell very sick at Newmarket, and having a desire to come to London, advanced on his way as far as Royston, where he was fain to stay till his sickness was over, which at last became so dan∣gerous, that his death was feared. At what time Dr. Andrews Bishop of Win∣chester attending on him, bewailed with great Affliction the sad condition which the Church was like to fall into, if God should take away his life, the Prince be∣ing in the hands of the Scots, which made
up the greatest part of his Houshold, and not well principled by those which had the tutelage of him, either as to the Government or Liturgie of the Church of England. The King acknowledge∣ing this sad truth, and condemning his own negligence in it, made a solemn vow, that if God would be pleased to re∣store him to his health, he would take the Prince into his own immediate care, instruct him in the Controversies of Re∣ligion, and set him on so right a bottome, that there should be no fear of his disaf∣fection either unto the Hierarchy, or the rites and Ceremonies of the Church; which he did accordingly. And he did it so effectually, that at such time as the Prince made his journey into Spain, and that some principal persons in all the Places and Offices belonging to him, were to follow after, Dr. Maw, and Dr. Wren, two of his Chaplains being appoin∣ted for that service, came to King James to know his pleasure and com∣mands. The King advised them not to put themselves upon any unnecessary
Disputations, but to be onely on the defensive part, if they should be chal∣lenged. And when it was answered that there could be no reason to engage in such Disputations, where there could be no Moderator; the King replied, that Charles should moderate between them and the opposite party. At which when one of them seemed to smile on the o∣ther, the King proceeded, and told them, that Charles should manage a point in Controversie with the best studied Di∣vine of them all; and that he had trained up George so far as to hold the conclusi∣on, though he had not yet made him able to prove the Premisses. 1619. On Friday the twenty fourth of March, Anno 1619. The Prince with the Marquesse of Hamilton, Marquesse of Buckingham, divers Earls and others performed great Justing at White-Hall in honour of the day, being the day of King James his happy coming to the Crown of England.
1620 And on the Sunday after, being Mid-lent Sunday, he attended his Father to S. Pauls Crosse, conducted in a most so∣lemn manner from Temple Bar to that Church by the Lord Major and Alder∣men, and at the entrance into the Church, received by the Dean and Chapter in their rich Copes, and other Ecclesiasticall Habits, and by them con∣ducted into the Quire; where having heard the Divine service for that day most solemnly performed with Organs, Cornets, and Sagbots, they went to a pre∣pared place where they heard the Ser∣mon at the Crosse preacht by Dr. King, then Lord Bishop of London; and from thence unto the Bishops Palace, where they were entertained with a Banquet. Infinite was the concourse of People at both those Solemnities, and all of them returned with great joy and comfort to see him so bravely accomplisht in the one, so devoutly reverent in the o∣ther.
1622. On Tuesday the eighteenth of Febru∣ary, Anno 1622. Accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, M. Erdimion Por∣ter, and M. Francis Cottington; he took ship at Dover, arrived at Bulloign in France, and from thence rode Post to the Court of Spain. The occasion this; Frederick Prince Elector Palatine had inconsiderately ta∣ken on himself the Crown of Bohemia, An. 1619. and for so doing, was by the Emperor deprived of his Ancient Patri∣mony; the Electorall dignity together with the upper Palatinate being confer∣red on the Duke of Bavaria, and the lo∣wer on the K. of Spain, who possest him∣self of all of it except the towns of Hei∣delberg, Frankendale, and Manheim, well manned and Garrisoned by the Eng∣lish. For the preserving of which places, and the recovery of the whole, when all means else had proved inef∣fectuall, it was held most expedi∣ent to negotiate a Marriage betwixt
Prince Charles and the Daughter of Spain. Which being first managed by the Leiger Embassadors in both Courts, was after∣wards prosecuted with more particular instructions by John Lord Digby (well verst and studied in that Court) whom the King sent as his Embassador extra∣ordinary to conclude the match. But Digby being fed with delaies from one time to another, it was resolved by King James, without making any of his Coun∣cel acquainted with it, that the Prince himself should go in Person, that he might either speed the Businesse, or break off the Treaty. According to this Resolution he be∣gan his journey, no otherwise accom∣panied or attended then with those three persons above mentioned, all of them passing in disguise, to avoid dis∣covery. Being come to Paris, they adventured to see the Court, where at a Mask, he had a view of that most ex∣cellent Princesse whom he after marri∣ed. But no sooner had he left the Ci∣ty,
then the French King had Advertise∣ment of his being there, who thereupon dispatcht away severall Posts to stay him in his journey, and bring him back; but the Prince had past beyond Bayonne, the last Town in France, without being overtaken by them, and posting speedily to Madrid, entred the Lord Embassadors Lodging, without being known to any but his Confidents onely. News of his safe Arrivall there be∣ing brought to the King, there was a present order taken for the sending of some of his Servants of all sorts, to at∣tend upon him in that Court, that so he might appear amongst them in the greater Lustre. But this lessened not the Cares and Feares of the English Subjects, who could not be more glad to hear of his safety, then they were afraid of the danger which he had incurred. For having put himself into the power of the King of Spain, it was at the Cour∣tesie of that King whether he should e∣ver return or no: it being a Maxime
amongst Princes, That if any one with∣out leave sets foot on the Ground of an∣other, he makes himself his Prisoner. Philip the first of Spain and Duke of Burgundy, being cast by Tempest on the Coast of England, was here detained by King Henry the seventh, till he had delivered up the Earle of Suffolk, who had fled for Refuge to his Court: and Mary Queen of the Scots, being for∣ced by her Rebellious Subjects to fly into this Realm, was presently seized on as a Prisoner, and so continued till her lamentable and calamitous death. So in like manner Richard the first of England, passing in disguise through some part of the dominions of the Arch-Duke of Austria, was by him took Pri∣soner, and put unto an heavy Ransome; and not long since Charles Lodowick the now Prince Elector Palatine posting through France, in hope to get the Command of Duke Bernards Army, was stayed in the middle of his jour∣ney by the Kings command, and kept
so long under Restraint, that he lost the opportunity of effecting his pur∣prose. This, though it was the generall Fear and apprehension of the English Sub∣jects, yet no body durst acquaint the King with it, but Archee the fool, who going boldly to the King, as he found him once in a good humour, told him that he was come to change Caps with him. Why, said the King? Marry, saies Archee, because thou hast sent the Prince into Spain, from whence he is ne∣ver like to returne. But said the King, what wilt thou say when thou seest him come back again? Marry, saies Archee, I will then take off the fools Cap which I put upon thy head, for sending him thither, and put it on the King of Spains, for letting him return. At which words, it is reported, that the King became ex∣ceeding pensive, never before so much apprehending the Danger of that Ad∣venture, as then and afterwards he did.
1623. But the generous Spaniard intended to make no such Market of him, but gave him all the Royall entertainment which a Princely Suitor might expect. Nor was the Prince wanting for his part in all fit Compliances by which he might both gain on them, and preserve himself. For by his Courtly Garb he won so much on the Affections of the Infanta, and by his grave and circum∣spect behaviour got so much ground upon the King and his Councel, that the match went forward in good ear∣nest. The Articles of the Marriage with all the Circumstances thereof were a∣greed upon, and solemnly sworn to by both Kings. Nor was the Pope want∣ing in the grant of a dispensation (with∣out which nothing could be done) wri∣ting a Letter to the Prince, who retur∣ned to him a Civil answer, which af∣terwards was reckoned amongst his Crimes, by such as rather would not then did not know the necessity which
lay upon him, of keeping at that time a plausible Correspondence with the Catholick party. But as for his Religion, the change whereof was moved by the Pope, and much hoped for by the Court of Spain at his first coming thither, he shewed so many strong evidences of his con∣stancy in it, that those hopes soon va∣nished. And that it might appear, that he professed no other Religion, then what was agreeable to the Rules of An∣tiquity, and not much abhorrent from the formes then used in the Church of Rome, the English Liturgie was by the care of the Lord Keeper Williams tran∣slated into the Spanish Tongue; and so many Copies of the Book then printed sent into Spain, as gave great satisfa∣ction in that point to the Court and Clergy. And this I must needs say was very seasonably done, the Spaniards being till then perswaded by their Priests and Je∣suits, that when the English had cast off the Pope, they had cast off also all Re∣ligion,
and became meer Atheists; the name of God being never used amongst them, but with a purpose to expose it unto scorn and prophanation. Insomuch that the Constable of Castile, being sent to swear the Peace concluded with Spain, when he understood the businesse was to be performed in the Chappel, where some Anthems were to be sung, desired that whatsoever was sung, Gods name might not be used in it, and that be∣ing forborn, he was content they should sing what they listed. King James himself so relates the story in Arch-Bishop Spots∣wood, fol. 530. But the Prince had another game to play, namely, the Restitution of the Pa∣latinate; which the Spaniard would not suffer to be brought under the Treaty, reserving it (as they pretended to be bestowed by the Infanta after the Mar∣riage, the better to ingratiate her self with the English Nation. Which being a point of too great moment to de∣pend upon no other assurance then a
Court-Complement, he concluded with himself that since he could not prevaile in the one, he would not proceed unto the Consummation of the other. And hereupon he was much edged on by the Duke of Buckingham, who having con∣ceived some deep displeasure against the Conde de Olivarez, the speciall Favourite of that King, desired rather that all Treaties should be broken off, then that any Alliance should be made in which that Conde had appeared so instrumen∣tall. But it did concern the Prince so to provide for his own safety, that no in∣timation might be made of the intended Rupture, till he had unwinded himself out of that Labyrinth into which he was cast. For which cause having desired of his Father that some ships might be sent to bring him home, he shewed himself a more passionate lover then ever formerly, and made a Proxie to the Catholick King and Don Charles his Brother, in his name to espouse the Lady Infanta; which Proxie he left
with Digby, not long before made Earl of Bristol, by him to be delivered with∣in some few daies after the coming of the expected dispensation. But no sooner had he took his leave, and was out of danger, but he dispatcht a Post unto him, commanding him not to deliver up the Proxie untill further order. And having so done, he hois'd Sails, and came for England, arriving at Portsmouth on Sunday the fifth of Octo∣ber, Anno 1623. From whence by Post-Horses he past to London, the next mor∣ning, and so by Coach to the King at Roy∣ston, to the great content of all the King∣dome, declared by Bells, Bonfires, and all other the accustomed expressions of a publick joy. The King being made acquainted with all particulars, and that no Assu∣rance could be had of the Restitution of the Palatinate, by the advice of his Privy Councel, dispatcht a command to the Earl of Bristol, not to deliver up the Proxie unlesse the businesse of the Pa∣latinate were concluded also▪ The ex∣pectation
whereof not being answered by Successe, a Parliament is summoned, to begin on the sixteenth day of Februa∣ry then next following, to the end that all things might be governed in this great Affair by the publick Counsel of the Kingdom. Not long after the begin∣ning whereof, the Duke declared be∣fore both Houses (more to the disad∣vantage of the Spaniard then there was just ground for) how unhandsomely they had dealt with the Prince, when he was in Spain; how they had fed him with delaies; what indignities they had put upon him, and finally had sent him back not onely without the Palatinate, but without a Wife; leaving it to their prudent Consideration what course to follow. It was thereupon voted by both Hou∣ses, that his Majesty should be desired to break off all Treaties with the King of Spain, and to engage himself in a war against him for the recovery of the Palatinate, not otherwise to be obtain∣ed. And that they might come the
better to the end they aimed at, they addresse themselves unto the Prince, whom they assured, that they would stand to him in that War to the very last expence of their lives and fortunes; and he accordingly being further set on by the Duke, became their instrument to perswade his Father to hearken to the Common Votes and desires of his Sub∣jects, which the King, prest by their con∣tinuall importunities, did at the last assent to. But in the conduct of this Businesse, the Prince consulted more the Dukes passion, and the pleasing of the Com∣mons in Parliament, then either his own or the Regall interesse. For there is no∣thing more unsafe for a King of England, then to cast himself upon the necessity of calling Parliaments, and depending on the purse of the Subject. By means whereof he makes himself obnoxious to the Humour of any prevailing Member in the House of Commons, and becomes lesse in Reputation both at home and abroad. The Commons,
since the time of King James, have sel∣dome parted with a peny▪ but they have paid themselves well for it out of the prerogative. And this appeared by their procee∣dings in this very Parliament: For though they had ingaged the King in a War with Spain, and granted him three Subsidies and three Fifteens toward the beginning of that War; yet would they not suffer that grant to passe into an Act of Parliament, till the King had yielded to another against Conceal∣ments. Insomuch as it was affirmed by Justice Dodderidge, at the next Pub∣lick Assizes held in Oxford, that the King by passing that Act, had bought those Subsidies and Fifteens at ten years purchase. Nor dealt they otherwise with this Prince then they did with his Father, those very Commons who had ingaged him in the Warre, and bound themselves to make good that ingagement with their lives and for∣tunes, most shamefully deserting him in the first Parliament of his
Reign, and after working more and more upon his necessities, till they had robbed him of the richest Jewels in the Regal Diadem. 1624. But to proceed, the Treaty with Spain being like to come to a Rupture, it was judged necessary to counterbal∣lance the Power of that King by nego∣tiating a Match with the Princesse Hen∣rietta Maria, the youngest Daughter of France; first set on foot by the Mediati∣on of the Earl of Holland, who found that Court inclinable thereunto, and afterwards concluded at the coming o∣ver of the Earl of Carlile, joyned in Commission to that purpose. It was reported, that when she was told that the Prince of Wales had been at the Court, and was gone for Spain; she An∣swered, that if he went to Spain for a Wife, he might have had one nearer hand, and saved himself a great part of the trouble. And I have read, that recei∣ving at one time two Letters from
England, the one from King James, and the other from the Prince, she put that from King James into her Cabinet, and that from Prince Charles into her Bosom. Of which King James being told, he was exceedingly pleased with it, saying, that he took it for a very good Omen, that she should preserve his Name in her Memory, and lodge Charles in her heart. 1625. During these preparations for War and Marriage, King James departed this life at Theobalds on Sunday the twenty seventh of March, Anno 1625. Immediately upon whose death Prince Charles was proclaimed at the Court-Gates to be King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, &c. The like done present∣ly after at London, and by degrees in all the other Cities and Towns of the King∣dom, with infinite rejoycings and Ac∣clamations of the People. The Funeralls of the deceased King were celebrated on the seventh of May,
his body being brought from Somerset-House with great Magnificence to Saint Peters Church in Westminster (where he was interred) the King himself being principall Mourner. Which though it were contrary to the Custome of his Predecessours, yet he chose rather to ex∣presse his Piety in attending the dead bo∣dy of his Father to the Funerall Pile, then to stand upon any such old Nice∣ties and points of State. The Funerall being past, he thought it was time for him to quicken the coming over of his dearest Consort, to whom he had been married on the Sun∣day before at the Church of Nostre-Dame in Paris; the Duke of Chevereux a Prince of the House of Guise (from which House King Charles derived him∣self by the Lady Mary of Lorain, Wife to James the fifth) espousing the Prin∣cesse in his Name. On Trinity Sunday, late at night, she was brought by a Royall Fleet of Ships from Bulloign to Dover, which being signified to the King who was
then at Canterbury, he went to her be∣times the next morning, and recei∣ved her with great expressions of Af∣fection, professing that he would be no longer Master of himself, then whilest he was a Servant to her. The same day He brought her to Canterbury, where he gave himself up to those Embraces, to which from that time he confined himself with such a Conjugal Chastity, that on the day before his death he commanded his Daughter the Princesse Elizabeth to tell her Mother, that his thoughts had never straied from her, and that his love should be the same to the last. On the Thursday after, being the six∣teenth of June, they came from Graves∣end to White-hall in their Royal Barges, attended with an infinite number of Lords, Ladies, and other people who could get Boats to wait upon them; the Ordnance from the Ships which were then preparing for the Wars, those from the Merchants Ships, and the Tower of London, thundering her Welcome as she past.
But in the heat of these Solemnities and entertainments, the King forgat not the main Concernments of himself and the Kingdome, and to that end began his first Parliament on Saturday the eighteenth of June, which fell out not un∣seasonably, that the French Lords might see with what Royall Magnificence he was attended by the Peers, Prelates, and other Officers of State (besides his own Domestick Servants) to the Parlia∣ment-House. At their first meeting, he put them in mind of the War in which they had ingaged his Father, and of the promise they had made to stand to him in it with their lives and fortunes; that both his Land and Sea-forces were now in readinesse to set forwards, and that there wanted nothing but a present supply of money to quicken and expe∣dite the Affair. In Answer whereun∣to, the Commons past a Bill of two Subsidies onely, so short of the exces∣sive Charge which the maintenance of so great a Fleet and Army required
at their hands, that being distributed a∣mongst the Officers, Souldiers, and Mariners, it would scarce have served for Advance-money to send them going. Which notwithstanding, the King very graciously accepted of it, taking it as an Ernest of their good Affections, in refe∣rence to the greater Summes which were to follow. But the Plague growing hot in London, the Parliament on the eleventh day of July was adjourned to Oxford, there to be held on the first of August, at what time the King put them in mind again of the necessity of setting forward his Fleet, and that the eyes of his Confederates were fixt upon it. But the Commons had other fish to fry, and began to quarrel at the greatnesse of the Duke of Bucking∣ham, whom in the last Parliament of King James they had idolized above all men living. But he had served their turn already, and now they meant to serve their own. This was the first Assault which the
Commons made upon this King, though not directly on his Person, wounding him through the sides of his principal Minister; they were so well verst in the Arts of a Parliament-war, as to take in the Out-works first, that so the Fort it self might lie the more open to con∣tinuall Batteries. Concerning which, and the sad consequents thereof, take here the words of a Letter writ∣ten to the King from an unknown Person. These men, saith he, either cannot or will not remember, that never a∣ny Noble man in favour with his Soveraign, was questioned in Parlia∣ment, except by the King himself in case of Treason, or unlesse it were in the Nonage and tumultuous time of Richard the 2. Henry the 6. or Edward the 6. which hapned to the destructi∣on both of the King and Kingdome. And that, not to exceed our own and Fathers Memories, in King Henry the eight's time, Wolsies exorbitant power and pride, and Cromwels contempt of
the Nobility and the Lawes, were not yet permitted to be discussed in Parliament, though they were most odious and grievous to all the King∣dome. And that Leicesters undeser∣ved favour and faults; Hattons insuf∣ficiency, and Rawleighs insolence far exceeded what yet hath been (though most falsly) objected against the Duke; yet no Lawyer durst abet, nor any man else begin any inve∣ctives against them in Parliament. And then he addes (some other pas∣sages intervening) that it behoves his Majesty to uphold the Duke a∣gainst them, who if he be but de∣courted, it will be the corner-stone on which the demolishing of his Monar∣chy will be builded. For if they pre∣vaile with this, they have hatched a thousand other Demands to pull the feathers of the Royalty, they will ap∣point him Counsellours, Servants, Alli∣ances, Limits of his Expenses, Ac∣compts of his Revenue, chiefly if they can (as they mainly desire) they will
now dazle him in the beginning of his Reign. How true a Prophet this man proved, the event hath shewn, and the King saw it well enough, and therefore since he could not divert them from that pursuit, he dissolved the Parliament, by whose neglect (I will not call it a perversenesse) the Fleet went out late, and returned un∣prosperously. In which conjuncture, if he had clapt up a Peace with Spain, (which the Spaniards had as much reason to accept as he to offer) he might have prevented the following Rupture be∣twixt him and France, and freed himself from the necessity of calling Parliaments, till he had no necessity for a Parliament to work upon, and then he might have found them as pliant to him as he could reasonably require. But he resolves to try his fortune in another as soon as he had performed the Solemnities of his Coronation, which was celebrated on the second of February, (commonly called Candle∣mas
Day) then next ensuing. In the externall Pomp whereof, he omitted his triumphant riding thorow the City from the Tower to White-Hall, the Charge whereof would have stood him in six∣ty thousand pounds, as some compute it; and he had then more necessary oc∣casions to expend his money, then Mo∣ney to answer those occasions. In the sacred part of it, there was nothing al∣tered, but the adding of a clause to one of the Prayers which had been preter∣mitted since the time of King Henry the sixth, and is this that followeth, viz. Let him obtain favour for the People, like Aaron in the Tabernacle, Elisha in the Waters, Zacharias in the Temple; give him Peters key of Discipline, Pauls Do∣ctrine. Which clause had been omit∣ted in time of Popery, as intima∣ting more Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction to be given to our Kings then the Popes allowed of; and for the same reason was now quarrel'd by the Puritan Fa∣ction. As for the Coronation-oath, it was the same which had been taken by
his Predecessors, as appears by the Re∣cords of Exchequer; Not made more advantageous to the King, and lesse beneficiall to the People by the late Archbishop, though both the long Par∣liament in the year 1642. and the lewd Pamphlets of that time did object the contrary. The Coronation being passed over, he began his second Parliament on the sixth of the same moneth, in which he sped no better then he did in his first. The Commons voted some Subsidies to be granted to him, but they never past them into Act, that bait being onely laid before him, to tempt him to give over the Duke to their pride and fury, against whom they had framed a large impeachment ushered in by Sir Dudley Diggs, prosecuted with six bitter invectives, made by the best Speakers and most learned Lawyers of that House, and finally concluded by Sir John Eliot, who brought up the Rear.
1626. But the King easily perceived that his Royal Father and himself were as much concerned in it as the Duke, their fa∣vours being made his crimes, and their authority in bestowing Offices and Ho∣nours on whom they pleased, not ob∣scurely questioned. But the storm went higher then the Duke, some part of it falling down∣right on the King himself; it being o∣penly affirmed in the House of Com∣mons by one Mr. Coke (a true chip of the old block) that it was as good to die by a forraign Enemy as to be destroyed at home. Of this reproach, tending so much to the dishonour of his Government, he com∣plained in a Speech before both Houses, but without any remedy. And being fur∣ther incensed by the noise of a Declarati∣on which they had then upon the Anvil, he dissolved the Parliament on the eigh∣teenth day of June then following. No sooner was he freed from this,
but the necessity of his Affairs involved him in another Embroylment. The French Priests and Domesticks of that Nation which came into England with the Queen, were grown so insolent, and had put so many affronts upon him, that he was forced to send them home; in which he did no more then what the French King had done before him, in sen∣ding back all the Spanish Courtiers which his Queen brought with her. But the French King not looking on his own ex∣ample, and knowing on what ill termes the King stood both at home and a∣broad, first seized on all the Merchants ships which lay on the River of Burde∣aux, and then brake out into open war. So that the King was fain to make use of those Forces against the French, which were designed to have been used against the Spaniard, and to comply with the desires of the Rochelers, who humbly sued for his protection and Defence. But the Fleet not going out till after Michaelmas, found greater opposition at
the Sea then they feared from the Land; being encountred with strong Tempests, and thereby necessitated to return with∣out doing any thing, but onely shewing the Kings good-will and readinesse to∣ward their assistance. 1627. But the next yeare this design was followed with greater vigour by the Duke of Buckingham, who hoped there∣by to make himself of some conside∣ration in the eyes of the people. The gaining of the Isle of Re, which lay be∣fore the Town of Rochel, and im∣barred their Trade, was the matter aim∣ed at; and he had strength enough both for Sea and Land to have done the work, if he had not followed it more like a Courtier then a Souldi∣er; suffering himself to be comple∣mented out of the taking of their chief Fort, when it was almost at his mer∣cy; and standing upon points of Honour in facing those Forces which were
sent from the French King to raise the siege, when he might have made a safe retreat unto his ships without losse or danger. In the mean time his Majesty neither neglected his Affairs at home nor his Friends abroad: At home he found the Puritan faction to be much increased by the remisnesse of the goverment of Arch∣bishop Abbot, whom therefore he sus∣pended from all his Metropoliticall Ju∣risdiction, and confined him to his House at Ford in Kent, committing the exercise thereof to the Bishops of London, Dur∣ham, Rochester, Oxford, Bath and Wells, by Letters Patents, bearing date the 9. day of October, Anno 1627. A∣broad he found the Princes of Germany wormed out of their Estates, one after another, by the Emperours Forces, the King of Denmark (whom they had made the Head of their League) being driven out of the Countrey by Count Tilly, and hardly able to defend his own Dominions. No Prince so fit for the
prosecution of that cause, as Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, whom there∣fore he elects into the Noble Order of the Garter, and solemnly invests him with it in the midst of his Army, then lying at the Siege of Darsaw, a Town of Pome∣rella belonging to the Crown of Poland, on Sunday the twenty third of October, of the same year also. At which time he laid the grounds of that Confedera∣cy, which being seconded by the French, the States of the Ʋnited Provinces, and the distressed Princes of the Empire, brought that King into Germany; where he gave the first great check to the Em∣perours fortunes, and had restored the Prince Elector Palatine to his ancient Pa∣trimony, if he had not fallen unfortu∣nately at the Battell of Lutzen. 1628. Being thus ingaged and embroiled, he gave a beginning to his third Parli∣ament on the seventeenth of March,
and freely declares to them the necessi∣ties under which he lay; in Answer whereunto the Commons voted five Subsidies, but meant he should pay dearly for them before he had them. Such grievances as they thought fit to insist upon, were cast into the mold of a petition, by them called a Petition of Right; which if the King granted, he must lose his prerogative; if he deni∣ed it, he must lose all hopes of their supply in his great extremities. The consideration of which last induced him to yield to their desires, and con∣firm that petition by Act of Parliament, the Prerogative never so much descen∣ding from Perch to popular Lure, as by that concession. But though this Act of grace might have given satisfa∣cton even to supererogation (as one well observeth) yet the Commons were not so contented, but were preparing a Remonstance to take away his Right of Tonnage and Poundage, as disclaimed by him in that Act; which coming to the Kings knowledge, on the twenty
sixth of June, he adjourns the Parliament till the twentieth day of October then next ensuing. In the mean time the Duke prepares for the relief of Rochel, both by Sea and Land, and being ready to set sail, was suddenly cut off at Ports-muth by the hand of one John Felton, a disconten∣ted Officer of the last years Army, al∣ledging no other reason for that bloody act, but that the Duke had been decla∣red an Enemy to the Common-wealth, in a Remonstrance tendred to the King in the former Session. But such was the constancy of the Kings temper, and the known evenness of his spirit, that this sad Accident made little or no stop in the procee∣dings of the Fleet, which at the last set forwards under the command of the Earl of Lindsey,; who found the Haven of Rochel so strongly barred, that it was utterly impossible for his Ships to force their way (though it was gallant∣ly
attempted) and give relief to the be∣sieged; who thereupon set open their Gates, and received their King into their Town without more delay. To smooth his way to the next Session of Parliament, adjourned again till the twentieth of January, Arch-bishop Abbot is admitted to kisse his hand, by whom he is commanded not to fail of his atten∣dance at the Councel table; Dr. Barnaby Potter (a through-paced Calvinian) is made Bishop of Carlisle, and Mr. Mounta∣gues book called Appello Caesarem (for which he had been questioned and mo∣lested in the beginning of the Kings first Parliament) must be supprest and called in by Proclamation. But this little edified with the facti∣on in the house of Commons, who not onely took upon them the reforming of the Church and State, but called the Customers in question for levying Ton∣nage and Poundage, not then granted (nor ever likely to be granted as it had
been formerly) by Act of Parliament, and distraining such Merchants goods as refused to pay it. And in this point they went so high, that fearing they should be dissolved before they had ven∣ted their own passions in that particular, upon the second day of March they lockt the Doors of the Parliament-house, kept the key thereof in one of their pockets, and held the Speaker by strong hand in his Chair, till they had thundred out their Anathemaes not onely against such as should dare to levie it, but those also who should willingly pay it. The news of which riotous proceeding being brought immediately to the King, he sent his Band of Pensioners, accompani∣ed by his ordinary Guard, to force open the doors, and going himself to the House of Peers, he dissolved the Parlia∣ment, not having continued in that Sessi∣on above forty dayes. At the end of the former Session he had admitted Sir John Savill of York∣shire, a busie man in the House
of Commons, (but otherwise a politique and prudent person) to be one of his Privy Council, created him Lord Sa∣vill of Ponfract, and made him Com∣ptroller of his Houshold in the place of Sir John Suckling deceased. And a little before the beginning of the fol∣lowing Session, he took into his Coun∣cil Sir Thomas wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse in the same County, whom be created Viscount Wentworth, and made Lord President of the North, and within two years after Lord De∣puty of Ireland also. A man he was of prodigious Parts, which he made use of at the first in favour of the Popular Facti∣on: But being gained unto the King by Sir Ri. Weston then Chancellour of the Exchequer, (afterwards Lord Treasurer and Earl of Portland) he became the most devout friend of the Church, the greatest Zelot for advancing Monarchi∣chall Interesse, and the ablest Minister of State which our Histories have afforded to us.
On the judgement of these two his Majesty did much rely in Civil matters, as he did on the advice of Doctor Neile then Bishop of Durham, and Doctor Laud then Bishop of Bath and Wells, in matters which concerned the Church. These last he had called unto his Coun∣cil in the beginning of April 1627. and finding them to be of as great abilities to advise, as sincere affections to his per∣son; he advanced the first to the See of Winchester, and afterwards to the Arch∣bishoprick of York, Anno 1631. the se∣cond to the See of London, and from thence to Canterbury, Anno 1633. 1629. But whilest it was such hot weather at home, it grew cold abroad, the breach betwixt him and France being closed up at the same time, by the pru∣dent and seasonable intervention of the State of Venice. And not long after he concluded a Peace also with the King
of Spain, all things being left on both sides in the same condition in which they were before the war, but that the Spaniard did ingage that he would make use of all his Interest with the Empe∣rour, for restoring the Prince Elector Paine to his lost Estate. And now the King having thrown a∣way his Crutches (which had as often deceived him as he trusted to them) he began to stand on his own legs, and in short time became more considera∣ble in the eyes of the world then any of his Predecessors. The Spaniard sent hither yearly in English Bottoms no lesse then six hundred thousand Crowns in Bullion, for the use of his Army in the Netherlands, redounding very much to the Kings benefit in the coinage, and no lesse to the profit of the Merchants also, most of the money being return∣ed into Flanders in Leather, Cloth, Lead, Tinne, and other the manufa∣ctures and Native Commodities of this Kingdome. The Dutch and Easter∣lings
looke upon London as the safest Bank, not onely to lodge, but increase their Treasure; so that in short time the greatest part of the Trade of Christen∣dom was driven up the Thames. 1630. To make him yet more estimable in the sight of his People, God blest him with a Son, the presumptive Heir of his Dominions, on the twenty ninth of May, Anno 1630. and seconded that blessing with the birth of a Daughter on the fourth of November, in the next year after, as afterwards with a plentifull issue of both Sexes. 1633. Nor did he meet with any check in his Prosperity till the year 1633. at what time the Coles of Faction and Sedition, which seemed for some years to have been raked up in the ashes of content∣ment, kindled the next combustible
matter and brake forth again to the in∣flaming of both Kingdoms. Scotland burneth first, and takes fire on this oc∣casion. In the minority of King James, the Lands of all Cathedrall Churches and Religious Houses which had been setled on the Crown by Act of Parliament, were shared amongst the Lords and great men of that Kingdome, (by the connivence of the Earl of Murray, and some other of the Regents) to make them sure unto the side. And they be∣ing thus possessed of the said Lands, with the Regalities and Tithes belong∣ing to those Ecclesiasticall Corporati∣ons, Lorded it with pride and inso∣lence enough i their severall Territo∣ries, holding the Clergy to small sti∣pends, and the poor Paisant under a miserable vassalage, and subjection to them. King Charles ingaged in War at his first coming to the Crown, and ha∣ving
little aid from thence for the main∣tenance of it, by the advice of his Coun∣cil of that Kingdome, was put upon a course of resuming those Lands, Tithes and Regalities into his own hands, to which the present Occupants could pre∣tend no other Title then the unjust usur∣pation of their Ancestors. This he en∣deavoured, first by an Act of Revocation, but that course not being like to speed, he followed it in the way of a legal processe, which drew on the Commis∣sion for surrendering of Superiorities and Tithes, to be retaken from the King on such conditions, as might bring some profit to the Crowne, some Augmen∣tation to the Clergy, and far more ease and benefit to the common people. But these proud Scots chuse rather to expose their Countrey to the danger of a publick Ruine, then to part with any of that power (it might be cal∣led a Tyranny rather) which they had exercised on their Vassals, as they commonly called them; and thereup∣on conspired together to oppose the
King in any thing that should be offered in the following Parliament, which had relation to the Church or to Church-affaires. But because Religion and the care thereof, is commonly the best bait to catch the vulgar, they must find out some other means to divert the King from the prosecuting of that Commission; then the consideration of their own per∣sonall and private interesse; and they found means to do it on another occasi∣on, which was briefly this. King James from his first coming to this Crown, had a design to bring the Kirk of Scotland to an uniformity with the Church of England, both in govern∣ment and forms of worship. And he proceeded so far as to settle Episcopacy amongst them, naming thirteen new Bishops for so many Episcopal Sees as had been anciently in that Church; three of which received Consecration from the Bishops of England, and confer∣red it on the rest of their Brethren at
their coming home. Which Bishops he armed also with the power of an High Commission, the better to keep down the insolent and domineering Spirit of the Presbyterians. In order to the other, he procured an Act to be passed in the Assembly at Aberdeen, Anno 1616. for composing a Liturgy, and extracting a new book of Canons out of the scattered Acts of their old Assemblies. At the Assembly held at Perth, Anno 1618. he obtained an Order for receiving the Communion kneeling, for administring Baptisme and the Lords Supper in private Houses, in ca∣ses of extreme necessity, for Episco∣pall confirmation; and finally, for the ce∣lebrating the Anniversaries of our Sa∣viours Birth, his Passion, Resurrection and Ascension, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost. All which he got to be confirmed in the following Par∣liament. So far that wise King had advanced the work of Uniformity, before his engaging in the Cause of the Palati∣nate.
His Breach with Spain, and the War which did insue upon it took off his thoughts from prosecuting that de∣sign, which his son, being more intangled in Wars abroad and Distempers at home, had no time to finish till he had setled his Affaires, and attained to some measure both of Power and Glo∣ry. But being it was a businesse which was to be acted leisurely and by de∣grees, not all at once, he first resolved upon passing of an Act of Ratification of all that had been done by his Father, and then to go in hand with the intro∣ducing of a publick Liturgie. In the ef∣fecting whereof, at such a time as he went into Scotland to receive that unfor∣tunate Crown, he found a stronger op∣position in the Parliament of that King∣dom also, about the passing of that Act of Ratification, then he had reason to ex∣pect: But carried it at last by a far major part of that Assembly. This gave him the fist taste of their disaffection to his Person and Govern∣ment;
but he went forward notwith∣standing in pursuit of those purposes, which he brought thither with him. For not long after his return into Eng∣land, he gave order to the Dean of his Chappell Royall in Edenburgh that Pray∣ers be read therein according to the English Liturgie; that a Communion be had every moneth, and all Com∣municants to receive the Sacrament on their knees; that he who officiated, if he be a Bishop, perform it in his Rochet and other Episcopall Robes; and that he do it in his Surplice, if a common Presbyter; and finally, that not onely the Lords of the Council, but the Lords of the Session, and as many of the principall Magistrates of that City also as could conveniently, fail not of their attending the Divine Service there on Sundayes and Holy-dayes: For by this means he gave himself no improbable hopes, that the English Liturgy passing a probationership in the Chappel Roy∣all, might find a plausible entertain∣ment in the Churches of Edenburgh,
and be received by degrees in all the rest of the Kingdom. But the Presbyterian Scots not ignorant of the Kings intentions, insinuated into the minds of the common People, that this was a design onely to subject that pure Kirk to the superstitious Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and therefore that it did behove them to stand together as one man to oppose their entrance. The Lords and Gentry of that Realm, who feared nothing so much as the Commission of Surrendries before men∣tioned, laid hold on this occasion also: And they being seconded by some male-contented spirits of that Nation, who had not found the King to be as prodigal of his favours to them as his Father had been before, endeavoured to possesse them with Fears and Jealousies, that Scot∣land was to be reduced to the form of a Province, and governed by a Deputy or Lord Lieutenant, as Ireland was. The like done also by some Lords of Secret Council, who before had governed as
they listed, and thought their power di∣minished and their persons under some neglect, by the placing of a Lord Presi∣dent over them to direct in chief. So that the people generally being fooled into this opinion, that both their Christian and Civil Liberty were in no small danger, became capable of any impression which the Presbyterian Facti∣on could imprint upon them. Which vi∣sibly appeared by a virulent and sediti∣ous Libel, published in the year 1634. wherein the King was not only charged with altering the Government of that Kingdom, but traduced for very strong inclinations to the Religion of the Church of Rome. The chief Abettor whereof (for the Authour was not to be found) was the Lord Balmerino, for which he was legally convicted and con∣demned of treason but pardoned by the Kings great goodnesse, and by that par∣don kept alive for the mischiefs fol∣lowing.
The fire thus breaking out in Scot∣land, it was no marvel if it had laid hold on England also, the Puritans of both Nations working themselves about this time into a Body, and from henceforth communicating their Counsels and de∣signs unto one another. The King not long after his return thought fit to renew his Fathers Decla∣ration about lawfull sports on the Lords Day, the principall motives whereunto were, the increase of Popery in some parts of the Kingdome, occasioned by interdicting all honest Recreations on that day, and the rest of the Holy∣dayes; the tendency of the Sabbatari∣an Doctrine to down-right Judaisme; some orders made by some publick Mi∣nisters of Justice, for suppressing the Annual Feasts of the Dedication of Churches, commonly called Wakes; and finally, the bringing of Dancing, Running, shooting and other harmlesse Recreations, within the compasse of the Statute made in the first Parliament of
his Reign against all unlawfull exercises and pastimes; in which no such thing was ever intended. And though the Kings intention in it was onely to ease the people from that yoke of superstiti∣on which many of their Preachers had laid upon them; yet by the practise of those Preachers, it made more noise a∣mong the People, and wakened more to appear in defence of that which they call Religion, then all the Geese in the Capitoll. Nor did His Majestie speed much bet∣ter in another of his pious intentions, concerning the Conformity of Paro∣chiall Churches to their Mother Cathe∣drals. The Dean and Chapter of S. Pauls (as Ordinaries of the place) had ap∣pointed the Communion-Table in St. Gregories Church to be placed Altar-wise at the end of the Chancel, where it had stood (and by her injunctions ought to stand) in Q. Elizabeths time. Against this some of the parishioners appealed to the Dean of the Arches, & the Dean & Chapter
to the King. The cause being heard be∣fore His Majesty and the Lords of the Council on the third of Novem∣ber, Anno 162. it pleased his Majesty, having first shewed his dislike of all In∣novations, to declare that he well ap∣proved and confirmed the Act of the said Ordinary, and also gave com∣mandement, that if those few parishi∣oners before mentioned, do proceed in their said Appeal, then the Dean of the Arches (who was then attending at the hearing of the Cause) shall con∣firm the said Order of the aforesaid Dean and Chapter. On this encourage∣ment the Archbishop of Canterbury in his Metropoliticall Visitation, beginning in the year next following, and the Suffra∣gan Bishops in their severall and respe∣ctive Diocesses, did appoint the like, for the avoiding of those frequent incon∣veniences and prophanations which that sacred Table had formerly been exposed unto. This made the Puritan Faction open wider then before they did, as foolish∣ly
afraid of the breaking in of Supersti∣tion, by this last Declaration, as of Pro∣phanenesse by the other. And that they might keep peace with the Scots in all particulars, they dispersed many scan∣dalous and seditious Libels against the Governours of the Church, and all that acted by and under their Authori∣ty, not sparing the king himself if he came in their way; most certain tokens and prognosticks of those great Com∣bustions which soon after followed in both Kingdomes. 1634. Nor were there any lesse Apprehen∣sions infused into them by some zea∣lous Patriots, who most ambitiously affected the Title of , in the Orators language, the profest Champions of the Property and Liberty of the English Nation; the oc∣casion this: The Soveraignty of the narrow Seas, had not onely been in∣vaded by the Hollanders during the late
troubles both at home and abroad; but that invasion had been justified in some publick writings. And thereupon, by the Advice of Mr. Noy his Attorny Generall, he issued certain writs in the tenth year of his Reign, Anno 1634. directed to all the Port Towns of the Kingdome, to set out a certain num∣ber of ships furnisht with Mariners. Am∣munition, Victuals, and all other ne∣cessaries, for defence of the Realm; which Writs he afterwards extended also to the inland Counties, following therein the examples of his Predeces∣sors, in which none was better able to instruct him, then he that gave him that Advice. By means whereof he did not only recover that Dominion, which belonged to him on the Sea, but very much improved and enricht the Land, as before is said. Which notwithstan∣ding, some of the discontented mem∣bers of the former Parliament, and o∣thers of the same party, under colour of standing in defence of the Rights and Properties of the Subject, did stub∣bornly
oppose the payment of that im∣position, in which the Honour, Wealth, and Happinesse of this Kingdome was so much concerned. And though the King had the opinion of all the Judges, under their hands to justifie his procee∣dings in it; yet chose he rather to pro∣ceed against them in a legall way, then to make use of any arbitrary power, or the opinion of the Judges, which ex∣tra judicially had been given in the case. And so well did he prosper in it, that when it came to be argued in the Exche∣quer-Chamber, of the twelve Judges, ten absolutely declared themselves for the lawfulnesse of it; the other two (be∣ing Crook and Hutton) dissenting openly from that opinion, to which they had formerly subscribed▪ So that here being a mixture also both of Christian and Civil Liberties, which were given out to be in danger; it is no marvel if the Faction in both Nations did conspire together, to disturb the peace and happinesse of this flourishing Kingdom.
1637. The ground thus laid, it was thought fit the first part of the Tragedy should be plaid in Scotland. The Bishops of that Church, though they liked well enough of the English Liturgy, desired a Liturgy of their own, for fear of acknowledging some dependency of that Church on this; which being composed amongst themselves, and approved by some of the English Prelates, to whom his Maje∣sty referred the perusall of it, was re∣commended to the Scots for the use of that Church, and the twenty third day of July, Anno 1637. appointed for the first exercise and reading of it: on this occasion followed the sedition at Eden∣burgh, encouraged under-hand by the Marquesse of Hamilton, the Earls of Rox∣borow and Traquair, and many other of the Kings false servants, both in Court and Councel. This sedition afterwards brake out into open Action, the principall Stick∣lers
against the Book of Common-Prayer, and the Kings proceedings in the same, engaging the whole Nation in a solemn Covenant for the Extirpa∣tion of Episcopacy, and whatsoever they were pleased to comprehend under the generall Names of Heresie and Supersti∣tion, in which not onely the five Arti∣cles of Perth, but the whole Common-Prayer-Book was intended by them. And that they might be sure to keep their party together, they bound them∣selves in the said Covenant, to stand to one another in pursuance and defence thereof, against all manner of persons whatsoever, the King himself not be∣ing excepted. And though the King, by the perswasion of Hamilton here, and his untrusty servants there, gave or∣der for the suppressing of that Liturgy, the High Commission, the book of Ca∣nons, and even the Articles of Perth, though confirmed in Parliament, yet nothing could content their pride and insolency, but the utter abolishing of Episcopal government: which since they
found the King resolved not to yield un∣to, they were resolved to do it without him; in their Assembly held at Glasco, abolishing the Episcopal Order, and thundring their Anathema's and excom∣munications, not onely against the Bish∣ops themselves, but all such as adhered unto them. And that they might be be∣fore-hand with him, they intercepted his Revenews, surprised all his Forts and Castles, and finally put themselves into open Armes. 1639. This forced the King to set forth a∣gainst them, accompanied with an Ar∣my Royall, and furnished with such a gallant Company of Lords and Gen∣tlemen, as might assure him of a cheap and easie victory. But he conceiving that the terrour of his coming would reduce the Scots to obedience without blows or bloodshed, resolved in him∣self not to out-go Muster and Ostentation; and thereupon was very easily intrea∣ted
to refer all differences between them to certain Commissioners of both King∣doms. By their negotiation a generall Ac∣cord was made at Barwick on the seven∣teenth of June Anno 1639. upon which the King presently disbanded his For∣ces, and returned towards London, ha∣ving effected nothing by his chargeable expedition, but his making the Scots more insolent then before they were, and giving them a greater Reputation in the eye of the world then before they had; of which he became assured and sen∣sible when it was too late. For no sooner had he disbanded his Army, but the Pacification (such as it was) was openly protested against in the Scots Army; and many false copies of it were scattered abroad, to make it more dishonourable to the King, and of more advantage to themselves. The Officers of their Army were retained in pay, the old form of holding Par∣liaments in that Kingdom was altered
by them, and the prerogatives of the Crown invaded; their words and a∣ctions tending to a more generall De∣fection then before. So that the King was fain call home his Sheat-Anchor the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, whom not long after he created Earl of Straf∣ford, in the County of York. By whose advice, seconded by the Archbishop of Canterbury, his Majesty about the be∣ginning of December gave a publick inti∣mation of a Parliament, to begin on the thirteenth day of April then next following. And it was intimated so long before∣hand for these two reasons. First, that the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland might in the mean time hold a Parliament in that Kingdome, which he did, and mana∣ged so much to the Kings advantage, that an Army of 8000 Horse and Foot was speedily raised, and money gran∣ted by the Parliament to keep them in pay, and furnish them with Ammuni∣tion, Arms, and all other necessaries. Secondly, that by the Reputation of a
following Parliament, he might be the better enabled to borrow money for the carrying on of the war, in case the Par∣liament should fail him, as it after did. For being come together at the time appointed, instead of Acting any thing in order to his Majesties service, they were at the point of passing a Vote for blasting his war against the Scots To prevent which his Majesty was forced to dissolve them on the fifth of May, the Convocation still continuing, who granted him a Benevolence of foure shillings in the pound for all their Ec∣clesiasticall promotions, to be paid six years together then next ensuing. The Members of the dissolved Parli∣ament inflamed the people in all parts of the Kingdome with such discontent∣ments, which actually brake out in South∣wark into open sedition, not pacified without much danger, and the execu∣ting of the principal Leader. In the mid∣dle of which Distempers his Majesty was blest with a third Son, born on the
eight of July, Christned by the name of Henry, and by his Majesties command called Duke of Glocester. 1640. To welcome this young Prince into the world, the Scots put themselves in∣to Armes again, and backt by a strong faction here, thought that they could not do enough by standing on their de∣fence at home, unlesse they entred Eng∣land also, as they did accordingly. But they took not his Majesty unprovided, who had raised another gallant Army under the command of the Earl of Nor∣thumberland, as chief Generall, and the Earl of Strafford as the chief Comman∣der under him; himself with all speed posting towards the North, as soon as the News of this invasion had been brought unto him. But scarce was he well setled in the head of his Army, but he was followed by a Petition from some Lords of England, confor∣mable in the main points of it to a
Declaration of the Scots, which they called the Intention of their Army. So that the Cloud which gathered behind him in the South, threatned more danger to him then the Northern Tempest, which blew directly in his teeth. Sailing thus between Scylla and Cha∣rybdis, it concerned him to steer as even a course as he could, and thereupon he summoned the great Councel of his Peers to attend him at York, that do∣ing nothing in this great businesse with∣out their advice, he might give himself the better hopes of their assistance, as his occasions should require. By their advice Commissioners are appointed to treat with the Scots, to understand their Grievances, the reasonablenesse or unreasonablenesse of their Demands, and finally to make up the breach by such an Accommodation as might con∣duce to the peace and happinesse of both Kingdomes, and his Majesties honour. In the mean time he calls a Parlia∣ment, to begin at Westminster the third
day of November then next following, which if it had been held at York, as lying nearest to the danger and Scene of action, might not have proved so fatall and destructive to him as it after did. In the beginning of this Parliament, he cast himself on the love and loyal∣ty of his English Subjects, in which he found himself deceived of his expectati∣on. For the first thing they did, was to deprive him of the Counsels of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, and thereby to ter∣rifie all others from adhering to him in the times of his greatest need. These they impeacht of High Treason, remo∣ved them from the House of Peers, and committed them to the Tower of London, where the Archbishop staid four years before any particular charge, or any pro∣secution upon that charge, was brought against him. But with the Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland they made quicker work, inviting the People of all the three Kingdomes to bring them in such
matter as they had or could devise a∣gainst him; and having made all things ready for a publick Tryal, they brought him to the Bar before the Peers, sitting in VVestminster-Hall on the sixth of April then next following; but he so rational∣ly pleaded in his own behalf, and so fully satisfyed all objections which were made against him, that the Commons were fain to desist from the Course which they had begun, and to pro∣ceed against him in a Bill of Attain∣der. For the better passing whereof the Commons framed a Protestation on the third of May, in many things not un∣like the Scotish Covenant before menti∣oned, by which they bound themselves among other things, to maintain and de∣fend the Power and Priviledges of Parlia∣ment, the lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Subject, to endeavour to bring to con∣digne punishment all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Plots, Counsels and Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary; (amongst which
they reckon the Earl of Strafford to be one) and finally to stand unto one another, and to every other person whatsoever in any thing he shall do in pursuance of the said Protestation. Which Protestation being first taken by themselves, was the next day taken also by the House of Peers, and not long after obtruded on all the rest of the Kingdom. But not finding this sufficient to effect their purpose, they first forced the Lords by Tumults, and afterwards the King by their importunities to passe that unhappy Bill of Attainder; which having obtained, they brought him to the Scaffold on Tower-Hill on the thir∣teenth of May, where with as much Christian confidence and magnanimity as could be exprest by flesh and blood, he delivered up his neck to the Executio∣ner. In order to this great work which they knew the Scots much laboured for, and had declared so much in a Pamph∣let called The intentions of their Army, at their first coming into England, the lea∣ding
men in the house of Commons held a strict correspondency with the Scots Commissioners then residing in London, and voted no lesse then three hundred thousand pounds (by the name of a bro∣therly Assistance) to be given to the Scots in generall, under colour of repairing such damages as they had sustained in the time of this breach, but in plain truth to bind them fast unto themselves. And having made sure work with them, they deprived the King by little and little of almost all the ancient and undoubted prerogatives which of right belonged unto his Crown. The power of calling Parliaments, in case of his neglect or refusall, is put into the hands of Sheriffs and Consta∣bles; his right to Tonnage and Poundage must be disclaimed by Act of Parlia∣ment; the Bill of the Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, and that for the con∣tinuance of this Parliament during the pleasure of the Houses, are extorted by tumults. And by the terrour of the
like, the Act for Knighthood is repealed, and the imposition for ship-money con∣demned as an illegall Tax, and abolished also. The like Acts passed against the of∣fice of the Clerk of the Market, the Court of Stanneries, his propriety in the ma∣king of Gun-powder, the authority of the Council-Table, the Courts of Star-Chamber and High Commission, the ju∣risdiction of the Ecclesiasticall Courts, as also the Presidiall Courts held for a long time in York and the Marches of VVales. And finally, that he might lose both his strength in Parliament, and his power with the People, they extor∣ted the passing of two Acts, the one for taking away the Bishops Votes and place in the House of Peers, the other for dis∣claiming of his power in pressing Soul∣diers (enjoyed by all his Predecessors) for defence of his Person and the Realm. And that they might the better awe the King to their Concessions, the Ar∣my of the Scots must be maintained
with pay and plunder, till there was al∣most nothing left for them to crave, or the King to grant. But being at the last sent home, his Majesty followed not long after to settle his affairs in that bro∣ken kingdom; where to oblige that Na∣tion to him, he confirmed not onely all his former concessions by Act of Parlia∣ment, but all such things also as had been acted by them in their Assembly held at Glasco. And more then so, he parted with so much of his Eoyall Prerogative (invaded & usurped by them in the late Confusions) that he had allmost nothing left remaining to him, but the empty title, the having of a Sword carried be∣fore him, and some other outward pomps of Court, which signifie just no∣thing when the power is gone. This good successe of the Scots encou∣raged the Irish Papists to attempt the like, and to attempt it in the same way as the Scots had gone; that is to say, by seizing his Towns, Forts, and Castles, putting themselves into the body of
an Army, banishing or imprisoning all such as oppose their practises, and then petitioning the King for a publick Ex∣ercise of their Religion. The 23. of O∣ctober Anno 1641. was the day designed for the seizing of the City and Castle of Dublin, and many places of great im∣portance in the Kingdom. But failing in the main design which had been dis∣covered the night before by one Oca∣nelle, they break out into open arms, dealing no better with the Protestants there then the Covenanters had done with the Royall party in Scotland, Of this Rebellion (for it must be cal∣led a Rebellion in the Irish, though not in the Scots) the King gives present no∣tice to his Houses of Parliament, requi∣ring their counsel and assistance for the extinguishing of that flame before it had wasted and consumed that King∣dome. But neither the necessity of the Protestants there, nor the Kings impor∣tunity here, could perswade them to le∣vie one man towards the suppression
of those Rebels, till the King had dis∣claimed his power of pressing souldiers in an Act of Parliament, and thereby laid himself open to such acts of vio∣lence as were then hammering against him. Which having done, they put an army of Scots (their most assured Friends) into the Northern parts of Ire∣land, delivering up into their hands the strong Town and Port of Carickfergus, one of the chief keys of that Kingdom; and afterwards sent a small body of English to preserve the South, which English forces having done notable ser∣vice there against the Rebels, were kept so short both in respect of pay and o∣ther necessaries by the Houses of Parlia∣ment, (who had made use of the mony raised for the relief of Ireland to main∣tain a War against their King) that they were forced to come to a Cessation, and cheerefully returned home again to as∣sist the King in that just War which he had undertaken for his own defence. The ground and occasion of which War we are next to shew.
At such time as he was in Scotland and expostulated with some of the chiefs a∣mong them, touching their coming into England in an hostile manner, he found that some who were now leading men in the Houses of Parliament had invited them to it. And having furnished him∣self with some proofs for it, he com∣manded his Attorney Generall to im∣peach some of them of high Treason; that is to say, the L. Kimbolton, a Mem∣ber of the House of Peers, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Pym, and Mr. Strode, of the House of Commons. But sending his Serjeant at Arms to arrest their persons, there came a countermand from the House of Com∣mons, by which the Serjeant was deter∣red from doing his office, and the Mem∣bers had the opportunity of putting themselves into the Sanctuary of the Ci∣ty. The next day, being the 4. of January, his Majesty being no otherwise attended then with his ordinary Guard, went to the House of Commons to demand the five Members of that House, that he
might proceed against them in a way of justice; but his intention was discovered, and the birds flown before his coming. This was voted by the Commons for such an inexpiable breach of priviledge, that neither the Kings qualifying of that Action, nor his desisting from the prosecution of that impeachment, nor any thing that he could either say or do, would give satisfaction. Nothing must satisfie their jealousies and secure their fears, but the putting of the tower of London into their hands, together with the command of the Royal Navie, as al∣so all the Forts, Castles, and the Train∣bands of the Kingdome, all compre∣hended under the name of the Militia; which if his Majesty would fling after all the rest, they would continue his most loyall subjects. On this the King demurs a while, but having shipt the Queen for Holland, and got the Prince in∣to his own power, he becomes more re∣solute, and stoutly holds on the denyal. Finding the Members too strong for him, and London, by reason of the
continuall Tumults, to be a dangerous neighbour to him, he withdraws to York, that being in a place of safety, he might the better find a way to com∣pose those differences which now be∣gan to embroil the kingdome. At Hull he had a Magazine of arms and ammu∣nition provided for the late intended war against the Scots, and laid up there when the occasion of that War was ta∣ken away. Of this Town he intended to possesse himself, and to make use of his own Arms and Ammunition for his own preservation; but coming before the gates of the Towne, he was denyed entrance by Sir John Hotham, who by the appointment of the House of Com∣mons had took charge of that place. The Gentry of York-shire who had pe∣titioned the King to secure that Maga∣zin, became hereby more firmly united to him. The like had been done also by the Yeomandry, and those of the in∣feriour sort, if his proceedings had not been undermined by the Com∣mittee of four Gentlemen, all Mem∣bers
of the House, and all of them Na∣tives of that Countrey, sent thither purposely (in a new and unprecedent, way) to lie as Spies upon his Counsels, and as controllers to his actions. Some Messages there were betwixt him and the Houses of Parliament, con∣cerning the attoning of these differences, whilst he was at York. But the XIX Propositions sent thither to him, did de∣clare sufficiently that there was no peace to be expected on his part, unlesse he had made himself a cypher, a thing of no signification in the Arithmetick of State. And now the War begins to open. The Parliament had their Guards alrea∣dy, and the Affront which Hotham had put upon his Majesty at Hull, prompted the Gentlemen of York-shire to tender themselves for a Guard to his Person. This presently voted by both Houses to be a leavying of War against the Parlia∣ment, for whose defence, not onely the Train-bands of London must be in readinesse, and the good people of
the countrey required to put themselves into a posture of armes; but Regiments of Horse and Foot are listed, a Generall appointed, great summes of Money rai∣sed, and all this under pretence of taking the King out of the hands of his evil Counsellours. The noise of these preparations hastens the King from Yorke to Notingham, where he sets up his Standard, inviting all his good Subjects to repair unto him, for defence of their King, the Lawes and Religion of their Countrey. He increa∣sed his Forces as he marched, which could not come unto the reputation of an Army, till he came into Shropshire, where great bodies of the loyall and stout-hearted Welch resorted to him. Strengthened with these, and furnisht sufficiently with Field Pieces, Armes and Ammunition, which the Queen had sent to him out of Holland, he resolves upon his march towards London; but
on Sunday the twenty third of October was encountred in the way, at a place called Edge-Hill, by the Parliament Forces. The Fight very terrible for the time, no fewer then five thousand men slain upon the place; the Prologue to a greater slaughter, if the dark night had not put an end unto that dispute. Each part pretended to the victory, but it went clearly on the Kings side, who though he lost his Generall, yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of the dead bodies; and not so onely, but he made his way open unto London, and n his way forced Banbury Castle, in the very sight as it were of the Earl of Essex, who with his flying Army made all the haste he could towards the City (that e might be there before the King) to ecure the Parliament. More certain gns there could not be of an absolute ictory. In the Battel of Taro, between the Con∣derates of Italy and Charles the eight f France, it hapned so that the Con∣federates
kept the Field, possest them∣selves of the Camp, Baggage and Ar∣tillery, which the French in their brea∣king through had left behind them. Hereupon a dispute was raised, to whom the Honour of that day did of right be∣long; which all knowing and imparti∣all men gave unto the French For though they lost the Field, their Camp, Artillery and Baggage, yet they obtain∣ed what they fought for, which was the opening of their way to France, and which the Confederates did intend to de∣prive them of. Which resolution in that case may be a ruling case to this; the Kig having not only kept the Field, posse himself of the dead bodies, pil∣laged the cariages of the enemy, but forciy ope his way towards Lon∣don, which the enemy endeavoured to hinder, and finally entred triumphant∣ly into Oxford, with no fewer then a hundred and twenty Colours taken in th Fig. Having assured himself of Oxford fo his Winter Quarters, he resolved on hi
Advance towards London, but had made so many halts in the way, that Essex was got thither before him; who had disposed of his Forces at Kingston, Brent∣ford, Acton, and some other places there abouts, not onely to stop his march, but to fall upon him in the Rear, as oc∣casion served. Yet he goes forward not∣withstanding as far as Brentford, out of which he beats two of their best Re∣giments, takes five hundred Prisoners, sinks their Ordnance, with an intent to march forwards on the morrow after being Sunday, and the thirteenth of No∣vember. But understanding that the Earl of Essex had drawn his Forces out of Kingston, and joyning with the Lon∣don Auxiliaries, lay in the way before him at a place called Turnham-Green neer Cheswick, it was thought safer to retreat towards Oxford while the way was open, then to venture his Army to the fortune of a second Battel, which if it were lost t would be utterly impossible for him o raise another.
At Oxford he receives Propositions of peace from the Houses of Parliament, but such as rather did beseem a conquer∣ing then a losing side. But being resolved to treat upon them howsoever, he found the Commissioners so straitned in time, and so tied to such particular instructions as the Houses had given them, that no∣thing could be yielded to which might conduce to the composing of the present Distempers. At the opening of the Spring, the Queen came to him, who had landed at a place in York-shire called Burlington-Bay in the end of February, and now brought with her unto Oxford some supplies of men with a considerable stock of Pow∣der, Arms, and Ammunition. 1643. The next Summer makes him master of the North and West, some few places onely being excepted. The Earl of New-castle with his Northern Army had clea∣red
all parts beyond Trent (but the Town of Hull) of the enemies Forces. And with his own Army under the command of Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice (two of the younger Sons of his Sister Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia) he reduced the Cities of Bristol, and Exeter, the Port Town of Waymouth, and all the Towns of any importance in the Western parts, except Pool, Lime and Plimouth. So that he was in a manner the absolute Com∣mander of the Counties of Wilts, Dor∣set, Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall. And though the Towns of Plimouth, Lime, and Pool still held out against him, yet were they so bridled by his neighbou∣ring Garrisons, that they were not able to create him any great Distur∣bance. The noise of these successes was so loud at London, that most of the leading men in both Houses of Parliament pre∣pared for quitting of the Kingdome, and had undoubtedly so done, if the King had followed his good fortunes,
and advanced towards London. But un∣happily diverting upon Glocester, he lay so long there, without doing any thing to the purpose, that the Earl of Essex came time enough to raise the Siege and relieve the Town, though he made not hast enough to recover London with∣out blowes. For besides some skir∣mishes on the by, which fell out to his losse, the King with the whole body of his Army overtook him at Newberry, where after a sharp fight (with the losse of the Earl of Carnarvon, the Earl of Sunderland, and the Lord Viscount Falk∣land on his Majesties side) he had the worst of the day, and had much ado to save his Canon, and march off orderly from the place; followed so hotly the next morning▪ that his own Horse, which were in the Reere, were fain to make their way over a great part of his Foot, to preserve themselves. Being returned to Oxford with Suc∣cesse and Honour, he Summons the Lords and Commons of Parliament to
attend there on the twenty second day of January then next following; and they came accordingly. And for their bet∣ter welcome▪ he advances Prince Ru∣pert to the Titles of Earl of Holdernes and Duke of Cumberland, and creates James his second Son (born the Thir∣teenth day of October, Anno 1633) Duke of York, by which name he had been appointed to be called at the time of his Birth, that they might sit and vote amongst them. But being come, they neither would take upon themselves the name of a Parliament, nor acted much in order to his Majesties designs; but stood so much upon their terms, and made so many unhandsome motions to him upon all occasions, that he had more reason to call them a Morgrel Par∣liament in one of his Letters to the Queen, then they were willing to allow of. 1644. And now the Summer coming on,
and the time fit for Action, he dismisses them to their severall dwellings, and betakes himself unto the Field. The frequent traverses whereof, the inter∣changeable taking and losing of Towns by the chance of war, are too many in number to be comprised in this short Abstract. It must suffice if I take notice of those onely which are most con∣siderable. His Majesty prevaling in the North and West, 'Twas thought fit by the ruling party in the Houses of Parlia∣ment, to crave aid of the Scots, whom they drew in the second time, by the temptations of entring into Covenant with them, for conforming of this Church with that, sharing amongst them all the Lands of the Bishops, and sacrificing to their malice the Archbishop of Canterbury, as formerly they had done the Earl of Strafford▪ But besides these plausible allurements, the Commissio∣ners of that Kingdome were to have so great a stroke in the Government
of this, that the Houses could act nothing in order to the present war, no, not so much as to hold a Treaty with the King, without their consent. Upon these baits they entred England with a puissant Army consisting of one and twenty thousand men well armed, and fitted for the service: and having made themselves Masters of Barwick, Alnwick, and all other places of impor∣tance on the other side of the Tweed, they laid Siege to York, where they were seconded by the Army of the Earl of Manchester drawn out of the associated Counties, and the remaining York-shire forces under the Command of the Lord Fairfax.
The news whereof being brought to Oxford, Prince Rupert is dispatcht with as much of the Kings forces as could well be spared, with a Commission to aise more out of the Counties of Che∣ter, Salop, Stafford, Darby, Leicester, and Lancaster. So that he came before York with an Army of twelve thousand Men, relieved the Town with all things necessary, and might have gone away unfought with, but that such Counsell was too cold for so hot a stomach. Re∣solved upon the onset, he encountred with the enemy at a place called Mar∣ston-Moor, where the left Wing of his Hore gave such a fierce Charge on the right Wing of the enemy, consisting of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Horse in the Van, and the Scots Horse in the Reere, that they fell foul on that part of their own Foot which was made up of the Lord Fairfax his Regiments, and a re∣serve of the Scots, which they brake wholly, and trod most of them under their Horses feet. But the Princes Horse following the execution too far, and none advancing to make good the place which they had left, the enemy had the opportunity to rally again, and got the better of the day; taking some Priso∣ners of good note, and making them∣selves masters of his Canon. So that not being able to do any thing in or∣der
to the regaining of the Field, he mar∣ched off ingloriously, squandred away the greatest part of his Army, and reti∣red to Bristol. After this blow the Affairs of the North growing more desperate every day then other, York yielded upon com∣position on the sixteenth of July (being a just fortnight after the fight) the Mar∣quesse of Newcastle and some principall Gentlemen past over the Seas, and the strong Town of Newcastle was taken by the Scots on the nineteenth of October following. In the mean time, the Queen being with child, began to draw neer the time of her Delivery. And it was ge∣nerally believed that the Earl of Essex with his Forces had some aim on Ox∣ford, as the Seat Royall of the King, the Residence of his Court and Coun∣cil, and the Sanctuary of a considera∣ble part of the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy. In which respect it was thought fit that the Queen should remove to
Exceter, as a place more remote from danger, and not far from the Sea, by which she might take shipping for France as occasion served. On the sixteenth of April she began her journey, the King bearing her com∣pany as far as Abingdon, where they took leave of one another, neither of them having any the least presage, that the parting Kisse which they then took was to be their last. Convoi'd with a sufficient strength of Horse for her se∣curity on the way, she was received there with as much magnificence as that City was able to expresse; and on the sixteenth day of June was safely delivered of a Daughter, whom she Christened by the name of Henrietta. Assoon as she had well passed over the weaknesses and infirmities incident to Child-bed, she committed the young Princesse to the Lady Dalkeith, a Daugh∣ter of Sir Edward Villiers, one of the half Brothers of the Duke of Bucking∣ham,
and wife unto the Lord Dalkeith, the eldest Son of the Earl of Morton. Which having done (according to some instructions which she had received from the King) she took shipping at Pendennis Castle on the fifteenth of July, and passed into France, there to negotiate for some supplies of money, Armes and Ammu∣nition for the advance of his Majesties service, and to continue howsoever in the Court of the King her Brother, till she might return again in Honour and safety. And to say truth, her Removall from Oxford was not onely seasonable, but exceeding necessary at that time, the Earl of Essex, and Sir William Wller with their severall Forces not long af∣ter her departure drawing neer to Ox∣ford; on whose approach his Majesty leaving the greatest part of his Army for defence of that place, marched on directly towards Wales. Upon the News whereof, it was thought fit by the two Generalls, to divide their
Armies; it being agreed upon that Sir William Waller should pursue the King, and that the Earl of Essex should march toward the West, for the regaining of those Countries. And now the mystery of iniquity ap∣peared in its proper colours: For where∣as it was formerly given out by the Hou∣ses of Parliament, that they had under∣taken the war, for no other reason, but to remove the King from his evill Coun∣sellours: those evil Counsellours were left at Oxford unmolested, and the Kings Per∣son onely hunted. But the King understanding of this division, thought himself able enough to deal with Waller, and giving him the go by, returned towards Oxford, drew thence the remainder of his Army, and gave him a sharp meeting at a place cal∣led Cropredy bridge, where he obtained a signal victory on the twenty eighth of June, and entred triumphantly into Ox∣ford. This done he marched after the Earl of Essex, who had made himself ma∣ster of some places in the West of good importance.
During this march, it happened that one of the Carriages brake in a long narrow lane which they were to passe, and gave His Majesty a stop at a time of an intollerable shower of rain which fell upon him: Some of his Courtiers, and others which were neere about him, of∣fered to hew him out a way through the hedges with their swords, that he might get shelter in some of the Villa∣ges adjoyning; but he resolved not to forsake his Canon upon any occasion. At which when some about him seemed to admire, and marvelled at the pa∣tience which he shewed in that extre∣mity, His Majesty lifting up his Hat, made answer, That as God had given him Afflictions to exercise his patience, so he had given him patience to bear his Af∣flictions. A speech so heavenly and Di∣vine, that it is hardly to be paralell'd by any of the men of God in all the Scrip∣ture. The carriage being mended, he went forward again, and trode so close upon the heels of the Earl of Essex, that at
last he drave him into Cornwell, and there reduced him to that point, that he put himself into a Cock-boat with Sir Philip Stapleton and some others, and left his whole army to his Majesties mercy. His Horse taking the advan∣tage of a dark night, made a shift to e∣scape, but the Commanders of the Foot came to this capitulation with his Maje∣sty, that they should depart without their Arms, which with their Canon, Baggage and Ammunition, being of very great consideration, were left wholly to his disposing. Immediately after this successe, his Majesty dispatch'd a message from Tave∣stock to the two houses of Parliament, in which he laid before them the mise∣rable condition of the Kingdome; re∣membring them of those many messa∣ges which he had formerly sent unto them, for an accommondation of the present Differences; and now desiring them to be think themselves of some ex∣pedient by which this issue of blood might be dried up, the distraction of
the Kingdom setled, and the whole Nati∣on put into an hope of Peace and Happi∣nesse. To which Message, as to many others before, they either gave no answer, or such an one as rather served to widen, than close the breach, falsely conceiving that all his Majesties Offers of Grace and Favour proceeded either from an inabi∣lity to hold out the War, or from the weaknesse and irresolution of his Coun∣sels. So that the Trage-Comedy of the two Harlots in the first of Kings, may seem to have been acted over again on the Stage of England. The King, like the true Mother, compassionately desired that the life of the poor infant might be preserved; the Houses, like the false Mother, considering that they could not have the whole, voted that it should be neither mine nor thine, but divided be∣twixt them. But if instead of this Message from Tavestock, his Majesty had gone on his own errand, and marched with his
Army towards London, it was concei∣ved that in all probability he might have made an end of the War▪ the Army of Essex being thus broken, and that of Manchester not returned from the Nor∣thern service. But sitting down before Plimouth, and staying there to perfect an Association of the Western Coun∣ties, he spent so much time, that Essex was again in the head of his Army; and being seconded by the Earl of Manche∣ster and Sir William VValler, made a stand at Newbery, where after a very hot fight, with variable success on both sides, each party drew off by degrees, so that neither of them could find cause to boast of the victory. Winter comes on, which though it be not ordinarily a time of Action, will notwithstanding afford us some variety which will not be unworthy of our ob∣servation. And first, a Garrison is for∣med at Abington, (a Town within five miles of Oxford) by order from the two Houses of Parliament, under the com∣mand of Colonell Brown; the King and
Councill looking on, and suffering the Intrenchments to be made, the Works to be raised, and the Ordnance to be planted on the same. It cannot be denyed, but that Sir Hen∣ry Gge, Governour at that time of Ox∣ford, and many of the chief Comman∣ders which were then in and about that City, offered their service to the King, and earnestly desired leave to prevent that mischief which by the Intrench∣ments of this Town must needs fall upon them. But the Lord George Dig∣by, not long before made principall Secretary of Estate, had perswaded the King unto the contrary, upon assurance that he held intelligence with Brown and that as soon as the Town was fortified and furnished with Victuall, Arms and Ammunition, at the charges of the Houses of Parliament, it would imme∣diately be delivered into His Maje∣sties hand. In which design he was out-witted, and consequently exposed unto some losse of reputation with all sorts of People. For Brown having
brought his project to the highest round of the ladder (as himself expressed it) thought it high time to turn it off, and to declare himself for the two Houses a∣gainst the King; printing not long after all the Letters which passed between him and the Lord Digby upon this ocasi∣on. After this followed the taking of Shrewsbury, a place of very great im∣portance to the King, as the Gate which opened into Wales, situate on a rising ground, and almost encompassed round about by the river Severn; that part which is not invironed by water, being wholly taken up and made good by a very strong Castle. By the loss of which Town the Kings former entercourse with His loyall Subjects of North-Wales was not onely hindred, but a present stop was given to an Association, which was then upon the point of concluding be∣tween the Counties of Salop, Flint, Che∣ster, Worcester, &c. to the great prejudice of the Kings Affairs in those Parts of the Kingdome.
Then comes the lamentable death of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, kept for four years a prisoner in the Tower of London, as before was said; but reser∣ved onely as a bait to bring in the Scots, whensoever the Houses should have occasion for their second coming; as formerly on the like temptation they had drawn them in, with reference to the Earl of Strafford. The Scots being come, and doing good service in the North, it was thought fit they should be gratified with that blood which they so greedily thirsted after. And there∣upon the Archbishop being voted guilty of High Treason by the House of Commons, was condemned to die in such a slender House of Lords, that onely seven (viz. the Earls of Kent, Pembroke, Salisbury, and Bullingbrook, the Lords North, Gray and Brewes,) were present at the passing of the sentence of his condemnation. Which being past, he was brought unto the Scaffold on Tower-hill on the tenth of January, where he ended his life with such a mo∣dest
confidence, and so much piety, that his greatest enemies then present, who came to behold the Execution with hearts full of joy, returned back with eyes as full of tears. Last of all, comes another Treaty sol∣licited by the King consented to by the Houses with no small difficulty, and that upon condition to have the Treaty held at Uxbidge, a Town about fifteen miles from London, and more then twice as much from Oxford. Accor∣ding unto which appointment the Com∣missioners met on the thirtieth of Ja∣nuary accompanied with some Divines, for debating the point of Church Go∣vernment, when it came in question. But this Treaty proved as unsuccesse∣full as that at Oxford had done before; the Commissioners for the Houses of∣fering no expedient for an Accommoda∣tion, nor hearkening unto such as were tendred to them in the name of the King. So that there being no hope of bringing the Warre unto an end
this way, both parties were resolved to proceed in the other. The King having wintered his Army at Oxford and the Towns adjoyning, it was thought fit to send the Prince into the West to perfect the Association which had been begun in the end of the last summer; and in those Countries to advance such further forces as might not onely serve for the defence of them∣selves, but give some reasonable increase to His Mjesties Army. In the beginning of April he set for∣wards towards Bristol, accompanied with the Lord Culpeper and Sir Edward Hide, as his principall Counsellours, and some of the chief Gentry of the West, who were of most authority in their severall Countreys. But before he had made himself Master of any consi∣derable strength, news cme of the un∣fortunate successe of the Batel of Nas∣by, which much retarded his procee∣dings; and hearing afterwards that Sir Thomas Fairfax with his victorious Ar∣my was marching towards him, he
quitted Somerset-shire, and drew more Westward into the middle of Devon∣shire. Bristol being taken, and his Majesties affairs growing worse and worse, both there and elsewhere, he sent a Message unto Fairfax, desiring a safe conduct for the Lord Hopton, and the Lord Culpeper to go to the King and mediate with him for a Treaty with the Parliament. To which, after a fortnights deliberati∣on, he receives an answer the eight of November to this effect, That if he would disband his Army, and apply himself unto the Parliament, the Gene∣rall himself in person would conduct him thither. No hopes of doing good this way, and lesse the other, Exeter being be∣sieged, and Barnstable taken by the ene∣mies forces, he leaves his Army to the Lord Hopton, and withdraws into the Dukedome of Cornwall. But finding that Countrey unable to protect him long, he passeth into the Isle of Scilly, and from thence unto the Queen his
Mother, whom he found at Paris, not doubting but to receive such entertain∣ment in that Court, as might be justly looked for by the eldest Son of a Daughter of France. Which passages I have laid together in this place, that I might follow his Majesties affairs else∣where with the less interruption. The Prince being gone for Bristoll, as before is said, his Majesty resolved on the approch of Summer, to relieve such of his Northern Garrisons; as had been left untaken the year before, and from thence to bestow a visit on the as∣sociated Counties. But being on his march, and having stormed the Town of Leicester in his way, he returned a∣gain so far as Daventry, upon the news that Sir Thomas Fairfax newly made Generall in the place of Essex, was sate down before Oxford. Concerning which we are to know, that not long after the beginning of this everlasting Parliament, the Puritan
Faction became subdivided into Presby∣terians and Independents; of which the Presbyterians at the first carryed all be∣fore them. The Independents growing up by little and little, and being better studied in the arts of dissimulation, ea∣sily undermined the others, and outed their Lord-Generall, and all that com∣manded under him, of their severall places, under colour of an Ordinance for Self-denyall. That done, they con∣ferred that command on Sir Thomas Fairfax, a man of more Precipitation then Prudence, not so fit for Coun∣sell as Execution, and better to charge on an Enemy then command an Ar∣my. With him they joyned Collonel Oliver Cromwel (whom they dispensed with in the point of self-denyall) by the name of Lieutenant General; but so that he disposed of all things as Comman∣der in chief, and left Fairfax to his old trade of Execution, to which he had been accustomed. The like alteration happened also in the Kings Army; Collonel Sir Patrick
Ruthen, a man of approved valour and Fidelity, being by his Majesty made Earl of Forth in Scotland, was on the death of the Earl of Lindsey made the Lord Lieutenant of his Armies; and the next year made Earl of Brentfort, for the good service he had done in that place. Having both fortunately and faithfully discharged that office for two years and more, he was outed of his place by a Court-contrivement made in the favour of Prince Rupert, who a little before Christmas last was decla∣red Generallissimo of his Majesties For∣ces: which he most ambitiously aspi∣red unto, and at last obtained, notwith∣standing his late defeat at Marston-Moor, his squandring away so brave an army, and his apparent want of Age, Expe∣rience and Moderation for so great a trust. By these new Generals the fortune of the War, and the whole estate of the Kingdome, which lay then at stake, came to be decided. For Fairfax hearing that the King was come back as far as
Daventry (which was the matter he de∣sired) made directly towards him, with an intent to give him battel, and at a place neer Naseby in Northamptonshire, the two Armies met on Saturday the 14. of June. The King had the better at the first, but Prince Rupert having routed one wing of the enemies Horse, followed the chace so unadvisedly, that he left the foot open to the other wing; who pressing hotly on them, put them to an absolute rout, and made them∣selves Masters of his Camp, Carriage and Canon, and amongst other things, of his Majesties Cabinet, in which they found many of his Letters, most of them written to the Queen, which were after publisht with little honour to them that did it. For whereas the Athenians on the like successe had inter∣cepted a packet of Letters from Philp King of Macedon, their most bitter ene∣my, unto severall friends, all the rest of those Letters being broke open be∣fore the Common Council of Athens, one of which was subscribed to the
Queen Olympias, was returned untoucht; the whole Senate thinking it a shame∣full and dishonest act to discover and betray the Conjugall secrets betwixt man and wife. A modesty in which those of Athens stand as much com∣mended by Helladius Bisantinus, an an∣cient Writer, as the chief leading men of the Houses of Parliament are like to stand condemned for the want of it in succeeding Histories. But we return unto the King; who having saved himself by flight, gathe∣red together some part of his scattered Forces, but never was able to make head against the conquerors; losing one place after another, till his whole strength was almost reduced to Oxford, and some few Garrisons adjoyning. I shall take notice onely of some of the principal, viz. Chester, Conway, Here∣ford, Bristol, and Exeter, on which so great a part of his affairs did most e∣specially depend.
Chester first comes within the danger, a City of great importance in those parts of the Kingdom. To the relief of this place then besieged by Sir William Brereton, Collonel Jones, and others of that party, and at that time brought to some distresse, he made all the conve∣nient speed he could; but was pursu∣ed upon the way, and charged in front by the besiegers, betwixt whom this small Army was routed at a place cal∣led Bauton-Heath, and the Lord Bernard Stuart (newly created Earl of Lichfield) killed upon the place; the last of three brethren that had lost their lives in their Princes quarrell. On this discomfiture, the King draws towards the North-East, and com∣mands the Lord Digby with the Re∣mainder of his Horse to march for Scot∣land, and there to joyn with the Mar∣quesse of Montrosse, who with small strengths had acted Miracles in that Kingdome. But at a Village in York∣shire called Sherbourn (a fatall name, but pointing to another place) where he sur∣prized 700 of the Parliaments Foot, he
he was set upon by Collonel Cotly, his Forces made drunk with the good for∣tune of the day very easily mastered, and he himself compelled to fly into Ireland, never returning since that time to his Native Country. But notwithstanding the Kings mis∣fortune before mentioned, which hap∣pened on the twenty ninth of September; the Lord Byron, who had the command of the Garrison in Chester, held it out gallantly till the first of February; and then perceiving that there was no hopes of any Succour, came to an honoura∣ble composition, and gave up the Town, the greatest part of the Countrey falling into the same condition with their mo∣ther City. Before we leave the North-west parts, we must look upon the fortune of the Town and Castle of Conway, a place of principall Command on that narrow Channell which runneth be∣tween the County of Carnarvon and the Isle of Anglesey. Before this Town, being then besieged by Collonel Mit∣ton
came Doctor John Williams, former∣ly Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and at that time Arch-bishop of York: Who to ingratiate himself with the Houses of Parliament, and to save the charges of compounding for Delinquency, came with some forces to the aid of the Besiegers (some say in Armour) and encamped there till the place was taken; to the Amazement of the world and the eternall infamy and Reproch of his Person. Bristol comes next, a place conveni∣ently seated for the Trade of Spain, the River capable of great Ships, and the port well guarded. At the taking of this City by the Kings Forces, to such strengths as before it had, there was added a Fort Royall (as they called it) then conceived impregnable; into this City Prince Rupert (who had spent there too much of the year before) had put himself at the present, and was be∣sieged not long after by Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, who came before it on the twenty fourth of August, and had it surrendred
to him without any memorable resi∣stance, together with the old Castle and Royall Fort, on the thirteenth of Septem∣ber. The quick surrendry of which place, being so well fortified and furnisht with victuall, Arms and Ammunition, and the weak defences which were made to preserve the same, created some suspi∣cion of disloyalty in Prince Rupert to∣wards the King his Uncle. There had before passed some Letters betwixt the King and him, touching the Kings com∣ing to a speedy agreement with his Houses of Parliament, in which the King was prest so far, that he seemed to be displeased at it. And now this news coming on the neck of those Let∣ters, startled him into such a distrust of his Nephews Loyalty, that he dispatcht a messenger with all speed to the Lords at Oxford, to displace Collonell Wil∣liam Legg (one of the Confidents of Prince Rupert) who had succeeded Sir Henry Gage in the Government of that City, and to put into his place
Sir Thomas Glenham, a Gentleman of known extraction, and more known fi∣delity. Nor were the Lords of the Council lesse amazed at the news then his Ma∣jesty was, who thereupon, when Prince Rupert and his Brother Maurice return∣ed to Oxford, commanded them to be disarmed, and would not suffer them to walk the streets with their Swords by their sides, as they had done for∣merly; though afterwards by the Kings great goodnesse, they were restored to all apparences of favour, though not to any speciall places of Command or Trust. Hereford followes the same fortune, which having in vain been besieged by the Scots, from the 13 of July to the first of September, was suddenly surpri∣zed by Collonel Birch and Collonel Morgan (this last then Governour of Glocster) on the eighteenth of December. Exceter holds out longest, and was last attempted, such blocks as lay in the way between Fairfax his Army and that
City being first in the course of war to be removed. Which took up so much time that it was the twenty fifth day of January before Fairefax could come neer enough to give it a Sum∣mons, and being summon'd it held out till the thirteenth of April, and then was yielded upon as honourable Con∣ditions as any other whatsoever; all o∣ther Garrisons in the West being first surrendred, the Princes forces wor∣sted at Torrington, not long after dis∣banded upon Composition, and he him∣self retired into France for his perso∣nall safety. All these mischances thus hapning on the neck of one another, all the Kings hopes and expectation rested upon the coming of Sir Jacob Astley, created Lord Astley of Reading two years since; Who having kept together some Remainders of the Kings Forces since the Fight neer Chester, and increasing them with the Accession of some fresh supplies, mar∣ched towards the King, and was to have been met upon the way by Sir John
Campsfield with the Oxford Horse. But either through the want of intelligence, or the necessity of fate, or some oc∣casionall delayes, it was so long before Campsfield was upon his march, that the newes came of the Lord Astleys be∣ing vanquish'd at a place called Don∣nington neer Stow on the Wold, on the 21 of March. In which fight himself was taken prisoner, and with him all the Kings hopes lost of preserving Oxford, till he could better his con∣dition. 1646. In this extremity he left that City in disguise on the 27 day of April, Anno 1646. and on the fourth of May put himself into the hands of the Scots, then lying at the siege of Newark. After the taking of which Town, they carri∣ed him to Newcastle, and there kept him under a Restraint. The news hereof being brought to Oxford, and seconded by the coming
of the whole Army of Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, who laid siege unto it, disposed the Lords of the Council, and such of the principall Gentry who had the conduct of the Affair, to come to a speedy Com∣position. According whereunto, that City was surrendered on Midsomer day; James Duke of York the Kings second Son, together with the Great Seal, Pri∣vy Seal, and Signet, were delivered up into the hands of the enemy: by whom the young Duke was sent to Westminster, and kept in the House of S. James under a Gard with his Bro∣ther and Sisters; the Seals being carried into the House of Peers, and there broke in pieces. But long these young Princes were not kept together under that restraint, the Princess Henrietta being in a short time after conveyed into France by the Lady Dalkieth; and the Duke of York, attired in the habit of a young Lady transported into Holland by one Captain Bamfield. The Scots in the meane time being
desirous to make even with their Ma∣sters, to receive the wages of their ini∣quity, and to get home in safety, with that spoil and plunder which they had gotten in their marching and remarch∣ing betwixt Tweed and Hereford, had not the patience to attend the leisure of any more voluntary surrendries They there∣fore pressed the King to give order to the Marquesse of Ormond in Ireland, and to all the Governours of his Garrisons in England, to give up all the Towns and Castles which remained untaken, to such as should be appointed to receive them for the Houses of Parliament, assuring him that otherwise they neither could nor durst continue him in their protecti∣on. To this necessity he submitted, but found not such a generall obedience to his commands as the Scots expected. For not the Marquesse of Ormand one∣ly, but many of the Governours of Towns and Castles in England conside∣red him as being under a constraint and speaking rather the sense of others then
his own; upon which grounds they con∣tinued still upon their guard, in hope of better times or of better conditi∣ons. But nothing was more hotly pressed by the Scots, then that the Marquesse of Montrosse should lay down his Com∣mission, who with small strength in the beginning, and inconsiderable for∣ces when they were at the best, had acted things in Scotland even unto ad∣miration. For besides many victories of lesse consequence, he had twice bea∣ten the Marquesse of Argile out of the field, followed him home, and wasted his Countrey with Fire and Sword. He vanquisht Baily, one of the best Soul∣diers of the Faction, commanding over a well-formed Army in a set battell fought between them; followed his blow, and made himself Master of the City and Castle of Edenburgh, relea∣sing divers of his Friends who had been seized and imprisoned there when he first took Arms. Had the Lord Digby's Horse come to him, he had not onely
perfected, but assured the conquest of that Kingdome. But instead of those aids which he expected, he was unex∣pectedly set upon, and his whole Army broken by David Lesley, sent from the Scots Army in England with six thousand Horse to oppose the progresse of his fortune; whose coming being known to the Earl of Roxborow and Traquair, (in whom the King continued still his wonted confidence) was purposely concealed from him; to the end that he being once suppressed, and in him the Kings power destroyed in Scotland, they might be sure from being called to an account of their former Treasons: however he began to make head again, and was in a way of well-doing, when he received the Kings command to disband his Forces; to which he readily conformed, took ship, and put himself into a voluntary exile. These Obstacles removed, his Maje∣sty conceived some thoughts of find∣ing Sanctuary in Scotland, the Scots
having first assured him, (as he signifi∣ed by Letter to the Marquesse of Or∣mond) before he put himself into their hands, that they would not onely take his person, but so many of his party al∣so as repaired unto him, into their pro∣tection, and stand to him with their lives and fortune. According to which hopes on his part, and those assurances on theirs, he had a great mind to return to his Native Countrey, his Ancient and Native Kingdome, as he used to call it, there to expect the bettering of his condition in the changes of time. But the Scots hearing of his purpose, and having long ago cast off the yoke of Subjection, voted against his com∣ing to them in a full Assembly; so that we may affirm of him as the Scripture doth of Christ our Saviour, viz. He came unto his own, and his own recei∣ved him not. The like resolution also was entertained by the Commissio∣ners of that Nation, and the chiefe Leaders of their Army, who had con∣tracted
with the Houses of Parliament, and for the summe of two hundred thou∣sand pounds in ready money, sold and betrayed him into the hands of his Ene∣mies, as certainly they would have done with the Lord Christ himself for halfe the money, if he had bowed the Heavens and came down to visit them. By the Commissioners sent from the Houses to receive him, he was condu∣cted to Holdenby a fair house of his own, and one of the goodliest Piles in Eng∣land, scituate not far from Naseby, (to the intent that he might be continually grieved with the sight of the fatall place of his overthrow) but kept so close that none of his Domestick servants, no, not so much as any of his own Chaplains were suffered to have Accesse unto him. In the mean time a breach began be∣twixt the Presbyterian Party in both Houses and some chief Officers of the Army, which growing every day wi∣der and wider, one Cornet Joice,
with a considerable party of Horse, was sent to seize on his Majesties Person, and bring him safe to their head Quar∣ters. There at the first he was recei∣ved with all possible demonstrations of Love and Duty, some of his Chaplains licensed to repair unto him, and read the Book of Common-Prayer, as in former times, and the way open to all those of his party who desired to see him. This made the Animosities between those of the two Houses and the Army to be far greater then before, the City closing with that party of the Houses which desired the Kings coming to the Parliament, and going down in a tu∣multuous manner required the present voting of a Personal Treaty. This made the Speaker and such of both Houses, as either held for the Army, or had no mind to see the Kings Return to London, to quit the Parliament, and to betake themselves to their Protecti∣on; incouraged wherewith they resol∣ved upon their march towards London,
to restore those members to their Hou∣ses, and those Houses to the Power and Freedom of Parliaments. Upon the noise of whose Approach, the Ci∣tizens who before spake big, and had begun to raise an Army, under the Command of the Lord Willowby of Par∣ham, sent their Petitions for a peace, and gladly opened all their works be∣tween Hide-Park Corner and the Thames, to make an entrance for the Army; who having placed their Spea∣kers in their severall Chaires, and sup∣prest those of the opposite party, made a triumphant passage through the chief Streets of the City, with Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, and Colours flying. The King removed from one place to another, was brought in the course of those Removes to Casam Lodge, an House of the Lord Cravens not far from Reading, where he obtained the favour of giving a meeting to his Chil∣dren at Maydenhith, and there they di∣ned together; the Generall willingly
consenting, and the Houses then not da∣ring to make any denyall. From thence he was at last brought to his own Palace of Hampton Court, where being terrified with the Appre∣hension of some Dangers, which were given out to be designed against his per∣son by the Agitators, who for a time much governed the lower part of the Army, he left that place, accompanied onely with two or three of his servants, and put himself unfortunately into the power of Collonel Hammond in the Isle of Wight, where no relief could come unto him. Being secured in Carisbrook Castle, Propositions are sent to him from the Houses of Parliament, as had been done before at Newcastle, and Holden∣by-House: to which he returned the same Answer now as he did before, their Demands being nothing bet∣tered, and his condition nothing worse then before it was. Provoked wherewith, the Houses past their Votes of Non-Addresses to his Majesty,
and take the Government upon them∣selves, as in the times of Ʋacancy and Inter-regnum in the State of Rome; wherein they were confirmed by a De∣claration from the Army, binding them∣selves to stand to them in defence of those Votes. During the time of these restraints, he betook himself to meditation, and then composed that most excellent Book entituled , or the Pourtraiture of his sacred Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings. The Honour of this work some mercenary Stick∣lers for the two Houses of Parliament have laboured to deprive him of, and to transfer it to some other, though they know not whom. But it is well known to all that knew him, that his Majesty had alwayes a fine stroke with his pen, which he practised at all times of leasure and recesse from businesse, from before his coming to the Crown, to these last extremities. By which means he became Master of a pure and elegant Stile, as both his intercepted
Letters, and those to Mr. Henderson at New-Castle in the point of Episcopacy (where he could have no other helps but what he found in himself) do most clearly evidence. 1648. And now the Subjects of both King∣doms, which before had joyned in Arms against him, began to look upon his E∣state with Commiseration; and seeing they could obtain no favour, or freedom for him in the way of Petition, they re∣solved to try their fortunes in the way of Force. And first a very considerable part of the Royall Navy, encouraged by Ca∣ptain Batten, formerly Vice-Admirall to the Earl of Warwick, was put into the power of the Prince of wales to be made use of for his Majesties ser∣vice in that sad condition; and next the Kentish, who twice or thrice before had shewed their readinesse to appear in Arms on his behalf, put themselves
into a posture of War under the con∣duct of one Master Hales (an Heir of great hope and expectation) and after under the command of George Lord Goring Earl of Norwich. The arl of Holland, whom he had cherisht in his Bosome, and who unworthily deser∣ted him in the first beginning of his trou∣bles, repenting when it was too late, of his great disloyalties, began to raise some small Forces in the County of Surrey; Langhern, Poyer, and Powel, who before had served under the pay of the Houses, seized on some strong Towns and Castles in South-VVales, and declared against them; the Castle of Pomfret was surprized by Stratagem, and kept by them who had surprized it, for his Majesties service. And fi∣nally the Marquesse of Hamilton (not long before created Duke Hamilton of Arran) having raised a strong Army of Scots, confederated himself with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Thomas Glenham and others of the Kings party in the North, and having Garrisoned
the Towns of Berwick and Carlisle, past into England with his Forces under co∣lour of restoring the King to his Crown and Liberty. But these eruptions in both King∣doms, though they might give hi Ma∣jesty some hopes of a better conditi∣on, yet did they not take him off from looking seriously into himself, and ta∣king into Consideration those things which had formerly passed him, and which might seem most to have pro∣voked Gods displeasure against him. And what they were which most par∣ticularly grated on his Conscience ap∣peareth by the Prayer and Confession which he made for the times of his Affli∣ction; and is this that followeth, viz. Almighty and most mercifull Father, as it is only thy goodnesse that admits of our imperfect Prayers, and the knowledge that thy mercies are infi∣nite, which can give us any hope of thy accepting or granting them; so
it is our bounden and necessary Duty to confesse our Sins freely unto thee: and of all men living, I have most need, most reason so to do, no man having been so much obliged by thee, no man more grievously offen∣ding thee: that Degree of know∣ledge which thou hast given me, adding likewise to the guilt of my Transgressions. For was it through ignorance that I suffered innocent blood to be shed by a false pretended way of Justice? Or that I permitted a wrong way of thy worship to be set up in Scotland, and injured the Bishops in England? O no; but with shame and grief I confesse, that I therein followed the perswasions of worldly wisdome, forsaking the Dictates of a right-informed Conscience. Where∣fore O Lord, I have no excuse to make, no hope left but the multitude of thy mercies; for I know my re∣pentance weak, and my Prayers faul∣ty. Grant therefore, mercifull Fa∣ther, so to strengthen my repentance,
and amend my Prayers, that thou maist clear the way for Thine own mercies; to which O let thy Justice at last give place, putting a speedy end to my deserved Afflictions. In the mean time, give me Patience to endure, Constancy against temptati∣ons, and a Discerning Spirit to chuse what is best for thy Church and Peo∣ple which thou hast committed to my charge. Grant this, O most merci∣full Father, for thy Son Jesus Christs sake, our onely Saviour, Amen. Now as the King thus armed himself against all future events, in the middle of these hopes and expectations; so the Houses of Parliament were not wanting to themselves in their care and diligence to destroy those hopes, and make those expectations fruitlesse and of no effect. For the Storm thus brea∣king out on all sides, Lieutenant Gene∣rall Cromwel with some part of the Ar∣my is ordered to march into Wales; where he reduced such Towns and Ca∣stles
under his command as had before been manned against them, the three chief Captains above named yielding themselves upon the hopes of that mer∣cy which they never tasted. This done he hasteneth towards the Scots, whom he found in Lancashire, discomfits them, takes all their Foot, with their Canon, Arms, and Ammunition. The Duke or Marquesse, with his Horse, which had escaped out of the fight, were so closely followed by the diligence of the pursuers, that most of his Horse being slain or taken, himself was sent Priso∣ner unto London. Following his blow, Cromwel be∣stowes a visit on Scotland, suppresses all those in that Kingdome, who stood in any sort suspected of the crime of Loy∣alty, the Towns of Berwick and Car∣lisle being delivered into his hands with∣out blowes or Blood-shed. An expe∣dition which he made good use of in his following Counsels, discovering by this means the weaknesse and condition of
the Countrey, the irreconcilable Facti∣ons and part-takings amongst the great ones of that Realm, on whose divided wills and pleasures all the rest depen∣ded; and on what side they lay most open and assaultable, when any further occasion should be taken (as there after was) to attempt upon them. In the mean time some Troops of the other part of the Army scatter the weak forces of the Earl of Holland, who fly∣ing towards the North, is taken at Saint Neots in the County of Huntingdon, and sent Prisoner unto London also. The Kentish being either scattered, or for∣ced over the Thames, put themselves into the Town of Colchester, and are there besieged by Sir Thomas Fairfax himself with his part of the Army. The issue of which Siege was this, that after some extremities endured by the besieged, the place was yielded upon composition, the Townsmen to be safe from plunder, the Souldiers and their Commanders to yield themselves
Prisoners absolutely without any Con∣ditions. The Principal of these were the Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, all of them of appro∣ved valour and fidelity: of which the two last were shot to death upon the place, the first reserved for the Scaffold; on which he lookt death in the face with as much magnanimity, as Hamil∣ton and Holland (who suffered at the same time with him) entertained it with a poorness and Dejection of Spirit. And which was worst (because it lost some Reputation to the Prince in his first Attempt) the Marriners grow∣ing discontented that Prince Rupert was appointed to be their Admirall, instead of the Lord VVilloughby of Parham, by whom they desired to be commanded, fell off with many of their Ships, and returned again to their old Admirall the Earl of VVarwick. By the withdraw∣ing of which Ships he was rendred the lesse able to do any thing considera∣ble on the Sea, and landing with some
Forces neer Deal-Castle in Kent, sped not so fortunately as both his Friends hoped and himself expected. But notwithstanding these Successes, the Houses seeing how desirous the whole Nation was of a Personall Trea∣ty, recalled their Votes of No-Address, and ordered that a Personall Treaty should be held with his Majesty at Newport in the Isle of VVight, to begin on the eighteenth day of September next following. But the Commissioners which were sent to mannage this Trea∣ty, spent so much time upon each Nice∣ty and Punctillio of the Propositions, be∣fore they drew towards a Conclusion, that they gave the Officers of the Ar∣my too much opportunity to frame and publish a Remonstrance, bearing date at S. Albans on the sixteenth of Novem∣ber. In which it was declared that the King was the sole cause of all that blood-shed which had been made in the Kingdome, that he was incapable of any further trust in the publick go∣vernment,
and that nothing could be more expedient to the safety of the Common-wealth, then to bring him to the Bar of Justice. Nor staid they there, but in pursuit of this Design, some of the Officers were appointed to go into the Isle of Wight, and having seized upon his Person to bring him over to Hurst Castle in Hampshire, from whence they brought him by degrees to VVind∣sor, and at last to VVestminster. And on the other side, the Independent Party in the House of Commons (holding intel∣ligence with the Army) voted his Ma∣jesties Concessions to be so unsatisfacto∣ry, that no well-grounded Peace could be built upon them. In the next place, a care was taken by the Army to purge the House of all those members to whom his Majesties condescensions had given satisfaction. Which done, a New Court, called the High Court of Justice, is to be set up, a President of the same appointed, certain Commissioners nominated to
Act as Judges, and a set time designed to call his Majesty to a Tryall, in an unprecedented way, before his Sub∣jects. It is reported that at his going from the Bar, one of the Souldiers most barbarously spit in his face, and used very reproachfull words against him. Which though his Majesty suffered with his wonted patience, yet the Di∣vine vengeance would not suffer it to go unrevenged; that wretch being not long after condemned in a Court of War, for some endeavours to make a Mutiny in the Army, and openly sho to death in S. Pauls Church-yard. And now Saturday the 20 of Janua∣ry, the day of his appearing being come, his Majesty was brought from the Pa∣lace of Saint James unto VVestminster Hall, to appear before the new Judges, and answer unto all particulars which are thought fit to be objected. His appearance could not be avoided, in regard he was under a constraint;
but no constraint could force his will to make him acknowledge their Autho∣rity, or submit himself unto their judge∣ment. He would not so betray the Liberty of the English Subject (as he plainly told them) to any arbitrary and lawlesse Power, as he must needs do by submitting unto their proceedings; and therefore since the Laws and Li∣berties of the Land were now in que∣stion, he stood resolved to dy a Martyr for them both. For which contempt (having stood resolutely on the same term, as oft as he was brought before them) he was sentenced on Saturday the twenty seventh of the same moneth to lose his life, by the dividing of his head from his body. That fatall morning being come, the Bishop of London, who attended on him in that sad exigent, read the mor∣ning Prayers, and for the first Lesson thereof, the 27 Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel, relating the History of our Saviours Sufferings under Pontius Pi∣late,
by the practise of the chief Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees, and others of the Great Council of the Jewish Nation. At first his Majesty conceived that the Bishop had made choice of that Cha∣pter, as being very agreeable to his present condition; But when he under∣stood that it was the Chapter which the Church had appointed for that day in her publick Kalendar, he see∣med to apprehend it with some signes of rejoycing. No sooner had he done his Devoti∣ons, but he is hurried to VVhite-Hall, out of the Banqueting-house, whereof a way was forced to a Seaffold on which he was to act the last part of his Trage∣dy in the sight of the people. Having declared that he died a Martyr for the Lawes of this Kingdome, and the Li∣berties of the Subjects, he made a Con∣fession of his Faith, insinuating that he died a true Son of the Church of Eng∣land, he betook himself to his private Devotions, and patiently submitted that Royal Head to an Executioner, which
had before been crowned with so much outward Pomp and Splendour. The Members of both Houses had often promised him in their Petitions, Messages and Declarations, that they would make him a great and glorious King, and now they were as good as their words, changing his fading but painfull Crown of Thorns, which they first platted for him, to an immarcessible Crown of Glory. At his first coming to the Crown, one of his Chaplains in Ordinary, and now a Bishop in this Church, taking good heed unto the close contrivances of some, and the seditious actings of others in his two first Parliaments, thought fit to give him and his Coun∣cil such an item of it, as might awaken them to prevent those mischiefs which otherwise might ensue upon it. And thereupon he preached before them on these words of S. Matthews Gospel, viz, But when the husbandmen saw the
Son, they said among themselves, This is the heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance, Mat. 21.38. In the dissecting of which Text, he made such an Anatomy of the Husbandmen, whom he had in hand (with reference to some Plots and Practises which were then on foot) and his whole discourse upon the same, that he gave the King and those about him such Remem∣brances, as might make them have an eye unto themselves and the publick safety. But then withall (though he carried on the matter with great care and prudence) he drew so much dan∣ger on himself from some leading Members in the second Parliament, who thought themselves as much con∣cerned in the Sermon as the chief Priest and Pharisees did in the Parable, that he was upon the point of leaving the Kingdome, when he had news that his Majesty had dissolved the second Par∣liament in no small displeasure. What he then preached concerning
the said Husbandmen, was after practi∣sed, and that he then fore-signified was accomplished now. Which shewes him to have been both a Priest and a Pro∣phet, if at the least the name of a Pro∣phet may be given unto any man who foretelleth not of things to come by Di∣vine Revelation, but out of a deep in∣sight into businesse. But we return unto the King, whom if we looke on in his Children (the most lively Images and Representations of deceased Parents) we shall find him to have been the Father of four Sons and five Daughters. 1. CHARLES-JAMES born at Greenwich on Wednesday the 13. of May, 1629. but died almost as soon as born, having been first christened by Dr. Web, one of the Chaplains in Attendance, and afterwards a Bishop in Ireland. 2. CHARLES Duke of Cornwall by Birth, Prince of Wales in Designa∣tion,
and Knight of the Garter, born at his Majesties house of Saint James neer VVestminster, May 29. 1630. so∣lemnly crowned King of the Scots at Edenburgh on the first day of January, Anno 1650. But being invaded by an Army from England, under the com∣mand of Generall Cromwell, he was forced to quit that Kingdome and try his fortunes in the other; so closely followed by the Army, which com∣pelled him to that Expedition, he was fought with neer VVorcester on the third of September 1651. before the Earl of Darby and some others of his party here could come to aid him with their Forces. In which Battel, though he acted beyond the expectation of his Friends, and to the great applause of his very Enemies; yet it so pleased the Divine Providence that he lost the day, and being miraculously preserved (not∣withstanding the diligent search which was made after him) he passed safely o∣ver into France to the Queen his Mo∣ther. Finding that Court unsafe for
him, he passed into Flanders, accompa∣nied with his Brother the Duke of York, Anno 1654. where they have continued ever since. 3. JAMES born in the same place on the 13. day of October Anno 1633. entituled Duke of York by his Majesties command at the time of his birth; cre∣ated so by Letters Patents, bearing date at Oxford, January 27. Anno 1643. and not long after made Knight of the Garter. Taken prisoner at the surren∣dry of Oxford, June 24. 1646. he was carried to his Majesties house of Saint James, and there kept under a Guard with his Brother and Sister; but being attired in the habit of a young Lady, he was conveyed thence about two years after by one Collonel Bamfield, who brought him safely into Holland, and pre∣sented him a most welcome guest to the Princesse of Orange, from whence he past afterwards into France to his Mother and Brother.
4 HENRY born on the eighth of July, designed to the Dukedome of Glocester, and so commanded to be cal∣led. Left by his Majesty at the House of Saint James (the place of his birth) at such time as he withdrew towards the North, Anno 1642, he remained there till the Death of his Father, and some years after, and then upon the promise of an Annual pension, was per∣mitted to go into France to his Mother and the rest of the Kings Children. But in the year 1654. almost as soon as his two elder Brethren had removed them∣selves into Flanders, he found a strong practise in some of the Queens Court to seduce him to the Church of Rome, whose Temptations he resisted beyond his years, and thereupon was sent for by them into Flanders. 5. MARY born on the fourth of November, 1631. and married to Count VVilliam of Nassau Eldest Son to HEN∣RY Prince of Orange, on Sunday the se∣cond of May, Anno 1641. conveyed
by the Queen her Mother into Holland in February following, where she stil remains. Her Husband having succee∣ded his Father in all his Titles and E∣states, died young, and left her the hopefull Mother of a Son, now Prince of Orange. 6. ELIZABETH born the twenty eighth of January 1635. survi∣ved her Father, but died with hearts grief not long after. 7. ANNE born the seventeenth of March 1637. died before her Father. 8. KATHARINE, who died almost as soon as born. 9. HENRIETTA born at Ex∣ceter June the sixteenth 1644. convey∣ed not long after into France by the Lady Dalkeith to the Queen her Mo∣ther, where she still remains. It is observed of the VVolf, that as
soon as he is once full he begins to howl, and such a howling fit fell at this time on the Presbyterians. They had carried on this Tragedy to the very last Act from the first bringing in of the Scots to the beginning of the war, and from the beginning of the war till they had brought him prisoner into Holmby-House, and then quarrelled with the Indepen∣dents for taking the work out of their hands, and robbing them of the long-expected fruits of their Plots and Pra∣ctises. They cried out against them in their Pulpits, and clamoured against them in their Pamphlets for this most execrable fact, of which themselves were parcel-guilty at the least, Et si non re, at voto pariter Regicidae, &c. On the other side, the Independents, who had washt their hands in the blood of the King, seemed as desirous as the Presbyterians to wash their hands of it. By them it was alledged more calmly, that they had put Charles Stuart to death, a∣gainst whom they had proceeded as the
sole cause of so much bloodshed; but that the King had been murthered a long time before by the Presbyterians, when they deprived him of his Crown, his Sword and his Scepter; of his Crown, by forcing from him those Prerogatives which placed him in a Throne of Emi∣nence above his People; of his Sword, by wresting the Militia out of his hands, by which he was made unable to pro∣tect them; and finally, of his Scepter, in divesting him of the power of cal∣ling Parliaments, and of his Negative voice in making those Laws by which he was to govern all estates of men under his Dominion. And more then so, that they had deprived him of his naturall Liberty, as he was a Man, of the socie∣ty of his Wife, as he was a Husband, of conversation with his Children, as he was a Father, of the attendance of his Servants, as he was a Master, and in a word, of all those comforts which might make life valued for a Blessing. So that there was nothing left for the Indepen∣dents to do, but to put an end to those
Calamities, into which this miserable man, this vir dolorum (as he might very well be called) had been so accursedly plunged by the Presbyterians. Thus did each party seek to shift the guilt of this most execrable Act upon one another, and thus fell CHARLES the meekest of Men and the best of Princes, leaving behind him an exam∣ple of Christian fortitude, in suffering patiently that blow, which neither the Law of God or man, nor any deser∣vings of his own could inflict upon him. His body being removed to VVindsor was there interred in the same Vault with K. Henry the 8. but not interred with that solemnity, nor in that publick form and manner which is appointed in the Li∣turgy of the Church of England, of which he had been alwayes a devout Obser∣ver, and to the last a resolute Patron and Defender. His Funerall solemnized and his Death lamented with fewer tears than can be easily imagined;
men bleeding inwardly from their hearts, when their eyes durst not ex∣presse outwardly what grief they felt. So dangerous were the times, Ʋt suspi∣ria etiam subscriberentur (as Tacitus af∣firmeth of the times of Domitian a most cruell Tyrant) that mens very sighs were registred and kept upon account toward the undoing of many in the time to come. But though he died thus in the strength of his years, he still lives in the memories of all good men, and by that most excellent Portraiture which he hath made of himself, will be preser∣ved alive amongst all Nations, and un∣to all succeeding Ages. The Pourtraiture of King Charles in his Solitudes and Suf∣ferings, will be a Character of his Parts and Piety beyond all expressions but his own; a Monument of richer metall than all the Tombs of Brasse or Marble erected to the honour of his Predeces∣sors; which no Inscription what∣soever, though in Letters of Gold, and engraven with a pen of Di∣amonds,
can be able to parallel. And so I shut up this short View of the Life and Reign of this glorious King, as Tacitus doth the Life of Julius Agricola, a right noble Roman (the names of the persons onely changed) viz. Quiquid ex Carolo amavimus, quic∣quid mirati sumus, manet mansurumque est in animis hominum, in aeternitate tem∣porum, fama rerum. Horat. Carm. lib. 1. Ode 24. Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit, Nulli flebilior quam mihi— THE END.
