H2467 12498639 62613
SOME Considerations Upon the QUESTION, WHETHER The Parliament is Dissolved By it's Prorogation for 15 Months? The two Statutes upon which this Question depends are, 4. Edvv. 3. Cap. 14. Item it is accorded, That a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and more often if need be. 36. Edvv. 3. Cap. 10. Item for maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of divers Mischiefs and Grievances vvhich daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every year. As ano∣ther time vvas ordained by another Statute. Printed in the Year, 1676.
SOME CONSIDERATIONS Upon the QUESTION, Whether the Parliament is Dis∣solved by its Prorogation for 15 Months? The two Statutes upon which this Question depends are 4 Edvv. 3. Cap 14. Item it is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and more often if need be. And, 36. Edvv. 3. Cap. 10. Item for maintainance of the said Articles, &c. a Parliament shall be holden every year, &c. I. THE first Point in this Case is, Whether these tvvo Statutes are still in Force and not Re∣pealed? They are not Repealed by the Act that Repeals the Triennal Act: That being no way contrary or inconsistent with the two former Laws, and therefore doth not derogate from them. If we have not a Parliament every year the King neg∣lects the two former Statutes. But if we have not a Parlia∣ment in three years the king neglects not only them, but the last Statute of his own making.
There is a rule in Law, that if Laws and Statutes seem to be contrary, the one to the other, yet if by interpretation they may stand together, they ought so to do. In this case there is not so much as a seeming contrariety. Rol. Rep. part. 1. fol. 91. So likewise, fol. 91. If a Statute extend in words to Repeal another statute, yet if the intent of it was not to repeal it, it shall not be repealed. And it is evident, there was no inten∣tion to prejudice or weaken these Laws, both by his Maje∣sties speech, made the 21 of March 1663, to the Parliament; as also Sir Edvvard Turners speech (then Speaker of the House of Commons) made the 17 of May 1664, at the con∣clusion of that Session. The offence taken was at the man∣ner and means in and by which the Act of King Charles the First did appoint a Parliament to be assembled. And not on∣ly the Title of this Act declares they intended a repeal, but of one Act, viz. that of King Charles the first,) but also the very Act it self mentions and allows these Statutes of Edv. 3 to be Laws in force, and approves them. But if there were as there is not any colour that these Sta∣tutes are hereby repealed, yet it is plain that the Statute of the 16th. of Car. 2. Cap. 1. (which should make the repeal) is not to take place till after the determination of this Parlia∣ment. The words are, That hereafter the sitting and hold∣ing of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued above three years, but that vvithin three years from and after the de∣termination of this present Parliament, &c. your Majesty, &c. do issue out your Writs, &c. Here the enacting part of this Clause doth not take place till after the determination of this present Parliament. And the word (hereafter) in the begin∣ing of the Clause, has clearly reference to that time; and with what Grammer or sence doth this redition (But that, &c.) otherwise correspond to the preceding words, which will be plainer, if you suppose it penn'd, But that vvithin three years from and after the end of tvventy years, next ensuing; shall
not in that Case the word, hereafter, refer to the end of twenty years, and if this Parliament survive this Progogation there may not be much odds in point of Time, whether of the two wayes the clause had been penn'd. That the Kings of England have not duely nor constantly observed these Statutes ever since their making, doth not render them of less force; For the Kings Omissions to ful∣fil a Law, or his personal Offences, can never be drawn into question Judicially, because the King is not under any com∣pulsion, nor accountable to any Court, and is so far, and in such respect Solutus legibus; But all Acts of the king con∣trary to law, are adjudged to be in deceit of the king, and the law voids and nullifiies all such Acts, Hobart. Page 154. II. The next point is, Whether the King is bound by these Sta∣tutes, and vvhether it is in his povver to suspend, supersede or dispence vvith them. The king is the only person that can be meant or bound; For he it is that is to summon or ld Parliaments, and there∣fore the Statutes intend to oblige him, or else they intend nothing, And the laws for Parliaments, that secure our Re∣ligion, Properties, and Liberties, are become onely Advi∣ces and Counsels to the Prince, with no Obligation further then the Princes present thoughts of their Expedience. It is a Rule in law, when a thing is ordained that implies any act to be done proper only to the king, The king shall be bound by a general Act. Case of Warren and Smith. Rolls, 1. Rep. Fol 156.
These Statutes are in pursuance of the Common Law, and the king cannot dispence with the Common Law. The Mirror of Justice, a very ancient and authentique Book saith, Cap. 1. Sect. 3. That it vvas a Lavv in King Alfred's time, That Parliaments should be holden tvvice a year. And all our antient Histories testify that frmerly Parliaments were held at the three great Festivals every year. Co. Lit. 110. 4. It is a general rule in law, That the king cannot dispence with any Statute made pro bono publico, Cook Rep. 5. 15. In the case of Ecclesiastical persons, The Judges in parliament declare, That the king being the Head of the Common∣wealth, cannot be an Instrument to defeat an Act of Parlia∣ment made pro bono publico. Plow. Com. 236, 237. 5. Co. rep. 14. The king cannot dispence with, but is bound by Statutes made concerning Courts of Judicature. Stat. 13. R. 2. Ca. 13. 15. R. 2. Cap. 5. & 2. H. 4. C. 11. made for restraining the Ju∣risdiction of the Court of Admiralty. King Jmes, by his Letters pattents granted to the Admiralty larger Authority and Judicature than those Statutes did allow, with a clause of non obstante to those Statutes, The Common-law-courts grounding themselves uon those Statutes granted prohibi∣tions contrary to the letters pattens, and thereupon the said Admiral complained to the king And all the Judges then gave their opinions, That those Statutes did oblige the king, and that the king could not by his letters pattents go contrary to those Statutes. Co. Jurisdiction of Courts fol. 135. 136, 137. The Subjects have the same right in the Courts of Judicature, as they have in the Laws, and the same right to the Laws as they have to their Estates. The Statute 2. Edvv. 3. Chap. 8. commands the Justices that they shall not delay doing right in any point notwith∣standing any command by greator privy Seal, and the Sta∣tute of 14. Edvv. 3. Cap. 14. is to the same purpose. Fitzherbert hath a writ upon these Statutes requiring the
Judges to proceed notwithstanding any such Command, Nat. Brev. 240. That those laws of Ed. 3. for Annual Parliaments are pro bono publico, and of the greatest concern to the Nation, be∣sides they are made concerning the highest Court of Judi∣cature, of the Dernier Resort, and which regulates and keeps all the rest in order, needs not a proof to any reasonable man Nay, the kings in parliament have very often own'd it. One of these Statutes viz. 36. Ed. 3. is express in this case; For that Statute begins with the confirmation of Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta, has three other Articles for remedy and redress of Mischiefs by the kings officers and purveyors; so comes to an Article for relief of the Subject by original writ out of the Court of Chancery; and then for maintein∣ance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, this Article that a Parli∣ament shall be holden once a year, was enacted. And this Atticle was held of that consequence, that in the next Parli∣ament following, 37. Ed. 3. Cap. 1. Magna Charta, and Char∣ta de Forresta, are confirmed with the word Especially to the Acts of the preceding Parliament; as if they thought those Charters would be rendred ineffectual to them, if they were not secured by Annual Parliaments. The king may as well discharge Magna Charta, as these Statutes that are made for the maintenance of Magna Charta. Reason will tell us, if we consider the nature and business of parliaments, That we ought to be secured of them with∣in a time certain, and the Law has prescribed this of a year and no other to be that certain time. The parliament Rolls 5 Ed. 2. No. 29. and the 1. R. 2. N. 59. are both express in the Case, and that because the par∣liament is the only Court wherein the Subjects can recover their right without the fear of delay, or the oppression of great Men. And how could they answer any of those ends, if the time prescribed by the Lavv, be not punctually obser∣ved▪
An absolute and direct law, and not sub modo, as under forfeiture of such a sum, or such a penalty, cannot be dis∣pensed with by the king, but all his Acts against it are nul∣lities, nay this reason and rule is extended to Common per∣sons and cases; that when a Statute prohibits a thing to be done, it makes a nullity of any thing done against it, if there be not a penalty limitted in the statute for the breach of it. Our king in his answer to the House of Commons of the 24 of Feb. 1672 declares, that he doth not pretend to the right of suspending any Laws wherein the Properties, Rights and Liberties of any of his subjects are concerned. and all our Properties, Rights and Liberties are bound up in those laws of annual Parliaments. But this Fancy of Dispensation, cannot take place with any man that considers the first of these two statutes, viz. That a parliament shall be held every year once, or more often if need be. Where the king is left only Judge of the need of a Parliament oftner than once a year▪ but whether the king see need or no, it is absolutely, positively and peremptorily ordeined, That a parliament shall be holden once a year. And to make any other interpretation of the said law, is to sup∣pose that the parliament did by that Act change the Com∣mon-law, which gave us a right to annual frequent parlia∣ments. and deliver it wholly into the Will and pleasure of the king. And so the next statute of 36. Ed. 3. is to be re∣duced to this sence, viz. For maintenance of the said Arti∣cles and statutes an redress of divers mischiefs and grievan∣ces which daily happen, a parliament shall be holden every year, or once in 20 years, as the king please. But admit the last words of the statute of the 4th Ed. 3. (if need be) runs to the whole sentence, yet according to this sence, The king is obliged to call a parliament within the year if there be need, and a prorogation for 15 mouths puts it out of his power to call them what ever need there may be. Neither will the preamble of the statute of the 27. Eltz.
Chap. 8. help the matter, it would be very hard, that a Pre∣amble of an Act of Parliament should repeal or enervate statutes of that consequence, especially when the enacting part hath not a word to that purpose: but in truth this pre∣amble is far from an allowance, for it is a complaint of Par∣liaments not being so often holden as in antient time, where∣by the Subjects of this Realm are greatly hindred and de∣layed of Justice. It is worth the considering, how the King should have more power by the law to deprive us of constant annual Parliaments, than he had to deprive us of the four Terms in the year, or the four Quarterly Sessions of the Peace. In Johnsons and Norton's Case, it is there said, That the King cannot adjourn the Courts of Westminster-Hall intermitting a Term, and that to do so vvould be a breach of Magna Charta, (nulli negabimus, nulli deferrimus Justitiam.) And is it not as high a breach of the great Charter to intermit the great∣est Court of Judicature beyond the time appointed by law? It is very true the king is trusted with the time when they shall sit, so it be within the year, for that is positively pre∣scribed by the law; so also is the king trusted with the grant∣ing Commissions to the Judges and Justices of the Peace, which he may as legally omit and frustrate those laws, as o∣mit the appointing a time within the year by his Writ for the Parliament to meet. And it is evident, that it was the opi∣nion of that great king, Edvv. 3. That the Lavv of the Realm is such, that upon mischifs and dammages vvhich happen to the Realm, the King ought and is bound by his Oath, vvith the accord of his People in Parliament, thereof to make remedy and lavv. And in truth there is great reason that the king should be more especially obliged by his Oath to the laws of Parli∣aments, that being of highest concern. But to conclude this point with an Argument to the ca∣pacity of such as do fancy the king can dispence with laws of so great moment and concern. Those Worthies must allow
that where the King can dispence he is not intended to dis∣pence, without a Clause of non obstante to the statute he doth dispence with. And there is no such clause in the Record of Prorogation. III. If these statutes do oblige the king, the next point is, Whe∣ther this Prorogation be contrary to those tvvo statutes of Edw. 3. and vvhat the Consequences are thereupon? The statutes are, That a Parliament shall be holden eve∣ry year. This prorogation being for above twelve months, intermitts a whole year, for the statutes say, There shall be a Parliament holden once every year, or oftner; And the Prorogation saith, there shall be no Parliament holden for 15 months, then next to come. It is a foolish fancy to imagine that the statutes are suffici∣ently answered, since a Parliament was holden in 1675. and another Parliament shall be holden in 1676; for in all cases where the Law speaks of a year, or a year and a day, it is un∣derstood and reckoned for twelve Calendar months, to take its relation and date from the subject matter that the Act treats of; If otherwise, the sence of the statute will be, That a Parliament shall be holden once in two years. And it is plain that in Richard the second's time it was not so understood: For his first Parliament dissolved the 18th of November, his next parliament began the 20 of October following, where the Chancellour gives us the reason for summoning the parliament then, That the king would keep well his Covenant in holding annual parliaments. Cot∣tons Abridg. fol. 173. If this intermitting a parliament for above an year, be not contrary to these statutes, what can be? There is no difference to be made of any measure of time beyond a year, and there is no bounds to the time of a prorogation if
it may exceed that, it may be as well for ten or twenty years, and yet the Judges said in Harrison's Case, That in every statute there is some bounds set that must be kept. Lex & Consuetudo Parliamenti are dear in this case of an∣nual parliaments, neither will the single uncontested presi∣dent, passed sub silentio, the 5th of Eliz. alter the Law and custom of parliaments; There the parliament was pro∣rogu'd from the second of October, quinto Eliz. to the 5th of October, sexto Eliz. being a year and three dayes, and let it be granted that this prorogation for fifteen months, is as good and valid in Law as that: If they are both illegal, the one cannot support the other, no more than her commit∣ing of Wentvvorth and another Member in October follow∣ing, in that very parliament, for what they said in the House, shall take away the Liberty and Freedom of speech the Members in either house enjoy by Law and Custom of Parliament. In the Case of Tythes, twenty years pay∣ment will not prejudice him that can afterwards prove a mo∣dus decimandi; In this Case we have the Common-Law and several statutes to prove a modus. The Law-Books tell us,Cook, 4. Rep. Slades Case. That silent and sleeping Presidents,Leonard 2. p. 87. 29. 30. ne∣ver drawn into question,Crook. Eliz. 185. shall not alter what is established by Law and Reason.Cook 9. Rep. fol. 16, fully the Case. Our annual Parlia∣ments are established to us by Common-Law,Co. 12. Rep. Fol. 65. Statute-Law, and the Reason even of the Government it self. Neither can the Laws that were made in that Parliament be at all weak∣ned by it now; Their Validity depends not upon the law∣fulness of that Parliament, wherein they were made, but up∣on the distance of time since their making▪ during all which they have been received without contradiction, and incor∣porated into our Laws. Time and general reception, and multitude of Interests involved, creates an authority to that
which fresh and earlier pursuit would have rendred invalid, as also highly criminal in those that made it. 'Twere a very hard case if one single Act of the Crowns, contrary to law, because not observed or contested, should be of force to repeal and set aside the Common-law, several Statute-laws, and the constant course and usuage in all Ages. But if there be any use to be made of this president, it is that it shews us the opinion of that time, That a parliament in every year of the kings Reign did comply with the old Statutes, but this will do no service in the present case, for as our prorogation is contrived, the 28 year of this kings reign is without a par∣liament, whereas Queen Elizabeth's prorogation began the second of October, in the fifth year of her reign, and ended the 5th of October in the sixth year of her reign. The Reason of the Government in other cases, as all Courts of Judicature which are setled by law, and can meet without the kings particular Commission, as the Courts in Westminster-Hall, the Sessions of the peace, the County-Courts, the Hundred-Courts, the Court-Leets, &c. are ei∣ther fixed to a day certain for their beginning, or limitted within a time certain, and all within a year. Those that can∣not begin without the kings particular Commission, ought, ex debito Justitiae, to be granted whenever the Subject de∣sires it; especially if there be no other remedy for the Subject. So also parliaments are limited within a time certain, which is within a year, for therein the law is po∣sitive, but as to the particular day and place, and the durati∣on of their sitting, which could not be so well reduced into a fixed and positive Law, they were trusted with the king, as the proper subject of his Prerogative. By all this it will appear, that a prorogation for more than a year, is contrary not only to these two Statutes, but also to the Reason of the Government, the law and custom of the Parliament, and the Common-law it self, and therefore ille∣gal in all and every respect: And an illegal Act of the king
is void and null in law. My Lord Hobart speaks very ful∣ly to this Case, Hob. pag. 154. upon a lapse devolved to the Bishop, and at last to the King. where he saith thus. A Lapse is an act and office of Trust reposed by Lavv in the King, the end of vvhich Trust is to provide the Church of a Rector, and therefore tho the King may suffer the Church to stand void (vvhich yet is Culpa) yet he cannot bind himself that he vvill not fill the Church, for that vvere Injuria, & malum in se, and therefore shall be judged in Lavv in deceit of the King. For, Eadem mens presumitur Regis, quae est juris & esse debet. When it is said, That the prorogation is void and null in Law, it is only to be understood that it is so far void and null, as it is contrary to Law; for, the prorogation doth two things; First, It puts off the Parliament and all business be∣fore them, and determins the Authority they at that time have, and this part of a prorogation can never be illegall, for the King can dismisse a Parliament and determine their Authority at his own pleasure. Secondly, It appointed a time when they shall meet a∣gain, and their authority revive. Now this part of a proroga∣tion is bounded by the Law, which says, a Parliament shall be holden once a year, and therefore, if the appointment to meet again be not within a year, it is as if there had been no appointment at all; and such a prorogation is only a dismissi∣on of a Parliment and a determination, not a reviveing of their Authority. To all this there are some Objections which ought to be considered.
Object. The King might have dissolved this Parliament and called a Nevv vvithin the year, and therefore these Statutes might have been observed notvvithstanding the Prorogation. Ansv. This is a clear confession of the invalidity of the Prorogation, since it is allowed those Statutes will not be pursued unless the prorogation be annull'd, and the Parlia∣ment that subsists by it, dissolved: Neither doth the kings power to remedy it by another Act, support the validity of this; for then no Act of the kings, though never so much against Law, but may be as well justified, he having power left in him to remedy it. if he thinks fit, which is an excellent way of rendering our law Arbitrary, and the Power of the Crown Absolute. Object. The King hath frequently by shorter Prorogations and adjournments intermitted Parliaments for several years, vvhich is the same as if he had prorogued them at once for so long time. Ans. The case is directly different between these two, the shorter prorogation being within the letter of the Law, and those above a year directly contrary, tis very true it is as much a part of the statute, that mischeifs and grievances, should be redressed at the Parliament, as that a Parliament should be holden; yet nevertheless, though a King hereafter or in times past, has or shall, de facto, by short prorogations, evade the force and intent of those Laws against his Duty and Oath, that does not argue or prove, that therefore he may, de jure, make a prorogation above a year, which is to re∣peal those Laws: the wisdom of the Law doth in such cases put the king to renewing his Acts, and to bring them under a fresh consideration, Year Book 39. H. 6. as in the case of Pretections, where the kings protections for a year stand good, though several times repeated, yet one and the same protection for more than a year is utterly void. So the king can grant an exception to one single person from serving in Juries, and so to as many single persons as he shall find cause,
and such exceptions shall be good in law, but the kings Char∣ter to exempt all in such a County is void, because of the in∣conveniencies that ensue in such a case. The kings pre∣rogative extends only for the good of the people, never to their prejudice or great inconveniencies. In like case, the Judges have a power to give a day to the parties pleading before them from one Term to another, and may renew the giving of a day from Term to Term, as often as they see cause, but they cannot give a day during life, or for tearm of years, the reason is, that this power or lesser prerogative is intrusted with them for the better dispatch, and not for the overthrow of Justice. Besides the Parliament doth really assemble and sit at the time of every adjournment or proro∣gation, and the length or duration of their sitting doth not at all concern the state of this Question▪ They may as well say, the king need never call a Parliament, because he can by law annually hold a Parliament for two or three days, and then end them, not having suffered them to do any of the business of the Nation. Which is to argue from the kings power abused, which power ought to be exercised for the protection and better execution of the laws, to a nullity of the law it self. To conclude this point, It is no argument to say, the king is trusted, you have no remedy against him, you cannot compel him, for that is the very reason why all illegall Acts of the king are null and void▪ 5. Cok. 14. where there is a contrariety between the Law and the kings single Act, so as they can∣not stand together, the kings Act cannot over-rule and make void the Law but the law makes void the kings Act; all the kings Acts are under the power, operation and con∣struction of the law, and the law makes them either valid or void, according as they correspond or not with it, D, St. 22. 23.
IV. Since the prorogation cannot revive or continue the parliament unto the 15th. day of Feb. 1676. being in that particular contrary to law, and so void and null: The next point will be. Whether the Parliament be still sitting, and hath been so ever since the prorogation? To clear this point, it would be worth the asking, If the Parliament should pass Acts in February or March next, to what day should they relate? Must the members be allowed their priviledges and their  during this time? and a thousand more such like questions would arise. But it is clear that a Parliament prorogued is a Parliament not dissolved, but continued over to another day; and when the prorogation is legal▪ there is a Parliament continuing, but not sitting. To express the matter clearer, it will not be un-useful, either to the clearing this point or the better understanding the whole question in general, to explain the law of Parliaments in this place. If a Parliament meet, though afterward they be proro∣gued or dissolved before they make any Act, yet this in law, while it was sitting, was a Parliament holden. The Judge∣ments that are affirmed or reversed in such Parliaments are good in law, and so are all other their proceedings, and wa∣ges shall be paid. A Writ of Error then brought, would have been returnable at presens Parliamentum, and in pleading it is usually said, ad parliamentum incoat. such a day, & ab inde per prorogationem continuat. &c. Next, That a Session of parliament in law so called, is when there is an Act passed, and takes in all that time, that is, from the time of the meeting either by Summons or prorogation, until the time the parliament is prorogued or dissolved, for during all that time, they are in law looked upon as sitting, and all that sitting is called a Session.
Next, if a Parliament be summoned and meet, and then be prorogued either before or after any Acts passed, that this is a Parliament continued. Therefore 'tis Parliamett. continuat. per diversas Proro∣gatione us{que} ad such a day, & tunc tent. Therefore Parliament and Session of Parliament are dif∣ferent things; every Parliament must be before it can make an Act, therefore it must be and must have continance be∣fore it can make a Session, and all the while that it hath con∣tinuance it is a Parliament in being but when it is prorog'd it cannot be said to be a Parliament sitting, or that tis then holden, but by the prorogation is put off from sitting, or being holden, but continued. Hence you may observe the mistake of the Judges in Huttons Rep. Fol. 61. in not distinguishing between Parlia∣ment and Session of Parliament. Next, In this case, de facto, there was no sitting, but all departed, and the King hath summon'd them by his Procla∣mation, to Assemble upon the 15th of Feb. So the king doth not know they are now sitting. And though this Pro∣rogation for the Causes abovementioned, be not a legal pro∣rogation, and consequently not sufficient to perform the kings will to continue the parliament, and cause them to meet again on the 15th of February, Yet the kings pleasure hereby declared shall be so far effectual, as that they shall not be sitting in the mean time. For though the king mistakes the Law, yet his Acts are not void in those parts of them that are agreeable to Law. It would be a contradiction in Law to say, That a Parliament cannot sit but by the good plea∣sure of the king, and yet be sitting contrary to his pleasure and will declared. V. If the prorogation be void as to the continuing and re∣viving of the Parliament and the Parliament be not sitting, The next point is, Whether it can subsist sine die?
There is no president since the beginning of Parliaments, of any Parliament that was once sine die, that ever came to∣gether again. So that Lex & consuetudo Parliamenti is against it; and if we break through that, a Parliament may be any thing, every thing, nothing as the king please, and no man is wise enough to forsee what inconveniencies and mischiefs may thereby break in upon us. Whosoever will puruse the Rolls and Records of parliament, shall find them very ex∣act and curious in seting down the days and places from which and to which they were adjourned or prorogued; And if a continuance to a day certain be not so necessary that the king cannot dispence therewith, why should the parliament meet meerely to prorogue, as they have done in all times? Why besides the prorogation are there alwayes Commissions to continue them over? And you shall find in the record of 13. E. 4. Num. 42. 43. the king and both houses of parliament, though they had the assistance of Littleton and Hussy: yet utterly ignorant of this point of learning, A parliament sine die; they could find no other expedient, but Prorogation or adjourning the par∣liament to a certain day, or enabling the king by a special Act of parliament to call them (upon 20. dayes notice) soor. And that with so much caution and legall formalitie, That in the very Record of the prorogation, there is a salvo for that Act, of parl▪ and the Act it self recited in Engilsh, (for so Acts began then to be) and in hac verba, at the end of the latine record. In this president there are several things remarkable, that they understood not a prorogation or ad∣jornment sine die, to be legal, That if a praliament be proro∣gued or adjourn'd to a certain day, the king cannot call them sooner▪ That, 40 dayes noties, being lex et con suetudo par∣liamenti▪ The king cannot legally give them lesse notice unlss h be enabled by specall Act▪ of parliament. All rts and Commissions of like nature when all their procedings refer to the first day, and are pro hac vice, viz▪
Court of High Stevvard of England. Assizes, Nisi prius, Oyer and Terminer. Goal-delivery, &c. If they rise without adjorning, they are determined, Bro. Comis. 12. Iones 420, 421. 3. Leo. pag. 229. For these Courts have not certain days and times, like Terms to sit, but only a day to assemble, their Commission day, and then continne on by adjournment, the reason of Law requires as much, if not more exactness in the highest Court of Parliament, than in any of the inferiour Courts; and the Consequences that will ensue on a contrary way of proceeding, will be very fatal. The parliament is like those other Courts, they are dis∣solved by discontinuance, or by being put sine die, and the reason they are dissolved by the death of the king, is because they are thereby discontinued. The Statute of the 1. of E. 6. Ch. 7. provides in many Cases therein particularly expressed, That the death of the king shall not be a discontinuance; But the case of the Parlia∣ment and those other Courts and Commission are not com∣prized in that Statute. So that in those Cases, the death of the king remains to be a discontinuance. And further, the Writs of summons impower the Mem∣bers to act only in the Parliament therein appointed to meet such a day, and also their power from the People as they are representatives, relates only to the Parl▪ summoned by such a Writ, on such a day, and all things in law relate to that day, and if there be not a legal continuation from that day, to another certain day, their power by virtue of those Wrirts expire. Claus. ann. 5. H. 4. pt. 1. The king by Writs tested Octob. 20. 5. H. 4. summons a parliament to meet the third of De∣cember following; but after judging that day inconvenient, because of Christmas, by new writts tested 24. Nov. 5. H. 4. he makes a new summons. This new summons did really make a new parliament, for it made a new Election; The
king having once issued out his writs, could not support or continue that Parliament, but by their assembling and meet∣ing together, and being prorogued or adjourned to the day he intended, which being at that time inconvenient, he was forced to issue out new Writs, and cause the people to make new Elections. Dyer 203. So that the opinion, That when a new parliament is summon'd, a new day may be appointed without their meeting, was not known to be Law in that Age. Neither doth the president of 1. Eliz. prove any thing to that purpose, for in that case the parliament did meet the 23d of January, and did also appoint the Tryers and Recei∣vers of Petitions, and was prorogued by the Queens Com∣mission to the 25 following. If we should once depart from Lex & Consuetudo Parlia∣menti, let this following Instance amongst many be con∣sidered; A King, or a Protector, in the Infancy of a king, shall prorogue a Parliament sine die, and when they are all dispersed to their several habitations, he shall in three dayes notice summon 12 Lords, and 40 Commoners, well princi∣pled, well paid, and near at hand for his purpose, he may in few days change the Religion, subvert the rights and pro∣perries of the Nation, and enslave the people by authority of Parliament, or the Protector (such as he may be) may al∣ter the Succession, destroy our Priuce, and place himself in his room. But to all this will be said, The law and custom of Parliaments require 40 days notice, which secures us from such a mischief. It is replyed, That there is no stronger law and custom for the 40 dayes, notice than there is against Prorogations above a year, or Parliaments, sine die, and if the kings prerogative can extend to the more essential parts, it may to the circum∣stance of the time of notice: The king that notwithstand∣ing our old Stautes supported by the Law and Custom of Parliaments, can prorogue a Parliament to a time never so remote, or, sine die, (that is, to no time) which is farther
distant if he pleaseth, and hath no end but with his Life, can by the same prerogative make the time of notice as short as he please, that being piescribed by no Statute, and only de∣pending upon the law and custom of parliaments, and has been invaded by a more dangerous president than any other point of the law and custom of Parliament has been. Hen. 4. the first day he came to the Crown, summons a parliament by writ to the Sherffe, returnable the 7. day; he durst not venture upon a parliament discontinued, and so disolved by the resignation of Ri. 2. though they assembled but the same day that his writtes went out for a new, and notwithstanding they were such men as he planly approved of, yet new writs of Sumons and a new return of the Sherifs was thought Essential at that time. To all this is objected that Ano. 33. of E. 1. the parliament was dismised the 21. of March without limiting any day cer∣tain, and it doth appear, that an order was made in pleno parliamento on the 6. of April following, so that the same parliament dismissed, sine die. was recalled and sat again, Ryley, 240. 279. 282. To this is answered that this record will not be of validity to change our Laws, and constant practice of parliaments ever since they were setled. The Original Book in the Tower (of which) Riley, is a copy) was but extracts out of the close Rolls, and some parliament Rolls since lost, and a mistake in trancscribing the date of the record may very easily happen for that the former leave given was a disolution is eviedent, becase the members of the house of Commons tooke out there Writ for Wages, whith in those times, was never taken out till after the Parliament was dissolved. And, if to be dismissed, sine die, be a disolution, the question is gained; and is matters not much, whether this be an Order
of the Prelats and Temporal Lords, with advise and assist∣ance of the privie Council and Judges, for these were all ordered in the dismision to stay behind and attend. And the words, in pleno Parliamento, might be inserted, to distinguish it from an Act of the privie Council alone; which is the more probable, both because the nature of the Order is such, as the Kings Counsel alone could have made, and the dist∣ance of time from the 21th, of March, to the 6th. of April, was too short for a recealing of the Members; and too long to suppose them to have continued of themselves neer the Court, and within call Or whether the king did call the same Parliament after a dissolution, which the same king had don in the 28, year of his raign, and his son Ed. 2. did in the ninth year of his: Both which were upon a pretence to advise with him, and we have no lawes extent of their making; for this does but argue; That the  parliaments were not yet fully settled, haveing suffered lately in the end of H. 3. time a great alteration, and this vigorus and might prince Edvv. 1st. was attemping to extend his prerogative, so that we have other presidents of a like nature, as the sum∣moning of one Knight for every County, and one Citizen and one Burgess for every City and Burrough. But both these, and the former prsidedents, have been long since con∣demned and fully settled on the peoples side, this latter 21. Ed. 3. Num. 16, 17. confirmed 51. E. 3, N. 25. And the for∣mer the 50. E. 3. Numb. 177. Item prie lee commune que pleite Establier per Statute in ceste present Parliament que chescun ann soit tenus un Parliament de faire correccions en Royalme des errors & fauxetees; Si null y soynt troves & que les Chevaliers des Countees pur celles Par∣liaments, soyent eslus per Commune Election de les meilleur gents des dit Countees, Et nemy certifie per le Viscount Soul sans diu Election sur certeine peine. Res. Endroite diu Parliament chescun anne il y dyent Esta∣tutes & Ordinances faits les quex soyent dament gardes & tenus
Et quant al article del Election des chevalier qui vendroient a Parliament le Roy voit quils soynt Eslus per commune assent de tout le Countee. This Record is worth the Observing; it has not only setled the point, that our Kings could not have the same Parliament after dissolution, or being sent home returned again upon his Summons, or Writs to the Sheriffs, but set∣tles that the people of England ought not only to have a par∣liament every year, but a new Choise. To conclude this Objection, Let it be considered how weak a proof the date of this Order is in so great a point, to prove a parliament recalled after a dismission sine die, would require Journals of their sitting, Writs by which they were summon'd, or for wages, or Acts which were allowed to be in force, and of such a nature, as none but a Parliament could do; none of which are in this case. VI. If the Prorogation be void, the Parliament not sitting, nor can subsist sine die, then the last point is, That it must be Dissolved. It will be hard to find a president of a parliament that was neither Sitting, Adjourn'd, Prorogu'd, or dissolv'd; this is none of the three former, and therefore must be the latter, viz. Dissolved. If the Parliament be not sitting nor can subsist, sine die, and the prorogation be null and void, then what shall bring them together again the 15 of February? It is very true the king has issued his Proclamation for that purpose, but proclama∣tions are Acts of Grace, to notify and promulgate to the Subjects, the Laws that are, that they may be kept and ob∣served; but they cannot alter the Law, or any proceedings in Law. VVhen was there a parliament prorogued by proclamation? was not that always done by Commission?
and a Proclamation served only to give the people notice o the Kings pleasure, to order their occasions accordingly. In the beginning of the late troubles, the king by procla∣mation adjourned the Courts at Westminster to Oxford, with∣out any Writ of adjournment; and since the Return of his Majesty, in an Affize brought by Sir Edvvard Heath, against Mr. Pagit for the Office of Custos Brevium, of the Court of Kings Bench; It was declared in the Court of Kings Bench, That those Courts at Oxford were coram non Judice, and all their proceedings void, and nothing hath been legal of their proceedings ever since. At the time of the Chatham Invasion, the Parliament stood prorogued to the tenth of October 1667, whereupon the king issued out a proclamation to summon them to meet the 25th day of Iuly, at their Meeting the king told them, That he had summon'd them vvhen he vvas under an exigence, vverein he thought not fit to rely on less Counsel than theirs. And the truth is they were universally looked upon as a Council not a Parliament. And my Lord keeper in his Speech on the 10th of Ostob. 1667 told them, It vvas a doubt by grave and vvisemen, vvhether or no they could sit and act as a Parliament before that day. Object. But notvvithstnding it appcars by vvhat is said, That this Parliament is neither Sitting or Progogued, neither can it subsist, sine die, or by Proclamation, yet there are some vvill tell us, That it is the King's Prerogative alone to Prorogue or dissolve Parliaments, and they vvill urge the opinion of chief Justice Lee, That a Parliament cannet be dissolved or determi∣ned but ly matter of Record, and that by the King alone. Hutton Rep. Fol. 62. Ans. To this may be said, That no man or number of men (except the king) can by matter of Record Dissolve a Parliament: It is the right and prerogative of the king alone to do that. But there are several other wayes by which a parliament may naturally or violently come to its
end, To make the expression plainer, let this instance be offer'd; no man hath authority to kill any of the kings subjects without a lawful Commission derived from him; yet any of his Subjects may die naturaly or be killed violently, and though the person that did it be liable to punishment yet the subject is not alive. The death of the king or the resignation of his Crown, are known and confessed to be the natural, death of the parliament as well as of those other courts, As also the return of the king from a forreign Country into England determines a parliament summon'd by his lieutenant in his absence, as appeares expresely by the Act of parliament 18. H. 5. Ch. 7. The Duke of Gloucester, the kings uncle, told Richard the second of another way. If the king shall  absent himself from his parliament then sitting for the space of 40 Dayes. Histor. Angli. Fol. 2681. If a parliament should continue as long as this, and the king should issue no writs to fill their vacant places, it is more than probable, that would prove a natural dissolution. If the Gunpower treason had taken effect, or any such like wicked or sad accident should happen it would prove a vio∣lent dissolution of the parliament; So that cheif Justice Lee in in Huttons Rep. Fo. 62. was as much out in point of Law, that a parliament cannot be dissolved but by the king and by mat∣ter of record, as he was in good sence when he spoke of dis∣continuance of Parliaments by matter of Record: Primo Mariae, was a great Question, whether the Parliament then summoned was not void?Dyer, 98. Because 26 H. 8. C. 1. and 35. H: 8. C. 3. did unite and annex the Title or Stile of Supremum Caput Eccle∣seae Anglicanae, to the Crown, and this Title or Stile was omitted in the then writs of Summons: Some of the Judges and Queens Council thought this was not a necessary part of the Queens Stile, others thought otherwise, but it was ad∣mitted of all hands that supposing the Statutes of Henry the
Eighth had extended to have made this a necessary part of the Queens Stile, the force of the same Statutes had made void the parliament; so that it appeares evidently by this that it was their Opinion, that a parliament might be dissol∣ved by the force of former statutes, though the kings express pleasure for the dissolving of it did not otherwise appear upon record. Decimo. sept. Car. 1. was an Act made that the Parliament should not be dissolved, prorogued, or adjorned, but by their own consent by Act of parliament: Here the kings of dissolving Parliaments is limited by an Act, so that it is plainly subjected to former Statutes. The Trienal Act it self, is an Instance beyond exception, this parliament which repealed it, admitted it to have been a binding Law, else what need it to have been repealed? By this Act the kings prerogative was limitted both in calling and dissolving parliaments. Ex abundanti it might be said, That Acts of Parliament can bind, limit, restrain and govern the Descent and Inheri∣tance of the Crown it self, and all rights and titles thereunto. This was practised in Henry the Eighth's time, and in the thirteenth of Eliz. The affirming, holding, or maintaining the contrary was made Treason during her Life, and after her decease, forfeiture of all Goods and Chattels. Neither is there any form of words necessary for the king to use in the Dissolving the Parliament: If he bids them go home; If he tells them he hath no further use of them; or if he say, They may be gone. So also if he Prorogue them for a thousand years, it cannot be thought other than a Dissoluti∣on: The same would be if he Prorogued them for a hundred or tvventy years, or any time above a year, which is the boun∣dary the Law hath set; for if you exceed that, what shall the time be; or who shall have the authority to appoint it? FINIS.
