J1099 15618844 104184
A JOURNAL Of the late Motions and Actions OF THE CONFEDERATE FORCES Against the FRENCH, IN THE UNITED PROVINCES, AND THE SPANISH NETHERLANDS. WITH Curious Remarks on the Situation, Strength and Rarities of the most considerable Cities, Towns and Fortificati∣ons in those Countreys. Together with An exact LIST of the ARMY. Written by an English Officer, who was there during the last Campaign. London, Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old-Baily, 1690.
TO THE READER. THe War in which the Confederates are at present engag'd against that Disturber of all Europe, the French King, having been of late the chief Subject of Discourse a∣mongst all sorts of People; nothing certainly can be more diverting, than to entertain the Reader with a Diary of the Proceedings this last Campaign in Flanders; wherein is very carefully and particular∣ly set down, whatever may be thought worthy of Re∣mark. And, whereas in most Histories, many Things are taken meerly upon Trust or Hearesay, our Author (who was a Person of Worth and Note, and had a Considerable Post in the Army) being an Eye Witness of every Transaction; the Reader is not in the least Dan∣ger of being impos'd upon, or of swallowing Fables and Falsities instead of Truths. But, besides the Military Transactions, you have likewise here a Topographical Description of those Places the Army pass'd through in their March; in which, the Situation of the Towns, their Fortifications, Buildings, Curiosities, Customs of the People, &c. are not omitted. And, what is still more inviting; all those who are Friends to the Protestant Interest, must needs take infinit Pleasure in seeing that good Agreement amongst
the Confederates; which is no small Presage of Victory and future Success. For, if the Christians by their being Ʋnanimous, strike Terror and Amazement a∣mongst the Infidels in Hungary, Venice, Dalmatia, and wherever they come; we need not doubt, but, if we take Advantage of this happy Juncture of Affairs, and proceed as Ʋnaimously as we have begun; not only to rescue from Slavery many of those poor Creatures who groan under the French Yoak, but so to humble that proud Monster, as to make him beg leave to live quietly at home, without disturbing his Neighbours, and dispos∣sessing them of their Dominions.
A True Relation of the Actions and Motions of the Confederate Army in Brabant, Anno. 1689. With a short Historical Account of Hol∣land and Flanders. HAving left London at the same time with his Grace the Duke of Ormond, in Company of the Honourable the Earl of Pembrook, Embassador for Holland, and the Lord Lazington, Envoy to the Duke of Brandenburgh, who had one Man of War and two Yaughts for their Convoy;  the first Land we made, was the Brill. Bril, Is surrounded with a Water and a Sodwork-Forti∣fication, which is very Regular; here we made no stay, but sailed with the greatest hast up the Maze to Rotterdam; having by the way the diversion of seeing Howsedike, Blackwall, Lorden, Skelden, and several other very pretty Towns situated along the River. Rotterdam, Here we stay'd three days, and were di∣verted daily with viewing the admirable neatness and curi∣ous order of every thing, relating to the Houses and Streets of this fair City, where no Carts are suffered, but Sledds and Wheelbarrows, that the Pavements may not
be endamaged:  In the Market-Place of this Town, is the Statue of Erasmus in Brass: In the great Church, is the Mo∣nument of Admiral Du Wit; to the top of the Steeple is One Hundred and Twenty Steps. Ships of large Burthen, come up to most of the Houses in the Town; for the Conveniency of their Passage there are several Draw-Bridges, which are raised to give way when their occasions lead them to bring them up or down. The Banks of the Rivers, which are the Streets, are planted with Lime and Elm-Trees, which give their Shade in Summer and Shelter in Winter, and are a very great Ornament to the Town; the middle of whose Streets, are very curiously Paved with Stone; and the outside for two yards broad, with Clinker-Brick: Their Doors and Window-shutters, are all painted Green: Their Houses are neatly kept within, and placed in admirable order without: Their Men are tollerably fashionable, but their Women are generally Fat, burly and unsightly; they all go in Slippers, and their Coats come down but half way their Legs. Here is a sumptuous Stadhouse and Exchange, and I think every thing that can contribute to the composing of a lovely, decent, rich, commodious City. On the 14th we went to Delf, in order to see the Hague. Delf, To this place it is by Water two Leagues from Rotterdam. Our Boat was drawn by a Horse, rid by a Boy, who Trots him all the way, and in two hours time comes to his Journeys end. There are about sorty of these Boats (which are much like your Aldermens Barges on the Thames) which will contain about Forty Passengers; these Boats are so ordered, that one of them is to go this Course every half hour: There are likewise at Delf other Boats, which are obliged to go every hour to the Hague. The Buildings of this City are much after the same manner with Rotterdam: Here are two spacious Churches, hung all round and richly beautified with Coats of Arms; in the Old Church lyeth the Body and Monument of Admiral Van Trump; in the New Church lyeth Interred the Body of William Henrick
Van Nassau, First Prince of Orange; as stately a Monument as most in Westminster. Here are likewise interred three more Princes and Princesses; Over the Door of the Stadhouse are Engraven these two Latine Verses, Haec domus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat Nequitiam, Pacem, Crimina, jura, probos. From Delf to the Hague is a League by Water, and it costs Two Pence half peny the Passage in one of the foremen∣tioned Boats. Hague, Here is the Prince of Orange's Court about a quarter of a League from the Town (for this is not a City, although it doth surpass several Cities iin Grandure.) In a Grove hard by, is a very fine Mall. In the Stadhouse of this Town is the Burgermasters Chamber, wherein is placed the Strappado: Two Leagues from this place is Hounslerdike, where the Prince hath a very stately Pallace, whereunto appertaineth several Rarities, among which is an Ostridg and some Indian Oxen; He hath likewise another fine Pallace in the Grove near the Hague, in which is a very spacious Hall adorned with several curious Sculptures; from the Hague to Skeeveline is a Walk about two Miles in length, paved all the way with Clinker-Brick. About half way is the Heer Bentings House, now Earl of Portland, whereunto apper∣taineth a very famous Orange Garden, with a large Bird-Cage which is sixteen Rood long, and twelve Foot broad: To the top of the great Steeple of the Hagus is Three hundred Steps, and in the Church thereof is the Monu∣ment of Obdam, the famous Admiral of the Dutch Fleet, who was blown up together with his Ship as he was coming to an Engagement with the English Fleet. Most of the Gentry and Nobility in this part of the Country, have Ha∣bitations in this Town; they use few Coaches, but generally ride in an open kind of Chariot, which defends them from neither Wind nor Sun; the Carriages thereof are not slung as in England, so that they are little better than a gilded
Car:  The Women appear very modestly (or rather un∣mannerly Coy) not suffering a Man so much as to touch their Hands, without shewing a dislike thereunto. This Town is likewise famous for a Spin-house, in nature of a Bridewell, which is for restraining of Burgermasters Daugh∣ters which lead lewd lives, upon discovery whereof they are confined to this house for a year and a day. And from hence we were ordered to Breda, to joyn the Troop of Guards formerly gone thither; in Obedience to which we came back to Rotterdam, and began our Journey from thence on the Twentieth, and in two days arrived at our Journeys end, through a Country where to see a Stone is a Miracle; the Land there seems lower than the Sea, and I do believe so it is; for, half the Country would be overflown with the Sea; were it not for a great Multitude of Windmills that are kept constantly imploy'd in draining the Land by a pretty kind of Stratagem. There are several Towns, and good Entertain∣ment on the Road, wherein I observed no great Superstition (wherewith Brabant is horribly pestered) save in the matter of the Stork, which they account lucky both to particular Persons and the publick State; they being possest with a fond conceit, that they have a secret Instinct in them, which teaches them to abhor Monarchy, and that therefore they will breed no where but in a free State; and therefore they build their Nests for them in the Tops of their Chimneys, where they delight to breed. But if they chance to breed on the Top of a Burgermasters Chimney, they will rather choose to lose the benefit of the Fire-place, than disturb this lucky Bird; the Laws of the Land Protect them, and make it Penal to destroy them; for which there is a natural reason, especially in a Country where Frogs and Toads do so much abound, of which Vermin these Birds are great destroyers: and of which sort of Vermin, and Provision for the Storks, there is such plenty here, that if almost all the Birds in the Air were Storks, they may be feasted in Holland.
Breda,  When we arrived there, we were surprized to ride over five or six Draw-Bridges, before we came to the Town; as soon as you enter the Gates, which (if a Stran∣ger, they will not suffer you to do without a great deal of Caution) you are carry'd to the Governour, before whom you must give an Account of your self: This is a large orderly City, only that they are not so curious in their Houses, as they are in other Parts of Holland, though clean∣ly enough. It belongs entirely to the Prince of Orange: It is so well fortified, both by Nature and Art, that 'tis even impregnable, besides the Rampierts, which are all arched underneath with a strong Brick Arch, and are raised higher than the Houses of the Town, whereon is an Enne∣agon; there are two Pair of Outworks, each encompassed with a broad deep Water; on the Government of this Ci∣ty do depend seventeen other Towns of Note in the Pro∣vince of Brabant. This City was taken by a Wile from the Spaniard, by King Williams Grand-Father; our King hath a very fine Castle and Garden here. There is likewise a very remarkable Steeple here, which is in height four hun∣dred and thirty four Steps, all of carved Stone; wherein is a delicate Ring of Bells, which chime every half hour, to give notice of the Clocks going to strike, which strikes here so often; these Bells will readily and sweetly chime to any time. Near to the Top of this mighty Structure, in a round Ball, liveth a Trumpeter and his whole Family, which by reason of the height, seems to them that stand on the Ground, to be no bigger than that you may grasp it in your Arms: This Trumpeter is to sound every Night, after the Gates are locked, to give an Account that the City is safe. On the Twenty seventh, the Duke of Ormond received a Portent from Prince Waldeck, to march to the Army, which was encamped at Perway;  accordingly on the Twenty eighth we marched to a City called Lunehout. Lunehout, Here we were quartered at Country Hou∣ses, it being the Custom of this Country, to give Free
Quarters to the Souldiers on their March;  but the Houses were forsaken by the Inhabitants. In our March through this Country, I observed that every little House had a Hop-Garden belonging to it;  the next Day we marched to Skell. Skell, Here I had the Opportunity of Waiting on the Duke of Ormond to Antwerp. Antwerp, This is reputed the chiefest Town in all Flanders; the most beautiful, and the strongest situated; for the better Defence whereof, there is a strong Cittadel, formed with five Bastions;  some of the Streets of this City are sixty Paces broad; in the Middle of the great Street is the Statue of our Saviour on the Cross, carved at large and gilded; at the Entrance of the Gates, and Corners of eve∣ry Street, is carved the Virgin Mary with our Saviour in her Arms, and at the Foot of them a Place to kneel and wor∣ship: In this City are twenty five Colledges, Nunneries, and Religious Houses: No Art can exceed the Curiosity of the Jesuits Chappel in its Structure and Ornaments, which is wainscoated with all sorts of Marble; the Roof is painted by the best Hands: They were so free as to shew us all their Riches, which they valued to two Millions: They have for every Holy Day a several Skreen to draw before their Altar, which is richly painted and embroidered; you may go from hence to any Part of Holland by Water, so you may to Brussels: Here is likewise a Nunnery furnished with English Nuns, who appear extream Civil, but are great Bigots in their Religion, and great Athenians, as to News: From hence we went to Lire. Lire, Which is Two Leagues from Antwerp: Here is a∣nother English Nunnery. This Town is not very strong, but is a good Market Town, where all Provisions are plentiful and cheap;  next Morning we went to Reminian.
Reminian,  Here all the Habitations were forsaken in a Country full of standing Corn, whose Soil is very fertile, and all well tilled, yet we found a great Scarcity of all manner of Provisions, which we supposed the Inhabitants had withdrawn, by reason of the Army marching that way. We are now come into the Land of Idolatry, where the Images of the Virgin Mary, St. Ann and the Cross are wor∣shipped in every Grove, under every green Tree, and at e∣very cross Way; the Canaanites could never arrive to a great∣er pitch of Idolatry; so that this Land can be so fitly like∣ned to nothing as to a Paradice inhabited with Devils; and to say the truth, for their Complexion, the Inhabitants, both Men and Women, may keep the Feinds Company, there being no such ill-favoured megre Creatures in the whole Universe, as are these Walloons, who speak a broken French; it is true, you may meet with a Priest or a Bacon-headed Friar here and there that looks pretty plump and fat, the Mobile being a Kind of ill shap'd Monsters, starved there∣unto, 'tis supposed by the Covetousness of the Clergy, who Lord it over these poor Creatures, and have engrossed to themselves all the fine Houses and Habitations, and I suppose all the Riches and Provisions in the Country: The next Day we marched through Veltum to Bissen. Bissen,  Here we had the Help of an Ale-house for our Refreshment, which is all the Advantage we had beyond our former Quarters, where we could get nothing for Love or Money:  The next Day we marched through Lovaine. Lovaine Is a large uniform plentiful City, whither all the Gentry do repair from the Country, whilst the Army is in the Field. Here are eighteen Colledges and Monasteries, among which are all Orders of Monks and Fryers: In the great Church of this Town (which is a very stately Stru∣cture) is painted the whole Story of the Bible in the Glass. There is likewise the Statue of our Saviour riding on an Ass. This Church is much beautified with famous Sculptures▪
among the Colledges,  one of them is said to be of the most antient standing of any in the World; which is all my short Stay in this Place would suffer me to observe, we being to march that Night to Gree and Bee. Gree and Bee, The Country began to be dangerous; the Bores or Peasants being so bloody, rude, and surly, that as they find an Opportunity, they knock what Souldiers they can on the Head, and butcher them, though they gain no∣thing thereby but their Cloaths; as they did two of the Lord of Oxford's Regiment, which lurked behind us, and were never heard of after; for which Reasons we encamped in a Meadow that Night, and foraged our Horses, but could get no Meat but what we brought from Lovaine: Hence we marched the next Day to Perway, and joyned the Army. Perway, Several Branches of the Army being not yet come in. Here the Army was encamped in one Line, ha∣ving fifteen great Cannon, twenty six of a lesser sort, and twenty five small Field-Pieces, with four Mortars, and thirty Tin Boats; all the Camp we found plenty enough of every thing, there being store of Sutlers.  Here we staid till the ninth, and then marched in two Lines, the Pio∣neers having first cleared the Way for us to Sombreife. Sombreife, Here we encamped in two Lines, and were joyned with some Spaniards and Brandenburghers, which to all appearance were stout likely Men. Here some of the Lord of Oxford's Regiment began to mutiny about their Pay; whereupon one Boad, their Major shot, one of them trough the Head, who died within three Days, which qui∣eted the Mutiny, and the Major was justified by the Court Marshal for what he did. Here several Irish Men amongst the Foot, having conspired to go over to the French Army, were discovered, and shot to Death by Order of Court Mar∣shal: We were encamped here until the Fourteenth, and then marched to Gerempont.
Gerempont,  Here we encamped in three Lines, two of the Army, and one of the Baggage and Artillery; here were great Parties commanded out every Night, and fre∣quent Alarums, but nothing of Action, saving that a Party of the Dutch, under the Command of a Lieutenant, run away from a French Party, the Commander whereof, and some of his Men were taken by another Party of ours; but our Lieutenant that fled was shot, and every Tenth Man of his Men was hanged by Order of Court Marshal. At the Camp several Souldiers were by a Priest inveagled to desert our Army and go over to the French, some where∣of were taken in the Act, and shot, but the Priest made his Escape. Here the Inhabitants of the Country removed what they had into their Churches, or rather Temples of their Gods, which alone are free from the Plunder of the Soul∣diers, having this Motto on them (Altare Privilegiatum.) They keep their Markets at their Churches on the Sab∣bath, where we might have Champaign and Rhenish Wine plenty. Hence I attended on the Duke to Charleroy. Charleroy,  Here I had the Opportunity of observing the Strength of a most regular Fortification, which is ac∣counted the Key of Flanders; it was two Leagues distant from the Camp; in the Town was a strong Guard, and on the Road to the Camp were placed several Guards. This Place is memorable for nothing but that it is a good Garrison, which was the Design the French King had in building it: There is plenty of Meadowing about the Town, which makes it a good Quarter for Horse, and the neather part of the Houses of the Town are all Stables, which occasions the uncleanliness of the Streets. The Go∣vernour entertained the Duke (after the Spanish manner) with all sorts of the best Wine, and rode with us round the Walls, which are raised so high, that none of the Hou∣ses appear to any Body without the City; at this Town I observed a great Market of French Horses, which had been lately taken from their Army, and here exposed to Sail by Beat of Drum. At the Dukes Departure he was comple∣mented with the Discharge of the great Guns round the
Walls.  Thus we returned to the Camp, where I was commanded on a Party to Brussels, to guard our new Ac∣coutrements to the Camp, which were come thither out of England. Brussels, This City was twenty Miles from our Camp; the Road lying through several great Woods, made our Passage dangerous, and gave us reason to expect an Attaque from a French Party which lay in Ambush for us, but missed us. Brussels is large, but not very strongly fortified, there being only a dry Foss round the Outworks; within it are a hundred and twelve Churches and Chappels, among which are an English Nunnery, and several other Religious Houses; the private Houses and Streets are but too much furnished with Images and Crucifixes, which are most devoutly wor∣shipped by the Priest-ridden Mobile. The great Church here is sumptuously adorned, the outer Isles being hung with Tapestry and Arras, which are raised on three large Rows of Marble Pillars, compiled aster the Dorick manner of Archi∣tecture; the Rails, as you go up to St. Ann's Altar, are made of massie Silver, so are the Pillars of the Altar, of which sort there are above a hundred in this Church, which the Spectators may say do all vie with one another for Beauty and Riches; all the Windows, which are very large and splendid, are glazed with painted Glass; before these Altars, some Ladies or other (blinded with Popish Zeal) are constantly prostrate, so that all I can say on their Behalf, is, that they look like Christians; the Men and Women of this Town appearing much more gentile and fashionable than those of Holland; whereof (on a fair Day) you may see abundance in a Walk which is in an handsome, natural, regular Grove, leading to the Governours Pallace, which is likewise very great and splendid, having on one side thereof an Exchange; about it are divers magnificent Statues, with curious Gardens and Water-words; near the House is pitched a Tent which was taken from the Bassa before Buda, it is ve∣ry Noble and Rich, being all green Silk without, and fine Damask within, the Lodging Apartment thereof being wain∣scoated. In this Town is an English Academy, and before
it lie encamped a thousand Men,  commanded by Prince Vada∣mont, for the better Security thereof: It is said that Camlets and Lace are not cheaper in any part of the World than here. The Inhabitants have good Opportunities of Education, saving the Superstition of their wicked Religion, and are ex∣tream civil to Strangers, provided they intermeddle not with that. Here is a great Ordinary at two Guilders, which is three Shillings four Pence English, where you may have ex∣cellent Fare. Here is likewise a Market once a Week for Dogs, which they harness, and draw with them (in small Carts made for that purpose) their heaviest Lumber. Here we staid till the Twenty fourth, when we returned with our Accoutrements to the Camp,  and on the Twenty fifth, marched with the Army, which encamped at Monstrea. Monstrea, Here we encamped in four Lines, and staid but one Night, the French having forraged all that Country.  On the Twenty sixth we marched to Nevill. Nevill, Here we encamped in an oblique Round, with the Baggage and Artillery in the middle. Out of one of our Parties, we lost a Dutch Major, and an English Lieutenant, with five Men; and in the Action, took and killed about fifty French A Dutch (forraging) Party lost thirty Horses, which were taken from them by the French. The Army had great Out-guards, the French being round about them, and the Country extream woody; for the Defence of this Town, there is an old Fortification, with several round Towers thereon, not very strong; in it is a very magnifi∣cent Chappel, where Ladies of noble Descent, called Chan∣nonesses, officiate instead of Priests: They have a notable Knack of singing out their Devotion, wherein they are accompanied with Flutes and Organs. They entertained the Duke of Ormond with a Ball, and in Requital he treated them with a Collation one Evening at the Camp; their Go∣verness is a Princess, without whom they stir not abroad; they keep their Coaches (some with six Horses) and live very Court-like. None are admitted into this Society, but such as can evidence their Extract to have been Noble for thirteen past Generations together. They are all great
Fortunes, and sometimes change this Condition for a marri∣ed State;  when they happen to do that, they leave a hun∣dred Pound per Annum to the Society. When they are a their Devotion, they wear a white Linnen Vest, over which is a black Veil lined with Ermins, which trails; at other times they dress well, are Beautiful, Civil and well Carri∣aged. There are of this sort at Brussels and Monts, but are not so strict; neither can they boast that their Societies are so ancient as this. Hence we removed the First of August, and encamped in four Lines at Tressinean. Tressinean,  Here is the curiousest Garden and Wil∣derness in Flanders, embellished with many Rarities. The Gen∣tleman to whom this Place belongs, is a Protestant; who was so fond of his Fine Garden and his House, which is likewise very considerable, that he gave all his Money and Substance to the French Army, on condition that the Houses and Gardens might be spared; by which means this sumptu∣ous Structure alone hath escaped the Fury of the French Army. At this Place some Lunenburghers, Brandenburghers, and more Spaniards joyned us, which compleated our Army for∣ty five thousand Men. The next Day we marched through a very dangerous Pass, to Fountaine Laveck. Fountaine Laveck,  This Town hath been well walled, but is ruined, wasted, and decayed with the continual Wars, which this idolatrous Country is subject unto; which though as fertile a Soil, and as good a Climate as can be in the World, is of no use to any, save only to quarrel in: the Inhabitants, after never so much Labour and Industry imploy'd to raise Cattle or Corn, being certain to be plundered of all by one Army or other; it being but just, that God Almigh∣ty should withhold from them the Blessing of Plenty and Peace for their Idolatry. Here we were encamped in four Lines thus, in a triangular piece of Ground, joyn∣ing to the Town, where our chief Officers were Quarter∣ed; till the Seventh, when we marched in four Lines over
the Scombre,  by the help of Bridges made on Copper Boats; and about a Mile beyond the River in the County of Leige, in the French Territories, we Encamped in two Lines in a Strong place, the Rear of our Camp being Co∣vered with a River and a steep Rock; the Place where we Encamped was called Mashero Pont. Marshero Pont,  Here we remained only one Night, having sent our Pioneers (covered with a strong Guard) to cut a Passage for our Army through the thick Forrest of Arden; in the Action the French Attaqued them, but were repulsed with a considerable loss; this Forrest is noted to be the greatest Forrest in Europe, perhaps in the whole World; beginning at Brabant, it runs up into Hungary, and is said to be Eight hundred Leagues in length: On the Eighth instant we Decamped and Marched to Hemsurry. Hemsurry,  Here we were got three Leagues into the French Territories, and within two Miles of the Body of their Army, encamped in a Wood, with a Line of Cir∣cumvallation; which is stronger in Horse than ours; but ours stronger in Foot than theirs, and that conside∣rably: At this Camp we intrench'd our selves, and one of the French Lieutenants of Horse coming to view our Camp, mistaking our Out-guards for his own, came into hem, and was taken Prisoner. Sir Richard Brown, was this day run through the Body by Lieutenant Collonel Billensly, who was exasperated thereunto by some passionate ill Language, which the other used, who dyed on the spot, and was the next day buried in the Forrest. On the Tenth, the French General sent a Trumpet to ours, to desire the exchange of Prisoners. On the Eleventh we sent our Forragers under the Cover of Five Thousand Horse and Foot▪ to Forrage close by the Enemy; where∣upon, the French. Army was alarumed and drew out▪ but would not be invited to leave the Shelter of their Woods▪ There was that day some Pickeering, but little hurt done▪ and now we are resolved, since we cannot Attaque the French
Army by reason of the strong Situation of the Place where they are Encamped,  that we will eat up the Forrage round about them, and so starve them out of their En∣trenchments. Thus we spent our time till the Fourteenth, when we marched forward to Bressea. Bressea▪ Here we saw their Army draw forth, but they did not offer to Attaque us, though it was supposed the two Armys would have had some brushing here the French Army having received some considerable fresh supplies out of the Garrisons) but that Night we decamp'd; the French did not expect we would march so soon, having newly en∣trenched our selves, and our Pioneers for a colour: but we cut a large Pace, through a great Wood, quite another way; our Vant-guard took 12 of their Dragoons, and kil∣led one. Several Diserters came in to us, on our March; and in conclusion, we got beyond their Army, and march∣ing over Boated bridges towards Phillipville, we encamped on the 15th. at Tillroy. Villroy,  Here we were strongly posted, having on the Rear a River, with a steep Ascent on each side, and on the Front some Villages and Shottoes, which we had garrisoned among which was Wall-Court, to which all the Peasants of the Country, to the Number of Five Thousand had flocked, bringing with them all their Provision and Substance, thinking thereby to secure themselves, under Cover of the French Army; whose General had commanded the Inhabi∣tants of the Country, not to sell any Provision to our Army, on pain of Death, and burning their Houses, whereupon all Provisions began to grow very scarce and dear; whereat our General being enraged, sent two Regiments of Bran∣denburgh Foot, to require admission into the Town, and that they should bring their Provisions to the Camp, where they should receive the utmost value for them, which if they declined to do, he would batter the Town about their Ears:  These Proposals were with reluctancy condescended unto, and the Brandenburghers accordingly posted in the Town.
This is the Walled Village which was (more superstitiously than wisely) so vigorously Attaqued by the French Army, on St. Lewis's day, which is their Kings Birth day; out of a fond conceit, that that day is always prosperous to their Arms; which day being on the Sixteenth of this Instant, proved the direct contrary, their rashness being the occasion of the loss of most of the principal Officers of their Army, besides 3000 Sentinels killed in the Field, and a number wounded, with the loss of not above 50 or 60 on our side, among which was only one Officer of Note, who was a Major. The Engagement began on a Party of the Dutch, who gave way on the first Charge; but, our English being there also, who were the Guards (that day) for cover∣ing the Forragers, on whom the Design of the French Army chiefly was (and indeed if they could have passed that Guard, they might have taken 5000 of them) they bore the Brunt of the Battle, and by their bravery, gained the advantage of the Gound; which if the French could have got, they would have made use of it to our great da∣mage. All this while the Brandenburghers in Wall-Court, were not idle, but received the Attaque made on them, with a great deal of courage, committing a great slaughter on the Ene∣my; who demonstrated a great deal of desperate va∣lour to little purpose. This Rancounter lasted ten Hours, the Cannons playing all that while on both sides; theirs did us on mischief, but ours cut off several of their Horse, and made Lanes through their Foot as they Retreated; which they did not do, till they saw the Scotch Regiment, and the English Guards advance; whereupon they sounded a Retreat, and sent to our General for leave to bury their Dead; to which the General gave his consent, after having taken from them 12 of their Cannon, not esteeming it advi∣seable to follow Victory too far. In burying their dead they had the Boars to assist them, for which reason, before we de∣camped, the General ordered their Villages to be burnt, and gave the Soldiers leave to Plunder their Churches, wherein they found great Booty. The French Army is now Encamped within a Mile of us, and our Advance-guards
can see their whole Camp. In the Fight, and after the Fight, several Deserters came in to us, who gave us Account that a Multitude of their best Officers were slain, and that Marshal De Humiers, narrowly escaped; one of his Field Officers being cut off by a Cannon Ball, whilst he was lean∣ing on his Shoulder. Here we stay'd till the 19th, when we Marched about two Leagues, designing to Encamp; but the French being Encamped too near us, and the Place of our Encamping, not strong, our General thought fit to change his Measures, and so marched the Army three Leagues further, that day, a Party of the French following us, but at a great distance. Near our Camp we received an Alarum, that the French were in the Rear of us; whereupon, our General in half an hour put the whole Army into an advantageous Posture to receive them; but finding the Alarum to be false, and that it was only our own Rear Guard; we Marched to our Camp, where we stay'd till the 22th: And being informed, that the Enemy designed to get betwixt us and Charleroy; having likewise Advice from the Duke of Lorraine not to Engage them, we Marched early that Morning, without sound of Trumpet, or beat of Drum, through a very thick Wood, having the Evening before sent away our Cannon and Baggage toward the Som∣bruff, after having forraged and ravaged, in the French Territories. For three Weeks through this Wood the French followed us; whereof having Advice, and finding a little Plain in the middle of the Wood, our General there drew up the Army, lined the Wood, Manned a Shottoe, and turned our Cannons upon them; which their Out guards perceiving, Wall-Court being fresh in their memory, they were per∣swaded to be so Mannerly as to keep their distance. How∣ever, we Marched in a retreating Posture, relieving their Rear, every half hour; by this means, the English Guards, who led the Van in Morning, Marched in the Rear in the Afternoon: thus we Marched over the Som∣bruff by the help of four Bridges, on Copper Boats, guarded with Cannon; as soon as we got over, we Encamped at a Place called Jollie, by the River side.
Jollie,  Here we stayed till the 29th. but on the 27th. in the Morning, by break of day, the French having raised two Batteries over Night, laid on us with ten Pieces of Cannon of twenty four pound Ball from one Battery, and eight Pieces of eighteen pound Ball, from the other Battery; but we were prepared for them, and had provided sixteen Cannon to play against them, which were managed so well, that we did a great deal of Execution, both on their Battery, and Guards, and Attendants: We killed three of their Eminent Officers with one of our Balls, and found several of their Horses next day dead, near the Batteries: Of our side, we lost only two Men and a Woman; a Bomb fell among the Officers of Colloner Hayle's Regiment without doing any harm, the Fuzze being stifled; two more fell in a Meadow near our Guards, with the same success; there likewise fell two Hun∣dred Balls among our Tents, which injured neither Man nor Horse. All the prejudice done, was, that some of the Tents were torn, among which the Duke of Ormonds was one; not∣withstanding which, the Duke stood his ground (with the Troop drawn up) for three Hours, in the heat of the Cannon adoing, the General having forgot to send him Orders to draw off, without which he was resolved, not to quit his post: This sort of game lasted from four in the Mor∣ning till eleven, during which space of time, the Cannons never ceased playing. In the end we constrained them to quit their Battery, and we returned to our ground again, where we encamped that Night, and the next day we marched to Moutaine Sur le Samberg. Mountaine Sur Le Samberg,  Here we stayed till the 2d. of September, when we marched to our old Camp, called Vill de Perway. Vill de Perway,  Here we were encamped in two Lines, for two days, without any Action; The Weather being very bad, many of our Men fell sick of the Flux, with eating of Fruit, wherewith this Country doth much abound: By this
and other Accidents,  four Regiments of our English Foot, and two of Dutch were so wasted, that it was thought fit to send them to Winter Quarters, with Orders to send fresh Forces, out of the Garrisons, where they were to quarter, which Forces joyned us at Lombeck: On the 5th. we marched to Jonep. Jonep,  Here the Weather was likewise very bad, and the Ground we encamped on worse; in which sad Condition, we stayed till the 9th. and then marched to Notre Dame de Hall. Notre Dame de Hall,  This is a large Town of good Trade, where is a sumptuous Chappel, a Jesuits Colledge, with se∣veral Religious Houses; this Town pays 10000 Guilders per Annum, and a brass Gun to the French, that they may be protected from the fury of their merciless Army; on the 15th. Prince Vademont's Army of 15000 Men joyned us, which moved us to remove to Lombeck, to give them room on our Right. Lombeck,  Here the French Army having begun to set the Country on fire, 'twixt us and Brussels, Prince Vademont de∣tacqued 3000 Horse out of his own Army, and pursued them, who were followed by twice as many out-of our Ar∣my, under the Command of Mouns. de Bee: The Spanish Lieutenant General, Prince Vademont, came up with some of them, killed 120, and brought 60 Prisoners into Brussels, with the loss only of three Men, the rest fled; whereupon he returned to the Camp, where we remained till the 19th. when we marched to Enghien. Enghien,  This Town belongs to the Duke of Arcourt and Prince of Brand Rambourge, where he hath an extraordinary Mansion-House, and sumptuous Garden; some say it is as fine as Versailes, the Fame whereof hath brought several from Paris, and other remote parts to see it; it is likewise said, that the Prince, before the War raged so much, kept two Hun∣dred
Workmen all the Year imployed about it:  The Garden∣plat which is well walled about, cannot be less than three Hundred Acres; in one part thereof is a small Deer-Park, planted with several Groves, of divers sorts of pleasant stately Trees, as Fir, Walnut, Chesnut, Spruce-Fir; in the pleasure Garden are 52 small Statues in several Postures, and eight very large guilded, besides what are in the Hedges, which all run Water: There are Flower-Pots betwixt every Statue; there are likewise four Houses of Waterworks; in the middle of the Park of Mazes is a Fountain, in an Octo∣gon, arched on sixteen Pillars about twenty Foot high; on the Top are eight great Lions cut at large in Stone; under the Freez are eight Caesars Heads; The Fountain is railed, and banastered about with Marble; the bottom being flagged, and the sides lined with the same, as are the other four Hou∣ses of Waterworks: From hence you see eight great Walks, with Elm Hedges very curiously cut: Joyning to which are eight Labyrinths; on the side of the Walls are several regu∣lar Groves, some in a Triangle, some in a Quadrangle: In this Town are several Convents of Carmelites, and Capuchines: Here is also a Nunnery, and a stately Church curiously beautified with Sculptures; this Town hath been walled, but is now demolished: Here we stayed till the 22th. and then we marched to Syllie. Syllie, This day the French hearing of our decamping, left the ground where they were very strongly posted, in great disorder; leaving behind them in the Hurry, several Carriages, Barrels of Bear, Forrage, and other Luggage: Nevertheless we remained encamped at this place, till the 27th. and then marched in four Lines to Cambroug, where we encamped in two Lines, Prince Vademont's Army still keeping the Right. Cambroug,  Here the French Army was encamped within a League and a half of ours; who if they had a mind to shew fair play, need not want a delicate plain Champion Country for it; there cannot be a pleasanter sort of a Country, and
more capable of Improvement in the World:  But the Inha∣bitants are so given to Superstition, and Idolatry, that it is impossible any thing should prosper where they are. From our Camp might be seen eleven Churches, the Country being wholly dedicated to Religious Houses, which cannot be ter∣med any thing, so properly, as Nests of idle Idolatrous Peo∣ple, blind Leaders of the Blind, to whom the rest of the In∣habitants are all Slaves; if it were not so, and if it would please God to bless them with Peace, it would certainly be as pleasant, and plentiful, and perhaps as flourishing a Coun∣try, as any in the whole World: The chief of these Irreli∣gious Places, is the House from whence our Camp derives its Name; it is walled round, situate in the midst of this Plain by a River-side, 'twixt two of our Garrisons, Ath and Monts. Within these Walls is a famous Chappel, joyning to the Cloyster, adorned with admirable Carvings, and extra∣ordinary Painting; in it are many rich Altars, which they (at last) refused to let our Guards see, because, said they, they have given Offence in not kneeling, at the lifting up of the Host; but another Chappel they were admitted in∣to, where (among other Fopperies and Trumperies) I ob∣served a little Prayer, hanged up in Latin, to be learnt of all that came thither to devotion; the Prayer was to this effect, That it would please the Lady of Cambrogue, for the sake of the five Wounds, which her holy Image suffered in that place, by the hands of an unsanctified Jew, to grant five things; Namely, that in the Hour of Death, they may not want the Company of a Priest, whereby they may have the benefit of Auricular Confession, Absolution, receiving the Sacrament, and being anointed with Oil: This is a Carmelite Convent; They stamp little Medals of Silver, and sell them to the People, whom they perswade, shall by the wearing of them be kept from Sickness, Disa∣sters, Infection, or any Power of the Devil: This I heard one of them aver. In the larger of these two Chappels is a great Marble Pillar,  much like the Cross in Coventry, with all the Popes and Fathers of the Church, engraven on it: There is likewise engraven, the Expiration of our Saviour on the Cross, under which is drawn to the life two Priests,
laying him in his Grave, with Women weeping, all cut at large, in Marble: Here are likewise several large Tombs; one of them, which is indeed very rich, belongs to the Fami∣ly of Enghion; others lye in Arches in the Wall, cut at large, (impailed) in Iron grates; which though of stone, are very much defaced: which puts me in mind of Juvenal, who says, That the very Marble Statues, and Monuments must yield to the corroding Nature of Time, and pay a Tribute to Death. It is said, that the Prince of Orange's Army being about to be betrayed into the hands of the French, by the treacherous contrivance of these Fryars, he let his Soldiers plunder the Church and take away all they had, whereof there is now no sign, they having since admirably enriched themselves. Du∣ring our stay here, I went to see Ath. Ath,  This Town lieth at the West End of this Plain about a League and a half from the Right of our Camp, which stretcheth it self, when they are Encamped, in two Lines, at least a League; the Fortification thereof is a Septagon, with Out-works, answerable to every Bastion; It is Pallisadoed and Stakudoed with Turrets on the Walls, whereon are Golden Flower de Luces, which sheweth that it was Fortified by the French King, as was Charleroy, but by the Treaty of Nimi∣guen was surrended to the Spaniard: In the Counterscarp are Encamped a Regiment of Dragoons: In the Town are Quartered Three Italian, and Two Spanish Regiments of Foot; on the Walls and Ramparts, rows of large flourishing Lime∣trees, which adorn the Town and shelter the Building there∣of from Bombs: You go over Four Draw-bridges before you enter the Gates of the Town, which is encompassed with a large wet Ditch and a strong Fossbray; There are Four Gates to the Town, and Two Port-Cullis to every Gate; there is likewise a magnificent Church with Thirteen Altars; the great Altar hath on it the Ascention of our Saviour, En∣graven with a great deal of Cost and Art; on another is the Passion of our Saviour cut in Brass: The work of this Church, is most in Brass, as is Cambrogue in polished Marble of all colours: This Town is famous for good Buff, which is sold,
very cheap. On the Fourth I waited on the Duke of Ormond to Monts, in company of Twenty of our Guards. Monts,  This Town is built on a Hill, which is all sur∣rounded with Marshy ground; the Out-works are Sod works, not very uniform; the Buildings and Streets are large and handsome, as is the whole Town, but the Fortifications are irregular, and stronger by Nature than Art: It is surround∣ed with a Wall, whereon are old-fashioned Turrets, notwith∣standing which, the Situation of the place makes it really admirably Strong. The French, in King Charles the Seconds time, laid Siege to this Town, but were beaten from it by the powers of the renowned Earl of Ossory. Within this Town (on an hight) is Built a very high Piramid, whence is a very great prospect, they say for Seven Leagues round: On the top are Five round Turrets which are made use of for Prisons; it is all Built of Carved stone: This Town lies to the East End of the aforesaid place, and is from our Camp Four Leagues; in it are several Churches, Monasteries, Nun∣neries, and other Religious Houses; there are Two very magnificent Churches, one of the Canons, the other of the Canonesses; the latter is in every particular much after the nature of them at Neville, but the Church is much more a splendid Church, and most of the Ladies are related to the King of Spain, King William, or Sisters to some of the German Princes: Here Count Horne invited the Duke to a Ball, where the Canonesses after Evening Service, Danced (at their own House) with the Duke of Ormond and his Re∣tinue. These Ladies meddle not with Consecrating the Sa∣crament, which is left to the Priest. There occurred unto me here a Superstitious Ceremony, namely, the carrying of the Host in Procession, attended with Organs, Voices, and other Musick playing all the way, whilst Priests went with their Incense-pots fuming before it; it exceeds any Opera, which is a shew they much admire in these parts: In this Church is placed on a Pedestal in the middle of the Isle, the Image of the Virgin Mary Crowned, with our Saviour in her Arms likewise Crowned; she is Apparelled in a fine
Cloth of Silver Gown,  and every one that comes thither to Worship, makes a low bow to the ground, and kisses the Hem of her Garment. After all this view of their Churches, which strive every way to exceed one the other in Beauty and Riches, wherein they come pretty near one the other, ex∣cept that of Antwerp, which exceeds the rest; I can only lament that such Noble Structures should be dedicated to Idolatrous uses. On the 5th. we turned back to Combrogue, where we remained as long as we could get any Forrage, which was all devoured for Twenty Miles round, betwixt the French Army and ours, I believe I may say Forty Miles, without any great mistake; at last there grew a real scarci∣ty of Horse meat. On the 6th. Ten of the Grenadeers belong∣ing to our Guard, unadvisedly went a Forraging without a Convoy; Three of them were killed by the French, Five ta∣ken Prisoners, and Two escaped without Horses or Coats, which they had pulled off to work and make up their Trusses. The Peasant that belonged to the House where they For∣raged, brought the French upon them; but this action was sufficiently revenged on the French, by the Lunenburghers, who being a Forraging with their Carbines only, were set upon by some French Soldiers disguised in Boors Frocks, but they received them so warmly, that they killed Eight and twenty of them, and took about Seventy Prisoners, with very little loss. The day before we went to Monts, we marched a De∣tachment of Eight thousand Men towards the French Camp, together with Ten pieces of Cannon; when we came near their Out-guards, we sent a Lieutenant of Horse with Thir∣ty men to Fire on them, which he did, but they stirred not, neither returned their Fire: It was near a Wood, where it is supposed they had an Ambuscado, and thought to tra∣pan us; however this Alarum was so great a surprize unto them, that several of their Sutlers run away from them, and several of their Officers sent away their Baggage: We waited about Ten hours there to invite them to Engage fairly, but they declined it; the next day they Decamped and marched towards Tourney in order to send their Troops to Winter Quarters, and in a few days after we began to
disperse our Army to the Frontier Garrisons, to wit, Ath, Monts, Maestricht, Gaunt, Charleroy, Brussels, &c. in con∣clusion we marched towards Nevil, where we were discharg∣ed at Nevil, on the when the Duke took his leave in order to go for England, and the next day we marched, having free Quarters all the way to Breda, to Winter Quarters; where we arrived on the Twenty fourth,  and met with an account that the Granadeers who were taken by the French, had made their escape to Newburgh, where they are taken up as Deserters; but we have sent for them, and in a short time do expect them with us, where we now remain laid up for the next Campain. Amsterdam, standeth on 0996 Acres. Leiden, containeth 0250 Haerlem 0165 Rotterdam 0160 Dort 0130 Delf 0130 The latter five 0835 So that Amsterdam alone is bigger by 160 Acres than the aforementioned Five Cities. There is one remarkable passage, that is, the Burning of Colonel Billingsleys Quarters: One Evening, on our Road to Breda, from the Camp, we were forced to stand all Night drawn up on our Guard, for fear of the Boars rising against us; it was accidentally done, but in this Fire was consumed to the value of a Thousand Pound; the Parish-Church being next to the House very narrowly escaped.
A LIST OF OUR ARMY As it was Drawn up at Tillroy Camp. Horse-Regiments, First Line. Names of their Count. Names of the Chief Commanders. Colours of the Soldiers Cloaths. Numb. Men. DƲtch, Count Bullengburg. Red, lined White, Dra. 0300 English, Duke of Ormond. Red, lined Blew, Gran. 0060 English, Duke of Ormond. Red, lined Blew, Guar. 0200 Spanish, Count Dedamont. White, lined Blew 0300 Spanish, Don Quan Degusti. White, lined White 0300 Spanish, Monsieur Bay. White, lined White 0300 Spanish, Don Martin de Corduva. White, lined White 0300
Dutch, Wittenburgh. White, lined Red 0300 Dutch, Prince Waldeck. Gray, lined Red 0300 Dutch, Obdam. Gray, lined Scarlet 0300 Dutch, Min Heer Benting. White, lined Blew 0300 German, Overstrake. White, lined White 0400 Dutch, Lieut. Col. Webingha. White, lined Blew 0400 English, Oxford. White, lined Scarlet 0400     Total— 4160 Foot Regiments, First Line. Brandenb. Brandorf. Blew, lined White 0700 Dutch, Anholt. White, lined White 0700 Dutch, Rhinelscave. White, lined Blew 0780 Dutch, Grafton Barloe. White, lined Red 0700 Dutch, Overston Zalif. Gray, lined Red 0700
English, Talmash-Guards. Red, lined White 1000 Scotch, Part of the Guards. Red, lined White 0700 English, Fuzileers. Red, lined Yellow 0780 English, Hales. Red, lined White 0780 Lunenb. Obubermstoff. Blew, lined Red 0600 Lunenb. Hull. Blew, lined Pink 0600 Dutch, Dursling. White, lined Red 0700 Dutch, General de Alva. — 0700 Dutch, Prince Waldeck, Red, lined Red 0780 Brand. Prince Cor. Red, lined Green 0700 Dutch, Count Tilly. White, lined White 0700 Dutch, Buloe. Gray, lined Blew 0780     Total— 12400 Second Line. Dutch, Morewitt. Red, lin. White, Drag. 0350 Frizland, Prince Nassaw. Blew, lined Red 0300
Dutch, Baron de Hinds. White, lined Green 0300 Dutch, Baron de Hay. White, lined Red 0300 Dutch, Baron de Saxon. Red, lined Pink 0300 Dutch, Holston. White, lined Blew 0300 Dutch, Baron de Guistle. — 0300 Lunenb. Overstbrang. Gray, lined Blew, 0400 Dutch, Count Flodrop. White, lined Red 0350 Dutch, Grafton Nassaw. Red, lined Red 0300 Dutch, Erff. White, lined Green 0300 Hesse, Wattlebrook. White, lined White 0350 Dutch, Nassaw. White, lined White 0300 Spanish, Dumong. White, lined White 0350 Spanish, Monduboy. White, lined White 0350 Walloon, Pettincore. White, lined White 0350 Lunenb. Frank. White, lined Red 0480 Lunenb. Brankea. Blew, lined Blew 0350 Lunenb. Craw. Blew, lined Blew 0350     Total— 6380 Besides the Brandenburgh Horse which came to us to Not∣tredam-Hall, from the Siege of Ments which amounted to 6000
Second Line. Names of their Count. Names of the Chief Commanders. Colour of the Soldiers Cloaths. Num. Men. Dutch, Youg away. Red, lined Blew 0780 Dutch, Covert d'over Isle. White, lined White 0780 Dutch, Min Heer Van Fagall. Red, lined Yellow 0780 Frizland, Prince Van Nassaw. Blew, lined Red 0780 German, Prince de Berkovan. White, lined Red 0780 Lunenburg, Count Swenesive. Blew, lined Red 0780 English, Offarrell, Fuzileus. Red, lined Red 0780 English, Fitz Patrick. Red, lined Green 0780 English, Churchill. Red, lined Buff 0780 English, Hodges. Red, lined Red 0780 English, Count Shamburg. Red, lined White 0780 Dutch, Amalisworth. Gray, lined Red 0650 Dutch, Min Heer Dutell. White, lined Blew 0700 Brandenburg, Lord Beaumont. Red, lined Black, Plush 0780 Lunenburg, Major General Burrier. White, lined Red 0780 Brandenburg, De Hull. Blew, lined Red 0780 Dutch, Linstock. White, lined Blew 0780 Lunenburg, La Mott. Red, lined Black 0780 Lunenburg, Little Host. Blew, lined Red 0780 Lunenburg, Marquess de Budavid. White, lined Red 0780 Dutch, Winburg. White, lined Red 0780     Total— 16173
Second Line. Names of their Count. Names of the Chief Commanders. Colour of the-Soldiers Cloaths. Num. Mer. Sept. the 2d. Hoges, Churchils, Hales and Offarrels Regiments being wearied with Toyl and Sickness, were dwindled away to about 900 Men, for which reason they were sent to Breda, whence we were recruited on the 16th. with a Regiment of Sweeds Blew, lined Yellow 0780 Dutch, Regiment. White, lined White 0780       1560 Likewise Three Regiments of Dutch Horse, and Prince of Friezlands Guards 0900 0100   In all— 1000 A List of Prince Vademonts Army, Which joyned us at Notredam-Hall, where it Encamped Five hundred yards distant from the Right of ours, on the 18th. of September, 1689. in Two Lines. Horse-Regiments. Names of their Count. Names of the Chief Commanders. Num. Men. Walloon, Mouns. de Puis. 350 Walloon, Le Count de Masting. 350 Walloon, Duke descourt, two Regiments. 600 Spanish, Msioude▪ 300
Almaigne, Count de Egmont. 300 Almaign, Baron de Toursey. 300 Spanish, Ansiens. 300 Spanish, Lieutenant General Count de Sallizer. 300 Spanish, Le Count de Vatzzin Lieutenant General de la Troop de Strangere. 300     3100 Dragoons. Names of their Count. Names of the Chief Commanders. Num. Men. Walloon, Mounsieur de Vallauseire. 400 Walloon, Baronde. 400 Walloon, Mounsieur de Villais. 400 Spanish, Mounsieur de Castors. 350   In all— 4650
Foot Regiments. Spanish, Mounsieur Marine. 700 Mounsieur Maudrick. 700 Mounsieur Agiare. 700 Count de Shiron. 700 Noy Elle. 700 Sweeds, One Regiment. 780 Dutch, Three Regiments from Gaunt. 2100   Total— 6380 The Total of the Army when Prince Vademont had joyned us. Horse. The First Line. 4160 The second Line. 6380 Brandenburg, 6000— 7000 Dutch, 0900— Fizland Guards, 0100— Vudemonts Horse. 4650   22190 Foot. The First Line. 12400 The Second Line. 16170 Dutch Recruits. 01560 Prince Vademonts. 06380   36510 Total Horse and Foot 58701 FINIS.
