J565 12308581 59321
TWO TREATISES, THE FIRST CONCERNING GODS Certaine performance of his con∣ditional Promises, as touching the Elect, or, A Treatise Of Gods most free and powerfull Grace. Lately published without the Au∣thours privitie, and printed corruptly, by the name and title of solid Comfort for sound Christians. The second, Concerning the extent of Christs death and love, now added to the former. With an Additionall thereunto. Both of them preached at New-Castle upon Tine first for the vindication of the Truth of God and of our Churches doctrine. But Fitted for the Eye, by occasion of some oppo∣sition they found. By Robert Ienison Doctor of D. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for L. Blaikelocke at his shop at the Sugar-Loafe next Temple-Bar in Fleete-streete, 1642.
TO The right Worshipfull, nd other my late hearers in the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine. WHat good a first, by prea∣ching on thesetwo in∣ring arguments was ntended by mee, my earty wish is that you ay now at lengthreap nd make use of. The ormer argument (after t was newly preached)
I was (upon a co plaint made agai me, Sept. 10.17. 1629. and a conventi thereupon) charged have ready; (though was never called for yet being then m ready and copies tak at length, without  privity after elev yeares it came to  published, but w many errours. No to do my selfe rig I corrected the cop and have procured reprinting of it, and company of it doe nexe the other sh
Treatise as like unto it, n respect 1. of like na∣ure. 2. of like op∣osition, which it found  of like concernment o you all, who may ow more advisedly, nd some of you with osse prejudice (J hope hen formerly) consi∣ber of the evidence of he ruth of these waigh∣y & usefull arguments, nd acknowledge the aith fulnesse of him to∣wards you, who, out of duty and conscience to God, and love to you and your soules (setting
aside all base and perso∣nll respects) hath eve ought your spiritual good; & shall not ceas (though now far sepa∣rated om you) to pro∣mote and procure th sme, so commendin these two Treatises t your and the Church perusall, I rest (as on more specially, so for e ever) Yours and the Churches servant, Robert Ienison From Dantisck, May, 22. 1641.
THE CONTENTS Section 1. A Generall Hint of such points as have beene handled out of this Text. Doing here how to bee un∣derstood? Namely, Evangeli∣cally and so as to be extended o conversion, Faith, and to Gods will, manifested by word and worke. This will of God made knowne in his word, the onely Rule of our Doing, and of all our Actions. And not 1. Gods secret will. 2. The Will, Command,
and Example of others. 3. Ou owne will and wisdome. Sect. 2. Two maine doubt propounded and answered i this Treatise. 1. Doubt  whether Gods promises of Sal∣vation, &c. bee doubtfull, be∣cause they are Conditionall Here concerning the Validity of Gods Conditionall promise and force of the motives thence to weldoing. Happines and salvation promised Conditionally: 1 To weldoing. 2 To Constan∣cy he rein. Yet is not the happinesse of the Elect uncertaine: Either in it selfe, or to them alwayes after Conversion. How Gods Word speake differently of the same things. Two Considerations for the clearing of the first doubt. Sect. 3. First Considera∣tion:
Gods promises distin∣guished: Some are of the end; and these are Conditionall; Some are of the Meanes, and they are absolute. Sect. 4. A Digression, fur∣ther clearing, and justifying the aforesaid distinction from th' imputation of Liberti∣nisme. 1 In asmuch as life is not promised, but upon Condition, eglect of the meanes is ex∣cluded. 2 Concerning the absolute promises of the Meanes and Conditions. 1 The Meanes being many must not be divided. 2 Yet they may and must be compared: and so some gra∣es are considered as Ends and Effects of former and more common graces, such as the Gospell, &c. is.
3 Yet the promises of th End, whether maine End, or meane End, as the End, are ever Conditionall; and the promises of the Meanes, as Meanes, ever absolute, whe∣ther they bee Meanes more re∣mote, or nearer. 4 The Gospell it selfe is ab∣solutely promised, and also free∣ly given, both for the out∣ward Ministery, (which is directed by speciallhoyce, and sent to some, not to all,) and for the inward worke and power of it. Sect. 5. These promise concerning the Meanes and Conditions of Life, depend on Gods election. Gods election is not condi∣tionall, though his word bee Sect. 6. Yet 1. God mocke none in his word. 2. His Word and Decre
are not contrary one to another Sect. 7.3. Gods Decree takes ot away the Consent and Li∣erty of mans will. Sect. 8. Second Conside∣tion. The Conditions requi∣d of us, are also part of Gods ovenant and promise made nto us. One maine difference be∣tweene the Law and Gospell. Sect. 9. What God re∣uires, he both promiseth and orketh in the Elect. This is ewed in divers graces, as 1 In Faith, which God,  Requireth, 2 Promiseth,  Worketh. Sect. 10.2. In remissi∣n of sinne, which God, Requireth. 2. Promiseth, &c. Sect. 11.3. In Repen∣nce, which God, 1. requi∣th, 2. promiseth, &c. Sect. 12.4 In New obedience, hich God. 1. requireth, &c.
Sect. 13.5. In perseverance which God, 1. requireth. 2. Pro. &c. Sect. 14. So in othe graces, as Feare of God, know∣ledge and in humilitie an meeknesse, which God, 1. re∣quireth, 2. promiseth, 3. wo∣keth; Yea all graces given  in time, are according to God Election of us before time. Sect. 15. Second doubt Whether it be in our power t keepe the Conditions, and  doe things required. 2 If not, to what end a such precepts & exhortation. First Branch. It is shewed that it is not in mans power  doe well; to convert, &c. as  himselfe. Sect. 16. What pow man hath in Civill actions. Of seven degrees, to be c∣sidered in the perfecting of  very good worke, and that n
any one of them is in mans po∣wer. Sect. 17. Reasons here∣of. 1. His ignorance. 2. Vn∣beleefe. 3. Naturall impotencie. The estate of each man be∣fore his Conversion: Shewing how unable he is to doe good. Sect. 18. Use. To teach us hu∣mility, & to ascribe all to Gods power, which subdues our re∣bellion. Though we wil, yet both power and act are from God. Sect. 19. Gods grace is more then a gentle swasion, or common influence. The power of Gods grace in giving Faith, and working Conversion, shewed out of Scripture. Sect. 20. Foure absur∣dities: Ensuing out of the Doctrine of common grace. 1 Our benefit by Christ should be no more certaine then
that which we had and lost in Adam. 2. God should be no more effectuall in good then Satan in Evill. 3. Mans goodnesse should be ascribed to himselfe more then to God. 4. The difference betweene the good and bad should bee made by man himselfe, and by nature, and man converted should have cause to glory even in Gods sight. Sect. 21. Whence mans con∣version is? it is from Gods speciall grace, who removes the aforesaid impediments, 1 Of ignorance, 2. unbeliefe, 3. Inability. Sect. 22. What may be as∣cribed to man; What must be ascribed to God. What our Churches Doctrin is herein.
Sect. 23. Vse hereof: 1. To give all glory to God, and not any to our selves. Thus to doe is truely Christian. To glory in our selves, 1. Heathenish, 2. Popish. 3. Jewish, 4. Prophane. Such can neither pray aright, nor be truely thankfull. Sect. 24. Vse 2. To Com∣fort us, from the immutability of Gods purpose and promises; On which, and not on our selves, his grace and our Sal∣vation depends. To ascribe all to God the safest. Sect. 25. Second Branch, of the second maine doubt. To what end then are Gods precepts and exhortations? The needfulnes of this que∣stion. The answer in three things. 1. Our strength is now not to be measured by Gods Com∣mandments.
Sect. 26.2. Gods precepts and Exhortations are groun∣ded on his promise. Sect. 27.3. These Exhorta∣tions yet are not in vaine. 1. Not in regard of the re∣probate, who thus 1. Told what they could have done. Are, 2. Convinced: and so the Commandement in regard of God, not in vaine; Tet is not God unjust in so doing, Why? 3. Restrained: So that the Godly live more peaceably by them. Sect. 28.2. Such praecepts are not in vaine, in regard of the Elect. 1 Unconverted, who thus 1. Are taught to deny themselves, to fly to Christ, and to seeke helpe where onely it may be had.
Sect. 29.2. Are indeed converted, such precepts and Exhortations are sanctified of God as meanes of Conver∣sion. Gods Word is operative. Sect. 30.2. Converted, who thus are put in mind: 1. To stir up Gods grace in them: 2. To seeke after perfection, and to be thank full. Sect 31. These Exhortati∣ons expell Security, notwith∣standing that Gods grace worke all. 1. Ministers must exhort, and the people must depend on the publick Ministery. Sect. 32. The certainty of Election, and of Gods grace, should whet our diligence to all good duties. 1. Such as know their electi∣on, must not neglect meanes.
2. Much lesse should such as know it not as yet. . All must strive to doe well and expect an End, answerable to thei Doings. Sect. 33. A generall infer∣ence, teaching how, from the foregoing Discourse to con∣ceive of other controverte points, as praedestination &c. Sect. 34. All other point are framed according to the Doctrine of Gods praedesti∣vation, though the Remon∣strants (pretending so much) make Free-will and the power of nature the chiefe matter of their contention, and accord∣ingly frame other points. Sect. 35. The Doctrine taught concerning Gods Free and effectuall grace, lets us see: 1. That his Election is ab∣solute
and independant. 2. That Grace and Redemp∣tion are not universall. 3. That the Salvation and preseverance of the Saints is certaine. 4. That the Faithfull may be assured of their Election and Salvation.
IOHN 13.17. Happy are yee if yee doe them. SECTION I. HAving out of this Verse in severall Ser∣mons, A generall Hint of such points as have been hand∣led out of this Text. already (after a gene∣rall and Methodicall de∣ciphering of Happinesse, according as the Scriptures speake diversly of it) con∣sidered 1. Of the things to be knowne, and that
both according to their re∣straint, onely things revea∣led, and specification here, namely dueties of love and humility; 2. Of our duty and the necessity of know∣ing them; 3. Of our du∣ty in believing, willing, and affecting the things known; 4. The necessity of practise to be added to knowledge. Whence we concluded, that true knowledge is not bare knowledge, but such as is accompanied with good and answerable af∣fections and actions. Wee are now in the 5th and last place to consider of that blessednesse, or at least assurance of Blessednesse, which results out of such practise, as a strong motive to excite and stir up to the practise of things knowne,
and that out of these last words: Happy are yee if yee doe them. And so from thence to try our know∣ledge, by our practise and obedience. Where it would be con∣sidered that wee must con∣ceive of doing here, Doing here under∣stood E∣vangelical∣ly, and so as to bee extended to Conver∣sion, Faith, & Repen∣tance, &c. not legally, according to the rigour of the Law; For so should never any man be happy, (And Christ onely performed that perfect o∣bedience to Gods will, and wee onely in him:) but Evangelically, according to the equity of the Gospel, and according to a weaker degree of obedience, per∣formed in sincerity, Faith, and constancy, and such as God will graciously accept of in Christ; So that wee may and must also extend
this Doing more largely as having reference to Gods whole will, revealed and made known unto us. Now God manifests his will either by his words o workes; By word: 1. O Command, both Legall and Evangelicall; And so no onely obedience, Gods will how ma∣nifested. but Faith. Repentance, Conversion &c. come within the Com∣passe of Gods command▪ This is his commandement▪ that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jeus Christ, and love one another, &c. And this is the worke o God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. 1 Ioh. 3.23. Ioh. 6.29. Isa. 1.16.17 2. Of Restraint, and threatning; and so our Do∣ing is indeed our not doing▪ of evill forbidden, accor∣ding to that, Cease to do evill,
learne to doe well. 3. Of Promise; whether osolute or Conditionall; o that our obedience and oing according to this ord wil be also our Faith, nd our keeping, and ob∣erving the Conditions, of epentance, Obedience, c. Upon which the pro∣ises are made. 2. By Worke, and by the vent experimentally ac∣ording to his word; which it be good, then the thing quired is our thankful∣esse: if evill, befalling our lves, our Doing is our pa∣ent suffring, as wee are ught to pray: Thy will be ne (which includes also a illing suffring) and to say, e will of the Lord bee one; if it befall others, A.  our oing is Fearing,
And our amendmēt, Lu. 13.5. Now before I urge the further necessity of this do∣ing from the motive of hap∣pinesse in the Text, The ule of our doing, is onely Gods will made knowne. consi∣der wee briefly from th words, the rule of our acti ons and obedience, which wee may consider of fro the last word in the Tex , Them. For wee th are directed to Gods one Will and to things reveled and made knowne u to us; which as wee ha heard are, according  their restraint onely thin revealed, and which w are bound (and here suposed) to know; our D∣ings must be squared, a∣cording to the things w know; and this  he must answer that ,  that our Doings should
her be scanter, nor larger, hen these things which re made knowne and re∣ealed. For 1. Wee must doe all e know to be done, other∣wise wee should live in sins gainst knowledge and onscience, and so should nne more damnably and excusably, and be beaten ith more strips. 2. And in Doing we must ot (especially in matters f Gods worship) doe any ing but according to that e and will of God made nowne, and that both for atter and manner: I. 2.12. We ust set that onely rule be re us, and make it the quare and Line, the Samp∣r and the Coppy, accor∣ing to which we must di∣ect and order not only our
Faith, but all our Doing not following such othe rules as will not warran our actions. Nt 1 His secret will. Now these Rules are,  The secret will of God,  The will and Example  other, 3. Our own will an wisdome. 1. Gods secret will, thoug we doe conformably there unto, will not justifie o actions, either good or bad Not good, because the are not of Faith; and so may say that Gods writte Word, not understood a right, is for the true mening of it secret to us. S that though we doe acco∣ding to the true meanin of it, yet doing it with doubtfull conscience, a not of Faith and certai knowledge, it is sin to us.
2. Not bad, To doe ac∣cording to that rule, will not justify our actions, ei∣ther good or bad. for so might Herod and Pontius Pilate, nd the people of Israel ave beene excused when hey crucified Christ, seeing ey were gathered toge∣her for to doe whatsoever he hand and counsell of od determined before to e done, to justify our ctions from Gods secret il, were too saucy; Neither ust we desperatly live by hat rule, saying: If I be aedestinat to Life, live as I st, I shall not misse of Lif; f not, all my endeavours are a vaine, I cannot alter Gods ounsell. Wretched Crea∣ure art thou, who so rea∣nest; Dost thou not make Gods secret will thy rule? Suppose there were no∣ing else to stop thy outh, tell me: how know∣est
thou thy selfe to be  probated? Yea, or elected For so thou must needs a¦sume. But I am reprobate Yea, or I am elected; B when did ever God te thee, (if any,) that thou a a reprobate? that conce¦ning particular persons,  a secret kept to himself till the event and end d¦clare it; And no man c know himself elected wh lest hee lives so careles and reasons so prophanel Thy rule then is, believ repent, &c. And so th shalt be saved, and happ are yee, if yee doe the things. 2. The will and conm¦mand of others, 2 Not the will & command of others. Mar. 15.12, 13, 15. will not e¦cuse us, neither must be a rule unto us, as yet Pila made it to himselfe, in de¦livering
Christ to the Jewes o be crucified, saying, What ill yee that I doe unto him? &c. And they cryed: Crucify him, Crucify him. So he elivered him to be cru∣fied. So Math. 28.18. the Soul∣iers hired for money, did s they were taught, &c. the . The like I may say con∣erning the Example of o∣her men, many or great, ill r good; Yea of Christ him∣elfe simply, without his ord, see Mat. 23.3. And uke 9.5. Will thou that wee∣mmand Fire to come downe om Heaven and consume em? even as Elias did. 3. Our owne will and isdome, as to say, Neither our owne will or wisdome. we will ertainly doe whatsoever ing goeth forth out of ur owne mouth, &c. as
Ier. 44.17. So Paul befor his Conversion (as man now in like case) I veri thought with my selfe, Acts 26.9.10.14. that  ought to doe many things con∣trary to the Name of Iesus  Nazareth, which thing I al did, &c. And yet so doin he persecuted Christ, an kicked against the pricks. The things made know to us then, being the rule o our practise, wee are to b excited to live, practise, and doe according to that rule▪ and that the rather, that we thus may get some com∣fortable testimony, that ou knowledge and profession is sound; Yea especially be∣cause as here we are told, Happy are we if we doeso.
SECTION 2. BUt here, 1. Two main doubts propoun∣ded & an∣swered in this Trea∣tise. 1. Whether Gods pro∣mises be doubtfull, because conditio∣nall? It may be objected: of what vali∣dity is this motive from blessednesse, or what com∣fort or encouragement to weldoing can this be, when blessednesse here is promi∣sed only upon condition: f ye doe them? What bles∣sednesse is this, which (seemes) thus to depend on ffs and Ands? 2. It may be asked, Whether it be in our power to keepe the conditiōs, and to doe the things required. And if not, to what end are such pre∣ceps & ∣hortations. whe∣ther it be in our power to keepe and performe these Conditions, and indeed to doe these things, seeing its here required of us; and f we be not able of our selves to doe such things, to what end is it that God re∣quires them at our hands,
or exhorts and excites us to the doing of them? To the former I answer: This Cōdition here seemes indeed to make the Hap∣pinesse of Saints doubtfull, seeing Happine is not here or elsewhere in the Gospell promised, but upon Con∣dition, and that both of our doing (as doing hath been explained already) and of our continuance and per∣severance in weldoing. Concer∣ning the validity of Gods con∣ditionall promses & force of the motives thence to wldoing, c. Ge. 4.7 Jhn 7.17. Happnesse from sed  weldoing. La. 13 9.2 I et. 1.10 And to constance therem. Gas. 6.9. For the first, if thou dosi well, (that is, repentest, be∣lievest, and becomest sin∣cere,) shalt thou not be ac∣cepted? Or shall there not be a rmission, said God to Caine? who yet not do∣ing well, found no accep∣tation.
And saith our Saviour Christ: If any man will doe is will, hee shall know of the Doctrine, &c. And if it beare ruit, well, (thou maist spare t) and if not, then after that hou shalt cut it downe; nd if yee doe these things, ee shall never fall. And for perseverance: be not wea∣y of weldoing, for in due eason, we shall reape if we faint ot. But not withstanding such onditionall promises wee re taught by the same mouth and pen, Yet is not the Happi∣nesse of the Elect un∣certaine either in it selfe. that the eaping the blessednesse, he acceptation here, and he Eternal Salvation of Gods people and Elect is not barely doubtfull, either n it selfe, or yet alwayes to them fter their effectuall caling.
1. Not in it selfe, seeing i depends not on man bare∣ly, but upon another cause and ground; namely, on Gods eternall and immu∣table decree of Election, 2 Thess. 2.13. who hath from the begin∣ning chosen them to salva∣tion through sanctification of the Spirit, and beliefe of the truth. Which two (sanctification and Faith▪ and so repentance, obedi∣ence, and perseverance in them all) as hee requireth them of us, as Condition and Meanes of Life and Salvation; so doth hee also promise, and by vertue o his election effect these con∣ditions in us; as wee shal anon see in the particulars. 2. Not to them, Or to them alwayes after Con∣version. after their effectuall calling; And that the Conditions fore
named, (not of their Electi∣on, but) of their Salvation, be fulfilled in them; And, through Gods grace, by them: For so their Election (yea and Salvation unto which they are elected) is also sure to them; For (sith S Peter) if ye doe these things yee shall never fall, (as wee heard even now. So that here wee may take notice, How Gods word speakes dif¦ferently of the same things. that the Scrip∣ture speakes of the same things differently, some times as required of us, o∣therwhiles as promised by himselfe; sometimes as duties and as our workes, other whiles as blessings and his owne workes; some∣times as the graces requi∣red, & the glory promised, may be called the Fruit of the Gospell, and the effects
of the Ministery, as the in∣strument, otherwhiles as effects of his owne eternall decree of Election, and good purpose towards us in Christ; and so sometimes as belonging to the execu∣tion of his eternall decree, otherwhiles as belonging to his eternall decree to be executed; sometimes as he is pleased to make them knowne to us in his word and will revealed, shewing what he requires of us, and what is and will be pleasing unto him, otherwhiles as he hath purposed in him∣selfe from all eternity to worke them; sometimes as in common propounded to all in the Church, other∣whiles as proper to his own peculiar, in whom he will glorify his mercy; And
ence it is that sometimes is promises are propoun∣ed with condition, other∣whiles without condition bsolutly and indepen∣antly. God knowes who are his, nd what he will doe him∣selfe, and accordingly hee workes all his workes, as epending meerely on his owne, most wise, just, gra¦ious, and good will and pleasure, which nothing can or shall hinder, or dis∣appoint; And so with re∣ference to his owne coun∣sell and purpose, he speaks absolutely, and as things shall be: Yet for the effect∣ing of his purpose, hee dispenseth things in his word▪ as he pleaseth by pro∣pounding things generally to all promiscuously in the
Church, (passing by others as hee pleaseth) and that with and under condition, and so as (for ought at least wee know) they may or may not be, as the event also doth declare, and yet in regard of his elect ones all his purposes (and pro∣mises) of grace and glory shall most undoubtedly take place, and they shall not misse of that Salvati∣on, whereunto (through Faith and Sanctification of the Spirit) they were elected. This course (because w see it and doe observe it in the Scripture) wee must conceive God hath thought fittest for the manifesta∣tion of his glory, by shew∣ing forth his mercy, Justice▪ Liberty, and other his attri∣butes.
Now if wee understand and conceive it not so well as wee would, yet should wee not by any meanes question it, or frame things as we please accor∣ding to our easiest appre∣hension, but rather rest (denying our owne reason, judgement, will,) in that wee see to bee the course which God pleaseth to take. And this is that which now wee come particu∣arly to shew and prove ut of his Word, Two con∣siderations for the clearing of the first doubt. preparing he way, and endeavour∣ng to make all plaine, by andling of two maine Considerations.
SECT. 3. First, Gods pro∣mises di∣stingu shed: some are of the End, or of Happ∣nesse. Acts 16.21 Re. 2.10. And these are condi∣tion all. Psal. 1.1. Psal. 119.1.2. Ich. 20.19. Ro. 4.7.8. Psal. 32.1. 2. Mat. 24.26. Consider that God promises in Scripture a either of the End, or  the meanes leading to th end. Now first the promise concerning the End, as es∣pecially concerning Salva∣tion and blessednesse, an with Condition, as: Believ and thou shalt be saved;  thou faithfull unto death, an I will give thee a Crowne  Life; Or because here i mention of blessednesse, thi happinesse is promised with Condition of Doing and o Evangelicall obedience  Happy are yee if you doe them. So elsewhere upon the condition of obedience, negative; Blessed is the man that walketh not in the coun∣sell
of the ungodly, &c. 2. Affirmative: Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walke in the Law of the Lord. So it is promised upon the condition of Faith; Blessed are they that have (not seene and yet have) beleeved; of the pardon of sinne: Blessed are they whose iniquities are for∣given, and whose sinnes are covered; And of perseve∣rance and constancy untill the day of Jesus Christ; Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he commeth shall finde so doing. Now these promises be∣ing conditionall, all partake not of the End (which is Salvation) because all (par∣take not of, nor) keepe the condition, none indeed being able of himselfe to keepe any of those conditi∣ons;
It is not in mans power to doe good, to believe, Repent, Persevere, as of him∣selfe, (the proofe of this wil follow anon) and God is not now bound to give thi power to all, but to whom only he pleaseth. 2. But now God hath also made promises, Some are of the Meanes, and they are abso∣lute. which are most free and absolute, of giving where and to whom hee pleaseth all the Conditions and Meane themselves of Life, which he himselfe worketh in us▪ that so by these meanes we might attaine to the End, as Deut. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy Seed to love the Lord thy GOD, with all thy heart and with all thy soule, that thou mayst live.
Where the end promised s life, Suffrag. Britannor de 5. Artic. Thes. He∣terodoxa. 1. which the Israelites shall never attaine, unlesse his Condition of loving God were kept; But God doth here absolutely pro∣nise, that hee himselfe will give unto them this Con∣dition, and accordingly wil circumcise their hearts to love the Lord. So, in like manner as we have heard, God promiseth Blessednesse, to weldoing, to Faith, Repentance, Per∣severance, &c. which are also Conditions required of us; And this is the tenor of the Gospell, yet hee also promiseth to give Faith, Repentance, power to doe well, with the act of weldo∣ing and perseverance, with all other Meanes and Con∣ditions, and that without
Condition, without Iffs and Ands, and absolutely. So that these Graces and Meanes of salvation are no gifts given or promised, and offred upon Condition but absolutely; Gods promises concerning these Meanes of salvation and blessednes▪ as is said, are absolute, and are of such gifts and graces as which God (seeing ou impotency and inability to attaine the End without the meanes, as also to per∣forme the Conditions, and to use the Meanes as of our selves, and by our owne strength and power) doth promise to performe, or wi enable us to performe. This will also bee more evident anon in the particular in∣stances.
SECT. 4. But before I further pro∣eed, A digres∣sion fur∣ther clea∣ring, and justifying the afore∣said di∣stinction from the imputiō of Liberti∣nisme. it will be needfull to indicate what hath beene ught from such inferences s some mistaking or rather avelling at this Doctrine nd difference of the pro∣nises, may make, yea have lready made; As if be∣cause it is said (as shall be proved anon) that the graces of Faith, repentance, &c. are promised absolutely, without Iffs and Ands, or without respect to Condi∣tions in man, that therefore a dore is hence opened to Libertinisme and Swenckfel∣dianisme, whereby the foun∣dations of Christianity are overthrown, in asmuch as men are thus taught to neg∣lect the hearing of Gods Word and of the Gospell
preached, not to regard meekenesse in receiving the Word and Humility, unto which grace is promised▪ Yea even as they would have it, the grace of Electi∣on. I answer: No such thing can rightly without wilful cavilling be inferred hence. For first, That life is not pre∣mised but upon con∣dition, doth ex∣clude all neglect of means. (not to speake that none oppose Liberti∣nisme, Familisme, and con∣tempt or neglect of the meanes of the hearing and reading of the Gospell more then those that use this distinction of the pro∣mises) this very Doctrine (that the promise of salva∣tion is made upon conditi∣on, and made good to none (being otherwise capable) but to those that carefully use all the meanes ordained
nd appointed to salvati∣n) excludes all carelessenes nd neglect of meanes, one r other, seeing wee teach en according to the criptures; Gal. 6.7.8.9. That whatsoever  man soweth, that shall hee ap, &c. And that we are t to bee weary of weldoing. Without which constancy o reaping can be expected; nd that wee ought to give rnest heed to the things wee are, for how else can we es∣pe if we neglect so great Sal∣tion? &c. Heb. 2.1.2.3. This we shall rther shew and urge in e Conclusion of all. 2 But now chiefly con∣rning the absolute pro∣ise of giving the meanes d effecting the Conditi∣ns, concer∣ning the absolute promises of the meanes. on which blessednesse d Salvation is promised.  I say, 1. Seeing salvation
and blessednesse is the mai end instanced in, and the chiefe end respecting ma that the meanes appointe of God thereunto, The meanes being ma∣ny, must not be di∣vided. bein many, are not to bee seve∣red and divided one fro another, but to be consid∣red conjoynedly and all them, with relation to the maine end, and that ther∣fore as they are meanes  Salvation, (whether the have a nearer connexi with life, as Faith, Repe∣tance, Justification, & Or be further off, as t Gospell it selfe, our heari of it, and common and g∣nerall grace wrought by  they all of them conjoy∣edly and with respect  their maine end, are p∣mised absolutely and wit∣out condition, though
selfe, as mans chiefe end, e not promised in the Gospell, but upon such onditions. 2 Wee may yet consider hat these same conditions, Yet they may and must be compared, & so some graces may be considered as Ends & effects of former & more com∣mon graces such as is the Go∣spell, &c. which all of them have heir reference to Salvati∣n, as the Meanes thereof, ay yet be compared one ith another; And so some,  regard of such relation, ay be considered as par∣ular & Meane Ends, and ffects of some preceding uifts, which God hath or ained as Meanes more im∣ediately of such graces, t as meanes also more re∣otely of the maine End, d of salvation: So Faith, epentance, Holinesse, erseverance, which are eanes of blessednesse and lvation, and Conditions
of eternall Life, may be considered also as the End and effects of other grace and guifts of God; and  not given or promised b upon some Conditions which must be used  meanes more immediately respecting those mean ends, and which have refe∣rence not onely further o to the maine end, Salvat∣on, but more nearly to the intermidle ends, of Fait Repentance, &c. For L∣gick and nature teache us, that there is the le and utmost end, which  chiefly intended & ayme at, Finis ulti∣mus, ; or  and unto which all mean are ordained, and there an intermidle end: a mai end, & a meane end, whi is the Act and instrument  the efficient cause, by whi
e in tends to attaine to the maine and last end. The former in this busi∣esse now in hand, Finis in∣termedius ro finis ad finem, fine propter fi∣nem. is eter∣all Life, unto which wee re elected; The latter are aith, and other graces named, which as they are meanes of Life and blessed, esse, so are they effects and nds intended, which God workes and intends by the Gospell and word sent, preached, and received, or ttended to: So that the Gospell is the meanes by which we attaine first to these graces, and then to Salvation, by which God rings us to, and worketh Faith, Rom. 10.17 Ioh 17.17. Luke 3.5.1 Cor. 10.4.5. (for Faith commeth by earing, and hearing by the Word of God,) and so Sancti∣fication; So saith Christ: Sanctify them through thy
truth, thy word is truth. And so Humility, for it is God voyce in and by the Mini∣stery, whereby every m∣taine and hill is brough low, &c. This is one of those wea∣pons, if not chiefe, which puls downe strong hold and casts downe imaginati∣ons, and every high thing which exalteth it selfe a∣gainst the knowledge  God. Thus then the Gospelli a meanes of these and othe graces, as the next end thereof, as of Salvation i selfe more remotely; and these graces being conside∣red as the next and more immediate Ends of the Gospell, have their condi∣tions, which must not bee neglected, as the hearing of
he word, and attending ereunto, &c. Yet the same aces of Faith, &c. are to e considered also, and hiefly as meanes of eter∣all Life, and as Conditi∣ns thereof; which there∣re as meanes of Life and essednesse, and as Condi∣ons of the new Covenant  Life, are promised by od absolutely and with∣t condition; though as bordinate & intermidle ds, they depend also (or∣narily) on their Meanes d Conditions. Thirdly, I say, Yet the promises of the end, whether maine end or meane end, s  end, are ever Con∣ditionall. And the promises of the means as meanes ever abso¦lute, whe∣ther they be remote or nearer. yet that hether we speake of the iefe and last end, or of e meane and midle end, at it is true which was d: That the promise of e end, as it is the end, is th Condition; and the
promise of the Meane (whether nearer or furthe off) as meanes is absolute and without condition; S that let the Condition b what it will be, whether the maine end, or meane midle ends, yet God do both freely promise, an freely give and effect i and that whether it have more necessary and infa∣lible connexion with i end, as true Faith, Remi∣sion & Sanctification have or doubtfull onely and un∣certaine (inregard of us) a the preaching of the Go∣pell) by which yet all and each are not converted which yet in regard o Gods Elect, and of h chiefe intent in sending it is made effectuall by God, and so promised withou condition.
Fourthly, then I avow oncerning the Gospell, The Gos∣pell it selfe is absolute∣ly. Rom 10.17 1 Ioh. 1.9. Iames 2.6 the earing, and receiving of , (as also concerning all uch things as may be called ore remote meanes of fe, or conditions of Faith, which hearing; is of Remis∣on, which Confession is; f more grace, which Hu∣ity is, &c.) that it (as ese other) is both freely omised, and freely given, th in regard of the out∣ad means, and of the in∣ad work and effect of it. 1 The Gospell and out∣ard meanes are freely and solutely promised (even  was Christ himselfe the essed Seed, Gen. 3.15.) 1 Promi∣sed. and  the calling of us Gentiles,  partake of it. In the last yes the mountaine of the rds House shall be established
in the top of the Mountaines; Ia. 2, 2, 3. and all Nations shall flow un∣to it, &c. So Christ is pro∣mised to be given for a Covenant of the people: For a light to the Gentiles, Isa. 2.6, 7 & 49.5, 6. &c. . 66.18.13.20. to open the blinde eyes, &c. I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they shall com and see my glory; and I wi set a signe among them; an they shall bring all your bre∣thren for an offring unto th Lord out of all Nations, &c. Secondly, Freely gi∣ven   the out wrd mi∣nstery. R. 10 1 1. the Gospel and the preaching there is freely given of God and sent, without which, how should men come to Faith or calling upon God, or ye any other grace? For h shall they call on him in who they have not beleeved? & he shall they beleeve in him,  whom they have not heard
nd how shall they heare with∣ut a preacher? and how shall ey preach, except they bee nt? Therefore saith our Sa∣viour to his Apostles: Mat. 28, 19 20. Mare. 16, 15, Goe e and teach all Nations, &c. nd goe ye into all the World, d preach the Gospell to eve∣ Creature. Yet this is done, Which is directed by speciall choyce, and sent to some, not to all. both eely (in regard of the first oving cause, Gods onely mpassion and love,) and th choyce, in regard of e Nations, to which in eir severall and fit times e Gospell is sent, not to ch Nation at once, and  some scarce at all. Yet hosoever they are that at y time enjoy the Gospell d outward meanes, they ve them from the free ercies and goodnesse of
God, they were not mo worthy then others; Nei∣ther is it because God di foresee they would prof by the Gospell more the others. Why was it the sent and preached first t Israel, a gainsaying people (otherwise then for the further conviction,) & n to the Tyrians and Sydon∣ans, who (if like migh works, which were wrough to confirme the Gospe had beene done amon them which were done Corazin and Bethsaid would have repented lo agoe; Math. 1.21. Which yet Israel d not. But this is from Gods fre choyce, who (according  his wise and just Counsel sendeth it to this or th place (where he hath mu
people, Act. 18.9, 10. at least some, to call and gather by it) and purposely as hee pleaseth, will not, (or will not as yet) have it come to some other people. Thus when Paul and Sylas had gone throughout Phry∣gia, Act. 16.6 7. and the region of Galla∣tia, (preaching the Go∣spell,) they were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the Word in Asia; after they were come to Misia, they assayed to goe into Bithinia, but the Spirit suffred them not. 3 Among those, And for th' inwa work & o∣wer of whi∣ther the Gospel is sent, God giveth grace effectually to receive, and with meeke, humble, and good hearts, to entertaine it, not to all, but to whom he pleaseth. Thus among those that
heard Paul preach at Philip∣pi, Act. 16.14 its noted (onely) of Ly∣dia, that the Lord opened her heart, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. And who are called ef∣fectually (as being vessels of mercy, which God had a fore prepared unto glory,) not all Iewes, not all Gen∣tiles, but us, saith Paul, whom he hath called of the Jewes and of the Gen∣tiles, and not of the Iewes onely, but also of the Gen∣tiles. Therefore the Light of the Gospell, Rom. 9 23.  and saving re∣velation of the mystery of it, and the giving of wise∣dome by it is made to bee the guift of Gods free grace by Christ: In whom we have redemption through his bloo,
he forgivenesse of sinnes, Eph. 1.7, 8, 9. ac∣cording to the riches of his grace, wherein he hath aboun∣ded towards us in all wisdome and prudence, having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he hath purpo∣sed in himselfe, &c. So, Mat. 11.25, 26. I thanke thee, Oh Father, saith Christ, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to Babes; Even so Fa∣ther, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Now if Gods Word prove fruitfull, Lk. 8.15. Iam. 1.17 and the effect of it shew it selfe onely in those who receive and heare it in an honest and good heart. I would aske from whom is this good heart? Is it not from him from whom is every good guift, and every perfect guift, &c.?
Wee conclude then this digression (occasioned by an unjust cavill) and say, What God requires as a Conditi∣on, he al∣so workes in the E∣lect. that though Gods promise of Salvation, yea and of Faith, and other graces, wrought ordinarily by the ministery, bee propounded with Condition, yet the Conditions themselves and the Meanes of Salvation whether more immediate as our effectuall calling, Repentance, Faith, rege∣neration, justification, &c. or mediate and remote, are both promised and effected in us, without Condition, as being not made to de∣pend upon man, Mediasa∣lutis im∣mediata, & udis mediorum. either for the giving or the working and effecting of them in him, and so for other like particulars; God promiseth forgivenesse of sinne, to
such as doe confesse, for∣sake, and repent thereof; but who giveth repen∣tance, &c. doth not God? Ezek. 36.26.31. and Zach. 12 10. God requires our pray∣ers, and will scarce give us any good thing, unlesse we ask it, Matt. 7.7. Aske and it shall be given you; As Con∣fession. 1 Ioh. 1.9 And Ezek. 36. after a most free and gracious promise made by God of working all grace in our hearts, and giving both Spirituall and Temporall Blessings. Vers. 25.26. and 27. &c. Yet thus saith the Lord: Prayer. Rom. 10.14. & 8.26. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. But who gives this gift of pray∣er? onely hee that gives Faith, out of which prayer flowes, onely God by his Spirit; Zach. 12.10. Rom. 8.26.
We know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the spirit it selfe maketh inter∣cession for us, &c. Lastly, God gives grace  the humble; that is, more grace, Iames 4.6. But whe gives the grace of Humili∣ty? Humility. Doth not the Spirit  Gal. 5.22. Of which more afterwards. I say then of all these though God promise not good things to his Church but upon Conditions, and in the use of Meanes, which to neglect, and yet to ex∣pect the end, were presūp∣tion and to tempt God, yea to come short of it, yet Go∣freely and absolutely pro∣miseth to give, Heb. 4▪ 1.2. and make effectuall the Condition and Meanes themselves. Let this suffice for the
present, till wee make it more evident anon. SECTION. 5. TO proceed: These promises cōcerning the meanes depend on Gods ele∣ction. these promi∣ses of the meanes, and of fulfilling the conditions in s, depend upon Gods de∣ree and Election, which is ot conditionall, though is word be. His order in ecting us to life is not the me which hee observeth  promising and giving fe; He promiseth it upon ondition, and gives it not ut upon performance of ch Condition; But hee ust not therefore bee ought to elect us conditi∣onally, or upon the fore∣ght of such conditions rought in us, or by us. Which his electiō is not con∣ditionall. To teach (which yet some
teach) that God is so to be conceived to decree, as he doth execute his decree were to invert the order things. Indeed in the executi and in the Gospell, Armin. contra Iun. proposit. 19 he w have no man to attaine  end without the mean and without such conditi∣ons as hee requireth, yea he may and doth require all; (which is one reas why the promises are,  they should bee, propo∣ded in Scripture, Though his Word be. and  the Gospell preached, generally and promiscuou to all in the Church;) a God hath also so decre to bring men to Salvatio by such meanes; But  this is not the whole a entire decree of Go which implies his predes
nation of certaine singular and definite persons, who are knowne to God, and se∣ered from others by the decree of his election, whereby he hath absolute∣ly and onely according to is owne counsell chosen em to Salvation; unto which yet he (for the exe∣cution of his Decree) will ring them by meanes, and by the observation of such Conditions, as he will pro∣ound and require in the Gospell, on the perfor∣ance of which hee promi∣eth this salvation to all in he Church, but worketh hem onely in his Elect. Concerning which Election we thus read: Mat 20.6. Many are cal∣ed, but few are chosen. And the foundation of God standeth sure, having this Seale, the
Lord knoweth them that a his; 2 Tim. 2.19 Rom. 11.5 And so wee are told of Remnant according to the  lection of Grace. Otherwise (if God Election were onely condi∣tionall) it might so fall ou that all might bee reprob∣ted, that his Church migh faile on earth, yea an Christ should be no certai Head, as having no certain members assigned unt him. But God in the matter  our Salvation doth also u his absolute will in bring∣ing his Elect to the end ap∣pointed, powerfully an most infallibly. Christ saith, Lue 12.32. it is you Fathers good pleasure  give you a Kingdome; and you have not chosen me, b J have chosen you.
This could not be true, Iohn 15, 16  Gods will were in this ase onely conditionall. For ough God in his word romiseth life and blessed∣esse under condition of aith and Holinesse, yet he ecrees nothing under any oubtfull or uncertaine ondition. God in his word tells us hat wee should doe, and ow wee may hope to at∣ine to salvation, & to assu∣ance of our Election; but  his decree he sets downe hat he himselfe will doe, ccording to which hee workes and effects that grace in his Elect, which he equires of them (yea of ll) leaving others in his ustice, to their owne hard∣esse.
SECT. 6. YEt first hee doth no mock such as doe not through their owne obsti∣nacie or inability keepe the conditions; Yet first, God mocks none in his Word. But most cer∣tainly if they doe keep and doe that which is required (as once they were able to have obeyed God in hi hardest command, and sti stand bound so to doe) they shall undoubtedly bee sa∣ved; therefore was it said even to Cain: Gen. 4.7. If thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted Gods promises of life are conditionall. Yea in such command God doth not delude, bu reprove and convince such men of unbeleefe, and tha in his Justice.
And secondly, His Word and decree are not contrary one to ano∣ther. neither are he decree and Word of od contrary or repugnant ch to other, but onely bordinate. God makes s word subservient to his ecree, & reveales so much  his owne counsell and rpose, and in that man er as hee pleaseth, and so  may best serve his owne ds, which if wee cannot e by his Word, yet must e not search, much lesse arrel, with God therea∣ut, or frame his decrees cording to our own con∣its. God in commanding du∣es at mens hands, hath metimes other ends, then edience, (though that ely bee the thing which  are to looke unto, as re∣ired of us, in and by his
word,) his precepts are also sometimes for tryall, as th commandement given t Abraham, Gen. 22.2. of Sacrificing h Sonne. Sometimes for Convicti on, whereby he intends  convince his Creature  disobedience, yea of i owne inability, &c. as  bidding Pharaoh, let th people goe. These Ends hee keepe secret to himselfe, Exod. 8.1 (as the may respect this or th particular person,) an therefore though his pr∣cept seeme to crosse h secret pleasure & purpo (which the event decla at length what it was,)  our ignorāce must not cau us quarrell with God, b Faith should reconcile th seeming contrarietie.
The like is true in Gods ormises and threats where he exceptions and Condi∣ions are often concealed nd kept secret to God imselfe. If God then re∣eales part of his will and onceales part, this is nei∣her to contradict himselfe, or to deale doubly and eceitfully with his Crea∣ure. He speakes not one hing and meanes another; ut speaks that which con∣erneth us to take notice f, & conceales that which e will doe himselfe, and which hee hath absolutely et downe with himselfe, specially concerning the alvation of those whom  mercy he will save, and  time effectually call; and he just desertion of those hom hee in justice will
leave in the masse of perdi∣tion, See who list Dr. Crac∣kanthorpes Sermon of praedestina∣tion, pag. 15, 16. and therefore not give his grace effectually unto them. I may therefore sa the Conditionall part o Gods will is set downe i his word; But what he hat set downe absolutely, and whom in particular he wi save, and imprint Faith an Holinesse in their heart he hath reserved to him selfe, (as not being boun to reveale it till the eve shew it,) onely that there such an absolute will i God, is revealed, as we have already shewed. SECT. 7. SO that now, though  regard of the word a worke of the minister things may goe with
and Ands, and that the con∣ditions in regard of man whose actions proceeding f judgement, and having heir beginning from with∣n his will, are voluntary) ay, or may not be done or erformed; Yet as they are Gods workes (though re∣quired of us) and effects of is Election, (who chan∣eth without violence our ills) hee speakes of them without Iffs, and promiseth hem absolutely, yea and ccordingly worketh and ffecteth them himselfe. And so againe things may emaine in themselves in∣ifferent, to fall out this ay or that way, notwith∣tanding Gods decree or working infallibly this or hat. The certainty of Gods
decree doth not abolish the consent of mans will, Gods de∣cree doth not take away the consent & liberty of mans will. bu rather order it, and milde∣ly incline or draw it forth mans freedome of will ma well stand, with that neces∣sitie which is of infallibili∣ty, or of consequence, and mans actions may bee free, though otherwise in re∣spect of Gods will they be of unchangeable necessity. Gods decree takes not away all possibility to the contrary event, voluntarii iisciee & volunta∣rio commit∣tatur, Greg. Armin. lib. 2. dist. 29. in fine. but onely the contrary event it selfe, as his decree before all worlds, that at this timel should preach in this place on this argument, at this time, did not take from me, ever since, all possibility of not preaching at this time; (for I might have beene absent, or otherwise deter∣mined;)
But it tooke from me the actuall not prea∣ching at this time. I doe this certainly and infallibly, but yet freely; Gods decree takes from me the contrary event; so that (in sensu composito) these two cannot stand together, God hath decreed that at this moment, I should bee preaching these things; and I doe not at this moment, preach these things; But (in sensu diviso) these two may consist together; God decreed that I should preach these things at this moment, and I had power not to preach these things at this moment if I had pleased. Now if this sound harsh
to any, Praescientia Dei falli non potest. let it be considered the like inconvenien would follow upon God bare prescience, (which none denyes,) and his pre∣science may as well hen be denyed as his praede fi∣tions; Seeing Gods presci∣ence is as infallible as hi Decree is immutable. And thus much for the first con∣sideration. SECT. 8. 2 WE may now se∣condly consi∣der, The se∣cond consi∣deration making good the former. that in Gods new Covenant of Grace, the condition required of us,  also part of Gods Covenan and promise made unto us. So that this is one maine difference betweene the Law (strictly taken accor∣ding
to the Condition of workes,) and the Gospell preached both before and after the death of Christ, that the Law promiseth Life, and requires perfect obedience, but neither pro∣miseth nor gives power to performe what it requires; t leaves a man wholly to himselfe, and to his owne power. But the Gospell and new Covenant promiseth the ame life upon new and o∣ther conditions, The condi∣tions re∣quired of us, are also part of Gods Co∣venant and promise made unto us. Difference betweene the Law and the Gospell. no lesse (I ke) hard in themselves nd impossible to us to per∣forme aright by our owne rength then the other, and hat is upon condition of aith, Repentance, Holi∣esse, and Perseverance in em all; Yet so as that it oth promiseth and gives
power to keepe and per∣forme the Conditions (this latter depending on Gods Election) in which regard it is said, that the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, and that Christ is the Mediatour of a better Co∣venant, which is established on better promises, And why better? But because wh the Law could not doe, Heb. 7.19 and 8.6. Rom. 8.2.3 in th it was weake, through the flesh is done by the Law of the Spiri of Life in Christ Iesus, who God sent, &c. The first Covenant  said to be faulty, yet not  it selfe, for saith the Scrip∣ture, the Lord finding fau with them, (not with  barely) saith, the day come when I will make new Covenant with th
house of Israel & Iudah; Heb. 8, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, &c. not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fa∣thers, because they continued not in my Covenant (lo, there s the fault of it) I regarded hem not, saith the Lord; For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israell, after those dayes, saith the Lord; I will put my Lawes nto their minde, and write hem in their hearts, &c. Thus God promiseth to oe for us what he requires f us: At least hee requires he Fact (or act) of us, and e promiseth the ability, or ather indeed he promiseth nd effecteth the act also, e promiseth both, to write s Lawes in our hearts, and to orke all our workes for us; as rticularly, not onely po∣wer to beleeve, but the ve∣ry
act of beleeving, not onely  posse Credere, but according to that  unto you it is given to be∣leeve on him, Phil. 1.29. and not onely  beleeve on him (Christ)  also to suffer for his sake. So not onely the power, abili∣ty, and will to doe good but the will, power & dee too; For it is God that wor∣keth in you, saith Paul, both  will and to doe. SECT. 9. NOw all that is sai both in the form and in this latter Conside∣ration, What God requires, he both pro∣miseth and worketh in the Elect. will better & mo∣fully appeare by particul instances and proofes, Go promising Blessednesse a Salvation by Christ, 1 re∣quires some Conditions
us, yet, 2. hee promiseth to worke and effect the said Conditions in us; and 3. he doth also indeed worke the same, and that by ver∣tue of his new Covenant, wee will instance in some principall graces. 1 Faith God (promising Salvation and Happinesse) doth first require Faith, This is shewed in divers gra∣ces, as in Faith. Which God Rom. 10.9.1 requires Marke 9.23 as the Condition; and so pro∣miseth life upon that Con∣dition▪ and that with an Iff, (as in my Text) saying: If thou shalt confesse with thy mouth the Lord Iesus, and if thou shalt beleeve in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. So elsewhere, If thou canst beleeve, all things are possible to him that be∣leeveth. So also Ioh. 3.16,
& Act. 16.30.31. Be∣leeve on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt bee saved. Promiseth Ier. 31.33. Isa. 53.11. 2. Yet God also doth promise Faith; For is not Faith one of those lawes, which God hath promised to put into our hearts? By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justifie many; That is, by the knowledge of him, by which knowledge is ment faith, or at least such a knowledge as is not with∣out Faith, which is also pro¦mised elsewhere, they shall all know me, of which know∣ledge that is true, this is life eternall that they might know thee the onely true God, Ier. 31.34. Ioh. 17 3. Worketh. Eph. 2.8. Phil. 2.13. and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Yea 3. Hee worketh it both for habit and for act.
So we read, by grace yee are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves; For it is the gift of God, and as wee heard, unto you it is given (not onely) to beleeve on him, &c. SECT. 10. 2. REmission of sins, Remission of sinnes which re∣quires we should seek 1 Cor. 6.9. with 11. Ioh. 8.24. which God requires wee should seeke after, Luke 11.4. and without which (wee know) no Salvation, no bles∣sednesse, for as blessednesse is made to belong to such Rom. 4.7, 8. So we know that there can be no blessed∣nes, no salvation, without it. Know ye not that no unrighte∣eous (that is, such as are not washed and justified,) shall inherit the Kingdome of God, and to dye in our sinnes, is
threatned: if we believe not It then hath God appointed as a meanes of life. 2. God promiseth it, 2 Promi∣seth. Ier. 31.34. say∣ing, I will forgive their ini∣quitie, and I will remember their sinne no more. And this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sinnes. 3. He also worketh it, 3 Worketh. Isa. 43.35. I even I am he, that blotteth ou thy transgressions for min owne sake, and I will n remember thy sins. And wh is a God like unto thee, Micah. 7.18 19. that pardoneth iniquity, &c. Hee will subdue our iniquities, &c And of Christ, it is said: Him hath God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince, and a Saviour, for to give Repentance to Israel and for∣givenes of sins. Acts 5.31.
SECT. 11. 3. ANd so for Repen∣tance 1. Repen∣tance which God requires. Ezek. 18.21. Ier. 4.1. God requires t, as without which no ife, Luke 13.3. Except you epent yee shall all likewise erish; God promiseth life nto it, and upon condition of it with an Iff: If the wicked will turne from all his sinnes that he hath committed, and keepe all my Statutes, and doe that which is lawfull & right, he shall surely live; he shal not dye; And, if thou wilt returne Oh Israel, saith the Lord, returne unto me; and, if thou wilt put away thine abomina∣tions out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove. So Mat. 3.2.8.
2. Yet the same Go doth promise it, Promiseth. saying wil poure upon the hou of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusale the Spirit of Grace an of Supplications, and the shall looke upon me whom they have pierce and they shall mourne fo him as one mourneth fo his onely son, Zach. 12.10 and shall  in bitternesse for him,  one that is in bitternes for his first borne. 3. Yea he also works  hee gives it as is now sa out of Acts. 5.31. and else where: Worketh. Then hath Go also to the Gentiles gra∣ted repentance unto life and it is preached in h name. Luke 24.47. that i by his power, Acts 11.18. Acts 3.12.1 So that he both appointe
t, to be preached, and works it by preaching. SECT. 12. . SO for new Obedience, New obedience which God requires. and walking in the wayes of God in all since∣ity and holinesse, without which no man shal see God, eb. 12.14. 1. God requires it in his Covenant: Gen. 17.1. Rom. 6.3.4. Walke be∣fore me, and be thou per∣fect, or upright and sin∣cere; So we are buried with Christ by Baptisme unto death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so also we should walke in new∣nesse of life. 2. Yet God promiseth this, saying: Promiseth This shall be
the Covenant that I will make with the House  Israel, Ier. 31.33. Ezek. 36.26 72. after those dayes saith the Lord, I will p my Law in their inwar parts and I will write i in their hearts, &c. An elsewhere, I will put  Spirit within you, an cause you to walke in m Statutes. 3. Yea he performes it i us, Worketh. (and for us) according to that: Thou hast wrough all our workes in us (or fo us) Isa. 26.12. causing us in∣deed to walke in his Sta∣tutes, and to bring for good Fruit; For, saith Christ: As the branc cannot beare Fruit of  selfe, except it abide i the vine; Io 15.4.5. No more can y except ye abide in me;  am the vine, ye are the
branches; He that abi∣deth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much Fruit, for without me ye can doe nothing. SECT. 13. SO, Persever∣ance which God re∣quires. Gal 6 9. for Perseverance and Constancy with∣ut which no Crowne, no eward; 1. God requires as a Condition of Life and Happinesse; be thou Faithfull unto the death, and I will give thee Crowne of life, Rev. 2.10. In due season wee shall reape if we faint not. And Christ is said to reconcile us: that he might present us holy and unblamable, and unproveable in his sight, (especially) at the day of judgment, (if saith
the Apostle) ye contin in the Faith, Col. 1.22.23. Iohn 15.6, 7. grounde and setled, and be no moved away from th hope of the Gospell, &c. And elsewhere sai Christ: if a man abide no in me, he is cast for &c. And, if ye abide i me, and my words a bi in you, ye shall aske wh yee will, and it shall b done unto you. 2. He yet promiseth i to the great comfort of hi people saying: Promiseth. I wi make an everlasting Co∣venant with them, that  will not turne away from them to doe them good but I will put my feare i their heart, Ier 3.2.40. that they shall not depart from mee▪ so God will neither turne from us, nor suffer
o turne from him, though thers fall away, and erre oncerning the truth, as did Hymeneus and Philetus; ne∣erthelesse saith th'Apostle, 2 Tim. 2.18, 19. he foundation of the Lord emaines sure, (or steady) aving this Seale: The Lord noweth who are his. No emptation shall finally pre∣aile against such; 1 Cor. 10.13. For God s faithfull, who will not suffer ou to be Tempted above that ee are able, but will with the Temptation also make a way o escape, that ye may be able o beare it. Yea when such s trust in God, Ieremy 20, 8.9. are ready o yeeld (as Ieremy; who because Gods Word was made a reproach to him, and he was had in derision dayly, said he would no longer make mention of him, nor speake any more
in his name,) yet God word and Spirit quicke them up againe, as they d him; Yea God hath sai and promised: Isalme 125.3. The ro of the wicked shall no rest upon the Lot of th righteous, least the righte∣ous put forth their hand unto iniquity. And so Christ hath pro∣mised the continuance, an abode of his grace and hol Spirit; Iohn 4.14. saying: The Wat that I shall give him, shall  in him a Well of Water, spring∣ing up into everlasting Li See also Iohn 14.16.17. an 1 Joh. 2.27. and 3.9. 3. He accordingly work it; Worketh Phil. 1.6. Heb. 12.2. beginning and perfec∣ing his owne worke; He which hath begunne a goo worke in you, will perform it, untill the day of Ies
Christ. This Jesus Christ is lled the authour (or be∣nner) and also the fi∣sher of our Faith; Yea  us he speakes most com∣rtably: Iohn 6.37. All that the Father eth mee, shall come unto , and him that cometh to , I will in no wise cast out. SECT. 14. He like I may say for all  other Graces (unto ich Life is promised) d works all, So in other graces: As more espe∣cially, hu∣mility and meekenesse which God requireth: Iames 2.6. 1 Pet. 5.5, 6 as the feare God; Ier. 32.40. Know∣ge of God, which is re∣red, as in the Text: if know these things; pro∣sed. Ier. 31.34. Given Mat. 27, 28. So for humility & ekenesse, which makes argues) men blessed; Bles∣ are the meeke; Mat. 5.5. . It is required, and Gods
promises are made to  God giveth grace (1. mo grace) to the humble. A elswhere. Humble yo selves therefore under mighty hang of God, th hee may exalt you in d time. And see Isa. 57. and 66.2. Mat. 18.3. 2. It is promised: Promiseth Isa. 11.6 & 65.25, T Wolf shall dwell with  Lamb, and the Leopa shall lye downe with  Kidd; and the Calfe a the yong Lyon, and  Fatling together; Yea a a little Child shall  them; (thus shal the sto bee brought downe by  Ministery and Ministe (otherwise but weake c dren, in compariso those who are humbled their Ministery.) 3. Worketh. Yet it is Gods Wo
nd gift, as are all good ings else: Iames 1.17. Every good and very perfect gift is from a∣ve; &c. Now if it be not perfect gift, yet its a good ft, and therefore from the other of Lights, and given  from without; being a od giving, yea a good ft; its not called a habit, if we had it of our selves, d from our owne indu∣y, , not . as Philosophy calls ver∣es, which it ascribes to ns own power. o generally it is said (and y most truly be applied  this differencing grace  Humility, as some would ke it) who maketh thee  differ from another? and at hast thou that thou didst  receive? 1 Cor. 4.7. And for this ekenesse the Apostle kes it with love, joy,
peace, long suffring, gentle∣nes, goodnes, Faith and tem∣perance, a fruit of Gods sa∣ving and Sanctifying Spir (as these graces are oppose to the workes of the flesh Gal. 5.22.23. 1 Pet. 5.6. Yea it is ma the worke of Gods migh Hand, and a gift of Go power, Phil. 4.12. (not of mans)  when Paul saith, I kn how to be abased, that  how to carry my selfe, hum∣bly, and meekely, un Gods Hand: When I a want, when I am hungry,  suffer need, this is no other effect then that, 1 Peter▪  Humble your selves un the mighty Hand of God. But could Paul doe of himselfe; Verse. 13 No, there he addes concerning  (and by occasion of  concerning all things
sides,) saying: I can doe all ings through Christ that engthens me. Nay I wil ad, is meekenesse and humi∣y is a grace flowing from ection, (not preceding  going before it,) which erefore we as the Elect of d are bid to put on with er graces; For so Paul, put  therefore as the Elect of d holy and beloved bowls nercy, kindnesse, humble∣sse of minde, meekenesse, &c. nd so wee will conclude is point, and say, that not ely humility and those aces mentioned, even w out of Col. 3.12.13. Col. 3.12. . t all other gifts, graces, d blessings (which have, d so farre as they have ecessary connexion, with ernall life, as being ni∣ssary meanes and cond∣tions
of life, Yea all graces gi∣ven us in time, are according to Gods Election of us be∣fore time. Eph. 1.3, 4. Iohn 15.16. &c.) which doe come to us, and are gi∣ven to us in time, are ac∣cording to Gods Election of us before time, as it is said, Eph. 1.3, 4. That Ge hath blessed us with all Spiri∣tuall blessings in Heavenly places in Christ, (1. with Faith, Justification, Sancti∣fication, Adoption, Saving Knowledge, &c.) according  he hath chosen us in hi before the foundation of t World, that we should be Holy and without blame before hi in love; Particularly; abi∣lity to doe good, and to bring forth good Fruit constantly, For so saith our Saviour: Yee have not chosen mee, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that you should goe, and bring forth Fruit, and
that your Fruit should remaine. Hence we are said to be praedestinated, according to the purpose of him, Eph. 1.11. who worketh all things according to the counsell of his own will, and thus God fulfills all the good pleasure of his good∣nesse, 2 Thes. 1 and the worke of Faith with power. For it it is God (saith Paul) which worketh in you, Phil. 2.13. hath to will and to doe of his good plea∣sure. SECT. 15. ANd this leads the way to (and in part resolves) the second Objection or question propounded, The se∣cond main doubt re∣solved and it first shewed. whe∣ther it be in our power to performe what God com∣mands and exhorts to, and
if not, whether such com∣mands and exhortations be in vaine, or no. Seeing then this blessednesse here is urged as a motive to weldoing; It would (a lit∣tle further) be considered, whether the doing of these things (such as is named) be in our power or no; and whether such bare mo∣tives, be enough to enable us hereunto, and to cause us to doe that which is ou duty in believing, Con∣verting, Obeying, and Per∣severing? It may seem to be in our power thus to doe, seeing the doing of these things is ascribed to us: Happy are yee if yee doe them. I answer: That it is not in mās power as of himselfe to doe well, and Con∣vert, &c. No, iis not i our power to doe such things as yet God requires
of us by way of com∣mand and exhortation: hee requires, That wee should believe in God, and in Christ, and that we love one another, 1 Iohn 3.23. That we turne un∣to him, Ioel. 2.12.13. Iere. 4.1. That wee mortifie the flesh Col. 3.5. That we cease to doe evill, and learne to doe well, Isa. 1.16, 17. and that we worke out our Salvation, Phil. 2.12. But yet wee have no power as of our selves to doe any of these things; where yee see I speake not of actions civill, or mo∣rall only, according to man; Concerning which, though the bare doing of them be in the power of mans will; yet to doe them well in respect of all circumstances
required, especially in re∣gard of the end Gods glory (seeing all things, 1 Cor. 10.31. even our eating, sleeping, recrea∣tions must be done to that end (it may be doubted whether that they may be without sinne, and accep∣ted of God, more then com∣mon providence and ge∣nerall assistance be not re∣quired. Thus I may grant, What power hee hath in civill Actions. it is in mans power to goe to Church, or not, and when the Bell rings to a Sermon or Service, whether he will repaire to the Church upon that Summons, or goe to a Taverne, or walke in the Fields, taking his going to the place of Gods worship or Temple, as a meere na∣turall action, and as it may bee a removall from one
place to another; But to goe to the Church, as to the Church, that is, to that place where God hath appointed us to meete him, to heare our prayers, and to give us instructions and directions for the health of our Soules, and to goe w a desire, hope, and intent thus to be instructed, and to get good; This I say must come from more speciall grace; So that if two or more being together, one of them when the Bell alike calls and summons all, should leave the Company, and goe to Church, as to Gods House, (as it is said) this must pro∣ceed from more then his owne naturall power of will, even from such spe∣ciall grace as was denyed to those others.
But we speake of morall actions, according to God, and grace, and of actions supernaturall, such as have reference to Gods glory, and to our Heavenly life of grace and glory. SECT. 16. NOw if wee looke to what is done, Rom 3.12. Seven de∣grees to be conidered in the per∣fecting of every good worke. Whereof not any one is in manspow∣er the is not able and that by man left to himselfe, we find it most true which is said: There is none that doth good, no not one. Yea and if we looke into Gods Word, we shall find the Scriptures strangely to disable the best of us all, beeing consi∣dered of and in our selves, and left to our owne strength, For whereas there are Seven degrees to be con∣sidered, in the effecting o
ny good thing (as some ood Divines have obser∣ed) 1, The accomplishing r perfecting of it, 2. The oing or working of the hing required. 3. The be∣inning to doe it, 4. To peake that which is good, . To will, desire, and chuse , 6. To understand it, 7. To hinke it, we shall find, that ot so much as the least of hese can be ascribed to our wne power without Gods peciall grace. 1. To perfect, finish, 1 To Per∣fect it. or performe a good worke throughly so as to answer our desire and purpose, or o persevere in a good work o the end; is not from us, ut from God; For it is God, Phil. 1, 6. who having begun a good worke in you (saith Paul to the Philippians) will per∣forme
it untill the day of Iesus Christ. So Paul concerning himselfe, to will is present with me, but how to performe that which is good (that is▪ how fully to finish it) I find not. Rom. 7.18. Yea men cannot finish their owne evill worke al∣wayes according to their intent; how much Iesse good workes, Gen. 50.20. as Iosephs Bre∣thren; they thought evill a∣gainst him, but God ment it unto good; and so overrea∣ched them, so that they came short of their pur∣pose;) So Paul going to∣wards Damascus, with a pur∣pose to fetch thence, and bring bound to Ierusalem the Disciples of Christ, Act. 9.1.2. Yet was taken short in the way, fell downe; and in stead of finishing his own wicked intent, hee is turned
o the Obedience of Christ, ot to doe or finish his own will, but Christs; saying: Lord, Acts 9.6. what wilt thou have mee o doe? 2. 2 To doe it We cannot so much as oe that which is good without Christ, yea unlesse we be ingrafted into him: as he Branch cannot beare ruit of it selfe, Iohn 15.4, 5 except it a∣ide in the vine; no more can ee, except yee abide in me; For without mee (or severed from ee) yee can doe nothing. The ay of man is not in himselfe, it is not in man that walketh o direct his steppes, Ier. 10 23. . 10 23. Pro. 16.9. A mans heart may devise his way, but the Lord directeth his steps. We may know (as in my Text) what to doe, but we, s of our selves are not able to doe according to our
knowledge; Therefore prayeth David; saying, not only; Teach me the way of th Statutes, and give me under∣standing, Psal. 119.33, 34, 35. but make mee to go in the path of thy Commande∣ments. For wee are of our selves not onely blind, bu lame; and God must teach us, not only to know, but  doe; Psal. 143.10. Therefore said David againe: Teach mee to doe th will. Wee have that in us which till it be removed, hinders us from doing that which otherwise we would doe. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit. Gal. 5.17. Rom. 7.9. So that (saith Paul) yee cannot doe the things th yee would. So hee himself found it; The good that I would (saith he) I doe not. Isa. 26.12.  therefore ought bee done that is good; It is God th
worketh (as formerly is said) ll our workes for us and in us. 3 To begin a good work, 3 To be∣gin it. Phil. 1.6. is not from us (though we urpose it) but from the Lord; It is hee that begin∣eth a good worke in us. 4 To spake what wee have thought on and pre∣ared, 4 To speak good. is also from the Lord nd not from us; For so wie alomon concerning them oth: The preparation of the eart in man and the answer f the Tongue, Pro. 16.1. is from the Lord; And who (what mi∣ister especially) finds it not hus? 5 As we cannot doe, or peake and utter; 5 To will it. so can we ot so much as will any hing truly and spiritually good, as not our owne Con∣version or Salvation; For It  God (saith Paul to the
Philippians) which worket in you both to will and to doe; Phil. 2.13. But of this more large anon. 6 How should man wi that which is good, 6 To con∣ceive it. as  himselfe, when hee cann so much as understand o perceive it; For so wee are taught: 1 Cor. 2.14. The naturall man re∣ceiveth not the things of  Spirit of God, for they are fo∣lishnes unto him; neither  he know them, because they  spiritually discerned; Rom, 8.7. Yea th carnall minde is enmity a∣gainst God. 7 Lastly, 7 To thinke it. 2 Cor. 3.. 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. Psal. 94. Nay hee can∣not thinke any thing that i good; So Paul: We are no sufficient of our selves to thinke any thing as of ou selves, but our sufficiency i from God; Yea mans be thoughts are vaine; the
wisdome of the World is foolishnesse with God; And, the Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise that they are vaine. All these put together: what is it that man is able as of himselfe to doe, with∣out Gods speciall and effe∣ctuall grace, especially in the matter of Conversion, Repentance, Faith, &c. SECT. 17. NOw the reasons of this our inability to doe good, Reasons hereof. 1 His ig∣norance. may partly bee gathered and considered ut of the foregoing dis∣ourse; where we may take otice: First of that Igno∣ance (that ill disposed Ig∣orance) which is in us all aturally; whereby Re∣pentance,
Faith, with the power and life of Godli∣nesse, is accounted foolish∣nesse to the naturall man▪ At which, being called to them he scoffeth and mo∣keth. Hence it was tha when Hezechiah King of Ju∣dah sent out messenge with letters, to call those of Israel to turne againe unt the Lord; 2 Chron. 30.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. inviting by man faire & gracious promises; in the name and according to the Word of the Lord▪ they laughed the messen∣gers to scorne and mocked them. And doe not too many now adayes in like manner scoffe and laugh at such teachers as are most earnes with them to call them from their sinnes to a new course of Life and wel-do∣ing?
Though yet diverse of sher, Manasseth, Vers. 11. & Zebulon umbled themselves, and ame to Ierusalem;. But what? By their owne po∣wer? No; no otherwise hen those of Judah hum∣bled themselves; of whom with those others it is said, and added, that the hand (this notes the worke, yea and power) of God was to give them (that is, all of them both of Judah and Asher, &c.) one heart to do the commandement of the King and of the Princes, And 12: by the word of the Lord; But whence was this back∣wardnesse in others (whose hearts the Lord had not touched otherwise then by those common motives and exhortations used alike to them all because their cor∣ruption
(unto which they were left) told them as the like corruption (where spe∣ciall grace overcomes not) tells men now that God calls them to forsake their owne wayes which they have chosen, and so to de∣ny their own wil & choyce, to forgoe their sweet sins, and so to undergoe such afflictions and reproach as commonly attends upon Godlinesse; and a stricter course of Sanctification▪ Yea the nature of Gods perswasions is such, as that for the most part they ra∣ther disswade a naturall man, (left to himselfe) a, whosoever will come after me, let him deny himselfe, and take up his crosse and follow me. And, whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
Gospels, the same shall save it. Marke 8.34, 35. This to fleshly, yea to natu∣rall understanding, is as much as if Christ should have said: Fly from mee. 2 Secondly, 2 His un∣beleefe. to Ignorance wee may adde naturall un∣beleefe, which makes us with Adam rather flye from God as from a consuming Fire, Heb. 12.29. then come to him by Faith, Repentance, and by a totall resignation of our selves unto his will. 3 But chiefly, 3 His na∣turall im∣potency. when God doth informe our ignorāce by his word, and also by it gives hope, and proclaimes a pardon freely to the peni∣tent, and to such as shall be∣leeve & become new men. Yet there is that naturall impotency in man, where∣by hee wants power (now since the Fall) to returne or
to doe any thing wch is truly & spiritually good. There∣fore saith God: Can the E∣thiopian change his skin, er. 13.23. o the Leopard his spots? then may yee also doe good that are accustomed (or as it is in the Hebrew, taught) to doe e∣vill. The estate of each man before his Con∣version. In a word, we are dead in sinne, and by it; So that if wee would know what our naturall estate is before we by Gods special grace be effectually called, the Scripture will plainly and fully tell us, which calls us Servants of sinne. Rom. 6.20. And tells us: Wee are sold under sinne, Rom. 7.14. That wee are by nature the Children of Wrath, Eph. 2.3. Concei∣ved in sin, Psal. 51.7. That wee drinke iniquitie as water. Iob. 15.16. That our
thoughts are onely and alwayes evill. Gen. 6.5. That our heart is stony. Ezk. 36.26. that it is per∣verse & deceitfull above all things, and desperate∣ly wicked. Ier. 17.9. that our carnall minde is en∣mity against God, & not ubject to the Law of God, neither can bee. Rom. 8.7. Yea that out of Christ we can doe no∣hing. Ioh. 15.5. And as s said, (which may in∣clude all) we are dead in respasses and sinnes. Eph. .1. Dead in sinnes, and n the uncircumcision of he flesh, Col. 2.13. ow surely all these shew tous, that mans ability d power of his own free∣ll, especially in the busi∣sse of his owne Salvation.
is none at all. For if we be Servants of sinne, how c Libertie stand with this se vitude? If sold under th power of sinne, must n the Son onely make us free If we be conceived in sin naturally, then surely th remedy of sinne must be sought and found, not  nature, but without it.  our thoughts and imagin∣tions bee wholly and one evill, Shewing how un∣able he is to doe good. can they at all rea and lead us to that which truly good? If our hearts  naturally stony hearts;  they, so remaining admit  the Seed of Gods Wo and prove fruitfull? M they not be made both  & good hearts before th keepe the word, they hea and bring forth Fruit w Patience? Luke 8.15. If o
hearts bee deceitfull above all things, and desperately wicked, what soundnesse, sinceritie, or rectitude can e imagined in us natural∣y? If nature cannot submit t selfe to the Law of God, an it (thinke wee) as of it elfe either thinke or doe what is truly good? If out of Christ wee can doe no∣hing, can any thinke that ee can doe that which is hiefe of all, even returne gaine to God? And if wee e dead in sin, what sense r motion can we have, to oe any thing that is truly ood? SECTION. 18. HEnce wee are taught humility, and not to lory in our selves, but on∣ly
in God; Vse of this his impo∣encie to teach us humility; to ascribe all to Gods power, sbduing our Rebel∣lion. Yea hence we see that man brings nothing to his owne Conversion besides the bare faculty  Willing or nilling, which power if hee had not, hee should not bee so much as  man, but as a block or stoc uncapable of Gods grace But, when a man obe Gods call, the Spirit  God so mightily and po∣werfully perswades, th the will of man being el∣vated above it selfe, is bo withdrawne from evill, an drawne to God and good∣nesse, without any finall sistance. As, .13. when wee are bo again, this is not of blo nor of the will of the fiel nor of the will of ma but of God; (w worketh in us both to  end to d.) So when G
worketh, it is not left to mans power to use grace well, or to beleeve, Repent, & do good or no; as if when God hath done all he mea∣neth to doe, mans will is left in an equipage & even Ballance to move it selfe his wayes or that wayes, as t listeth; For so Gods grace should not bee praedomi∣ant; and the Conversion of the Elect should bee meerely contingent: but when God worketh the will, wee cannot but will; It is not left to us to resist; For God especially in the worke of our Conversion, workes so powerfully, as that our naturall resistibili∣y, yea and that actuall resi∣stance which wee make, doth not prevaile; neither oth it alwayes actually re∣sist;
but at that time the wi yeelds its consent. So th when we will actually th which is good, (supposi that God doth give us a ability to will) yet that wil∣ling is not from our selves. It is true we (suppose i our Conversion) doe freel assent and will and yeeld to the motions of Gods grace But the chiefe question i not, Posse velle. Though we will freely, yet power and act are from him. Sec Doct. Ward; de grat. discri∣minant. pag. 23. whether the will do freely yeeld and give assent to the first motion and at∣traction of grace; but whence is that free assent not whether we will freely, but whence it is that wee will freely; whether from our owne will, or from Gods effectuall grace? It is man that formally willeth in every good worke, (yea and this his will it is which
doth bring & draw out the ormall act of willing,) but t is God that so effectually nd powerfully moveth the will; that when he Worketh, then the will most certain∣y is wrought and brought nto act. Crtit caus         nos  n faimus, Sed ille facit ut saciamuspre bedo  voluntati. Auge gratt, & lib. aroit. . 16. So saith S. Augu∣tine: It is certaine that wee ur selves doe will, when we will, but yet God ma∣eth us will that which is good. And it is certaine, Nos ergo volus, sed Deus in nis opera∣tur & lle; Nos ergo opramur, s  nos pra∣tur & ope∣rari. Aug.  bono per se vranti, c. 13. that it s wee our selves which doe ny good when wee doe it, ut it is hee that maketh us doe it, by giving us most effectuall ability to our will; and it is wee that will, out God worketh in us to will; therefore we worke,
but it is God that worke in us to worke, or the ven act of working. SECT. 19: WEe must not think with some, th God gives onely a general and common grace; and by it gives to us posse si velim power to worke if we wi (though in some sense thi may be true, seeing there  a certaine power ove which the will (where it is) rules, and which it com∣mands; God denyes not th facultie of willing to th wickedst; which make their condemnation the more just: For if they ha not such a power, so farr they could not have sinne so that there is no man bu
may be good, or hath a po∣wer to be good, if he could will to bee good;) But to thinke wee can will of our selves what is good, is erro∣eous; so especially to will, s also not to will, or to nill, nd by nilling to resist de cto, and indeed Gods race. Gods grace then is more hen a gentle swasion, Gods grace is more then a gen swasion  common influence. and ommon influence, giving s a power which wee may se r not use at our plea∣re; So that we may if we will, be redeemed, Beleeve, epent, Persevere. No, God ves also the will it selfe, nd his grace (as also his in∣ention to save & redeeme) epends not upon conditi∣n, neither is suspended pon the contingent act of mans Faith and Will.
Grace hath its first act i the will it selfe, Haee gratia, a nul lo duro corde res∣puitur: ideo quippe tri∣buitur ut cordis duri∣ritia primi∣tus aufera∣tur. Aug. de prae∣destin. San∣ctor. cap. 8. which therefore cannot bee re∣sisted, because it first works in it the will not to resist; And surely, that can resist no more, from which is ta∣ken away the will to resist; thus to will is an effect of Grace, and not Grace a effect of the will not resi∣sting. And thus God of un∣willing makes us willing Man doth not first will, and then God make him to wi for so we might runne bac in infinitum Infinitly. To will then is a worke of Gods speciall and effe∣ctuall Grace and power, un∣to which his workes  Grace are ascribed; He be∣ing able to doe exceeding  dantly above all th  thinke, accor∣ding
to the power that wor∣keth in us; Eph. 3.10. 2 Thes. 1.11 The po∣wer of Gods grace in giving Faith & working conversion shewed out of Scrip∣ture. unto which po∣wer or effectuall grace not onely Faith it selfe and Conversion, but the fulfil∣ing of it also is ascribed; For it is God that fulfills all he good pleasure of his good∣nesse, and the worke of Faith with power. Now the power of grace appeares in giving the act of faith, and the giving of the act of Faith, (especially f withall we consider the manner of giving it, and of Conversion; by which all resistance is subdued) proves the power of grace; seeing the act is not pre∣sently given when  posse, or the power to beleeve if we will, is given; yea though wee should grant that the inward and out∣ward
swasion and fit object may carry a man to that which is good, Quoad spe∣cificationem non quoad exercitium actus. and from that which is evill, (to ap∣prove and preferre the one before the other,) yet they carry him not to the acting of that which is good, or to the exercise of the act. God exerciseth his omnipotenc in giving the act of Faith and Conversion. Eph. 1: 19.20. There∣fore the Apostle tells us of the exceeding greatnesse of his power to us ward, who beleeve, according to the working of his mighty po∣wer, which he wrought in Christ, when hee raised hi from the dead. Here wee heare of a power, of the greatnesse of his power,  the exceeding greatnesse of h power; yea of the might of hi power. Whereof such as
beleeve have an experimē∣tall feeling & knowledge; it being no other power which raiseth up the Soule by a spiritull resurrection from the death of sinne by Faith, then that which rai∣sed our blessed Saviour in his body out of the grave; For the Apostle speakes there of a present effect, and not onely of Gods power in raising the dead. This is that divine po∣wer which gives unto us all things that pertaine to life and godlinesse. 2 Pt. 1.3. Luke 11.21.22. 2 Pet. 5.9. Eph. 6.16. By this power of Christs grace, the strong man armed is over∣come and disarmed, yea cast out; And so Peter would have us resist Satan, strong and stedfast in the Faith; this is that shield wherewith we shall bee able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked, and the Gospell in the power of it, that is, the preaching of the Word to∣gether with the Sword of the Spirit, are the weapons of our warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4.5. Theophylact. Cajetan. and Anselme in locum. which are mighty through God to the pulling downe of strong holds, casting downe imaginations, &c. By these weapons were vanquished and brought to the Faith: Dionysius the Areopagite, Iustin the Philo∣sopher, and Martyr; Pantaenus, & those many who had used curious arts, who brought their bookes together, and burned them, Act. 19.15 the value of which amounted to fifty thousand peeces of silver, that is, to some eight hun∣dred pounds of our mony. And thus doe many finde by comfortable experiēce,
the power of Gods Word and grace converting them to God from such sinnes as were very powerfull and strong in them; Act. 26.18. Rom. 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18. and from the power of Satan; In which regard the preaching of the Gospell is called, the power of God to salvation, to every one that beleeveth, though to them that perish it be foolishnes; 2 Cor. 2.4.5 Phil. 1.29. Yet unto us (saith Paul) that are saved it is the power of God; what is? the preaching of the Crosse; which was not (saith Paul againe) with the inticing words of mans wisedome, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your Faith should not stand in the wise∣dome of men, but in the po∣wer of God. And seeing it is given to us not onely to beleeve on Christ, but also
to suffer for his sake, not onely the Act of Faith, is the worke of Gods power, but also our actuall suffring with patience for our faith▪ Hence Paul to Timothy: 2 Tim 1.8. Bee not asamed of the Testimony of the Lord, nor of mee his pri∣soner, but bee thou partaker of the affliction of the Gosll, ac∣cording to the power of God So hee prayes that the Co∣lossians might be streng then∣ed with all might, C. l. 1 11. according to (Gods) glorious power, unto all patience and long suffring with joyfulnesse. SECT. 20. NOw for conclusion of this point; Foure ab∣surdities, issuing out of the Doctrine of common grace. if Faith, Re∣pentance, and generally the Fruit of Christs death an passion be onely. Condi∣tionall;
if we will believe, if we will Repent, if wee will apply the Fruit of Christs death unto our selves, then will these gosse absurdi∣ties (among many others) follow. For then first, Our be∣nefit by Christ shou'd be no more certaine then that which we had and lost in A∣dam. the Benesit we have by Christ, shall be as uncertaine as that wee had in and by Adam, which wee lost when it was left to his owne keeping. Happinesse was set before him, and propounded to him with Condition (which was re∣newed to the Jewes in the giving of the morall Law) doe this and live. Yea God gave him (and us in him) power to have kept that Condition, If hee had would; but he gave him not the power and grace that he should infallibly in very
deed keepe the same; Ad (as we in him) had powe to stand and not fall; ye power was never granted to him or any (by vertue of the first Covenant) to rise againe, Bernard. if hee or they did fall. But God now gives more grace, and workes in us the Conditions of his new Covenant, which con∣sists chiefly (not in Com∣mandements, but in his most gracious and free promises▪ Secondly, 2 God should be no more effectuall in good tn Satan in evill. if Gods gra and the efficacy of it reach no further then to moral swasion, (outwardly and inwardly) what doth God more towards the Conver∣sion then the devil to wards subversion of asinner? Thirdly, 3 Mans goodnesse should be more ascri∣bed to him selfe then to God. in the Conver∣sion of a sinner, more shoul be ascribed to nature the
to grace; to mans will then to God; because God (by common grace) onely moves, but man obeyes; Now no man is good in that barely, he is moved to his duety and admonished, but in that hee obeyes the ad∣monition, motive, or per∣swasion. And thus should man be good and doe good; (be Converted, have Faith, nd continue in weldoing) especially because hee so wills, not because God made him good, or gave im Faith and Repentance, &c. but onely because God dmonished him that hee hould be good, and called pon him by precepts, ex∣ortations, and promises, to believe and to be holy. Lastly, hence also it would follow, that the dif∣ference
betweene the go and the bad, The dif∣ference be∣tween the good and bad should be made by man him∣selfe and by nature. betweene the Children of God and  this World, as suppose be∣tweene Peter and Iud should be wholy made fr nature, not from gract because to use grace arig (that is, to yeeld consent and to will our owne Co∣version) is from mans  will, and that is from m∣ture; and so grace shou conferre, and afford  more to Peter, who converts then to Iudas, who remain unconverted; which is co∣trary to that of the Apost saying, and asking: W distinguisheth thee, or mak thee differ from another And, what hast thou that th didst not receive? 1 Cor. 47. Now  thou didst receive it, why do thou glory as if thou hadst n received i?
This Text cutts the broat of free will, And the coerted should have just cause to glory even in Gods sight and o erthrowes the errour of niversall or cōmon grace. or so might Peter boast nd glory, and that justly with God; for if God by is common grace give on∣y a possibility to will our owne Conversion or not, and mans will afford the ct, or to be willing to con∣ert, then grace grants no ore to Peter then to Iudas; nd therefore Peter diffe enceth him selfe from Iudas,  as all true Converts from others) by something of his owne, and proper to him∣selfe; for they differ not eally by any grace of God, which they afore hand have eceived, wherewith they might freely worke and to operate with Gods grace,
or not. For both receive the same grace in common, and a power to will their own Conversion, So as that they may also nill it; This grace being thus farre com∣mon, puts no difference betweene them. What doth it then? Peter wills what Iudas wills not: Hee will make use of that common helpe afforded of God, and that out of his owne Liber∣ty of will and power of nature, Iudas (having the same Liberty and power) will not; Dr. Ward in Con∣ciore de gratia dis∣criminante. So that the dif∣ference betweene them is in the last place brought to that free Co-operation and working, which each of them hath from his natu∣rall power and inbred Li∣berty of will; So that it will invincibly follow that Peter
may glory in Gods sight after this manner, as even a Popish Writer (handling this argument against the Iesuites) brings him in thus speaking: Lord I give thee thankes that thou hast in mer∣cy conferred unto mee super∣naturall helpe; namely, to be able to will mine owne Con∣version; Bannez. in 2. q. 10. art. 1. document 30. but yet thou hast af∣forded the like and equall helpe unto Iudas, my fellow Disci∣ple; Howbeit J have added to that thou hast given mee, that which by the supernatural power thou didst not give me; namely, the will (actually) to convert; and where as I re∣ceived no more then he, yet I have done & wrought more thē he, in asmuch as I now be come justified, and hee remaines in his sinnes; Therefore I owe no more to thee and to thy grace
then this Judas who is not Converted. Now, Sic Au∣gusti. d praedestinat. Sanctor. c. 5. saith this Authour, and so say I, Christian E abhor to heare this boast∣ing; For it were pride is the highest so to thinke, and extreame blasphemy so to speake. Hence wee con∣clude, that Peter, and so all true Converts, doe receive from God, not only a power to convert if they will, but the very good will it selfe, whereby they consent and accept of grace offered; yea they receive not onely common grace, but that grace which eminently doth difference them from others, and that grace is from Gods predestination.
SECT. 21. F now we further take a view, It is fur∣ther shew∣ed whence mans con∣version is. It is from Gods spe∣ciall grace, who re∣moves the aforesaid impedi∣ments. 2 T. 2.25. As and aske whence is power of thinking, con∣iving, Willing, speaking, be∣nning, doing, and perfecting good worke is (for such ings are done as wee see he Faith full, and in such ive and dye in the Faith  feare of God) the an∣er is readily given; It is not from our selves so) m God and his effectuall ee; for hee it is that re∣oves the first. Obstacle spoken of) which is our turall Ignorance, by re∣ling his will effectually those that are hi, giving em Repentance, to the ac∣owledgement of the Truth. Which effect, though to
the Ministers and Teachers of the Truth (who know not before-hand the effec of their ministery in regard especially of particular per∣sons) it goe with a perad∣venture, Our ig∣norance. yet in regard  God, and of those who God hath given unto Christ it is without all peradven∣ture; and given according to Gods good pleasure, with speciall choyce  some, not al, and that by the free gift and gracious work∣ing of Christ, according to that of Christ him selfe I thanke thee O Father because thou hast hi these things from the wi and prudent, Mat. 11.25, 26, 27. and hast re∣vealed them unto Babe Even so Father, for so  seemed good in thy sight  All things are delivere
to me of my Father; And no man knoweth the Son but the Father; Neither knoweth any man the Fa∣ther save the Sonne, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveale him. See Iohn 6.45. The second impediment which was our naturall un∣eliefe, Our un∣beliefe. Ephes. 2.13. making us fly from God) he removes by giving is Sonne Christ, and offring imselfe propitious to us in im, there by holding out e Golden Scepter; yea aking us (who sometimes ere farre off) nigh by the oud of Christ. But thirdly and chiefely, Our na∣turall in∣ability. e takes away that naturall ability which is in us, by abling and giving not ely power to Repent, Be∣ve, and doe good, and to
persevere therein, but the very act of al these, (as is of∣ten noted) Is. 26.12. Phi. 2.1. So that now Paul, who look∣ing to his owne strength, could say for himselfe and others, We are not sufficient of our selves, to thinke any thing as of our selves; yet else where can say, 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 4.13. I can doe all things through Christ which strengtheneth me and our sufficiency is of G▪ Which wrk of God is di∣verly called in Scrip∣ture. Now this sufficient grace of God is his efficient or ef∣fectuall grace, as is proved. In which regard the worke of Gods grace and spir in Scripture is called  Creation, Psal. 51 12. Eph. .10. Vivification, Ephes. 2. Regeneratiō, Ioh. 3.5. Re∣novation, Eph. 4.23. Th taking a way of the sto heart and giving a hea
of Flesh. Ezek. 36.26. Con∣version Ier. 31.18. A Draw∣ing. Ioh. 6.44. A pulling a man out of the Kingdome of Darkenesse, into the Kingdome of Light. Col 1.13. I Peter 2.9. Acts 26.18. A working of the will and deed. Phil. 2.13. A writing of the Law in the heart. Ier. 31.33. In a word A rai∣sing from the dead John 5.25 Eph. 2.5. SECT. 22. THerefore all this grace and power is from God, and not from us; For, who can make or Create himselfe? Or who can raise himselfe from death by his owne power? Objection: Yea, but wee are not wholy dead, but
have some free-will. What may be ascribed to man, what must be ascrided to God. I an∣swer: We indeed will free∣ly what we will, but we can∣not attaine to will that which is savingly good; Our will is not corrupt or dead, in regard of the roote and beginning of such actions as are within its reach and power, but in regard of the Terme or Object: So that though it hath some Liber∣ty in things within the com∣passe of reason, Non quoad vadicem a∣gendi, sed erminum. yet it can no more reach to its owne conversion, or to doe things truely and Spiritualy good, as of it selfe, then the thing created to its owne Crea∣tion, or then the Child that is borne to its owne beget∣ting, or then Lazarus did to the raising of hims;elfe from death. This Worke (especially
of Conversion and Faith) as we have heard, is ascri∣bed to the same power which raised Christ from the dead, Eph. 1.19.20. And it is said by Christ: Iohn 6 44. No man can come unto mee, except the Father, which hath sent mee, draw him. And I will raise him up at the last day. Noting that both these require the same power, and that wee are as unable to doe the one, or to come to Christ, as the other; namely, to raise our selves from the dead; As then it was Gods power, and it onely which did at first create the World by his Word, which was opera∣tive, whereby God said: G. 1.3. Let there be Light, and there was Light, &c.) So it must be, and is the same mighty power, which by his word
begets, and creates us anew Yea a greater power seeme to be required; because i our Creation nothing re∣sisted, whereas in our repa∣ration and new Creatie our wicked wills resist and with stand as much as is them lyeth, so that Gods power appeareth in subdu∣ing and taking away this evill disposition of our wills, making us of unwil∣ling and rebellious, most willing and obsequious. The grace then afforded us, (which is as S. Angustin calls it, the grace of God by Jesus Christ,) is not onely a monitory grace whereby (whether outwardly or in∣wardly) hee would by his suasions incline us (for this is not enough, unlesse God first create in us spirituall
Life, whereby wee may heare and yeeld to his mo∣ives: For where there is no Life, swasions can take no place, no more then if Cicero with his eloquence should seeke to move the affecti∣pns of a dead man;) neither s it a common universall grace, assisting all and each like; but it is such a grace s gives to the Soule a spi∣rituall and divine being, which is to the Soule as health to the body, (yea more,) and which hath mans Liberty under the power of it, so as to make use of it, and to rule in mans will as it pleaseth, without offring any violence there∣unto, and without prejudi∣cing the Liberty of it, or its free manner of working, In a word, this grace is
which first workes thi good will, and then workes by it. It is that in ward mo∣ving, and effectuall grace, which is both praevenie quâ velimus, & subsequens ∣srustra velimus; That is, it both prevents us whereby we will, and it followes  (and accompanieth us con∣tinually) that wee will no in vaine; (or that we fall no a way from our stedfast∣nesse;) What our Churches Dectrine is herein. This is also the Doctrine of our Church in the tenth Article, which te us, wee cannot turne and prepare our selves by ou naturall strength and good workes to Faith and calling upon God, and that we have no power to doe good works pleasant and accep∣table to God, without the grace of God preventing
hat wee may have a good will, land working in us, when we have that good Will. SECT. 23. This Doctrine (being the very plaine and evident uth of God, Vse hereof. as wee have eene) both lets us see what ur duty is towards him, also what is the immuta∣lity of his counsell and ood purpose to us. 1. Hence we learne to give all glory to God, and not to  selves. We are hence taught  give all glory unto God, d not to glory in our lves; and for ever to re∣ember that of the Apostle, at we learne not to think of others or of our selves) ove that which is written, at no one of you (saith ee) bee puffed up for ont
against another, (much les∣then against God himself for who maketh thee t differ from another, and what hast thou that thou  not received; Now if th didst received it, why dost  glory, as if thou hadst not re∣ceived it? Let God th have all the glory of tha grace and goodnesse wher∣by thou differest from ∣nother; for it is hee wh hath predestinated us, un the adoption of Childre by Jesus Christ, to himself according to the good pl sure of his will; Ephes. 1.5. To the Pra of the glory of his grace,  But in such case, let us w the Psalmist in another ca say, Ps. 115.1. and that from the hear Not unto us O Lord, not  us, but to thy name g glory.
Thus to doe is truely Christian; Thus to do is Chri∣stian. For God hath so (according to his eternall Counsell) disposed of all things here below, 1 Cor. 1.29. Ir. 9.24. Rom. 3▪27. Rom. 4.2. that no fles should glory in his pre∣sence. Let him then that glori∣eth, glory in this, saith the Lord, that he understandeth and knoweth me that I am the Lord that exerciseth loving kindnesse, &c. The Law or Faith excludes all boasting in our selves: otherwise if wee will bring ought of our owne, we may rejoyce and glory, but not before God. To glory in our selvs is heathe∣nth. Bet us then leave all glory∣ing to the prophane Hea∣then, who indeed, wholy ignorant of Gods grace, have avouched, that we tru∣ly and justly may glory of our vertue; Which say they wee would never doe if it
were the gift of God, and not a thing of our own; And saith another, it is one prin∣cipall step to happinesse, for a man to admire himselfe, that is, to doate upon his owne excellency. Let us then give glory to God, Ciro de nat. Deorú, lib. 3. Sene∣ca de vita Beata, c. 8. Popish. and depend wholy upon him, and on his grace. Papists (not to say others) will be as little beholding to Gods grace as may bee, where they imagine their owne will and naturall strength to bee sufficient, there they think not the gift of speciall grace to be so necessary: they thinke it need full to make us to doe good duties, Bellarmde gratia, &c. ib. 5. c. 7. more easily & readily; So that to over∣come tentations, that no sin be committed, they doe not alwayes require Gods spe∣ciall
helpe, that is internall illumination, and superna∣turall motion, but any help whatsoever; But what a∣vailes it to be a Christian, if this be so? The Heathen indeed thinke they may come to happinesse, and a∣voyd all sinne, by the good Husbanding of their owne Freewill; and therefore flat∣ter themselves, saying, it is enough that they pray to Jupiter, for long Life and riches; As for a good mind and vertue, they wold give that to themselves, (and so not be beholding to Jupiter fr it,) Herat. Ep. 18. Lib. 1. so one flattered a great man, saying: The Gods grant thee long life, for as for other things, thou wilt give them to thy selfe. Now these are no Poeti∣call flourishes, but agree∣able
to the Doctrine and most serious meditations of their best Philosophers; Dit tibi det annos, tran∣quille caetera smes, sint mdo virtu∣ti tempora long a tuae Ovid. lib. 2. de ponto Eleg. 1. a Germanic. Arisot. in Ethic. Sene. Ep. 31. Ep. 54. Iemish. seeing great Aristotle, the Master of morality tells us, that both vertue and vice are in our power, or else we were neither to be prai∣sed for weldoing, nor dis∣praised for ill-doing; and that every man is the for∣ger of his owne Fortune Hence Seneca is angry with those that trouble the Gods with their prayers, that they might bee happy; say∣ing withall, make thy selfe happy: Ye hee tells u moreover, that in some re∣spct man hath the d van∣tage of God himselfe, see∣ing God is happy by the benefi of nature, but man is happy by his owne good Husbanding of his min
that is, God is happy, and cannot be otherwise; He is happy of necessity, but a good man is so by his owne Election & choyce, (whēce by the way wee see from whose forge wee receive those Doctrines, wch dayly do somagnifie mans power▪ gainst Gods grace, even frō Philosophers & Poets) hereun∣o ad what I read cōcerning ne Barcozba a Jew, Morn. de veritate re∣ligions Christ. c. 29. who would make himselfe Christ though it were forty yeares fter the destruction of the econd Temple,) & who hav∣g gathered ahūdred thou nd men about him did so rust to their invincible rēgth, as that he did cut off e of each of their singers; d going to battell he was ōt to say, Prophane. help us not thou ord of the World, seeing ou hast forsaken us, &c.
Answerable to which arto∣gancy is that of the gre Turke of late, who at∣tempting against Polan presumed even without▪ Gods assent, that they we able to destroy that Nati∣on; for when the chie Muphty, at the instance  Scander Basha, Generall ∣gainst the Polonians, ap∣pointed solemne prayers i their Meschites, for the good successe of his Army; the Great Turke did forbi them; saying, that without any ayde from God, the were able by their own forces to destroy the Polo∣nians; as was intimated  our late Soveraigne of f mous and happy Memery King Iames by the Cou George Ossolniski Ambas∣sadour of the King; of Po∣land,
in his Oration to him. See from these Exam∣ples what a height of pride men, who admire them elves, and trust in their wne strength, may attaine nto; Even to think them∣elves, if not in whole, yet n part sufficient without God; every one carries an dol in his heart, which is a ans owne selfe, whom he eft to himselfe) would set p against God himselfe sse or more. To conclude this applica∣on, wee see how justly S. ustin of old, and wee now ay challenge the enemies f Gods grace, with mani∣st dishonour done unto od, & monstrous pride, hich appears from hence; ecause in very deed, such n neither pray aright, Such can never pray right. nor
give thankes unto God fe any good thing; For sar S. Austin, August. de nat. & gra∣tia. c. 18. what is more foo∣lish then to pray for th which I have in mine ow power? And so may I s to our new Masters, what  that which I am to begg and aske of God? Is it su cient grace? Nay they w tell mee, I enjoy that alrea∣dy, by Covenant (in Ba∣tisine, D. Prid. lect. 4. in which is given  each sufficiēt grace to ser God if they will) and this have with such Hypocrit as never begge it. Is it th the good use of that grace But this I can draw into A by mine owne endeavou out of the inbred indi rencie of mine owne free will. Nor be tru∣ly thankefll Now who I pray y can seriously begge that  another, which hee hath
possesseth already? yea or ew can any be truly thāk∣ll for that which hee hath ot so much received as gi∣en and himselfe afforded? ow can wee glorifie God y offering him praise when ee aseribe (though but in art and in the second lace) the praise and power f weldoing to our selves? et them see to it who will ave Gods grace in mans Conversion to be common, niversall and such as they also partake as truly of, yea nd as effectually, who re∣maine unconverted. SECT. 24. SEcondly, the aforesaid Doctrine lets us see the immutability of Gods good
purpose, Vse 2, To com∣fort us from the immuta∣bility of Gods pur∣pose and promises. manifested by his promises towards those that are his; And so (to our unspeakable comfort) armes us against all doubt and conceits of our own unworthinesse, inability, frailty, and readinesse to fall from his grace, for a the freenesse of his promi∣ses and grace prevents our pride, so the firmnesse of his purpose, and most cer∣taine, powerfull, and inde∣pendant performance of his promises should preve our feares. For Gods pur∣pose according to Election, doth and will stand, not of our workes (or of any thing or power in man) but of him that calleth. Rom. 9.11. Though then Gods promises of Life and Salvation doe in Scripture runne with Condition, and
o are made generally to all  at least to all in the (Church,) that none may ave just cause to complain r blame God, but them∣selves if they attaine not to ife; Yet the performance of the Condition, On which and not on our selves, his grace and our salvation depends. and con∣sequently the thing promi∣sed are made (in regard of he Elect) to depend upon Gods most free grace and power, and so the effects of Gods grace and love are in u but the free grace, favour and love it selfe, together with the power working these, are in God, & there∣fore are immutable, and consequently our happy estate, and our Salvation (which depends not on our selves, but on these) is infi∣nitly more safe, being thus in God, then it could be in
us our Justification, Faith, Sanctification and Perseve∣rance, and so our Salvation should bee most mutable, if they de pēded on our selves, (so that wee may give such men leave to hold a falling a way frō grace, who make it to depēd on themselves, on their owne acceptation or rejection,) but blessed be God who hath underta∣ken for these also, and will accordingly as he hath most absolutely promised, so ef∣fectually worke in us, what∣soever he hath promised. If any should ake con∣cerning the World, why it continueth so long? Why the Sunne doth consantly rise and set, and why night and day, with the Seasons of the yeare doe so constāt∣ly succeed one another?
The answer is, that the wis∣ome, power, and provi∣ence, by which the World  governed, is not in the reatures themselves, nei∣eer depends on them, ei∣er Angels or Men, but on e most immutable God, se all things would soone ll into confusion & ruine; en so is it in this busines ere of mans Salvation (so ten mentioned) Happy en are wee, and most safe,  in matters of this nature ee (not neglecting the eanes) do ascribe nothing  our selves but all to od. Tutiores v∣vimus si to∣tum Deo damus, &c. August. It is most dangerous  ascribe too little to the ace of God; (said a wise d Learned Prelat;) for en wee robbe him of is ry. But if we ascribe too le to our selves, there i
no danger; To ascribe all to God the safest. for whatsoever we take from our selves, it cannot hinder us from be∣ing true Christians; But if wee ascribe that to the strength of our owne na∣ture, which is the proper worke of grace, then doe we blemish Gods glory. SECT. 25. THere remaines yet one maine question, To what end then are Gods precepts S exhor∣tations? and doubt to be resolved, and so wee will conclude:  things be thus, why the doth God command an exhort us to that which  not in our power to per forme? This question is ne needlesse, seeing from suc exhortations & command in Scripture: 1 Commo Christians doe gather
¦bility in us to keep all Gods commandments. 2. The need∣fulnesse of this que∣stion. The Lutherans and others would conclude universall grace, and the like possibility, to doe or not to do the things commanded and exhorted unto, seeing such commāds and exhortations are made to all, (especially in the Church,) in common to good and bad. 3 Both they in part, and chiefely Papists would hence establish (be∣sides the other) freedome of will, which we hitherto have overthrowne. I answer then in particu∣ar to the doubt propoun∣ded: The an∣swer. 1 Our strength now is not to be mea∣sured by Gods com∣mande∣ments. Three things; first wee must not measure our strength by Gods commād∣nents, so much wee may nd must learne out of Scripture; God commands
us to love him, saying: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart & with all thy soule, Mat. 22.37. and with all thy minde. So also wee may read in Deut. Deut. 30.6. 6.5. Yet the same Lord tells us also, that hee himselfe must first Cir∣cumcise our hearts to love him Saying by Moses: The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy Ge with all thine heart and wif all thy seule, that thou ma live. And to the like effect are all those places named concerning Faith, remiss of sin, Repentance, new ob∣dience, Perseverance, yea humility; all which God re∣quires at our hands, yea and exhorts us unto; yet as we have seene, See Sect. 9, 10, 11, 12 13, 14. we worke no these, but God by his effe∣ctuall
grace, and according to his promise, worketh them in us. So to specifie it, and to shew it in some of these more expressy, Christ saith: Come unto mee all yee that labour; yet the same mouth saith: Mat. 11.28. No man an come unto mee, Iohn 6.44. except the Father which hath sent mee draw him. So God bids us urne: Turne ye even unto me ith all your heart &c. Ioel 2.12. Yet aith Ephraim: Ier. 31.18. Turne thou e, & I shall bee turned. And he Church, Lament. 5.21. urne thou us unto thee O ord, and we shall bee turned; nd in very deed wee can∣ot suspirare, sigh for sin, nlesse God doe first in pi∣are, inspire and breathe it , Rom. 8.26. God must ause his winde to blow, & breath into us the Spi∣rit
of Life) before these waters (of repētant teares) doe flow. Psal. 147.18 So againe: Learne to doe well. Isa. 1.17. and Ia. 2.12. So doe as they, &c. And here: Happy are ye if y doe them. And yet saith our Saviour Christ: Without me ye can doe nothing. Iohn 15.6. And so for knowledge David spea∣keth thus: 1 Chrs. 28.9 And thou Solo∣mon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father &c. And here: If we know these things, &c. at. 11.27 And yet saith Christ: No man knoweth the Father save the son, and hee to when∣soever the Son will reveal him. And John 6.46. SECT. 26. SEcondly, Gods precepts and exhor∣tations are grounded on his pro∣mise. such Exhorta∣tions and Precepts have their foundation & ground,
not on our naturall power, but on Gods promises, as is said, 1 Thes. 5.23, 24. and on the new Cove∣nant. So, the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly; and I pray God, your whole spirit and soule and body, bee preser∣ved blamelesse unto the com∣ming of our Lord Iesus Christ; then it followes: Faithfull is he that calleth you, who will also doe it. Phil. 2.12. 13. So worke out your owne Salvation with feare and trembling; For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to doe of his good pleasure. So, Wash yee, make yee cleane, Isa. 1.16. Ezek. 36.2 saith God by his Prophet Isa. But by his Prophet Ezekiel: I will sprin∣kle Water upon you, and yee shall be cleane; and I will clense you. So, walke before me, Gen. 17.1. Ezek 36.27 Rom. 6.12.14. an bee thou perfect. And, I wild cause you to walke in my sta∣tutes.
Lastly, Let not sinne reigne in your mortall bodies. And, Rom. 6.12.14. sinne shall not reigne or have Dominion over you, &c. Rom. 6.12.14. SECT. 27. THirdly, These exhortati∣ons are not yet in vain. 1. Not in regard of the repro∣bate, who thus are told what they shold have done. Luke 12.47. and lastly: I say, that yet such Ex∣hortations and Command∣ments are not in vaine, but serve for very good ends, and that both in regard of the reprobate and Elect. 1 The reprobate, are hence put in minde what they should doe, or should have done, and what once they had power to have done. Secondly thus they are left without excuse, They are thus convinced as was Pharach. Exod. 8.1. as knowing Gods will, but not doing it; and Gods justice is thus made more manifest
in their condemnation, they cannot say they now perish for want of meanes, but because they are awanting to the meanes. Such com∣mands then are not in vain, though the thing comman∣ded bee not performed; for God hath other ends, (which hee is not bound to make knowne to us) why he commands such things. God sends Moses to Pharaoh, bidding him say unto him: Let my people goe, that they may serve me; Which was often repeated, yet the e∣ent shewed that the secret pleasure and purpose of God was, that hee should not let them goe: yea God also told Moses so much say∣ing: Exod. 11.10 Pharaoh shall not hear∣en unto you, (and a reason s given,) that my wonders
may be multiplied in the Land of Egypt. (And see Rom. 9.17. and Exod. 9.16. (And then it is added: & the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, so that he would not let the Chil∣dren of Israel goe out of his Land. Now though Pharaoh (as others his like now) stood bound to obey this Com∣mandement, And the Cōmand∣ment in regard to God is not in vaine. yet Gods chief ayme herein was not Ph∣raohs obedience, but to con∣vince him of Rebellion and hardnesse of heart; and so according to Gods inten∣tion it was properly a Com∣mandement of Conviction, so I may say as sound Di∣vines have said before me  Gods Word in the ministe∣ry of it, where the command is given to all to Repent and believe, is not to delud
men, though effectuall grace be not given to all so to doe; That Commande∣ment, though it should of all in duty be obeyed, and though in the intent of the Minister (who is to preach Faith and Repentance, 2 Tim. 2.25 and to call them thereunto, even those that oppose themselves) it have onely one end; namely, the Salva∣tion of those hee preaches unto, yet (as the event makes it plaine, by which God declares at length what his purpose was) in the intention and counsell of God it hath diverse ends; in them that are ordained o eternall Life it is a pre∣cept of obedience, because God will fully enable them to doe that which hee com∣mandeth: In the rest, it is
a Commandement of tryall or conviction; that to un∣believers, their sin might be discovered, and all ex∣cuse cut off. Thus when the precept is given to be∣lieve, but not the grace of Faith, God doth not delude, but reprove and convince men of unbeliefe, and that in his justice, because when they believe not, they sinne against grace offered them, and in some measure given them. So that from such Exhortations made in com∣mon to all, wee may not conclude, that God hath the same and alike good minde and intent infallibly to save all. Object. Yet God is not un∣just in so doing. Though God thus should attaine his end, and so in regard of him the Commandement should
not be in vaine; Yet should not this savour of great in∣justice and cruelty, to re∣quire a thing impossible to man left to himselfe? I answer, True,
Why? 1. 2. 3. 4. if God had not given man power and a possibility. 2. If Man had not willingly disabled himselfe, and drawne it up∣on himselfe, by his owne fault. 3. If man should now by grace aske (as he should) this ability to obey God, and to acknowledge his owne impotency, and be∣waile it. Yea 4. If God were bound to give it without asking; for man was at first made according to the Image of God, and had power sufficient given him, to have done whatsoever God should at any time have required of him. Sothat if man through his own default hath lost this power to obey God, yet God hath not lost his right to require his Obedience, wch he may justly doe, though he know man unable to discharge it. Hee may require it of a proud sinner to convince him, and to leave him with∣out excuse, as a man may require, and call for a debt of a great valew, which the debtor (falling into decay through his own ryotous∣nes & carelessenes) cannot now repay, especially if the debtour carry himselfe in∣solently and malepartly against the Creditour (as such men doe against God,) who may thus stoppe his mouth, and put him to si∣lence, yea to shame. But seeing they, in a sense of
their own inability, doe not aske this grace and power from God, God is not bound to give it unto them. But fifthly the truth is, man in the Gospell is not left wholly to himselfe: God both offers and gives more grace then he answers▪ so that if man repent and be∣lieve not when God calls him to it, hee sinnes against grace offered him, and a∣gainst the Gospell through his owne default (whether contempt or negligence) and so incurres greater condemnation then such as have not the same helpes meanes and grace offered them. 3. 3 They are thus re∣strained, and the godly live more peaceably by them. These Exhorta∣tions and precepts (unto which are annexed curses and punishments upon dis∣obedience) are howsoever
to restraine their naturall corruption (as in Herod) which else would breake out unto all outrage; So that there would be no living for the godly in the world if the feare of punishments upon their disobedience did not restraine the wick∣d Or howsoever, God 4. (in his justice) may doe this for the increase of their sin, their further hardning (after they have once hardned themselves against his grace) and just Condemna∣tion, as Isa 6.9.10. Heare ye. but understand not; and make the heart of this people fat. SECT. 28. SEcondly, Such pre∣cepts are not in vaine, in regard of the elect. 1. Vncon∣verted, who thus: 1. Are taught to deny them∣selves, and fiye to Christ. the Elect may be considered first as un∣converted; And first then,
such Exhortations and Cōmands are not in vaine; inasmuch, 1. As they prove to be the meanes of their Conversion; whilest seeing▪ hereby, and finding (upon riall) their own impotency o doe the thing required, nd consequently their mi∣ery if the things be not done, they are forced to fly ut of themselves, to seeke elpe where helpe may be ad, and that is from Christ  who is also preached and ffered to such as thus roaning under their owne urthen seeke and come to im for ease, Mat. 11.28. ome unto mee all yee that la∣ur and are heavy laden, &c.) thus the very Law is id to be our Schoolema∣er to Christ, Gal. 3.24. seeing it oves a preparation to
Conversion, by accident, yet by Gods singular provi∣dence towards his elect∣ones, who in a manner are forced to acknowledge their own unrighteousnesse and impotency, to despair of themselves, and to seeke righteousnesse and life i Christ the redeemer by Faith, Gal. 3.21. & 22. according to that:  there had beenè a Law give which could have given life very, righteousnesse sho have beene by the Law. But to Scripture hath concluded  under finne, that the prom by Faith of Iesus Christ mi be given to them that believ This then teacheth the what especially to beg  Gods hand, And to seek help where it only may be had. namely, there newing of their nature b his power; Yea and stirre them up to beg the same
to pray for grace, and to use all good meanes besides, as the Word and Sacraments whereby they might attaine to saving and effectuall grace. Thus God bids his people turne unto him, saying: Ezck. 33.11. Turne yee, turne yee from your evill wayes, for why will yee dye Oh house of Israel? And they pray to him now (sen∣sible of their owne inabi∣lity) saying: Lam. 5.21 Turne thou us ob Lord, and we shalbe turned. Let us runne, Heb. 12.1. 1 Cor. 9.24. saith the Apostle, with patience the ace that is set before us: And, so runne that yee may obtaine; Now the affection of Gods people is expressed in that of David: Ps. 119.32. I will runne the way of thy Commandements when thou shalt enlarge my eart; And by that of the
Church: Cant. 1.4. Draw me, and we will runne after thee. Thus againe David speak∣ing to God: Psal. 119.4.5. Thou hast com∣manded us to keepe thy pre∣cepts diligently. (It seemes then it is in our power so to doe; No, therefore hee knowing his own impoten∣cy, flyes to God, by prayer, saying:) O that my wayes were directed to keepe thy statuter; And, thus the Imperative in Scripture doth not beget the Potentiall, but only the optative. Hence, Da Domine quod jubes, & jube quod vis, & non frustra subebis. Au. de bono per∣sever. ca 20. S. Austin: Lor give mee power to doe wh thou commandest, then con∣mand and require of me wh thou pleasest, and thou sh not require it in vaine. And accordingly it may be no∣ted, that there is not any thing required of us in all
Gods Commandements, oth Legall and Evangeli∣all, but for the effect of it, ve are directed, enjoyned, nd called upon to seeke he same of God by prayer, n some or other of the pe∣tions of the Lords Prayer; s might be at large decla∣ed, and as I elsewhere have hewed; So that if God quire our obedience, as every where hee doth both for matter and manner, say ng, So speake yee, Iam. 2 12. and so doe ee, &c. And here: Happy are yee if yee doe them. This should but stirre us up to pray, as in the Lords prayer: Thy will bee done in Earth as it is in Heaven; Psa. 143.10 and as David prayeth, Teach mee to doe hy will, for thou art my God Wee may then very truely say, that for God thus to
require of us things to us impossible, is a very grea Benefit, because it is the way for us to attaine to a possibility and power to doe what he commands. SECT. 29. ANd this now is second∣ly to be considered, 2 Are in∣deed con∣verted. tha by such Exhortations and Commands the Elect are indeed converted. Seeing these are Sanctified of God as meanes to this end, Such pre∣cepts and exhortati∣ons being sanctified of God as means of convertion. Heb. 4 12£ and as instruments by which the Holy ghost renewes the will, and doth convert it for by the meanes of such his precepts and Exhorta∣tions the Holy Ghost uset to shew forth its power i the Conversion of sinners With his Commandement
and Exhortations God oucheth the heart, and o∣peneth it, to attend, to re∣eive the Word, and to bey it, as in those converts, Acts 2.37. and in Lydia, Acts 16.14. Yea with his Word (which is operative) he gives grace, strength, and power, Acts 3.6.7. & 12.16. and himselfe performes hat which hee requires. As when Peter said to the lame man: Rise up and walke; Immediatly his feete and ancle ones received strength, and be leaped up stood and walked, &c. But by whose power? His owne? Nay, not by the power of Peter, much lesse by his owne power; But onely by the name and power of Jesus, who wrought with Peters word. Thus Christ cryed to La∣zarus, who had beene dead
foure dayes, saying, Laza¦rus come forth, But what po∣wer had dead Lazarus so to doe? Yet Lazarus, even hee that was dead, came forth, &c. He arose from the dead (as wee shall all doe hereafter) but not by his owne power, but Christs Yet the rising is ascribed unto him, though the pow∣er by which hee arose was onely Christs. So wee are taught to preach and speak even to such as are dead in sinne, and to say to them: Awake thou that sleepest, Ephes. 5.14. and arise from the dead. And yet though they bee dead, our exhortation is not in vaine, where it pleaseth God to make it effectuall (whose Spirit as the winde, bloweth and, worketh where it will, in every one that is borne
of God, Joh. 3.8.) & Christ gives unto them Light and Life. This at once shewes that uch precepts and exhorta∣ons doe neither imply any ower in us, now as of our lves, to Convert, Repent, d to Beleeve, and do well, hough wee are said to onvert, Repent, and Be∣ve) neither are they in ine, seeing though God quire, that which is im∣ssible to us, yet he gives  power to us to doe that ich he requires; namely, Repent and Beleeve, and obey; this hee doth in  here, and will fully ish and perfect in his od time hereafter.
SECTION. 30. BUt now, Con∣verted, who are put in mind to stirre up grace in them. 2 Tim. 1.6. lastly, let u consider the Elect a thus already converted, and then such precepts and ad∣monitions are not in vaine For 1. now having receive a new Life, they are th put in minde to stirre  (as one would do fire) God grace in them; which with out such Exhortations,  a weake fire under gree wood would soone decay And to worke out the Salvation with feare a trembling, that is, w much humility, and w as little selfe-confidence. 2 They are thus ad∣nished to seeke after pe∣ction, To seek after per∣fection, and to be thankfull. to seek to Christ  for their preservation
erseverance; And to consi∣er what Christ hath done or them, that so they ight bee more thankfull nd carefull, by all holy & ood endeavours, to doe nd performe what God on eir parts doth and may astly require by way of re∣itall at their hands. Such Exhortations then  them doe help to keepe  this Heavenly fire; For od preserves thē by such eanes, who otherwise of emselves are ready to de∣rt from, yea and to fall om grace received. Therefore is that Caveat, e heed Brethren, Heb. 3.12.13. least there  any of you an evill heart  beleefe, in departing from  God; But exhort  the daily, while it is ed to day, least any of you
be hardned through the deceit∣fulnesse of sinne. 2 Cor. 6.1. Thus also doth Paul and Timothy ex∣hort the Corinthians, say∣ing: We beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God i vaine. Such exhortation are not to insinuate tha men may or shall at lea fall from the grace of pra destination, or from th grace of Gods effectua calling, which proceed from God, and comes to  by way of Gods eterna purpose; for this is mo constant and unchangabl Rom. 11.29. But least the fall away, God preser them by such exhortati (his owne and others) as  the meanes of their safe And God may justly  quire of those whom  hath once effectually call
nd quickned by grace, the ight use and employment of such talents as they have eceived. Yea it would ow bee greater shame to hem, if being made strong, nd furnished with Spiritu∣ll Weapons, they should ot resist Satan, sinne, and mptation, but suffer the heefe to robbe, & spoyle em of their graces. SECT. 31: TO conclude all; These ex∣hortations expell se∣curity, though Gods grace work all. these Exhortations and com∣ands, though they be not  our owne power to doe d keepe accordingly, yet e see they are not in vaine t have their speciall use any wayes, yea we are by  meanes to neglect them, lesse we will neglect our
owne Salvation. Though the power be Gods, yet th duty is ours; And God pro∣mising his power, require yet of us our endevours▪ Therefore saith he, Labo or worke not for the meat th perisheth, Iohn 6.27. but for that whic endureth to everlasting Life which the Sonne of Man sh give unto you. Though th Sonne will give it us, ye not without our labour so worke cut your Salvation For it is God that worketh? Philia. 12.13. you, &c. Though it be God that workes, yea an will worke in us, yet we must not neglect to work As wee Ministers the must labour and still cast  our Nets, Ministers must ex∣hort. yea bee patie though of a long time we catch nothing, in meekn instructing those that op∣pose
themselves, (expecting if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth; 2 Tim. 2.25 and must rest as∣sured, that we bring glory to God even in those that perish, and that the peace which we preach in and by the Gospell, (whereof they judge themselves unwor∣thy,) shall returne to us a gaine, and our worke still be with the Lord. So all generally are hence taught to depend on the publike ministery, And the people must de∣pend on the pub∣lick mini∣stery. and on the Word of Exhortation, seeing God compels us not, but gently drawes us; and neither to expect that God by Enthusiasme and imme∣diate revelation without the word should inspire us, or yet so farre to presume
on Gods decree of praede∣stination of us (either the one way or the other) as either to expect and hope to attaine eternall Life, (be∣ing the end) without a care∣ll, conscionable, & con∣stant use of the Meanes, or yet to despaire of attaining nto Life, if wee with any good conscience doe use the Meanes. SECT. 32. THe consideration o our Election, The cer∣tainty of Gods ele∣ction and of Gods grace, shold whet our dili∣gence to all good duties. whether we have the knowledge o it or no, and the certaine and infallible performance of all Gods promises (which wee have so fully proved) should whet our diligence in all good duties, teaching us to labour earnestly for
Faith and all other saving graces, which as they are the meanes of our Salvati∣on, so are they the evidence of our Election; As we are chosen to Salvation (and to attaine it) through sanctifi∣cation of the Spirit and be∣leef of the Truth; So are we to give all diligence to make our calling and Election sure; 2 Thes. 2.13 2 Pet. 1.10. For, saith S. Peter, if yee doe these things, ye shall never fall. As Faith and Repentance, & like graces are blessings, in regard of God, & so doe befall the Elect, most cer∣tainely; whereof also hee gives them assurance, by his most free and absolute pro∣mises, Ephes. 1.3. and by his Covenant of Grace: So are they (most of them at least) duties, in regard of us, being requi∣red of all (living especially
in the Church) and such as from which none may ex∣empt themselves. Though then we should know our selves to be ele∣cted to life, Such as know their ele∣ction, must not neglect the means. yet wee are by no meanes to neglect the meanes of Life; as hearing of the word Faith, Repen∣tance, prayer, perseverance, &c. Seeing God hath as well foreordained us to the meanes as to the end, to these as well as to life; yea to life by these meanes; so that if any will neglect the meanes, let him never look to attaine the end. So that I avow it, and say, that if it were possible that the Elect should not bee sanctified, should not beleeve, or not use the meanes (being cal∣led to the use of them) upon that supposall they should
never attaine to life, but perish eternally; So Paul concluded in a like case; Hee was assured of safety for himselfe, and those that sailed with him; yet said he most truly, except these (the mariners) abide in the ship, and so use the meanes of safety appointed of God yee cannot be saved. Hebr. 12.14 See Acts 27.22.24.25. with verses 30.31. Luke 13.3. Therefore say I to such: Follow peace and holi∣nesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. And, Iohn 8.24. ex∣cept ye repent, yee shall all like∣wise perish. And if ye beleeve not, saith Christ, that I am he, yee shall dye in your sinnes, Iohn 3.36. and hee that beleeveth not the Sonne shall not see Life. On the other hand, Much Iess should such as know it not a yet. let not the wickedest that tru∣ly repent and beleeve, des∣paire
of Life; Let them do well, and they most un∣doubtedly shall have well; God himselfe could say to Cain, whom yet hee knew to be a reprobate: Gen. 4.7. if thou dost well, shalt thou not be ac∣cepted? And I as truly may say to all (one and other) as our Saviour in my Text: If yee know these things, happy are ye if ye doe them. Exclude not thou thy selfe, & Gods Word will not exclude thee; doe thou thy duty, and attend to the Word; (as for Gods secret counll meddle not with it, neier search into it, and I am sure God hath not revealed to any in particular aforehād, that they are reprobates) and flye to God, though he seeme an enemy unto thee; at least put it to this adven∣ture,
and say to God as the Lepers reasoned concerning the Syrians: if he kill us, we shall but dye; See 2 Kings 7.3.4. And with the Nini∣vites, saying when they heard a terrible threatning absolutely (for the forme of it) denounced: Iona 3.9. who knoweth if God will returne & repent, &c. Repent thou, and put it to the tryall (otherwise thou shalt most undoubted∣ly perish) & thou shalt finde unexpected successe. Oh that we durst or would but take tryall of Gods Truth, and promised mercies. Oh that God would make this exhortation (working po∣erfully by it) effectuall to he calling home of his owne. But howsoever let us all know that wee must expect
an end answerable to our doings. All must expect an end answe∣rable to their do∣ings. If then, saith Paul, yee live after the flesh, yee shall dye; but if through the Spirit yee doe mortifie the deeds of the body, yee shall live; Be not deceived, God is not mocked; For whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reape; Rom. 8.13. For he that soweth to the flesh, Gal. 6.7, 8. shall of the flesh reape cor∣ruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reape Life everla∣sting. Cease then to doe evill, learne to doe well; If ye be willing and obedient, Isa. 1.16, 17, 19.20. yee shall eate the good of the Land; But if ye refuse and rebell, ye shall be de∣voured with the Sword; for the month of the Lord hath spoken it. Know it then for a certainty, that
God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them who by pa∣tient continuance in weldoing seeke for glory, honour, Rom. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and immortality, eternall Life; But to them that are contenti∣ous and do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousnesse, In∣dignation and Wrath, Tribu∣lation and anguish upon every soule of man that doth evill; But glory, honour and peace to every man that worketh good. And so I conclude, saying with my Text: If ye know these things, happy are yee if ye doe them. A COROLLARIE. SECT. 33. WHereas Truth is e∣ver consonant to it
selfe, A generall inference from the foregoing discourse. and that there is no reall and true contradicti∣on in the Scriptures, but a sweet Harmony and Ana∣logie, proportion, and cor∣respondence, betweene and among all the parts there∣of; and seeing the Scrip∣tures are so evident and ex∣ceeding plaine, pregnant and full. For the proofe of the powerfull determi∣ning, and most effectuall operation of Gods grace, and of the most certaine performance of Gods con∣ditionall promises, by his undoubted working and effecting of the required Conditions themselves, ac∣cording to his most abs∣lute and free promises, and his new Covenant made in Christ, as now hath beene shewed; we may from such
pregnant proofes and evi∣dence of Scripture cōceive of the truth of such other points and articles, Teaching us how to conceive of other con∣troverted points. as have either dependance on, or reference unto the afore∣said evident doctrin, which (some of them especially) perhaps are not so cleare unto us, partly through the doubtfullnesse & seeming obscurity of some texts of Scripture; partly and espe∣cially by reason of the blindnesse, and yet selfe wisedome of mans corrupt reason, who is ready to conceive of God onely, ac∣cording to his owne fancy, or at least not willing to entertaine any thought of God, but such as hee can well in reason conceive of. Now these other points
are especially the Doctrine of predestination, As of pre∣destinati∣on, the end of Christs death, cer∣tainty of salvation and perse∣verance. namely of election and reprobati∣on, the efficacy, intention, & end of Christs death, the certainty of Salvation, both in it selfe and to us, with the perseverance of the Saints in grace, without falling away from it, either finally or totally, with o∣ther lesser, yet like points which our Church of Eng∣land and other Reformed Churches doe hold and maintaine against Pelagians▪ Papists, Semipelagians, Re∣monstrants, or Arminians, and Socinians. SECT. 34. ITs true, all other points doe chiefely depend up on the Doctrine or Gods
predestination; All other points are framed, ac∣cording to the do∣strine of Gods pre∣destinati∣on. and as it is conceived of by either party, so and accordingly all other heads of Doctrine are framed. But whereas our Adversaries charge us with an unwillingnesse in handling that Controversie, they doe it very falsly. For our men begin with it and prove it substantially out of holy Scriptures, to the full Conviction (though not satisfaction) of our re∣fractory Adversaries; And doe accordingly thence conclude against universall grace and redemption, (which extend not them∣selves beyond the Decree, Collat. Ha∣giens. p. 489. and are no more Conditi∣onall then the Decree it selfe, which Gods Word makes absolute and inde∣pendant;) So against the
Apostasie of the Saints, and uncertainty of Salvation▪ &c. But yet it is as true, that there is that necessary a∣greement amongst all these points of Controversie, that holding any of these latter points as we, according to Scripture, doe hold and maintaine them; Predesti∣nation (as those other points also) must be main∣tained just in that manner, and no otherwise then wee hold and teach it, (which yet is according to the Scriptures,) Ibid. Though the Re∣monstrants make free∣will their Helena, and according∣ly frame other points. which the same our Adversaries cannot (wholy) deny. Though to speake as the thing is, the Remonstrants, pretending to make the Doctrine of predestination the sole and onely contro∣versie,
and accordingly to reduce and frame all other controverted points there∣unto; hoping for great advantage hereby, and pre∣suming to make their Doctrine, especially concer∣ning reprobation, passe for current amongst the vulgar or most, because of the plausiblenesse thereof; and because every common understanding cannot clear it so easily, of the odious, though most unjust, impu∣tations laid upon it, as, that it makes God the Author of mans sin, unjust, cruell, and tyrannicall. &c. Yet I say in very deed, the onely Helena, which they as their Friends the Papists, doe so earnestly strive and con∣tend for, is the power of nature and liberty, indif∣ferency,
and freedome of mans will, and naturall power in workes and acti∣ons supernaturall; This they doe, will, and must maintaine, and accordingly they frame their predesti∣nation, and all their other Tenets, opposing mainely the Doctrine so clearely laid down in the Scripture, and now taught (though by me but weakly) in this present Treatise. Against this especially they bend all their forces, (though in vaine) as knowing that if this free, powerfull and determining grace of God in mans conversion espe∣cially) be granted and suf∣fred to stand, then of neces∣sity the whole Fabricke of their predestination and other Tenets must all of
them fall before it, as Dagon before the Arke of God. SECT. 35. SEeing then that (as our Churches Doctrine is) the Church may not so ex∣pound one place of the Scripture, Artic. 20. From the Doctrine taught of Gods free and effe∣ctual grace we may in∣ferre, that it be repug∣nant to another; And that the places brought for proof of this one point, are so pregnant, we are there∣fore to conclude also, 1. That Gods eternall decree of Election is as ab∣solute as are his promises, That his election is not condi∣tionall, or of all, but absolute & indepen∣dant. for effecting in us what hee requires of us; (on which indeed the promises de∣pend;) and that his election is not of al, with Condition of their workes, (as the Papists would have it) of
Faith, (as the Arminians would have it,) or of humi∣lity and meekenesse (as our new refiners frame it,) but of those few only, to whom hee hath absolutely in his new Covenant promised, and in whom he effectually in time worketh all these, both Faith, Humility, and other graces. 2. That Gods effectuall grace, That grace and redempti∣on are not universall. and the Redemption wrought by Christ, is not (in the Arminian sence) universall and common, equally intended for all, and that Christ by his death hath not obtained Recon∣ciliation and remission of sinne, for all and each. So that if any place of Scrip∣ture to us see me to import otherwise; it must be ex∣pounded (as indeed the
hardest places of all may) agreeable to such most e∣vident Texts, as whereon the foregoing discourse is built, and must admit of such an exposition, as is agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, and not repugnant thereunto. 3. That, That the salva∣tion and finall per∣severance of the Saints is certaine. as Gods promises of grace are most free, and absolute, and doe infallibly and necessarily take place; So also, not onely the Election, but Salvation, and so the finall perseverance in grace of Gods Children, s most certaine and infal∣ible, as not depending on man himselfe, but on Gods purpose, promise, That the faith∣full may be assured of their salvation. and power. 4. That consequently the Elect, after Conversion, may be assured and ascer∣tained
by their Faith, in these absolute promises (to their unspeakable comfort) of their Election and Sal∣vation, and not only of their present estate and being in grace. . FINIS.
THE SECOND TREATISE Concerning, The extent of Christs Death and Love. With an Aditionall Further clearing the Doctrine. By the same Author. The Contents may briefely bee viewed in the Margent. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for L. Blaikelocke at his shop at the Sugar-Loafe next Temple-Bar in Fleete-streete, 1642.
THE Extent of Christs Death and Love. EPHES. 5.2. And walke in Love, as Christ also loved us, and hath given himselfe for us &c. HAving spent the greatest part of an houre in hand∣ling the Duty of Love, with the kinds, activenesse and Constancy
of it: as also the Motive thereunto, Christs Love to us, which is also an Example and Pattern; Christs love consi∣dered. I considered Christs Love as a Fountaine and Roote, And then the effect and fruit of it in giving himselfe for us. For the first, As a root and cause why he died. I considered Christs Love with the Ob∣ject of it, us; shewing it (as also the Love of the Fa∣ther) to be, 1. Free, not depending on any thing in man. Rom. 11.35, 36. 2. Eternall, as being 1. from eternity, Jer. 31.3. 2. To Eteruity. Iohn 13.1. Rom. 8.39. 3. Great and infinite. John 15.13. Greater Love hath no mn then this, that a m lay downe his life for his friends.
This was such a love as whereby hee paid the ut∣most farthing due to our sinne. Vse. 1. And so it is not a common love, but specially of some. To account no∣thing too deare for Him, &c. 2. Therefore this is not a common, but a choise love: and therefore seeing it is such a love as he could not have shewed greater, Let any judg whether it is like∣ly that hee with like and equall love and intention died for all and each, re∣probate as well as Elect, otherwise then either in re∣gard of the sufficiency of the price paid, or of a com∣mon love and Philanthro∣py: and whether he loved, whilest he died, the repro∣bate, Judas, Pilate, (yea Cain and Pharao then in Hell)
with the greatest love of all, As only of the elect. and so that hee could not have shewed them greater love. For surely then there should have beene for them not onely an impetration of reconci∣liation, remission and sal∣vation, but also an effectu∣all Application thereof, as in the elect. This greatest love then respects the elect onely and such men as are infallibly to be saved. For the second, According to the ef∣fect of it, his death. (And hath given himselfe for us.) not to insist on these par∣ticulars, 1. Who gave him∣selfe? Christ, God-man, 2. Whom gave hee, or what, not an Angell, &c. but himselfe: not silver and gold, &c. 1 Peter 1.18. 3. What to be, an offering and a sacrifice, &c.
4. To Whom; not to Satan, but to God, and that by way of price. That which is chiefly of us now to be considered is, For whom especially did Christ die, or give him∣selfe? 5. For whom Christ gave himselfe: For us, sayth the Text. 1. For us, enemies and sinners. Rom. 5.6.8.10. but so we are all. Therefore, 2. For us] especially the elect, and such as doe be∣leeve. See the Apostles owne exposition, Verse 23. Not for all mankind alike. The husband is the head of the wif, even as Christ is the Head of his Church, and he is the Sa∣viour of the body. Christ is the head and husband of his Church, and these are holy ones, the elect people of God whom the Holy Ghost doth sanctify, as in
our common Catechisme. Christ then is an Head of such as Adam was of all mankind. As only of the elect. He is the head of his Church. For though Christ tooke on him mans nature, yet not as it is common. Howsoever, as in each wo∣man is the nature of man in common, yet each man is not each womans husband and head, but hers onely to whom hee is joyned in a speciall bond and contract, so here. Can wee say all the wide World is Christs Church, or that every man throughout the world from the beginning belongs as a member to this Head and Church? So, And Savi∣our of his body. Christ is said to bee the Saviour of the body. He is a Saviour of all, but espe∣cially of those that believe▪ 1 Tim. 4.10. Do all be∣lieve?
no, all men have not faith. 1 Thes. 3.2. Are all members of Christs Body? So Verse 25, Christ loved the Church and gave himselfe for it, that hee might san∣ctifie it, &c. Where Christs spirituall Love and intent is shewed, whilest hee of∣fered himselfe, in regard of the infallible conferring of salvation, by vertue of which love and Merits of Christ the elect have Faith, holinesse, perseverance and eternall life infallibly con∣ferred upon them, as lear∣ned Abbats reasons out of Romans 8.32. Abbats de veritate gratiae Christ p. 36 Hee that spared not his owne Sonne, but de∣livered him up for us all: how shall hee not with him also freely give us all things? For whom therefore pro∣perly
hee gave his Sonne, God gi∣ving Christ, gives with him all things, to those also with his Sonne hee gives all things; Re∣pentance, Faith, Hope, Cha∣rity, Perseverance, his Spi∣rit, and by it, whatsoever is needfull to salvation. But these hee gives not to all; and therefore all are not alike loved, or alike in the Death of Christ. There∣fore where the Apostle saith, Pro quibus nobis? prae∣scitis, in∣quit, praede∣stinati, &c. Au∣gst Ioh. tract. 45. Christ was delivered up for us all, Saint Augustine asketh, for which us? and answereth, for us whom hee did foreknow, predesti∣nate, justify, glorify: as Verse 30. Of whom it followes, Ʋse 33, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? There is a power then in Christs Death: Tit 2.14. hee gave himselfe for us, that hee might redeeme us from all iniquity,
and purifie to himselfe a pecu∣liar people, zealous of good Workes. Redemp∣tion in∣cludes, 1. Gods acceptati∣on. And Redemption includes, 1. Acceptation into Gods favour, but is Christs offering a sweete smelling savour in regard of every one? so it must be for every one whom hee thus loved, and for whom he gave himself, it includes Remission (even actuall re∣mission) of sinne. Eph. 1.7. Pardon of sin. In whom wee have Redemp∣tion through his blood, the forgivenesse of sinnes, so Colos. 1.14. Have all remission of sinnes? 3. Free∣dom from the power of sinne. Sanctification and free∣dome from the power and rage of sinne, Redemption is from our vaine conversa∣tion, 1 Peter 1.18. And here Ephes. 5 25, 26. Hee loved the Church and gave himselfe
for it, that hee might sanctify and clense it, &c. but are all sanctified. In a word, Christ giving himselfe as a Husband to his Church indues his Church with all his riches (oh how rich is every mem∣ber of Christ!) As God gives his Sonne, and the Sonne himselfe, so he gives with him all things also, as is said Rom. 8.32. What are these things? And all things be∣longing to life and godlinesse. All things pertaining to life and godlinesse—to glory and vertue, 2 Pet. 1.3. That is, all things belonging both to the end and meanes: unto both which wee are elected: 2 Thes. 2.13. —God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation (lo, Which all men have not. there is the end) through sanctification of the spirit, and beliefe of the
truth (lo, these are the meanes.) But see 1 Cor. 1.30 Christ is made to us (namely such as for whom hee specially gives himselfe) wisedome, Christ not being to all, but to some only, righteousnesse, Sanctification, and redemption. 1 Wisedome, what? Wisdome to all alike? no: I thanke thee O Father because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto Babes; even so Fa∣ther, for so it seemed good in thy sight. 2 Righteousnesse: What? Righte∣ousnesse. to all? Onely to such as have faith, Rom. 1.17. & 3.22. The righteousnesse of God which is by faith of Iesus Christ, unto all and upon all that beleeve; but all have not faith, as is said; faith is the gift of God. Eph. 2.7.
Therefore is it called the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1. All are not of God, and therefore beleeve not, heare and obey not, Ioh. 8.46.47. why do ye not beleeve me (saith Christ) hee that is of God hea∣reth Gods words: ye therefore heare them not, because ye are not of God. All are not Christs sheepe, and there∣fore all beleeve not; ye be∣leeve not, said Christ againe to the Jewes, because yee are not of my sheepe—my sheepe heare my vorce. Ioh. 10.26.27. 3 Christ is to his, Sanctifi∣cation. Sancti∣fication; this is a fruit of the word, (Sanctifie them through thy truth, thy word is truth, Ioh. 17.17.) and a gift of the Spirit. But is Christ san∣ctification to all? no 1. his word sanctifieth not all men, because never inten∣ded
for all Acts 16.6.7. Paul and Silas were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia: After they were come to Mysa, they assayed to goe into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not. 2 His Spirit, like the wind, blowes where it listeth, Ioh. 3.8. namely on the elect on∣ly savingly; hee for them by dying purchased the spi∣rit, by which his benefits are made effectuall. 4 Christ is made Re∣demption, but is that of all? Re∣demption. no. —Thou wast staine and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation. Revel. 5.9. Not all nations, but some out of all, according to that of Paul, explaining whom hee meanes by Vessells of mercy,
which God had afore prepared unto Glory, Rom. 9.23.24. even us (saith he) whom hee hath called, not of the Jewes onely, but of the Gentiles: he saith not all us Jews, or all us Gentiles, but us of the Iewes and Gentiles. Objection. This do∣ctrine is not against the do∣ctrine of our Church. This is a∣gainst the doctrine of our Church, which tells us that the offering of Christ made up∣on the crosse, is a full, perfect and sufficient sacrifice, oblati∣on and satisfaction for the fins of the whole world. I answer, no: The Church indeed useth the phrase of Scrip∣ture, but not against the sense of Scripture, whose meaning therefore is the same with that of the Scrip∣ture; for our Church doth tell us, Artic. 20. that (as it is not law∣full for the Church to ordaine any thing that is contrary to
Gods Word, so, neither) may it so expound one place of Scripture that it be repugnant to another. Therefore our Church useth not the Scrip∣ture phrase so as to bee re∣pugnant to those other pla∣ces named, or yet to it selfe which (besides much more that might bee said) in the 17. article, tells us, That God hath decreed by his Coun∣sell secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he hath chosen in Christ out of mankind. So that, see∣ing to deliver from curse and damnation is the effect of Christs death according to the everlasting purpose of God, Therefore Christ hath not redeemed all mankind, so as to deliver them from curse and damnation, see∣ing his everlasting purpose
and constant decree was to deliver from curse & dam∣nation, not all Mankind, but those whom hee hath chosen in Christ out of mankind. Re∣demption, in Gods purpose and intention, reacheth not beyond the decree. Our Church then doth not deny universall re∣demption: Which de∣nies the e∣quall ap∣plication of redemp∣tion to all. for we truly say with it and with the Scrip∣ture, Christ died for all. Yet it denies that equall and universall Application of this redemption, whose e∣vent is suspended, & hangs either on the libertie of mans will, or on any condi∣tion in man (which God will not work.) We deny not, but say that Christ paid a price for all, but such as is to bee applied to each by the meanes of faith, which
is not of all, and not by the very act or fact of his oblati∣on, so that, faith being pre∣supposed, & comming be∣tweene, all and each are ca∣pable of salvation, and they are such as, beleeving, shall be saved. Objection. But doth not the Scripture invite all, and make promises to all, and that truly, not fainedly? Math. 11.28. 1 Tim. 2.4. Rom. 11.32: I adswer, The pro∣mises are made to all upon con∣dition of faith. there is none but may truly and seriously be invited to partake of the pardon of sinne and of life by Christs death, upon the condition of Faith. Bee it knowne unto you, that through this man is preached unto you the forgivenesse of sinnes, Act. 13.38.39. And by him all that be∣leeve are justified &c. And
elsewhere, Acts 10.43 To him give all the prophets witnesse, that through his name, whosoever beleeveth in him, shall receive remission of sinnes. Now this is grounded on the me∣rit of Christs death: Which ge∣nerality is grounded upon Rom. 3.24, 25. The me∣rits of Christs death. wee be∣ing justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus: whom God hath set forth to be a propitia∣tion, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousnesse for the remission of sins &c. In this regard and upon this ground, if I were a∣mong the Barbarous hea∣then, among Jewes, Turks and Infidells, I (if I could speake to be understood of them) would first endea∣vour to let them know Christ and his benefits, and then I would seriously in∣vite them all to beleeve on
him, yea and would assu∣redly in Christs name, pro∣mise unto all true penitents and beleevers among them, pardon of sinne and life e∣ternall, having (though I be no Apostle) warrant for the same from our Saviour himselfe, saying, Ma. 16.15 16. Goyee into all the world, and preach the Gospell to every creature, hee that beleeveth and is baptized, shall be saved: but hee that be∣leeveth not shall bee damned. And I would ground such exhortations and promises upon the merits of Christs death, Gods Word conjoynes insepara∣bly, faith and salva∣tion. the fruit whereof doth actually belong to such onely as beleeve, as is said. So Gods word doth teach us, whose will (as wee see in his word) doth immu∣tably tye and conjoyne to∣gether repentance and par∣don,
faith and salvation, and contrariwise. It excludes from pardon the impeni¦tent, and from salvation the unbeleever, upon which ground I say, if Pharaoh o∣bey and beleeve, he shall be saved: If the Ninevites be∣leeve they shall not perish. There's no falshood nor mockery here, seeing the promise is conditionall. And though it be said by some, Gerh. d. Enchirid. consolator. Dy. that God inviting all, such is his heart inwardly as he hath manifested him∣selfe outwardly, and that he beares the same mind to us, which hee shewed to us in his sonne Christ, who is the image as of his essence, so of his will, and that wee must not thinke he shewes himselfe kind outwardly, and yet inwardly hates us.
I answer, Men must not be too bold to inferre that God should equivocate and deale hypocritically with men, whilest hee in∣vites and calls them to that whereunto hee effectually workes not. How God even seri∣ously in∣vites men in his word Though Je∣suiticall equivocations and Reservations doe falsify and destroy the Propositi∣on uttered, yet Gods secret decrees never destroy or falsify his will revealed; seeing as is said, Gods will in his word doth connexe and tye together the end and the meanes, repentance and pardon, faith and sal∣vation, life (eternall) and Godlinesse, 2 Pt. 1.3. glory and vertue▪ (Both which and all things pertaining to both, his di∣vine power doth give unto s.) Neither is the tru o
this connexe by any decree of God, or sinne of man broken. And as for Gods will, what Gods will, made knowne by Christ, is. whereof Christ is both the Image and the interpreter, we may see it declared by himselfe, in these words. First, Ioh. 6, 37.38, 39, 40. saith hee, All that the Father giveth mee, shall come to me: and him that commeth to mee, I will in no wise cast out; then hee ads immediat∣ly, for I came downe from heaven, not to doe mine own will, but the will of him tha sent me. And this is the Fa∣thers will which hath sent me that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up againe at th last day. And this is the wi of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Sonne and beleeveth on him may have e∣verlasting
life. Lo, Gods will in Christ is not to save any but such as beleeve (I speake not now of infants) & all such he will save; How God wills not the death of the wic∣ked. God then wills mens salvation in willing their faith and Re∣pentance: and so he wills not (yea and sweares hee wills not, or hath no plea∣sure in) the death of the wic∣ed, Ezek. 33. in that hee wills not their sinne and impeniten∣y: Therefore its said, 11 cleared I ave no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the ricked turne from his way and ve: (thats it especially which God hath pleasure in.) Therefore it is added, Turne ye, turne yee from your vill wayes, for why will yee die O house of Israell? as if he ad said, if ye will not turn, yee must assuredly dye: I
have inseparably conjoy∣ned these two together, im∣penitency (persisted in) and death. The truth is, in that place of Ezekiel, The people conceiving that evills did befall them not for their owne, but for their parents sinnes, saying The Fathers have eaten soure grapes, Ezek. 18.2.4. and ver. 19.20.21.22.23. and the childrens teeth are set on edg, the Lord there Ezek. 18. Where this same doctrine and point is hand∣led, sweares that — the soul which sinneth shall dye (whe∣ther the soule of the Fathe or of the sonne) and tha the sonne shall not beare th iniquitie of the Father — bu if the wicked will turne fr all his sinnes — hee shall sure live, and not die. And the it followes, have I any plea¦sure at all that the wicke
should dye? and not that hee should returne from his wayes and live? and 31. cast away from you all your trangressions— for hy will ye die, O house of Is∣rell. God therefore answe∣ing their objection, who thought themselves puni∣hed for their parents sins, denies the same, and tells them it is for their owne sinnes; and whereas they thus spake, Ezek. 33.10 11. if our transgressi∣ons and our sinnes bee upon us, and we pine away in them, how hould wee then live? The answer in effect is, by re∣pentance; unto which God accordingly exhorts them, saying and swearing, as I live, I have no pleasure &c. as formerly; so he sweares, he had rather they should repent and live (seeing these
two are inseparable, and without repentance, no life) then persist in impeni∣tency (whilest they shuffled off their sinnes to their Fa∣thers) and so perish: (which two also are inseparable:) so that if they persist in im∣penitency, his will then is they shall perish. God doth truly will the death of im∣penitent sinners, who will deny it? and when he wills not their death, it is as much as if hee had said hee will not their sinne and impenitency: but if they would goe on in sinne, hee must and did will their death. Therefore he saith, turne ye, turne yee, why will ye dye? i. Why will ye run upon your owne death? and yet hee assures them by oath) they dyed not but
for their sinne, though they thought otherwise. So, on the other hand, How God wills the salvation of all. God wills mens salvatiō, in willing their faith and re∣pentance, & so he wills that all men should be saved; 1 Tim, 2, 4. and so wills the salvation even of such as perish; but how? first by approving it if it were done, Even of such as per. 1 By ap∣proving   , not by decree∣ing the event. but not by decreeing the extent, nor yet so as to worke it by speciall and ef∣fectuall grace. The obedi∣ence and faith, suppose of Pharaoh, had beene a thing pleasing to God: but it was not a thing to bee given by God from Gods decree. But for those that are saved hee so wills their salvation that hee decrees the same, and according to his de∣cree, infallibly produceth the same, according to that
of Christ, Ioh. 6 37. Ier. 31.3. All that the father giveth me, shall come unto me, and of God, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Therefore with loving kind∣nesse have I drawne thee. The one is according to his will revealed, The di∣stinction of Gods will secret and revea∣led justifi∣ed. his signifying will, the other according to his secret will, or the will of his good pleasure; which an∣cient distinction of the Schooles must not bee so seighted, or so easily cryed downe; and our Church doth hold it, Artic, 17 whilest in the 17. Article it useth first these words, hee hath con∣stantly decreed by his Coun∣sell secret to us: and these a∣gaine in the end of that ar∣ticle, In our doings that will of God is to bee followed which we have expressely declared un∣to us in the word of God. So
that it would not imperti∣nently be thought on what God wills by the will of his precept, and what hee wills by the will of his decree: what Gods will is to mee concerning that hee would have me doe, and what he wills with himselfe in his owne secret Counsell; what hee wills at my hand as my duty, what hee will bestow upon me freely as a blessing. God seriously wills mee to doe my duty, and shewes me what would bee acceptable to him, as name∣ly to pray for all men; 2.3. and to make no exception of any, but to further, every mans salvation: but, saith Austen, &   if the Church were certaine who (in particu∣lar) were predestinated to goe into everlasing fire
with the devill, It would as little pray for them (though yet living on earth) as it doth for him. 2 God so farre wills the salvation of all, By giving men so much grace as to leave them faul∣ty if they answer it not. that hee se∣riously exhorts sinners to repent, and accordingly in his Gospell gives them so much grace, knowledge and good motions and so far enables them thereun∣to, that there is a true fault in them that repent not; that is, there is either contempt or neglect of the Gospell, and so indeed, besides their o∣ther sinnes, a new fault a∣gainst the Gospell, whence their condemnation be∣comes the greater, and the condition of such as never heard of Christ more tole∣rable at the day of judge∣ment then theirs. Math. 11.21, 22, 23.24. There∣fore
(besides that God gave men power sufficient in A∣dam to doe what he requires and that men have disa∣bled themselves to doe that which hee otherwise hath right to require) I say God, upon the forenamed groūd, may seriously invite all, ex∣hort all, & require of them that, which hee gives them so much grace to performe, that it is out of their owne deficiency if they performe it not: & withall may pu∣nish them justly for not do∣ing it their perishing is of thē∣selves: Man is never puni∣shed but for his owne sinne. Onely God gives not that powerfull grace to them (as hee is not bound) by which (as depending on his election) infallibly they might convert.
Here is then the mystery; Christs merits are availeable to all be∣leevers: Though God invite all, and promise life to all upon the condition of faith, and that promise be grounded, as is granted, upon the merits of Christs death, yet the fruit of Christs death doth actu∣ally belong only to such as beleeve. The price paid for all, and which shall cer∣tainely bee to the salvation of beleevers, yet profits not all, But to be∣leeve is not gven to all. because faith is not given to all (as not the meanes of faith) but to the Elect one∣ly. We therefore preach and teach that Christ dyed for all, How Christ dy∣ed for all men. so as that all and each, may, by the vertue of Christs death, through faith (the Gospell once comming to them) may I say obtaine re∣mission of sin and life; and
so Christs death hath pur∣chased a possibility of sal∣vation for all men, if all men can beleeve. But wee say againe that Christ so dyed for the Elect that, How only for the Elect. by vertue of the merit of his death (which was specially intended for them according to Gods eternall decree) they not onely might, but should infallibly attaine faith here, and ob∣taine life eternall hereafter, (and that without any cō∣pulsion of their wills. Hence it comes to passe (though the particularitie of Gods promises be ob∣jected as an odious doctrine and comfortlesse) that the promises of the Gospell are of two sorts. Gerhard.  pri. Gds pro∣mises di∣stingusbed▪ 1. Condi∣tionall which are me ge∣nel. 1. Con¦ditionall, and of the end which is salvation, requi∣ring
faith and repentance; and so Gods promises are generall, and hee seriously invites all, and mocks none who performe the conditi∣on. Abso∣lute, which are parti∣cular. 2. Absolute, and of the Meanes: whereby, as he absolutely, (and without condition required of us) promised Christ himselfe Gen. 3.15. so also both the outward, and also inward effectuall Meanes, as the working of faith, writing his Lawes in our hearts, Ier. 31.33.34▪ and 32.40. putting his feare in our hearts that wee depart not from him, &c. Which, as they depend not on any condition in man, but only on Gods free, absolute and immutable decree, so doe they particu∣larly and specially belong to the Elect, and not to all. Let any shew me a promise
in Scripture whereby God hath promised to give faith universally to all without exception. But who these in particular are, the effects of Gods eternall love, manifested in time on and in them, doe and will shew and declare.
An Additionall. Shewing the true state of the aforesaid question (mistaken by the opposer) and the truth further strengthned by the same arguments (s the Doct∣rine of our Church and of Scrip∣ture)  which it was opose with the best way of econciling seeing contrarieties and trudictis of Sptu, in the oint of Gods free grace and mans Free-will. THe former Doctrin cocerning the ex∣tent of Christs Death, though seemingly opposed, yet was but light∣ly
hurt, seeing the true state of the question, as it was handled, was not so much as touched. That which the opposer undertooke to prove (on the Text, Arminian grounds for their universall Redempti∣on▪ Rom. 4.25.) was, That Christ died for the sinnes of all and each. Which he would prove. 1. from the Doctrine of our Church, or from some pas∣sages out of the Common Prayer Booke, Homilies and Articles. 2. From the Scripture, shewing that it teacheth that Christ died, 1. For the World. Iohn 3.16, 17. 1 Ioh. 2, 2. 2. For all men. Esay. 53.6. Tim. 2 6. Heb. 2.9. 3. For uch 1. as might hve perished, Rom. 14.15. 1 Cor. 3.11. 2. as do Perish 2 Pet. 2. 1. Heb. 6.6. With Lutheran answeres
to that interpretation which we give of these places. Now I, The true state of the questi∣on. Christ died not with like inten∣tion to save all. Which is shewed, (whose purpose was (and is) to defend my selfe and the Doctrine taught by me, and as it was taught by mee) doe avow that in all this, the state of the question is mistaken, which was not and is not, Whether Christ died for al men and each, but whether for all alike, and out of equall love, and a like intention of sa∣ving all. Therefore to the proofs brought and alledged I thinke good only to answer by opposing like, yea, much stronger proofs both from our Churches Doctrine, but especially from the Scrip∣tures. The chiefe difficulty will be in reconciling of the seeming differences.
1. Our Church, To be the doctrine of our Church, which sheweth Christ died for his ser∣vants and people. Te Deum. as it tells us of Christs full perfect and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sinnes of the whole World, so it tells us also for whom more spe∣cially he died, and whom he redeemed. Wee pray thee helpe thy servants whom thou host redeemed with thy most pretious bloud, and O Lord save thy people, What people? not all, and make thy chosen people joy full. But what people is that? not every people or person (alike) Thou hast multiplied the Na∣tion, and not increased the Ioy. Esay 9.3. According to the double expression of the promise made to Abra∣ham, Gen. 22.17. I will multiply thy seed s the Starres of the Heaven, (by which may, at least by allusion, But be∣lievers. be meant the chil∣dren of Abrahams faith,
the elect,) and as the sand, which is upon the Seashore. The darke sands are more in number, but not so light∣some as the Starres. So, Benedictus Who are these? Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for hee hath visited and redeemed his people: and thou diddest open the King∣dome of Heaven to all belie∣vers now, who are these his people and believers, his Church but the Church of God? Grant that by the Merits and Death of thy Sonne Iesus Christ, Commu∣nion. and through faith in his bloud, we and thy whole Church may ob∣taine remission of our sinnes▪ and all other benefits of his pas∣sion. And his elect people. Now who or what is this Church, but the chosen people of God, Collect for All Saints day. as, Almighty God who hast knit together thy elect in one Communion, and fellowship in the mysticall
body of thy Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, &c. Catechism answ. 6. So in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifyeth ee and all the Elect people of God. This last shewes what is ment by the former an∣swer—hath Redeemed mee and all mankind. Burial the first prayer. And Al∣mighty God—in whom the soules of them that bee elected, after they be delivered from the burthen of the flesh, be in joy and felicity. Let these be compared with these words, Collect for good Fri∣day. Almighty God, wee be∣seech thee graciously to behold this thy family, for the which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to bee betrayed— and to suffer Death upon the Crosse. So in the Homily or Ser∣mons of the salvation of mankind—Christ is now the righteousensse of all them Homily. fol. 13.
that truly doe believe in them, he for them paid the ransome by his Death, &c. The like in the 17▪ Article, Article 17. where wee are told that God hath decreed by his Counsell secret to us to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he hath chosen in Christ out of mankinde, &c. Now redemption from curse and damnation (the proper ef∣fect of Christs death) doth not, in Gods intention go beyond the decree (as a∣bove page 586.) And Ar∣ticle, And 29. 29. The wicked and such as be void of a lively fayth, although they do carnally and visibly presse with their teeth the Sa∣crament of the body and bloud of Christ, yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ; if in no wise, then he impetra∣ted
not for them remission of sinne and other benefits of his death. And these al∣legations may be opposed to those other which from the same bookes and doctrine of our Church have beene alleadged, sufficient to weaken whatsoever au∣thority either is or seemes to be in the same. The Scriptures also, It is the Doctrine of the Scriptures. as hath beene proved (page 12.3.) shew that Christ died not equally and with the same intention for all, see Tit. 2.14.—a peculiar people. so Ephes. 5.2. with 23.25. Hee is the Head of his Church of the elect, as for∣merly) and the Saviour of the body. Of his Church: so Ambrose, Ambrrs. in Luc. c. 7. l. 6. Though Christ suf∣fered for all, yet specially he suffered for us, because hee
suffered for his Church; wher∣by as one of our late wor∣thies infers, hee clearely signifieth that so Christ died for all, Abbot de verit gratiae Christi p. 35. Christ is the Head onely of his body and of his Church. as that yet in the death of Christ all are not to be thought or con∣ceived to be equal or alike: hee died in common for all, but specially for the Church: to wit his will was to satisfy for all by the dig∣nity and worth of the price paid, but by the will of his good purpose hee did im∣petrate (and obtaine par∣don) onely for the elect, that is, for the Church; so that wee may and must distinguish the greatnes of the price paid, and the pro∣priety of redemption. And what saith our Sa∣viour? Dying on∣ly for his sheepe. I ly downe my life for the sheepe. Iohn 10. verse 11.15.
If it bee said all men are Christs sheepe, that's, con∣futed, ver. 27, 28. compared with 26. for his sheepe heare is voyce — & never perish — but yee beleeve not, (saith he o those Jewes that would ot heare, i. Harken to and elieve his voyce) because ye e not of my sheepe. But its said (by the Ar∣inians,) Objection. they are called eepe, not in respect of eir present, but future ndition are they so, I will  retort: Retorted. and why then ay not God bee said also elect believers, that is, such  shall by Gods mercy be∣eve, which wee say; and  from so saying be for∣d to hold that onely such  doe, or are foreseene to lieve, forsooth by using e power of their owne
will aright, are elected. But their future condition is present, Answered. in Gods decree: and hee calls them sheepe even before their conver∣sion in respect of his de∣cree, as Ʋerse 16. Other sheep I have which are not of this fold, &c. These were given to Christ before they wer (actually) sheepe: eve that they might be so. Fo if they were not given t Christ till after, then the should give themselves t Christ, before God ga them to him—So Iohn 1.13. And for his friends. Christ laid downe his  for his friends: (that is,  Gods decree friends,  themselves enemies,) or  his Church, Redemptio which is the elect of Chri death, implieth in it a d∣verance of the redeem
from the power of darke∣nesse, and a translation of us into the Kingdom of his deare Sonne; yea remission of sins; in whom wee have redemption through his bloud, Colos. 1.13.14, 15. even the forgivenesse of sinnes. Now these belong not to all, but are the inheritance of the Saints, for whose redemp∣tion Christ more specially and intentionally died. These things and places of Scripture would be con∣sidered & thought on with those other places which simply an universalitie of Redemption. How the seeming differences of Scrip∣ture in this point may be recon∣ciled. And if there ee truth in the one; so is there also in the other. The Scriptures doe not contra∣dict, but explaine and in∣terpret themselves. How shall wee then Re∣concile these things? if the
right stating of the questi∣on, such as wee have heard, will not do it, what then will do it? I have heard of one, who, being a man of place, had a complaint came before him, and when hee heard the first party speake concluded it must needs be true hee said: and after, hearing the other tell his tale, (hee could not see but that) hee spake truth too: and yet one of them spake against the other. Doubtlesse his inability to decide the controversie pro∣ceeded from imbecillitie of judgement; Mens weaknesse of judge∣ment to do it. as doth also the Popes, who, though he pretend an infallibility  judgement, An ex∣ample in the Pope. and to be judge of controversies, yet whe this debate, or the like in∣cluding this, between
the Dominicans and Iesuits came before him and was discussed, Injuncti∣ons of si∣lence on both sides will not do . hee thought the best way of decision was to injoyne both party silence, so in effect leaving each side to believe his owne tenets as truth, when yet both cannot be true. But we are sure that Gods word is truth in all the parts of it, and in no part opposeth it selfe. What shall wee then do in our case? In a Pro∣clamation to suppresse Doctor  Booke Ia. 17. 1628. shall we recon∣cile these, by procuring a restraint of both parties, that neither by publicke reading, preaching or making bookes, either Pro or contra, concer∣ning these differences they be∣gin anew to dispute. This was once done, but in the in∣tentions of the procurers thereof, most subtilly and
fraudulently as wee have cause to imagine, if we may judge by the effects, for thereby quite contrary to his Majesties gracious in∣tentions, who desired peace, they made use of it for their own ends to promote the Arminian cause, play∣ing fast and loose with it, urging it only against their opposers, whilest others presumed to take liberty, presuming on the favour of such, as in case of com∣plaint they knew must bee their Judges. But (let the Kings throne ever be guilt∣lesse) this was, under such colour, made use of the Ar∣minian party, and inten∣ded by them, to supplant and suppresse the truth of God, which we know they had (and the rather by this
meanes) well nigh effected. This then is not the way. What then? how shall we then reconcile these dif∣ferences? wil the distinction of Impetration (by Christ) and Application (by man) doe it? The distin∣ction of Impetration by Christ, And Appli∣cation by the power of māswl. wl not doe it. as if Christ by his death and the merits of it did obtaine grace and re∣conciliation for all men, but did leave the effectuall ap∣plication thereof to them∣selves, and to the right use and imployment of their own free-will, giving them a power to believe, repent, and in a word, to be saved if they will, but leaving the will to themselves? Surely no. This hath beene suffi∣ciently confuted before. Christ is and must be a Sa∣viour both by the merit of his death, and by the efficacy,
and power of his Spirit, Christ is our Sai∣our as well by his spirit and the power thereof as by his Merit. the sending of the Spirit and giving it is a fruit of his death; and our justification is the effect both of his death and resurrection: yea re∣mission of sinnes is, as wee lately heard, a great part of our redemption. But thus to teach, what is it but to say that Christ did not ob∣taine that this his reconci∣liation should be applied to all for whom it was merit∣ed? or that deliverance is obtained for one, suppose in prison, but not that hee might (certainly) be delive∣red, no, we have heard the will is as well from God and his grace, as the Power, the act of beleeving as well as the power to beleeve if we will. God once giving Christ, gives all things need∣full
also, as it is said out of Rom 8.32.33, &c. This reconcilement then implieth first freewill in man: which is, as I conceive, Against mans free will. the maine marke which many shoot at, this (such is the pride of nature cor∣rupt) they must and will maintaine, and accordingly frame all other their te∣nents concerning Gods pre∣destination and the extent of Christs death, &c. to up∣hold this. But I aske: The elect are saved infallibly. did Christ onely die that wee might be saved if wee will? I know God compells no man; man wills freely when hee wills, as being inabled so to will by Gods effectu∣all grace: and so, And  in regard of God hee wills infallibly, and infallibly is saved, yet still in regard of himselfe,
freely (God sweetly drawing him & making him willing) even as chance and counsell may stand together. But for God and Christ only to pur∣chase this power, But not by power of their owne will. pardon and reconciliation, & then, for the application, Mans free∣will and choyse is determi∣ned by God. to leave it to the power of mans will (not specially actuated by God) what is this but to make Gods decree to hang upō mans will, when yet his decree determines al inferi∣our causes? Gods de∣cree should be uncer∣taine. 2. Yea to make Gods purposes and decree (for particular men especi∣ally) vncertaine seeing a cō∣ditionall decree (as well as a conditionall proposition) puts nothing into being (or affirmes nothing cer∣tainely) yea so it is possible God should not have a Church on earth, and Christ
should be a Head without a body or members, if their conversion depended thus on themselves: Adam when hee truely had freewill, And so should also conversion be. yet used it to his hurt: how much lesse can wee, now in state of corruption, and disabled by sinne, and ha∣ving the same Devill to tempt us, bee able to stand out against temptations? So that it is not only possible, but probable, if it were left to our will and choyce, that there should be no conver∣sion in the World, nay al∣most Impossible (all things considered) that it should be otherwise. No, no, The conversion, and so the preseverance in grace, and salvation of the elect, is not left uncertaine. See John 6.37. Ieremy. 31.3. & 32.40.
And 3. As Gods Word, so our Churches Doctrine is against freewill, as in the Collects for the second Sun∣day (as they call it) in Lent and for Easter day (for I know against whom I doe dispute,) Our Churches Doctrine is against fre-will. but especially in the tenth Article, where wee teach: Man cannot turne or prepare himselfe by his owne naturall strength and good workes to Faith and calling upon God. Wher∣fore wee have no power to do good workes acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that wee may have a good will, and working with us when wee have that good will. Againe, by this Doctrine▪ The differenting of one man from an other is left to
man himselfe (seeing God is alike in his love and in∣tent to all) which is directly contrary to the Apostle 1 Cor. 4.7. So is the Scripture. Who distingi∣sheth thee, or maketh thee to differ from another? 1 Cor. 4.7. And what hast thou which thou didst not receive? yea, and so a man might even glory with God himselfe, as that text shewes, and as hath beene shewed formerly. How then? shall wee, Diffe∣rences in Scrip∣ture recon∣ciled not by mens wresting of Scrip∣ture. (for the reconciling of these seeming differences) take upon us to interpret Scripture as we would have it speak for our owne pur∣pose? God forbid: Let us take the genuine sence, and it will agree well enough with other Scriptures, if we would use diligence and set aside foreconceits; only
our care must bee so to in∣terpret one place (which may seeme to make for our purpose) as to make and leave it consonant or to a∣gree with other places, and as it is commonly called, with the analogie or Proporti∣on of faith▪ But what if wee cannot make these agree, But by bringing their un∣derstan∣dings in obedience to the word, so as to satisfie our selves? In this case, let us ingenuously and as there is true cause, suspect, yea acknowledge our owne shallownesse and our Ignorance, which one∣ly makes all Contradictions in Scripture; must wee bee wiser or full out so wise as is God himselfe? If God please to keepe secret from us the connexion of things, the order and manner of his working, It will become us to search no further (for
there is no searching of his un∣derstanding) but to rest in that which is clearly revea∣led, By resting in things revealed, and in such things (so in the generall revealed, though for manner and cir∣cumstance not so clearly conceived) to deny our owne reason, and to bring with us an humility of under∣standing (I meane not in the Popish sence, to beleeve, by an implicite faith, what by mens authoritie, Without determi∣ning of things se∣cret. under pre∣tence of the Church shall be imposed upon us; but) to submit to the truth of Gods word, & of the Scrip∣tures, the authority of which is greater then the whole capaci∣tie of humane understanding and wit, as one speaketh, & that generally in all such things as we otherwise can se no reason of; as for ex¦ample:
when judgements, (like the overthrow of Sodom & Gomorrah &c.) were to befall Gods people of Israel and Judah, so that the question (in regard of the strangenesse & circum∣stances of the evills) was foretold to be, Deut. 29.23, 24, 25 wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this Land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger? men shall give this answer, and say, It was because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their fathers &c now this answer might soon & safely be given out of the revealed will and word of God: but if any would inquire further, as how or whence it came that God would suffer them so to provoke him, and not stay them by his power &c.
their mouth is stopt with that which followes, And verse 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may doe all the words of this Law. That they were destroyed, for their sinne is evident, that's revealed; but if you inquire into any higher cause in God, that's a secret, and we should sinne to seeke a rea∣son of his counsells; here wee should captivate our reason & understanding to Christs word, not diving in∣to the reason or depth of Gods doings and judgements, as knowing most certainely that both that is most true which he speaketh, and just which hee doth, as an ancient writer truly speaketh; and with
Paul cry out—O depth—how unsearchable are his judge∣ments, and his wayes past finding out? wee eannot call that unjust in which wee can∣not deny the judgement of God: Ro. 11.33. for his will is the chiefe and supreame Iustice of all: neither is that therefore not just which God doth, because man cannot comprehend the power of his Iustice, saith Sal∣vian. Curiositie condem∣ned, The instance given is not impertinent to the case in hand; Christ died for all men, yet the most of men by Gods just judge∣ment perish in their sinnes, and (if wee speake of those that have heard of Christ) in and for their unbeleefe and impenitencie. This is the onely cause of their pe∣rishing which wee are to looke unto: if we will needs
search and looke higher, As dange∣rous. & seeke out reasons of Gods will, we shall lose our selves and the truth too; if wee will needs pry into the arke, we shall be destroyed, with those of Bethshemesh; if wee will search and gaze upon the majesty of God and dive into those depths we shall bee overwhelmed with his glory, & perhaps, come into the bottomlesse depth of all: our onely wise∣dome will bee to become fools that we may bee wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. The best answer of doubtfull things in Scripture, is our faith to beleeve what God teacheth when wee see not the reason of it. if ever wee would profit in Gods Schoole; and to deny our owne reason where God denies to give a reason. Points of this Nature are matters of faith, not of dis∣pute; and faith will beleeve that it sees not, and yeeld its assent to those things the
causes whereof it knowe not: which rule I wish it were as well practised, as is well said by an Arminian. Of such things and doubts as we cannot easily answer, especially in reconciling seeming differences, bring faith (saith an ancient Fa∣ther and martyr) that is a ready solution of all doubts. Let us not leane to our owne understanding: Iusti. . none is (saith prosper) a more eloquen preacher and pub∣lisher of such deepe mysteries and secrets then he that con∣fesseth that the things which hee teacheth are such as can∣not be expressed. And so I will conclude with a say∣ing of Cajetane in the case of Gods particular Electi∣on of some according to his (Immutable) decree, Cajetane. in Rom. 9. and
of mans free-will (free from compulsion) which case in∣cludes this of ours, which is, Christ died for all men; and Christ died specially and with intention and purpose accor∣ding to Election to save some onely, namely the Elect: This onely will quiet our under∣standing. I find (saith he of the one, & I of the other,) both in the Scripture: both are true: now if you shall say, joyne these two true things together, make them agree J answer, I know for certaine that one truth is not contrary to a∣nother, but how to conjoyne them, I know not: This Ig∣norance quiets my under∣standing. And so in this our case, if that which hath otherwise beene said will not do it, seeing both truths are evidently taught in Scripture, Let not us op∣pose
the one to overthrow the other (for in the ence explaned, It may e an∣ted that Christ died  all men) but rather in this and in all other like cases, let  acknowledge our owne weaknesse of judgement and Ignorance; and let this Ignorance quiet and bound our understandings. FJNIS.
