L1209 12730926 66487
The Casuist Uncas'd, IN A DIALOGUE Betwixt RICHARD AND BAXTER, With a MODERATOR Between Them, For QUIETNESSE Sake. By Roger L'Estrange. The Second Edition. LONDON, rinted for H. Brome at the Signe of the Gun in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1680.
upon the Manners, as well as the Services of the Royall Party. What can I do better, then to face him with the Acts of the Assem∣bly, and the Proceedings of the Two Houses, to the Contrary? And to produce his own Act and Deed in evidence against his Profes∣sion? On the One hand, you have Mr. Baxter valuing himself up his Principles of Loyalty, and Obedience; And on the Other ha, you have the very same Mr. Baxter, (according to the Outward Man) not only pleading the Cause, but Celebrating the Justice, and Canonizing (as in his Saints Rest, Pa. 101. of the Old Edi∣tions) the Prime Directors and Instruments of The Late Rebel∣lion: Asserting the very Doctrine of Those Positions, whereupon it was founded. When Mr. Baxter Sets up for a Toleration; wh can be fairer then to shew him his own Arguments against it? Or to ask him, how HE, (a kinde of Heteroclite in his opinions,) that has Chalk'd out so singular a Plat-Form of Church-Regiment  himself, comes now to be a Common Advocate for all the Dis∣senting Parties? Take him in One Mood, (as in his Five Disputa∣tions, and elsewhere) and he tells ye, that a Diocesan Prelacy is plainly Antichristian, and Intolerable. And yet in his No-Conformists Plea, and other parts of his Writings, he tells ye agan, that the Nonconformists would have submitted to it. Now if the Constitution was so Abominable, why should they submit to it▪ And if it was not so, why does Mr. Baxter say that it was? An why does he still persist, in Debauching and Alienating the hea of the People from their Rulers, in matters which he himself acknow∣ledges to be Warrantable, and Established by Law? And so for  Liturgy and Ceremonies, he's at the same Variance with himself, about the Lawfulnesse, or Vnlawfulnesse of Those Points also. Now since Mr. Baxter has been pleased to take upon himself, the Patronage of the Non-Conformists Cause, and to put forth his Plea, and his Plea again for That Interest; what can be more Obi∣ging then to take him at his word, and consider him under the Publick Character of Their Representative? At This Rate, Mr. Baxters Works will be as good as a Non-conformists Dictionary to us: and assist the World toward the Vnderstanding of the Holy Dialect, i a Wonderful manner. For the Purity of the Gospell; the ways of Christ: the Ordinances of the Lord; the Power of Godlynesse; the Foundations of Faith; the Holy Discipline: A Blessed Re∣formation, &c. These are Words, and Expressions, that signify quite another thing to Them, then they do to Us. Faithful Pastors; Laborious Ministers; Heavenly Guides; Zealous Protestants;
The Upright in the Land: Humble Petitioners; Just Privi∣ledges; Higher Powers; Glorious Kings; Holy Covenanting unto the Lord, &c. This is not to be taken now, as the Language Crrant of the Nation, but only as a Privy Cypher of Intelligence betwixt Themselves, and the Cant, or Jargon of the Party. Nay, they fly from us in their Speech, their Manners, their Meaning, as well as in their Profession. The very Christ-Crosse in the Horn-Book is as much a Scandal to them, as the Crosse in Baptisme; and they make it a point of Honour to maintain the Freedome of their Own Tongue, in token, that they are not as yet a Conquer'd Nation. But are the Non-conformists agreed upon it, or not; that Mr. Baxter shall be their Speaker; and that what he delivers in Their Name, shall be taken and deemed as the sense of the Party? If it be so; we have no more to do then to Consult Mr. Baxter himself, and from his on Writings, (which I have here Cited, and Apply'd, with exact Faith, and Justice) to take our Measures of the Dissen∣ting Brethren. No man presses Obedience to the HIGHER POWERS, more Imperiously then He does: But then he makes Those Higher Powers to be still the Usurpers, one after another, as they get into ACTU∣AL POSSESSION. [Prove (says he) in the Preface to his Holy Common-Wealth) that the KING was the HIGHEST POWER, in the time of Division,—and I will offer my Head to Justice, as a Rebell.] His meaning must Inevitably be This; Either that the King had no Right to the Crown before the Divisi∣ons, or that he forfeited his Title, by the Rebellion; which is an Admirable way of Transition, from rank Treason, to Lawfull Au∣thority. But in all Thse Cases, he has still a Recourse for a Salvo to his Box of Distinctions: and tells ye, that they Shot at CHARLES STUART in the Field, for the Honour and Safety of the KING in the Two Houses: And then, Good Lord! How he runs himself out of Breath with Detesting, and Renouncing, and Renouncing, and Detesting KING-KILLING! And yet upon Occasion when Oliver the King-killer falls in his Way; How does he lay himself out in Euloyges, upon the PIOUS Defunct! Praying, (as the highest Instance of the Veneration he had for That Usurper) that the Spirit of the Father might descend up∣on the Son. [We pray (says he to Richard) that you may IN∣HERIT a tender care of the Cause of Christ] Key for Catho∣licks, Ep. Ded. But then in another Fit, he shall advance ye into,
his Politicks, with a Troop of Aphorismes; Lay Principalities and Powers Levell with the Ground, and tear up the very Ordi∣nance it self of Government by the Roots. [If Providence (Says he) STATEDLY, disable him that was the Governour &c.] Ho. Com. Thes. 136. [And yet he does not down-Right vow the Doctrine of King-Killing; He does indeed approve of giving Battle to the Kings WILL: but whether to aym at it, in his Maiestys HEAD, or in his HEART, is not, as yet, STATEDLY determin'd. Now t moderate the matter, The Presbyterians only cut off his Majestys Hands, and Feet, so that he could neither Help nor Shift for him∣self, and then gave him (Sold him I should say) to the Independents, Who cut off his Head. If Mr. Baxter speaks the Sence of the Non-Consormists, as he pretends to do, then must This serve for an Ex∣position of their Loyalty; But if not; Why does not the Party either disown or take away his Commission? This is it, which the Restlesse, and Implacable Adversaries of our Common Repose, make such a noyse in the World with, as the work of the spirit of Persecution; the Enflaming of Differences; the Widening of Breaches; and the Violation of the Act of Oblivion. Whereas, in Truth, there's nothing in it of a Spiteful Invective, but on the other side, it is only a playn, and a necessary defence. Mr. Baxter, in his Non-Conformists Pleas, delivers (in his way) a kind of Deduction of the War. Particularly, under the Head of [Matters of Fact to be fore-known, to the True Un∣derstanding of the Cause.] 2d Part. Pag. 120. In This Chapter, from the Question of the Constitution of Churches; the Powers of Princes, and Pastors in Eccclesiastical Matters, and Cases of Law∣ful Separation; he makes a Sally, without any manner of Connexi∣on, or Provocation, into the State and Right of the War. Pa. 123. He charges it upon a Faction among the Bishops, and the falling in of the Majority of the Parliaments, to the Popular part of them; in That division: which is a Calumny, as remote from the Subject of his Discourse as it is from Truth. If it had been as he woud have it; how comes the whole Order of Bishops to be Assaulted? Their Per∣sons Affronted; and their Votes in Parliament taken away; with∣out distinction? Was the Feud so deadly, as to make them destroy Themselves; and Ruine the whole Hierarchy in Revenge? How came it to pass, that Bishop Hall, a Person Celebrated even by Mr Baxter himself for his Piety and Moderation: How came This Re∣verend
Prelate I say, te be so Coursly handled by the Corporation of the Smectymnuans, Marshall, Calamy, Young, Newcomen, and Spurstow: and Treated by Five of the most Eminent men of the Par∣y, with Scurrilitys fitter for the Priests of Priapus, then the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell. Pa. 124. He goes on with his Remarks upon Bishop Laud, over and over. The Book of Sports, on the Lords day, the business of [Altars, Rayls, and Bowing towards them. After∣noon-Sermons and Lectures put down; Imprisonments, Stigmati∣sings, Removals, &c.] And then Pa. 125. He poceeds to [the new Liturgy Imposed on the Scots, &c.] But says he, (a little be∣low) we are Vnwilling to be the Mentioners of any More then Concerneth our Present Cause, and the Things are Commonly known.] Which is such a way of Mentioning no more, as gives to understand without speaking, all the Ill Imaginable that was Left unsaid. Methinks Mr. Baxter might have let This most Reverend, Pi∣ous, Loyal and ANTIPAPAL Arch-Bishop have slept quietly in is Grave, and out of pure Gratitude to our Present Sovereign, to whose Mercy this very Gentleman owes his Life, setting aside the Ve∣neration that belongs to Majesty, and Truth; Mthinks Mr. Bax∣ter might have spared this Lbell, ander the Government of the Son, against the Administrations of the Father. But it is no new thing, or Criminals to Arraign Innocents; or for Those that ae Par∣don'd for Subverting the Government, to shoot thir Arrows (vn itter Words) against Those that hve been Persecuted and Mur∣ther'd for Endeavouring to defend it. And now after all Thes Imputations upon the King, the Church, and the Loyall Party, vn to the Degree of making them Aswera∣le for all the Blood that has been spilt: We must not so much as presume to say that we are Innocent. But every Vindication of the King, the Church, and the Law from the Insults of the Common Enemy, is ex∣claimed against as an Inrode upon the Act of Indemnity. If Mr. Baxter will needs be laying the Rbllion at the wrong dor, and Dis∣charging the Presbyterians: Why my not any Honest man Reply upon him; and say, (in agreement with Mr. Baxter himself, Non-Conformists Plea, I. Part. Pa. 127. that it was the Solemn League and Covenant that did the work: Which Solemn League was not only an Exprsse Oath of Allegianc to Presbytery, but to the most Tyrannical of all Presbyteris, Tht of te Scottish Kirk it self. But why do I call it an Oath of Allegiance to Presbyte∣ry? When it was in Truth, a direct Conjuration against the Go∣vernment, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, for the Introdu∣cing of it?
It would be Tedious, and Superfluous, to Crowd all the Particu∣lars of This Pamphlet into a Preface; so that I shall rather refer the Reader, to the Book, for the rest; where he may compare Mr. Bax∣ter with himself: for it is, Effectually, but an Abstract out of Mr. Baxter's Writings. By the Paradoxes, Disagreements, and Contradictions he will be able to Iudge of the Authour; and by the Authour, in a great Measure of the Party. He that would see them drawn more to the Life, may repair to the Original of our Saviours for the Pharisees, in the Gospell. Examin them Narrowly and you shall not find so much as the semblance of a Colourable Argument; but they are still changing their Battery, and Pretense, according to the various Accidents, and dispositions of State: and it is but tracing the History of the Late times to find every Round of the Lad∣der, that advanc'd them from Petitioners to Rulers. They Plead the Cause of Thousands in the Land, they tell us, and yet there's not a Single man in all Those Thousands, that understands one bit of the Controversy. They cry aloud against Idolatry, Superstiti∣on, Abominations, Symbolical Ceremonies, Will-Worship, Humane Inventions, and Order their Disciples just as they do their Children: They dresse up a Terrible thing of Clouts, and call it a Bull-begger, which is no other then a Mormo of their own Cre∣ating. They have a certain Routin of Words, and Sayings, that have the tone of Magique in the very Sound of them, and serve only (without any other Meaning) like the Drum, and the Trumpet, to rouse up the Multitude to Battle. But the Lords Ordinance, and the Primitive Pattern stand them in Mighty stead. For though they have been Foyld as often as Encountred upon This Question; yet the very Terms of the Controversy being is good as Syriack, to the Common people; there is a Mist cast before their Eyes, and they are never in so good time, to see Visions as when they are stark blind. To Conclude, I have exposed these Shes to the ck, rather as Mr. Baxters work, then my own. If , it was none of my Fault that my Authour would not me. Nor have I any more to say upon the whole matter, but that I have been as fair to Mr. Baxter, as He hath been to Himself.
A DIALOGUE, &c. Moderator. Richard and Baxter. Mode∣rator. YEs, yes. I remember the Conference at the Savoy perfectly well; by This To∣ken, that Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson (the Bishops of Ely and Chester) deliver'd you this very Proposition. That Command which Commandeth an Act in it self Law∣full,The Proposi∣tion at the Sa∣voy about the command of lawful Superi∣ours. and no other Act whereby any unjust Penalty is enjoy∣ned, nor any Circumstance whence directly, or per acci∣dens, any Sin is Consequent which the Commander ought to provide against, hath in it all things requis to the Lawful∣nesse of a Command, and particularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per accidens Unlawfull; nor of Com∣manding an Act under an Unjust Penalty. [B of Wor∣cesters Letter, in his Vindication against M. Baxter. P. 36.] Ri. Very Good;Richards Re∣solution er his hand. and I gave them under my hand my Opinion to the Contrary. [Because (said I) the fist Act commanded may be per accidens Unlawful, and be Commanded by an Vnjust Penalty; tho' no other Act or Circumstance Commanded be such.] Ibid. Pa. 36. Ba. Nay hold you Brother, I'm of another Opinion.Baxter of an∣other opinion. [If the thing Commanded be such as is simply ill, and forbidden us by God in all Cases whatsoever, then no ones Commands can make it Lawfull: But if it it be a thing that is only Inconvenient, or Unlawful by some Lesser accident; then the Command of Au∣thority may pre-ponderate, as a more weighty Accident]
R. B's Church-Divisions,Many Com∣mands anlaw∣ful which the subject ought yet to obey. P. 194. Nay [Many a Ruler sinneth in his Commands, when it is no Sin, but a Duty of the Inferior to Obey them. As if a Magistrate Command Religious Duties in meer Policy: or if he force a Lawful Command with Unlaw∣ful Penalties; and Yet it will be the Subjects Duty to Obey.] Ibid.No Rule is bound o pro∣vide against Events not to be foreseen. [Nor is any Ruler bound to suspect, and prevent such Unusual Dangers of mens Sin, or Ruine, as fall out beyond all Rational Foresight, or Expectation; of whose Probable Event (or Possible at least), there was no just Evidence.] R. B's Non-Conformists Iudgment. P. 60. Mo. Magistracy cut off at a blow.Your Argument (Mr. Richard) has cut off all Magistracy at a Blow: For there is not any Command Imaginable that falls not within the Reach of your Exception. And Mr. Baxter is in the Right on't. But what do ye think now (Gentlemen) of the Operation, or further Extent of such a Power? Ri. The Civil Power must not make Laws about Gods Worship.If you mean as to matters concerning Religion [No man  any Authority to make Laws about Gods Worship, but  Christ hath given him.] Non-Conformists Plea 2d Part. P. 28. Ba. Pray'e hold me a little Excus'd There too; for [we renounce the Opinion of them that hold that Circa Sacra the King hath no Power to Command the Circumstances of Worship.But Baxter says, that Circa Sacra he may.] N-Conformists Plea. Part 2d. P. 73. Mo. Richard and Baxter still at variance.There is but a Right and a Wrong in the case (my Masters) and you have hit them both again, I make no doubt on't, but your Circa Sacra compre∣hends Liturgies, Ceremonies, and other Circumstances of Order, relating to the Church, pray'e tell me how your Consciences stand affected that way: Not as to the Merits of the Cause (for the world is allready clogg'd with That Controversy) but I would willing∣ly know what thoughts, You, and the Party you plead for, entertain of our Ecclesiastical matters.
Ri. [When the King call'd us to signify our desires in 1660. the Ministers of London were commonly invited to come to Sion Col∣ledge,Richards Ac∣count of the Savoy-Con∣ference. Vshers Primi∣tive Episco∣pacy offer'd, but rejected, that their Common Consent might be known: And There we agreed, to desire or offer nothing for Church-Government but A.B. Ushers Modell of the Primitive Episcopal Government. When his Majesty would not grant us That Modell, nor the Bishops once Treat about it, he was pleased in his Gratious Declaration a∣bout Ecclesiastical Affairs to offer and prescribe the Episcopacy of England as it stood, with little alteration, &c. (A Government (says his Majesty) Fol. 10. Which is established by Law, and with which the Monarchy hath flourished through so many Ages, and which is in truth as ancient in this Island as the Christian Monarchy thereof.The English Episcopacy submitted to by Richard, &c) [This Declaration we Ioyfully and thankfully accepted, as a opefull means of a Common Conformity and Concord.] Non-Con's Plea, 2d. Part Pref. Ba. [The English Prelacy (I tell you) is the product of proud Ambition and Arrogancy;But held An∣tichristian and Diaboli∣ca by Baxter. and contrary to the expresse Com∣mand of Christ.] R. B's. Five Disputations P. 45. Bishops are Thorns and Thistles, and the Military Instruments of the De∣vil.] R. B's. Concord. P. 122. How could you ustify then a Submission to such a Prelacy? Mo. If an Angel from Heaven I perceive were em∣ploy'd to bring  two to an Agreement,Richard and Baxter never  e recon∣cil'd. he shoul lose his Labor; Fo That which is highly acceptable to the One, and the hopefull Foundation of a Common Concord, is Antchristian, Diabolial, and Unsfferable to the Other. You ae up (I find) at every Turn with the  Projectpunc; and in such a manner too, as if the most onable thing in the World ad been offer'd o the One ▪ and refused on the Other:The Ground of A.B. Vsher Pro∣ject of Episco∣pacy. Whereat That  was  accommodated to the ard  the Kings Affairs, at the time of Fra∣ming  any man, in a case of Extremity,  of an Arm r a Leg, for the  yet he a very strange re∣quest
to ask a man in a state of Freedome, and Safety, to part with a Leg or an Arm from his Body: And as wild a thing, on the other side, to Grant it. But the very offer at it under a pretense of Conscience, was highly disingenuous, especially when upon the Issue the Scruple was remov'd by the Refsal; and This Sa∣tisfaction given to the world, by your own Acknow∣ledgment, that Conformity and Episcopacy may stand well enough together, when you please. Ri. I cnnot deny but that [may proposed to have yilded to Pre∣lacy,Many would have yielded to Prelacy, &c Liturgy, and Ceremonies.] Non-Con. Plea, Part I. P. 136. Ba. Why truly [a Certain Episcopacy may be yielded to, for the Peace (if not for the Right Order) of the Church;The Diocesan Episcopacy gratifies the Devil, says Baxter, and not to be re∣admitted.] [But the Diocesan Episcopacy which was lately in England, and is now laid by may not be lawfully reassumed, or readmitted, as a means for the Right Order or Peace of the Church.] R.B's. Five Disputation, P. 2. 1659. [A Government which gratif∣eth the Devil, and wicked men.] Ibid. P. 36. Mo. R. and B. still Clashing.Still upon the Contradiction. But if they were so well dispos'd to come In, what was it I beseech you that put them off again? Ri. The New U∣niformity spoil d all.When they saw the New Act for Uniformity, thir Delibe∣rations were at an End. Ibid. P. 26. Ba. [After proving Prelacy to be against the ill of Christ▪ and the Wellfare of the Churches,Prelacy Un∣lawful in it slf says Bax∣ter. Five Disp. Pref. 1. and contrary to the word of God, and Apostolical Institution, Ibid P. 51. what need was there then of any further Disswasion? Mo. Why not Pre∣lacy as awful after the Act, as before?Pray'e tell me Mr. Richard; Was Prelacy Law∣full Before the Act for Uniformity, and not After? You are Angry at the One, and therefore you Re∣nounce the Other; for it was no longer Prelacy, Litur∣gy, or Ceremonies, it seems that you boggled at, but
the New Act. Now since you your selves were con∣vinc'd, that such a Conformity as aforesaid would have been Warrantable, and only transfer'd your Ex∣ceptions to the New Act; how comes it that you go on still decrying the State, Rites, and Offices of the Church to the Multitude; and make That a matter of Consci∣ence in One breath which you left at Liberty in Another? The Uniformity does not alter the case one jot to the Common People;It is the same case still to the People. but the Layety may as lawfully submit to Prelacy, Liturgy and Ceremonies, After the Act, as they did before. Ri. [The People who now adhere to the Non-Conformists,Hard thoughts of Epicopacy and Bishops, and upon what groun who were at age before the Wars, had very hard thoughts of the Bishops Persons; and some, of Episcopacy it self; because of the Silencing of Ministers, and ruining of Honest men about Sundays-sports, Reading That Book, and other suh things, beside Nonconformity, &c. Non-Con. Plea. Part I. P. 139. Mo. the Bishops and Episcopacy it self you say were thought hardly of; partly for Slencing your Miisters. Which was yet a way of proceeding Conformable to the directions of the Law; and in part, (among Other Provocations) for the Book of Sports upon the Lords day. Be it spoken with Reverence to the Honour and Duty of that Holy Day; I should have thought that the Rebells assaulting of their Sovereign at Edge hill up∣on That day,A Grter Scandall to trvell upon the Lords day then to give theKing bale. might have given your Scrupulists as hard thoughts of the Faction that did it, and of those Sangui∣nary Casuists that sounded the Trumpet to That Battle. But how came they off I beseech you, from That fro∣ward Humour? Ri. [When the Ministers that guided them,Richard Con∣fesses that the Miniters gu∣ded the peole▪ and says that the Non-con∣formists un∣dertook for the next Bi∣shops good behaviour. began to seem more reconciled to the Episcopal Party, and upon the Rports and Promi∣ses which they had heard, that the next Bishops would prove more mo∣derate, pious, and peaceable then the Former, and would by experi∣ence
avoid Divisions and Persecution; the said People began to be in∣clin'd to more Reverent and Favourable Thoughts of the Bishops, and were upon experience of the late Confusions in a far fairer way to Vni∣on and Submission to them then before. Non-Con. Plea, Part I. P. 139. Mo. If it be True that the People were induced to have a more Charitable Opinion of the Prelates, by the Hopes which their Guides gave them of having better Bishops next bout▪ It appears, fist that the Quarrel was not to the Office,The Quarrel not to the Of∣fice of Bishops but to the persons. but to the Persons. And Secondly, it shews that the Ministers menage the Mul∣titude, For or Against their Superiours, as They please: which lays a stronger Obligation upon the Govern∣ment, to secure a Well-affected Ministry, when the Publique Peace lyes at the Mercy of the Dissenting Clergy. But what becomes of us next? Ri. When they saw their Teachers taken from them, and some  set over them against their Wills who were better known to them tho the Obtruders:Richard Rea∣sons why the People sell from the Chuch again And when they heard of about 2000, Silenced at once, This so much Alienated them from the Bishops, that it was never since in Our Power to bring them to so much Esteem of them, and Re∣rence for them as might have been. Non-Con. Plea, Part I. P. 140 Mo. The Unifor∣miy made E∣piscopacy and Common-payer unlaw∣fll. 'Tis the Law that Silences, an not the Bishops.So that upon the Upshot, there pass'd an Act for Uniformity, Ergo, Episcopacy and Common-Prayr are Vnlawfull. See now what it is that you call Silencin of so ma∣ny Ministers. It is no more then a fair Revival of those necessary Provisions for the Safety of the Go∣vernment, which had been violntly overborn and discontinu'd in our late Troubles: Upon which vio∣lation, ensued our Deplorble Confusios And to take the businesse aright, he Law does not sece your Ministers more then it does Ours: but holds forth one Commn Rule indifferently to All men, with a respect to Politicall, as well as Ecclsiastal-Concord.
Every man sees before him the Conditions of his Freedom; and he that either Cannot, or Will not comply with the Terms of a General Rule,Non-Confor∣mists silence themselves. Silenceth himself. And is not the Man neither that is Silenced by This Law, but this or that Incongruous Practice or Opinion. If Richard thinks fit to come In, there's no body hinders him; and if Iohn will not come in, who can help it? In short, This way of Silencing amounts to no more then a very Gentle Expedient for the stop∣ping of those Mouthes that would be blowing the Coal towards a Rebellion. Wherefore I beseech ye Gentle∣men for the Act of Oblivions sake, which has done a great deal more for you then This comes to, have some pitty for the poor Act of Uniformity. As to your account of about two thousand Silenc'd Ministers, a matter of 8 or 900. difference shall break no squares betwixt you and me.Berter parti∣culars suffer then  Or∣der o ∣vernment be dissolved. But what yet if they Were two thousand? must the divine Ordinance of Government be prophan'd, and the harmony of Or∣der Dissolv'd, in favour of that Inconsiderable Party of Irregulars; and to the scandal of six times as many Consciencious and Obedient Subjects of the State both Ecclesiastical, and Civill? Ri. For my own part [I do not know that I differ in any point of Worship, Ceremonies, or Discipline,Richard a∣gees with Dr▪ Reynolds  conform'd. from the Learned Dr. John Reignolds] R. B's Letter to Mr. Hinckley, P. 89. And my Judgement is, that [a Peace with the Divines of the Episcopal Judgement is much to be desired, and earnestly endeavour'd.] Five Disp. Pag. 1. Mo. If you agree in the Conclusion with that Re∣verend Dr. you are safe; and take This for a Rule; Out of the ways of Love and Peace there can be no Comfort.
Ri. Alas [It is a Sect, as a Sect, and a Fction, as a Faction, and not this or that Sect or Faction which I blame:Richard pleads altoge∣ther for Love. It is Unity, Love, and Peace which I am pleading for; and he that is angry with me for calling men to Love, is angry for calling them to Holynesse, to God, and Heaven. Holynesse which is against Love, is a Con∣tradiction; it is a deceiptfull name which Satan puteth upon Unho∣lynesse. Church Divisions. ref. Ba. Your Churches bear with Drunkards, Whoremong, Railers,Baters way of epressing. Open Scorners at Godlynesse, Five Disp. P. 37. [Te most ungodly of the Land are the forwardest for your ways. You may have allmost all the Drunkards, Blasphemers, and Ignorant Haters of Godlynesse in the Country to Vote for you.] Five Disp. Pref. Pag. 17. To the Adherers to Prelacy. Ri. ichard a∣gainst rash nsuring .[He is as Mortal an Enemy to Love, who back-biteth, and sith he's Profane; Or he is an Ety Formalist, or he is a luke∣warm, Temporizing, Complying Man-Pleaser; As he that sait he is a peevish, Factious Hyocrite.] To Preach without Love, and to hear without Love, and to pray without Love, and to com∣municate without Love to any that differ from your Sect, Oh what a loathsome Sacrifice is it to the God of Love!] Church-Divisions. Preface. Love is the fulfilling of all the Law; the End of the Gospel; the Nature, and mark of Christs Disciples, the Divine Nature; the Su of Holynesse to the Lord; the Proper Note by which to know what is the man, and what his State; and how far any of his Other Acts are acceptable unto God. Ibid. Ba. Baxter a∣ginst RichrdHow many years have we beg'd for Peace of those that should have been the Preachers and wisest Promoters of Peace; and cannot yet obtain it; nor quiet them that call for fire and sword, not knowing what Spirit they are of? Non-Con. lea, Pref. [The Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs telleth us, that the King would have given the People Peace, but with Vnpeacea Clergy-men, No Petition could prevail.] Ibid. [And all This is out of a bitter nmity to Gods word and ways;Mr Baters Chaity to the Clergy and discipine of he Chuch for they will be at more pains then This, in any way that is Evill; or in any Worship of Mans devising. They are as zealous for Crosses and Surplces, Processions, and Prambulations, reading a Gospell at a Crosse-way, the Observaion of Holy days, the repeating of the Litany, or the like Forms in the Common Prayer, the bowing at
the name of the word Iesus, (while they reject his Worship) the receiving of the Secrament when they have no Right to it, and that upon their Knees, as if they were more Reverent and Devout then the true Laborious servants of Christ; with a Multi∣tude of things which are only the Traditions of their Fathers; I say they are as zealous for These,His brotherly Love. as if Eternal Life con∣sisted in them. Where God forbids them, there they are as forward as if they could never do enough, and where God Commands them, There they are as backward to it; yea as much against it as if they were the Commands of the Devil himself. And for the Discipline of Christ,Church ann State ar∣raign d. tho all parts of the world have much opposed it, yet where hath it been so fiercely and powerfully resisted? The Lord grant that this harden'd, willful, malicious Nation fall not under that Heavy Doom, Luke 19.27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me. R.B's. Saints Rest, Part. 3. P. 91. Mo. To see the difference now Gentlemen, betwixt your two Spirits! The One, so meek,Richard and Baxter of two quite dif∣ferent spirits. and like a Chri∣stian, the Other, so clamorous, and so Uncharitable. What hopes of Unity and Peace; or what Pretence to't; so long as these dividing and defaming Liberties are kept a foot? Your Friend Richard tells you very well (Mr. Baxter) that Such Holynesse is a deceiptfull Name that Stan puts upon Unholynesse,The persecu∣ted are the pers¦secutors. and a loathsom Sacrifice to the God of Love. You revile the Government, and those that Conform to it, and yet at the same time you tell the People that you are persecuted. You would be thought kinder to his Majesty how∣ever, in devolving the severity from the King upon the Clergy; and yet his Majesty is pleased to minde you that [Since the Printin this Declaration, severall Seditious Pamphlets and Quaeres have been Published, and Scatter'd abroad, to infuse dislike and Iealousies into the hearts of the People; and of the Army, and some who ought rather to have repented the former mischief they have wrought, then to have endeavour'd to emprove it, have had
the hardynesse to publish that the Doctrine of the  (against which no man with whom we have conferred  excepted) ought to be reformed as well as the Discipline. So that all this yielding was too little, it seems to stop the Mouths of an Insatiable Faction. But what is it at last that you would be at? Ri. Be sure first of what spirit he Non-Con∣fomists are.I beg of the Clergy that before they any more render Odis These whom they never heard, and Vrge Rulers to Execute the Laws against them; that is, to confine, Imprison, Excommunicate, Silnce, and Vndo thm, they would be sure, what manner of spirit they are of. Non-con. Plea, Part I. Epistle. Mo. [Sure of what spirit you are] do ye say! Why Certainly your own Conscience tells you that we are sure of that,The spirit of the Non-Con∣formists. as Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, and Under∣standing can make us. You are by your own Professi∣ons of the Presbyterian Spirit. The Spirit that made Per∣jury the Condition of Life, Liberty and Estate, to eve∣ry man in the Case of your Covenant. The Spirit that Entred upon Sequestred Livings, and left not the Loyal Clergy the Freedome, so much as of Teaching a School, to supply themselves, and their Miserable Fa∣milies with Bread. The Spirit that deny'd the King in his Distresses, the Comfort of so much as a Common-Prayer Book, or the Assistance of his own Chaplains. His Late Ma∣jesties Judge∣ment & Expe∣rience upon it.[A greater Rigour and Barbarity then is ever used by Christians, to the meanest Prisoners, and Greatest Ma∣lefactors; whom though the Iustice of the Law, deprive of Worldly Comforts, yet the mercy of Religion allows them the Benefit of their Clergy, as not ayming at once to destroy their Bodies, and to damn their souls, EIK.BAS. 207. [They that envy my being a King,The spirit that Richard plads, or. are loth I should be a Christi∣an; while they seek to deprive me of all things else, they are affraid I should save my Soul. Ibid.] Behold here in a few words the Spirit that you plead for.
. poor Creatures, [We would [only] have a Tolera∣tion of all ha's Tolerable [he that will Tolrate All, is Bad;Richards o∣leration. and he that will Tolerate▪ none that differ, is Madd.] R. B's. an∣swer to Dr. Stillingfleet. P. 84. Mo. If the Church may be Iudge, all that are Tole∣rable are Tolerated allready;Who are the Judges, the Government, or the People. If the People must be the Iudges, the Intolerable must be Tolerated for Company. For so long as every Party Makes, or Pretends it self, to be in the Right, all the Dissenters have one Common Plea. But in case of any Indulgence to be allow'd, it is certainly due to these in preference, that are quiet∣est without it. I cannot but have great Compassion for any Party that labours under a Religious and In∣vincible Disagreement,Modest Dis∣senters de∣serve pity. and Modesty applies to Au∣thority for Relief: For so long as they only tell their own Tale, I cannot but in harity believe that they have no other design then to do their own businesse. But when a Conscientious Pretense comes to be carry'd on by Scandall, Invective, Reproach, and such Methods as are directly Irreligious; the dispute is no longer matter of Scruple, or Worship, but Superiority, and Power.The Dispute is not Scruple but Power. There may be Religion in telling the Government what you desire, but the exposing of your Superiours to the People▪ is Down right Sedition. And, as you have hand∣led the matter, you might e'en with as good a Grace tell the Rabble in plain English: Look ye my Masers,Plain▪ dealing. here's a company of Anti-Christian Swearing, Drinking Fellows, that will not let us have Liberty of Conscience; But I would fain hear you two debate the business of Toleraon a little betwixt your selves. Ri. What [if you shall smite or cast out a supposed Schismatique, and Christ shall find an able, holy peaceable Minister,Richard puts the Case of a Saint and a Schismatick. or other Christi∣an Wounded, or Mourning out of doors. Pet. for Peace. P. 12. [Or see a Schismatique wounded and a Saint found Bleeding, &c. Saints Rest. P. 1.
Ba▪ And now you talk of Saints, Richard [to think of such a Friend dyed at such a time,Baxters Saints and such a one at another time, such a pretious Christian slain in such a Fight, and such a one at uch a Fight, (O what a number of them could I name) and that all these are enter'd into Rest; and we shall surely go to Them, but They shall not return to Us.Baxter sully resolved to go to them that dy'd in Rebel∣lion. Saints Rest. P. 100. In That State of Rest, Angells as well as Saints will be Our blessd Associates. Ibid. P. 101. [I think Christians, This will be a more Honourable Assembly then you ever here beheld, and a more happy Society then you were ever of before. Surely Py and White,He joys to think what Company he shall have. &c. are now members of a more Knowing, Vnerrig, Well-order'd, Right-aiming, Self-denying, Vnanimous, Honourable, Tryumphant Senate, then This from whence they were taken, is or ever Parliament will be. It is better to be door-keeper to That Assembly whither Twisse &c. are Translated; then to have continu'd here the Moderator of This. Saints Rest. P. 101. [Nay how many Professors will rashly rail and lye in their Pas∣sions?Baxter says, that Profes∣sors will rail, and lye, &c. How few will take well a Reproof, but rather defend their sin? how many in these times that we doubt not to be Godly have been guilty of Disobedience to their Guides, and of Schism, and doing much more to the hurt of the Church, a very great Sin. Peter, Lot, and 'tis like David did oft com∣mit greater Sins, R. B's Five Disdutes▪ of Right to Sacraments P. 329. But a man must be guilty of more sins then Peter was in deny∣ing and forswearing Christ,But that nei∣ther Perjury, drunkennesse, Incest, Con∣cubines, nor Idols, can make them dotoriously ungodly. that is notoriously ungodly; yea, then Lot was, who was drunk two nights together, and com∣mitted Incest twice with his own Daughters; and that after the miraculous destruction of Sodom, of his own wife, and his own miraculous Deliverance. Nay, a man that is notoriously ungodly (in the sense in hand) or Unsanctify'd, must be a greater sinner then Solomon was with his Seven hundred Wives, three hundred Concubines, and gross Idolatries, P. 326.327. Mo. And are These the Saints (Gentlemen) that you are afraid should be cast out,The Saints that are cast out for here∣ticks. for Schismatiques? They must be of your own Canonizing then, for I as∣sure you I finde no such Saints in our Kalendar. But let me hear I beseech you whom we are to keep out, and whom to take in.
Ri. We must either Tolerate All men to do what they will,Either Tole∣rate All or None, but up∣on a Penalty▪ which they will make a matter of Conscience or Religion; and then some may offer their Children in sacrifice to the Devil; and some may think they do God service in killing his Servants, &c. [Or else you must Tolerate no Errour or fault in Religion; and then you must ad∣vise what measure of Penalty you will Inflict. Church-Divis. P. 363, 364. Mo The two great Difficulties will be to say what Errours are Tolerable, and what not; and then to bring the Magistrate and the People to an Agreement upon the matter. Ri, [If no Errour were to be a Tolerated,No men must be Tolerated, if no Errour. no men were to be Tole∣rated and the Wisest in the World must be numbred with the Intolera∣ble, as well as the rest. Church Divis. P. 348. Ba. [But some People make those things to be Duties which are no Duties, and Sins which are no Sins, calling Evil Good,Baxter shews the Inconve∣niences of To∣leration. and Good Evil; and having made a Religion of their own, confi∣dently think that it is of God, valuing all men that they have to do with according as they are nearer or further off from This, which they account the way of God; chusing a Church or Party to joyn with, by the Test of This Religion, which their Pride has Cosen. Church Divis. P. 11. [Thus they divide the Kingdom and Family of Christ;Pride makes one mans Re∣ligion. destroying first the Love of Brethren and Neighbours in themselves, and then labouring to destroy it in all Others; by speaking against those that are not in their own way with Contempt, and Obloquy,Faction ano∣thes. to repre∣sent them as an Unlovely sort of Men; and if the Interest of their Cause and Party require it,Which ends in bloud. And yet pass for doing God good service. And the moti∣on of the spirit. perhaps they will next destroy their Persons: And yet all this is done in zeal of God, and as an Acceptable service to him. Ibid. P. 12. [And they think it a resisting of the Spirit to resist their Judgment. P. 13. [I have known too many very honest-hearted Christians, especi∣ally Melancholique Persons and Women who have been in great doubt about the Opinions of the Millenaries, the Separa∣tists, the Anabaptists, the Seekers, and such like; and after earnest Prayer to God,Enthusiastick▪ zea▪ they have been strongly resolved for the way of Errour, and Confident by the strong Impression
that it was the Spirits Answer to their Prayers, and thereupon they have set themselves into a Course of Sin. Ibid. P. 162. And [In truth it is very Ordinary with poor phancyfull Wo∣men,Dotage aen fo Reela∣tions. and Melancholy Persons to take all their deep Apprehen∣sions for Revelations. Ibid. P. 167. Mo. Well; but these people all this while take themselves to be in the right. Ba. Scripture the Rue.But as for that which is Contrary to Scripture, I am sure it is contrary to the Will of God. Church Divis. P. 166. Mo. But who must expound it?Out of all doubt; but what if They expound the Scripture One way, and You Another? Ba. One mans Faith must not Impose upon ano∣ters.[Why if they believe That themselves which they can give you no reason to believe, they must be content to keep their belief to themselves; and not for shame perswade any o∣ther to it without proof. If they say that God hath revealed it to them, tell them that he hath not revealed it to You, and there∣fore That's nothing to You, till they prove their Divine Revela∣tion. If God reveal it to them, but for themselves they must keep it to themselves. Ibid. P. 166. [If they say that the spi∣rit hath told Them the meaning of the Scripture, say as before that it is not told to you which is not proved to you. Ibid 167. [But if we do through weaknesse or perversnesse take lawful things to be unlawfull,Mistake will not justifie the Errour, nor exuse a Disobedience. Men will be zealous even in Errour. More zeal then under∣standing is not good. None so fierce and bold as he Ignorant. That will not excuse Us in our disobedi∣ence. Our Errour is our Sin, and one Sin will not excuse ano∣ther R. B's. Five Disput. P. 483. [He that mistakingly thinks any thing is good or bad, Duty or Sin which is not so, will be zealous in persute of his Mistake if he be serious for God. Cath. Theol. Pref. [It is an Ill sign when your zeal is beyond the proportion of your Understanding: And your Prudence and Experience is much lesse then other mens, as your zeal is greater. Church Divis. P. 123. [Beside that the more weak and worthlesse, and Erroneous any ones Judgment is, usually the more furious are they in the prosecution of it, as if all were most certain Truth which they apprehend. These are the bold∣est both in Schisms, and persecutions. Ibid. 357.
Mo. But you will say, that in cases where the common people may be imposed upon by Credlity, Phancy, or Weaknesse, they may repair to their Teach∣ers to set them right. Ba. Even the most of Teachers take abundance of things for true and good that are false and evill, and for false and bad,Even Teach∣ers themselves are false Guides. which are true and good: Much more are godly vulgar people Ignorant, and consequently erre in many things, Cath. Theol. Pref. [And I my self was mistaken in my Aphorisms of Iustifi∣cation and the Covnants,M. Baxter himself has been mistaken▪ as I have acknowledged in the same Preface. Mo. You have had very ill luck, Sir,Ill luck with his Apho∣risms. with your Aphorisms. Ri. [I must confess that when God had first brought me from a∣mong the more Ignorant sort of people,How Richard was wheedled in. and when I heard Religious Persons pray without Form, and Speak affectionately, and seriously of Spiritual and Heavenly things, I thought verily that they were all undoubted Saints, till e're long, of those whom I so mch honoured, one fell of to Sensuality, and to Persecuting Formality; and ano∣ther fell to the foulest Heresy,i. e. he was re∣conci 'd to the Church. and another to disturb the Churches Peace, by Turbulent Animositys and Divisions. Church Di∣vil. P. 23.24. &c. Ri. [I thought once, that all the talk against Schisme and Sects, did but vent their Malice against the best Christians, uder those Names; But since Then,Richards best Christians found to e Schismaticks. I have seen what Love-killing-Principles have done. I have long stood by while Churches have been divided, and Subdivided; one Congregation of the Division labouring to make the other Contemptible, and odious; and This called, the Teaching of Truth, and the purer Worshiping of God; Church-Divisions. Pref. Ba. [When so great a man as Tertullian was deceived by Montanus, and his Prophetesse:Great mn misled, and why not . When such a one as Hacket could deceive not only Coppinger, and Arthington, but abun∣dance more; when David George in Holland, Iohn of Leiden in Munster, &c. could deceive so many persons as they did; when
the pretended Revelations of the Ranters, First, and the Quakers After, could so marvellously transport many Thousands of pro∣fessors of Religion in this Land,Believe not every spirit. I think we have fair warning to take the Counsell of St. Iohn. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirit whether they be of God. Church Divis. P. 164. Te Dissen∣ters Cause is still Gods cause. Their false Prophets. Te Kings death directed by a Revela∣tion. Sedgwicks day of Judg∣ment. Vavasr Pow∣es Prophecy of no more Kings or Taxe.[Alas? how common was this in the Army, to set up and Pull down, do an undo, own and disown, as by the Spirit of God! There was Mr. Erbery, Mr. Saltmarsh, Mr. Dell, Mr. William Sedgwick, who as from God wrote one week to the Army, against their putting the King to Death, and the next week wrote to them quite on the other side, and that set Lon∣don by a Prophecy or Vision on looking for the day of Judge∣ment, on a set day. Second. Admon. to Bagshaw. P. 68. Vavasor Powell at Clifton upon Thame in Worcestershire, quickly after Wor∣cester Fight, said in his Sermon that he would tell them these things as from God that they should have no more Kings, nor any more Taxes, nor pay any more Tithes. Ibid. P. 69. Mo. Pray'e do but consider now, if your particu∣lar Pastors disagree among themselves; if you your self, Mr. Baxter, have been mistaken in your Judge∣ment as well of Truth in Notion, as of Persons; If those that you took for Saints, proved Schismaticks; and Persecutors, those that you took for Conscientious Pro∣fessors, are we not much better in the hand of a known and Impartiall Law that cannot deceive us, then at the Mercy of a wilde Multitude,Rather the Law of the Land then the Humour of the people. Unknown and Prepossess'd, who in all probability will impose upon us? Ri. A Fear of sinning is necessary in all that will be Obedient to God, and will be saved:A Fear of sin∣ning ought to be cherished, even in a mi∣stake. It is that Fear of God which is the beginning of Wisdom. It is therefore to be loved and cherished, even when Scrupulousness mistaketh the matter. Non-Con. Plea. 2d. Part. P. 163. Ba. Dangerous trusting to scruples.There's no trusting to Scruples. [I have known some that have liv'd long in douhts and fears of Damnation who have turn'd Anabaptists, and sodainly had Comfort; and yet in
a short time they forsook that Sect, and turn'd to another. I have known those also that have liv'd many years in timorous Complaints, and fears of Hell, and they have turned to the An∣tinomians, and sodainly been comforted; and others have turned Arminians (which is clear contrary) and been comforted; and others have but heard of that Doctrine of Perfection in this Life, and sodainly been past their fears, as if hearing of Perfe∣ction had made them perfect: And from thence they have turned Familists, and at last shew'd their Perfection by Fornication,, and Licentiousnesse and mere Apostacy; who yet liv'd very conscien∣tiously and blamelessely, as long as they liv'd in their Fears and Troubles, P. 170. Chuch Divis. [Could I have believed him that would have told me five years ago (This bearing date Ian. 15. 1649.Who would have thought it?) that when the * Scorners of Godlinesse were subdu'd, and the bitter persecutors of the Church overthrown; that such should succeed them who suffered with us,Th Episcopal Clergy. who were our Intimate Friends, with whom we took sweet Counsel, and went up together to the House of God?Simeon and Levi. Did I think it had been in the hearts of men professing such zeal to Religion, and the ways of Christ to draw their Swords against each other: and to seek each others Bloud so fiercely? Alas! if the Judgment be once perverted, and Errour hath perverted the Supreme Faculty, whether will men go, and what will they do?O the force of a misguided Concience! O what a potent Instrumen for Satan is a misguidd Conscience! It will make a man kill his dearest Friend, yea Father or Mother, yea, the Holyest Saint, and think he doth God good service by it:The very Case of the seduced muiude. And to facilitate the work, it will first blot out the Reputation of their Holinesse, and make them take a Saint for a Devil▪ Saints Rest. P. 133. [Whence can it be, but for want of self-denyall, that Magistrates prossing a zeal for Holynesse rgard no more the Interest of Christ; but that the Name (and but the Name) of Liberty, (a Liberty that hath neither Moral Good,The Name of Libety does moe en he considea∣tio  Hea∣ven it self. or Evill in it) is set in the ballance against the things of everlasting Consequence, and thought sufficient to over weigh thm; And that the meer pretense of this Indifferent Carnal Liberty is thought an Argument of sufficient weight for the Introduction of a wicked, Damning Liberty, even a liberty to deceive, and destroy as many as they can, and to hinder those that desire mens Salvation. R. B's Self-denyal Epist. Monitory. [Shall eve∣ry man have leave to do evill,Baxtr against Liberty. that can be Ignorant enough to
think (or say he thinks) that he doth well? And must Magi∣strates rule as men that are Uncertain whether there be a Christ, or a Church, or Heaven, or Hell; because some are found in their Dominions so foolish, or Impious as to be Uncertain of it?And Tolera∣tion. Ibid. [Will mercyfull Rulers set up a trade for butchering of Souls, and allow men to set up a shop of poyson, for all men to buy and take that will, yea to proclaim this poyson for Souls in Streets, and Church Assemblies? &c. Ii. But the same Argument that tempts the sensuall to Hell; doth tempt such Magistrates to set up Liberty for drawing men to Hell. Ibid. Is Faith and Holynesse propagated by Perswasion, and not by Force? Surely then Infidelity, Popery and Ungodlynesse ar Propagated by Perswasion too; Again I tell yo, self-love doth make such Rulers wiser then to grant Commission at liberty to all that will, to tice the Souldiers to Mutinies and Rebellion, &c. Ibid. Liberty, in all mat ers of Worship, and of Faith, is the open and apparent way to set up Popery in the Land.Liberty the way to set up Popery▪ N-Con. Plea. Pref. M. Well Mr. Richard: After this frank and sensi∣ble Dclaration of your self upon this Chapter, do but teach me which way in the world to reconcile your Practice and your Conscience; for you are a Per∣son certainly of all men Living, the most Improper Advocate for a Toleration;Mr. Richard an Improper Advocate for Toleration. and the most unfit Sollici∣tor of a Popular Petition. First, as your Iudgement lie directly against the thing you pleade for. Secondly, as you are conscious of the danger, as well as the Injusti of such a License. Thirdly, you have been a very u∣happy Instrument already betwixt his Majesty and his Subjects. And Lastly, In demanding That over again from This King, by which his Father was destroy'd, you make your self suspected to have some Ill De∣signe: For to Triumph and Rejoyce (as you do) af∣ter the Thing is done, is lesse, a great deal, then to forethink the doing of it. And it is not only that you are sufficiently convinc'd of the mischiefs of a Toleration, but your Conscience (if I be not much mi∣staken)
will make as good a shift as any mans with∣out it. Ri. W are against no Bishop or Church-Government of Gods Appointment. Prof. of Non-consormists P. 89.Richard is a Conformist. [We hold it not unlawful to take Oathes, and make Covenants, Subscriptions, or Declarations of things Lawfull, when Authority commandeth us. Ibid. P. 98. We readily Subscribe the doctrine of the 39. Articles. Ib. 98. We are far from condemning all Forms of Prayer, and Publick Liturgy, P. 100. We pick no Quarrells about Forms and Words. Church-Div. p. 176. [Tell me if you can, where God forbids you to use Good and Lawfull Words in Prayer, meerly because the Magi∣strate, or Pastor bids you use them. Is this the meaning of all the Precepts of Honouring, and Obeying your Superiours? [Do nothing which they bid you do, though otherwise Lawful] O Strange Exposition of the 4th Commandement? p. 178. [I take the Common Prayer to be Incomparably better then the Prayers or Sermons, of many that I hear; and to be the best that I expect in many places when I go to Church. R.Bs. Letter to Mr. Hinckly p. 78. [It's like, the Pharisees Long Liturgy, was in many things worse then Ours, though the Psalmes were a great part of it: and yet Christ, and his Apostles oft joyned with Them, and never Condemned them. Ch. Div. P. 176. [He is void of Common sense that thinketh that his Extemporary Prayer is not as truly a Form to all the People, as if it had been written in a Book. And every Publick Minister Imposeth a Form of Prayer up∣on all the Congregation. Ibid. 179. [We hold, not all the use of Ima∣ges, even the Images of Holy Persons, to be Vnlawfull. Profession of Nonconformists. P. 104. [We hold not a Gown, or other meer distinctive Garment for Ministers to be Vnlawful. And some of us hold a Surplice rather to be used, then the Ministry forsak. Ibid. [Many of us hold it Lawfull to communicate Kneeling Ibid. p. 105. [We all hold that God must be Orderly, and Decently Wor∣shipped with the Body, as well as Spiritually, with the minde. And that Reverend Gestures, and Behaviours are fit, not only to expresse Mental Reverence to God, but also to Excite it, in our selves and others. Ibid. 105. We are for the use of the Creed, Commandements, and Lords Prayer. p. 106. Ba. [It is now about Twenty Years since I Preach'd at a Fast to the Parliament for Loyalty; the King the next morn∣ing
was voted home to his Crown, and Government, 2d part of Non-Con. Plea. Preface. In This Sermon, I have given the World a Tast of my Affections to the Church.Mr. Baxters Sermon that brought the King in. [Gentlemen, I have nothing to ask of you for my self, nor any of my Brethren, as for Themselves; but that you will be Friends to Serious Preaching, and Holy Living, and will not ensnare our Consciences with any Vnscripturall Inventions of men.Presbytery for the Lords sake This I would beg of you as on my Knees. 1. As for the sake of Christ. 2. for the sake of Thou∣sands of poor Souls. 3. For the Sake of Thousands of the dear Friends of the Lord. 4. For your own sakes. 5. For the sake of your Posterity. 6. For the Honour of the Nation and your Selves. 7. For the Ho∣nour of Sound doctrine, and Church-Government. &c. Pa. 45. and 46. For if you Frown on Godlynesse, under pretense of Vniformi∣ty in Vnnecessary things; and make things worse then when Li∣bertinism, and Schisme so prevail'd: the people will look back with Groans,Oh the happy times when Presbyterians rul'd. and say; What happy times did we once See! And so will honour Schisme, and Libertinisme, and Vsurpation, through Your Oppression. 8. I beg this of you for the Honour of Sove∣reignty, and the Nations Peace. Ibid. And then for your [new-made Religions,Have a care of scandalous Inventions. The Ignorant Church-Ty∣rants. and needless Scandalous Inventions, and an a∣doring of your Titles and Robes of Honour, covering your Ig∣norance, Pride, and Sensuality, which Church Tyrants call the Order of the Church. &c. [All the Images of Piety, Govern∣ment, Unity, Peace, and Order, which Hypocrites and Phari∣sees sat up, are despised Engines to destroy the Life and Seri∣ous Practie of the things Themselves, and are set up in Enmi∣ty against Spirituality, and Holyness, that there might be no other Piety, Government, Unity, Peace, or Order in the Church, but These Liveless Images. Ch. Div. Pa. 105. & 106. Ri. [Though we are not satisfied of the lawfullness of using the Transient Image of the Crosse,Richard not absolutely a∣gainst the Cross. as a dedicating Sign, and Symbol of Christianity, so much Sacramental (much lesse to refuse from Baptisme, and Christendome, all Christian Infants, unlesse they will have them so Crossed, no more then if a Crucifix were so Imposed, and used) yet do we not Condemn all use of either Crosse, or Crucifix. Nor do we presume Conscientiously to Reproach, and dishonour the An∣tient Christians, who living among Pagans that derided Christ Cru∣cify'd, did shew them, by oft using this sign, that they were not asha∣med of the Crosse. And though we find, that they used more Rites,
and significations, devised Signs, and Ceremonies, then we think they should have done, yet we judg it our Duty to love and honour their Memorial; Nor do we take all Rites to be Sinfull that are sig∣nificant. Non-conformists Profession Pa. 103.104. Ba. You are not satisfy'd of the Lawfulnesse, &c. you say.axters a Loyallist. But are you convinc'd of the Vnlawfulnesse? For [we must obey Magistrates though we know not that their Commands are Lawful, so long as they are so Indeed, and we have no suffici∣ent reason to believe them Unlawfull. Holy Cm. Thesis. 323. For [It is not our Erroneous Conceits,Errour is no ecuse for disobedience. that a Lawfull Com∣mand is Unlawfull, that will excuse any man from the Guilt of Disobedience. Ibid. 357. [But if a thing seem to you very needfull to a Good End, and yet the word be against it, avoid it: &c.The Preeoce of Natue, and true Reason avoids ll Law [And if you hink that the Scripture commandeth you This or That Positive means, if Nature and True Reason assure you that it is against the End, and is like to do much more harm, then good, be assured that you mistake That Scripture▪ Ch. Divis. pa. 205. Mo. It is a strange thing Mr Richard, that your Conscince should be so easy to your self, and yet so Troublesome to the Government.A Popuar Fallacy. But your Reserve of leaving every Pivate man to judge, First, of the Condition of the Law, by the Word; and Then, of his Iudgment of That Scripture, whether it be Right or Wrong, by Nature and Right Reason: This Reserve I say undoes all again: For every man that does Ill, with a Good Intention, reckons that he has Nature and Right Reason on his side. Now for You Mr. Baxter; you tell us over and over so often of your Fast Srmon to the Hse of Com∣mons, and the Kings being called in the nxt day, as if That very Sermon had wrought his Majestiss Re∣stauration, But I find up Perusall of it hat you are just as kind to the Church in this Piece of 1660. as you were a litle before to his Majesty in your Holy Common Wealth of 1659. That is to say; you are beg∣ging,
arguing, and Casing of it all that is in you, to keep them both out; and truly This Particular piece of yours makes almost as bold with the King himself,The Presbye∣rin way of bining in he King. as with the Episcopal Clergy: as you shall hear by and by. Was it not enough for you to Adjure the Commons into an Opposition o That Order in the Church, which (as he tlls you) is as Antient as the Monarchy of This Island? An Order, that you and your Confederates most Unduifully destroy'd? But could you now have the Confidence to demand the spoyls again, which you first ravish'd from the Church, and the Independents afterward took from you, as the Reward of your Sedi∣tion, and Schism? And could you yet have the grea∣ter Confidence, in case of a Disappointment, to break out into this most Unchristian Exclmation, on the be∣half of the People? Oh: [What happy times did we on see! That is to say; when the Kingdome was Laid in Blod, and Ashes; all that was Sacred, trampled under Foot, And all this Confusion, only to heave the Pres∣byter into the Saddle. Ri. Richards challenge,I have described the Iudgment of such Non-conformists  I have Conversed with, (not undertaking for every odd person wh I know not) I do desire those that seek our Bloud, and Ruine, by the false Accusation of Rebellious Principles,In justificati∣on o the Non-Conformiss. to tell me if they can, [wht Bodies, or Party of men on Earth have more sound and Loya Principles of Government, and Obedience. 2d. Part. Non-Co. Plea. Pref. [Our Accusations are. 1. That we are Presbyterias, and Phanatiques.The Non-Conformists charge. 2. That we began the War in 1641. and 16▪ 3. That we destroy'd the King. 4. That our Principles are Disl∣al. 5. That we are Ploting a Rebellion. Ibid. But what is a Pr∣byterian? Mo. A Presbyterian is a Member of a State Faction, under a Religious denomination.A Presbyterian defin'd. For by that  we do not understand such as are really of That Clsscal and Whymsical Profession; but a sort of People tha
drive on a Political design, under the Colour of an Ec∣clesiastical Scruple of perswasion. And in as extensive a Latitude do you take the Word, your selves.Presbyterians swallow ap all othe Sect at irst, and ten spw the up agin. For all the Sects are Presbyterians (or Dissenting Protestants, as you call them) when you have need of them in Conederacy against the Government; though the Presbyterians spews all the rest up again, (as they did in 1647. when they had done thir work;) But pray what say ye to the Bginning o the War? Ri. [In 1642. the Lamentable Civil War ok out;Richard say that the Epis∣cpal mn b∣gan he war. Te two Hou∣ss, Lord ieu∣ens. Oi∣cr, Civil and Miiy, As∣semby  Di∣vine, amst all Episcopl mn. At which time as far as ver we could larn by Aquintance with sm of them, and Report of others, excepting an Inonsidrable number, the Houses of Lords and Commons consisted of Those that had still li∣ved in Conormity to the Church of England, and the Episcopal Government, &c. 1 Part. Non-Conform. Plea. p. 126. [The Lord Liutenants whom the Parliament chos, were almost all Episo∣pal Conformists, Ibid. [The ar Greater Part of the Geneall Officers, Colonells, Liutenant-Colonells, and Majors of the Earl o Essex his Army; And of the Sea-Capais, and of the Mjor-Gne∣rals of Brigades, and Counties about the Land, bid [The As∣sembly of Divines at Westminster also, were mn that had liv in Conformity, except about 8. or 9. and the Scots, p. 12. Mo. You do well Richard to say that hey HAD Lived in Conformity, for the Complying humour was now going off apace; Insomuch that a profet opposi∣tion to the Orders of the Church became qckly a distinguishing mark of the disloyal Party:The Kings ∣gag'd Enem ere all . And all those Parliament men, Oicers, and Assembly-Divnes, Contributed Unanimously in their several Satn toward the Common Ruine. On [Frydy Dc. 1. 1640. A Petition was brought into the  Allderman Pennington from the Citizens of Lonn▪ in  name of 15000. Complaining of the Church-, in having Arch-Bishops, Bshops, &c. Usin the Crsse in Baptisme; Kneeling at the Communion-Table,  un∣lawfull
in the Protestant Church. Diurnal Occurrences. Pa. 12. Ian 13. Petition against the Government of Bishops from Several Counties. P. 16. Ian. 13. The Remonstrance with 700. hands against the Bishops and their Prelacy was read, P. 33. March 7. A Bill against Episcopacy read in the House of Commons, &c. Pa. 47. Mar. 10. 1640. Bishops Votes in Par∣liament taken away, Pa. 49. in Novem. 1641. several Tumults against Bishops, and Dec. 11, 12. Bishops accused of High-Treason. The Bishops in the mean time Petitioning his Majesty, and entring a Protest of their Priviledges, and against Tumults. Apr. 2. 1642. A due and necessary Reformation of the Govern∣ment and Liturgy of the Church pretended. Ex. Col. P. 135. It is to be hoped, that all These violences upon the Ecclesiastical State, and the Persons of the Bishops, were not acted by Conformists. And it will not be deny'd, I suppose that after the Posting and Proscri∣bing of the Greater part of the Clergis Friends, (as well as the Kings) The Schismatical Intrest was carry'd on by the Major vote of the Remining Frag∣ment; and all This was before the Eruption of the War; the Earl of Essex not receiving his Commission, till Iuly 12. 1642. Unless you'le say that Episopal men themselves, were for the Extirpation o Bishops. Ri. The Parlia∣ment bought in the Scots.[When the Parliaments Armys were worsted and weakned by the King, and they found themslves in dangr of being Ovrcome, thy intreatd help from the cots ('tis true) who taking advantage of thei streights, brought in the Covenant, as the Condition of their help. Non-Conf. 1 part. p. 27. And or the Assembly 1 [I think I have not read of mny Assemblies o Worthier men since the A∣postles days.Few worthier Assemblies since the Apo∣stles days. Answ. to Dr. Stillingflet. p 84. The Covenant d Vow, was taken by the Parliament, and by their Garisons, nd Soldiers that would voluntarily take it as a Test whom they mig
Trust Non-Conf. Plea. p. 128.Their good naue toward the Indepen∣dents. [The Assembly never endea∣voured to turn the Independents out of the Parish-Churches, and Benefices, nor to Silence them; forbidding them Publick Preaching, as you do us, &c. Answ. to Dr. Stillingf. p. 14. They Imposed no Liturgy, no one Ceremony; no Practice on them, contrary to their Conscience, p. 85. The Presbytery being only a Tolerated, or Intended thing, without any Imposition that ver we knew of. Mo. It is very well known what pains your Cele∣brated Assembly took to make the City bleed for That Scottish expidition,The Guild-Hall han∣gue  brought in the Scots. and we have the Guild hall Haran∣gues on That Occasion, still upon Record. But I shall rather mind you of some Proceedings which you would be thought to have forgotten; to the Immortal Honour of your Confederates. Only half a dozen Words in the way to it- It is no wonder for men that have so low an Esteem for Generall Counsells, as both You Sir, and Mr. Baxter professe to have, in several of your Writings, to en∣tertain yet very Reverend Thoughts of the Pybald As∣sembly. His Late Majesty had quite another Opinion of them. See his Proclamation, Inhibiting the Assembly of Divines, an others Summoned to Westminster, by an Ordinance of Both Houses of Parliament. Bibliotheca Regia. P. 328. Iun. 22. 1643. Whereas there hath been a long time, a desperate and Se∣ditious design amongst diverse Factious persons,His Majesties Proclamation against the Assembly of Divines. Jun▪ 22. 1643. to alter the whole Frame, Constitution, and Government of this Church; so long and so happily Established within this King∣dome; in pursuance whereof they have discountenanceed, and in a manner suppressed the Book of Common Prayer, settled by Law; driven away, Imprisoned, Removed, ve∣ry many Learned, Orthodox, Godly Divines, and Mi∣nisters from their Cures, for discharging their duty and Conscience in Preaching: and in their places, without the least colour or shadow of Lawfull Authority, have Institu∣ted,
or Deputed mean Factious Persons Unqualify'd with Learning or Virtue;Painful, Able, Laborious Ministers. to corrupt and poyson the minds of our Good Subjects, with Principles of reason and Rebellion, and have seized the Rents and Revenues of our Bishops,The Loyall Presbyterians. Deans, and Chapters, for their own private Lucre, or Benefit, and for the Maintenance of the Army in Rebellion a∣gainst us.The . Pray Observe my Friends, that this was before the Scots were call'd in; and the work of men too in Op∣position to the Church: I come now to your Apostoli∣cal Assembly. Since These bloudy distempers, and when so many Armies are on Foot in several parts of the Kingdom,Kings Procla∣mation. a Bill hath been presented to us for the Calling of an Assembly, of such Divines, as are mentioned in the said Bill, the far greater part whereof are men of no Reputation or Learning;A Dutiful Proposition. and eminently disaffected to the Government of the Church of England▪The Worthy . and very many of them are persons who have openly prached Rebellion, and incited the People to take up Armes against us, and so are not like to be proper Instru∣ments of Peace, in Church, or State; which Bill having many Clauss in it very derogatory to our Honour, and Iust Rights,The  and very Scandalous to the Reformed Protestant Religion: not so much as any part being left to Us, either in the Choice of the Persons, or in Adjorning or Dissolving the Assembly. Bib. Regia. Pa. 329. What do you think now of the Worthy Assembly? your [Men of sound, and Loyall Principles of Govern∣ment, and Obedience. These are the Men that you de∣clare your selves Resolved to stand or fall by; (and out of your own mouths a Man may warrant This Asser∣tion; that you are no better Friends to This King, then that Parliament and that Assembly were to the La. Methinks This Testimony of his Late Majesty against your designes, and Proceedings, should move your
Consciences and stare you in the Faces, as if it were his Ghost. You would have the world believe that the Cove∣nant was never Imposed, but that people might take it, or let it alone, as they pleased; That the Assembly silenced no body; forced nothing; and that Presby∣tery was only as a Tolerated, or Intended thing, &c. Now how great an Abuse this is upon That part of the Nation that does not know the story,An Abuse put upon the Na∣tion. will ap∣pear out of the Memorials of These Times, under the Authority of the Faction it self. The Lords and Commons took the Vow and Cove∣nant Iun. 6. 1643. Husbands Collections. Fol. 203.An Extract of Pariament Proceedings 1643. and thought fit to have it taken by the Arie, and King∣dome. Ibid. Arch-Bishop of Canterbu Temporal Livings, Dignities, and Ecclesist Pmotions Sequestered, Iune 10. 1143.  for calling an Assembly of Learned  (Thirty of the Layety, in the Commission.) Iune 24. 208. An Or∣der for Ministers upon the Fast-day to pray for a bles∣sing on this Assembly. Iune 27.43. The Assembly Petitions Both Houses for a Fast, and the removing of Blind Guides, and Scandalous Ministers; destroy∣ing Monuments of Idolatry,The Assembly stir up the people to rise. &c. Iuly 10. 193. Fol. 240. [An Order for Divines that attend the Assem∣bly, to go into the Country to stir up the people to rise for their Defense. Aug. 10. 1643. Fol. 285. [An Ordinance for taking away of Superstitious Monu∣ments. Aug. 28. 1643. Fol. 307. An Ordinance to examine Witnesses against Scandalous Ministers, Sep. 6. 164. Fol. 311. Souldiers to take the Covenant, Octob. 10 Fol. 359. An Order for the Assembly of Di∣vines, to treat of a Discipline and Government, the present to be aboished, and to prepare a Directory▪ Octo. 1. 16.  An Order for returning the
Names of such as take not the Covenant to the House of Commons, Nov. 30. 1643. Fol. 390. An Order for diverse persons to take the Covenant at Margarets Westminster. Dec. 12. 1643. Fol. 399. An Ordinance disabling any person within the City of London, from any place of Trust, that shall not take the Covenant. Dec. 20. 1643. Fol. 404. An exhortation for taking the Covenant, &c. Feb. 9. 1644. Fol. 422. An Order for taking it throughout the Kingdomes of England, and Scotland, with Instructions▪ Feb. 9. 1644. Fol. 420. A Second Order for demolishing Superstitious Monu∣ments. May 9. 1644. Fol. 487. An Order for none to Preach, but Ordained Ministers, except allowed by Both Houses of Parliament, May 6. 1645. Fol. 646. An Order for putting the Directory in Execution. Aug. 11. 1645. Fol. 715. Severall Votes for choice of Elders throughout all England, and Wales. Feb. 20. 1646. Fol. 809. An Order for taking the Negative Oath, and National Covenant. Iun. 2. 1646. Fol. 889. An Order for putting the Orders of Church-Govern∣ment in execution. Iun. 9. 1646. Fol. 889. An Order for dividing the County of Lancashire, into 9. Clas∣ses, Octob. 2. 1646, Fol. 919. An Order for Abolishing Arch-Bishops, and Bishops, and settling their Lands upon Trustees for the use of the Common-Wealth. Octob. 9. 1646. Fol. 992. An Order for the speedy di∣viding and settling of several Counties of This Kingdome, into distinct Classical Presbyteries, and Congregational Elderships. Ian. 19. 1647. Scobells Acts, 139. The Form of Church-Government to be used in the Church of England, and Ireland, agreed upon by the Lords and Commons, assembled in Parliament, after Advice had with the Assembly of Divines. Aug. 29. 1648. Fol. 165.
By this time I hope you are satisfy'd that it was a Presbyterian War according to the very Letter,Prov'd to he a Presbyterian War. Or if the Nonconformists did not begin the War, pray'e who bid? Ri. Our Calamities began in Differences about Religion,Richard says, the War began about Reli∣gion. and still That's the wound that most needs Closing, &c, R. B's. Fast Ser∣mon. 1660. p. 41. Ba. Do not you know, that write about the Cause,Baxter says, it began about matter of Law. that the War was not founded in Theologicall differences, but in Law differences? R. B's. Letter to Mr. Hickly. p. 25. Ri. The first open beginning was the Militia,Richard says, 'twas about the Militia. Non. Conf. Plea. p. 126. Ba. I know how unsatisfy'd many are concerning the Law∣fullnesse of the War;Baxter says, the War was made for Re∣formation. I cannot yet perceive by any thing which they object, but that we undertook our Defence upon warran∣table Grounds. The extirpation of Piety was the then great Designe, which had so far succeeded, that very many of the most able Ministers were silenced; Lecturers, and Evening-Ser∣mons on the Lords Day suppressed; Christians imprisoned, dis∣membred, and Banished; the Lords Day reproached, and de∣voted to Pastimes; that it was as much as a mans Estate (at least) was worth, to hear a Sermon abroad, when he had none, or worse at home; To meet for Prayer, or any Godly Exercise;A lewd scan∣dal upon the late Kings Go∣vernment. and that it was a matter of Credit, and a way to Perferment to revile at, and be enemies against those that were most Consci∣entious; And every where safer to be a drunkard, or an Adul∣terer, then a painfull Christian: And that multitudes of Hu∣mane Ceremonies took place, when the worship of Christs Institution was cast out, besides the slavery that Invaded us in Civil Respects: So am I MOST CERTAIN that this was the work which We took up Arms to resist: And these were the Offen∣ders whom we endeavoured to Offend. And many of those that scruple the Lawfulness of our War, did never Scruple the Law∣fullness of destroying us; nor of that dolefull havock, and Sub∣version that was made in the Church of Christ amongst us.
The fault was, that we would not more willingly change the Gospel for Ignorance, and our Religion for a Fardel of Cere∣monies. R. B's. Saints Rest. p. 257.258. Ri. [But the Kings Subjects may not enter into Leagues, C∣nants and Arms against him,Rcard will not allow of war ot Reli∣gion. without his consent, and Laws, m∣ly to propagate Religion and Reformation in the Kingdom. Non-conf. Plea, 2d. part, pa. 77. [If Governors command us to sin against G, Subjects must not obey, but yet not Resist; Much less take up Arm  Reform Others, or even to bring in a True Religion by Vnauthoris Violence. Ibid. p. 56. Ba. It is but a delusory course of some in These Times tt write many Volmns,Baxter i for a Reigious Wer. to pove, that Subjects may not bet Arms against thi Prices fo Religion. Ho. Common-wealth, p. 41.They are fools that think ther . [It is either Confusion and Ignorance of the State of th uestion, or palale errour in them that maintain, that it is  lawfull to fight for Religion. It is one thing to fight to mae oers Religious, and another thin to sight to preserve  wn Religion, and to preserve te means of Religion, to Us, nd the Nation, and our Posterity, Ibid. Persecutors  tae away our Lives or Liberties, if we worship God accordi o his Will,In ca o prsecuti we figh or our own, and our poseri alation. and use the necessary means of Salvation. It ghting ainst this Persecutin▪ we sight principally, and ul∣timately, for our Own, and Posterities Salvation, and nex, for the Necessary means theeto, and Proximately for  Lives and Liberties. Ibid. Mo. The Rancour, and Inhumanity of This Scan∣dal makes me take the Lesse notice of your shifts and contradictions; so that I shall wave the Course of your Reasoning, and speak a Word to your Con∣science. Pray'e cast a back Thought upon the Piety, the Moderaion,The late Kings sffeings for∣got en among geater . the Unexampled sufferings and Con∣stancy of That Incomparable Prince, whose Govern∣ment, and Administration is here so Diabolicall▪ Traduc'd. It is a wonderfull thig to me, that th Legal Justice that was execed upon two or thr
Contumacious Schismatiques, should be so fresh in your Memory, and yet the Tragedy of that Royal, and Protestant Martyr that fell a Sacrifice to the Idol of your Enthusiastical Reformation should be so utterly forgotten.Pryn, Burton, and Bastwick lamented, but not a word f the Royal Maryr. How can you so call to mind the silencing of a Stubborn Cabal of Lawless Mutineers; And the Bloud of Canterbury, your Sacrilegious Robbing, and Taking Possession, not fly in the aces of your Com∣plices? Especially considering how much you your selves have contributed to the common Fate. Ri. [How far the arliament was fom being Presbyterians, may b sn in te Propositions sent from them by the Earl of Essex, to the King at otinham, and patly their defeating all the de∣sires and endeavurs of hose that would have Presbytery settld thorow the Land. We know of no places,Presbytery not setled, say Richrd. but London and Lan∣cahire, where it was commonly taken up, and some little of  at Coven∣try, and some few such places, Non-Cons. Plea, st. part, 128. Ba. [It is not known that the Presbyterian Government hath been exercised in London, in Lancashire,Baxter con∣tradicts hi, And cofos himsel with comparing  day of Ri∣chard Pote∣ctor wih Charle. . and in many Coun∣ties these many years? 5. Disp. Prf. 28.29. [Look into this County where I live, and you shall finde a faithful, humble, laborious Ministry, Associated, and walking in as great Uni∣ty as ever I read of since the Apostles Days: No Difference, no Quarrels, but sweet and amicable Correspondency, and Communion, that I hear of. Was there such a Ministry, or such Love and Concord, or such a Godly People under them in the Prelates Reign? There was not: Where we had Ten drunken Readers Then, we have not One now;Ten  Hypo∣crites Now  One  and where we had One Able, Godly Preacher Then, we have many Now: and This is our Loss and misery in these times, which yo so much lament. Ibid. Mo. This last passage I finde in a Preface Entitled [To those of the Nobility, Gentry,Baxters Com∣peen to the Sons of the . 1659 and Commons of This Land that adhere to Prelacy: Publshed in the year 1659. and usher'd in, by an Epistle Dedicatory, [To his igh∣ness Richard Lord Protector of the Common Wealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland: with this expressi∣on in the last Page. [Your zeal for God will kindle in your SUBJECTS a zeal for You:Richard Crom∣wells faitfull Subiects. and for a Farewell, [A Faithfull Subject to your Highness, as you are an Officer of the Universal King. Richard Baxter. It is worthy of a Note Mr. Baxter, that your Pen cuts more still in 1659. then it did in seven years be∣fore, and that your Humour runs much, (about That season) upon Casuistical Points, and the Colla∣tion of Affairs, and Times. Now all the Reason I can discern for your change of Topique still upon That Crisis, is This. The Wheel was almost come round again, and Rebellion upon the very point of finishing its Course. or they had run the Monorchy down, into an Aristocracy; That, into a Democracy; Cromwell took up the Government next, in a Single Person. But all these Successive Usurpations were so Grievous, and Insupportable to the people, that necessarily the next Remove must be the Restoring of the King, to perfect the Revolution. Now so soon as ever you discover'd the dawning but of the least hope for his Majesties Restau∣ration.Mr. Baxters, Political A∣phorismes composed ex∣presly to keep out the King. what Mists did you presently cast before the Peoples Eyes in your Political Aphorismes, upon the Question of Authority, and Obedience? What pains did you take to possesse the Nation with an Opinion of the blessed differences betwixt the State of Matters uoder Richard the Usurper, and Charls the Martyr? and to hammer into the heads of the Multitude, the danger of Re-admitting their Lawfull Soverein? Pray'e tell me Sir, was Mr. Dance's Sequestred Living, and your Little Worcestershire Association so Inestimable a Prize, that you could part with the Bloud of a most
Religious Prince; the Lives of at least Fourscore Thou∣sand Christians; the Order of the Government, both in Church and State; your Lives, Liberties, and Estates; the Peace, Honour, and Well being of Three Kingdoms, and all This, in Exchange for Infamy, Beggery, and Bondage, and yet reckon your self a Gainer by the Bargain? Ri. The Common-wealths-men persecuted me and Others, so far as to make Orders to Sequester us, for not taking the Engageme▪Poor Rchard like  and prying againt the Scots. and for not keeping their Fasts and Thanksgivings for the  gainst Scotland. R. B's. 2d. Admonition to Bagshaw. p. 9. Ba. [It is a dreadfull Observation to see so much of the Spi∣rit of Malignity possessing those that once said they sought a∣gainst Malignants;The spirit of Malignity has taken  the Army. and that the inisters and Servants of the Lord, are rayled at by  as ormely they were by the worst of Those  esroyed; and with this ddfull Aggravation, that Then it as but Some that were Reviled, and now, wih many,  is All. Th, it was but under the Name of Puritan, and Roun eads;The Presbyte∣rians Perecu∣ted. and Now it is openly, as Ministers, under the Name of Priests, and Black-Cats, and Presbyters and Pulpiteers. Slf-dyal, Ep. Monitory. Mo. This is to Intimate that the Psbyterians were under a Persecution, Who were the Persecutors,The Presbyte∣rians Journey∣men (the Ar∣my) se up for themselves. I be∣seech ye? Even Your own Iorney men; who when they had wrought Seditn long enough under you, took the Trad into their Own hands, and set up for Themselves. And that you may not value your selves upon the Merits of your sufferings; Pray'e what was it that you suffer'd for? Presbytery is too Tyrannical for the spirit of an Indepedent to bear. The Stomack of That Party would not brook it,Somewhat of an accomoda-Generosiy in the Inde∣pendents. and so they cast it up again: For there is, though a Licentious, yet some∣what of a Practical, and Accomodable Generosity in that Party. But are not you aware, Gentlemen, that the
worse you speak of these people, the greater is your Condemnation; for making the Episcopal Party still, more Insupportable then These, at the very Worst? Ri. [Was it not Persecution, when many Anabaptists and Se∣paratists made such work in England,The poor Presbyterians persecuted by the Army, for not joyning against the Scots. Scotland, and Ireland, in Cromwells time, and after, as they did? when so many were turn'd out of the Universities for not Engaging, and so many out of the Magistracy, and Corporation-Priviledges? And when an Ordi∣nance was made to cast out all Ministers who would not pray for the success of the Wars against Scotland, or that would not give God thanks for their Victories. When I have heard them proess, that there were many Thousand Godly men, that were kill'd at Dunba ( instance in no other) and yet WE were all by their Ordinance to be cast out, that would not give God thanks for This. Ch. Div. Pa. 256. 1668. What more harsh kinde of Persecution could there be then to force men to go Hypocritically to God against their Consciences,Oh the perse∣cution o for∣cing men a∣gainst their Conscienes. and take on them to beg for the Success of a War which they Iudg'd Vn∣lawfull. and to return him a Publick Counterfeit Thanks for Blood∣shed; yea, for the bloud of Thousands? &c. Ibid. Ba. Only See to This Brethren, that none of you suffer as an evill-doer;But so long as hey do not suffer as evil-doers. as a busy-Body in other mens Matters; as a Resister of the Commands of Lawfull Authority; as Ungratefull to Those that have been Instruments of our Good; as evill-Speak∣ers against Dignities; as Opposers of the Discipline, and Or∣dinances of Christ; as Scornfull Revilers of you Christian Bre∣thren; as Reproachers of a Laborious, Judicious, Conscien∣tious Ministry, &c. Saints Rest. Pa. 131. Mo. You do not speak I suppose of the Seven or Eight and Twenty Cathedralls that were Defaced;No persecu∣tion to op∣presse the Church and all that love it. The 115. Ministers forced out of their Livings within the Bills of Mortality: nor of the History of Querela Can∣tabrigiensis. You accounted it no Persecution the for∣cing of men to Pray for the Successe of a Rebellion against their Sovereign; and to give God thanks for the Victories over the King, and the Loyal Assertors of his Majesties, and the Churches Rights and Go∣vernment.
As for you, Mr. Baxter,Mr. Baxtr places the Crown upon the wrong Head. your Counsell is very good, if it were not that in the Dignities, and Lawfull Powers you have plac'd the Crown upon the wrong head: and directed an Obedience to the Faction, in stead of the King: after your usual Method of Crushing the One, to Advance the Other.The King de∣stroy'd by Presbyterians, as Presbyteri∣ans. But it will be a hard matter I believe to convince you that the Presbyterians de∣stroy'd the King, and that they did it as Presbyte∣rians too, though I reckon it to be very easily Proba∣ble both from their Practises, and Positions. And Tis I should not at This time have made the Question, but that your self Mr. Baxter, have been pleased to bring it upon the Carpet. Ba. [The Generality of the Orthodox, Sober Ministers,The Loyalty of axters Orthodox so∣ber Ministers. and Godly people of This Nation, did never consent to King-Kil∣ling, and Resisting Sovereign Power, nor to the Change of the Antient Government of this Land. But they have been True to their Allegiance, and Detesters of Unfaithfullness and Ambi∣tion in Subjects; and Resisters of Heresy and Schisme in the Church, and of Anarchy, and Democraticall Confusions in the Common-wealth. R.B. Sermon before the Commons, Anno. 0. 1660. Pa. 44. Ri. It is most certain Brother, that we did never directly con∣sent,Richard sub∣ject to the Higher pow∣er, but not re∣solv'd which it is. (as you say) But Vnhappily there hath been a difference among us which is the higher Power, when Those that have their Share in the Sovereignty, are divided: But whether we should be Subject to the higher Power, is no question with us. Ibid. 45. Mo. If by your Orthodox, Sober Ministers you mean, the Episcopal Divines, your Assertion holds good, or in a Litterall Construction either; but if you intend the Non-Conformists, under these Two Epithets of Ortho∣dox, and Sober; What do ye think of Mr, Manton,An Even score of Orthodox sober Divines. Calamy, Case, Douglas, Burton, Herle, Goodwyn, Woodcock, Brooks, Bridges, Marshall, Cockayn, Fair∣cloath,
Saltmarsh, Sterry, Strictland, Newcomen? And for Brevity sake, I. O. W. I. and R. B. shall make them up an even score. I could shew ye how these Reverend Authors have traced the King killing Cause, from the very Egg to the Apple; (as they say) Preach'd the Lawfullness of the War; the People into a Rebelli∣on; the Kings Head to the Block; and then Justi∣fy'd all when they had done. And yet who but these men of Bloud, to Quarrell with the Govern∣ment, because they cannot get themselves Privi∣ledg'd above the Peaceable and Obedient Sons of the Church? What do ye think of the Author of CELEUSMA; that told the Commons in a Sermon Sept. 25. 1656.The last Kings bloud not valu'd at a Ceremony. [That the Remove of Prelatical Innovations Coun∣tervail'd for the Bloud and Treasure shed and spent in the Late Distractions:] Is not this person now with his Clamor ad Coelum, a very hopefull Solicitor for a Se∣cond Reformation? He that has Solemnly declared, that [If the Re-Imposing of Ceremonies could have brought the Late King to Life again, he would never have yiel∣ded to it.] At the Rate of Computation, why shall not a Ceremony at this day, out-weigh the Life of the Son, as Formerly it did That of the Father? But what needs more proof then the very Order of Aug. 10. 1643.☞ For the Assembly-Divines to  the People to rise for their Defence? There is another person also who is engaged i This present Controversy, to whom I would gladly Recommend a due Consideration of this following Extract.
[When Kings Command Unrighteous things,The Kings Murther justi∣fy'd the day after it was committed. and people suit them with willing Commplyance, none doubts but the destruction of them both, is Just and Righteous] A Fast Sermon to the House of Commons. Ian. 31. 1648. Pa. 5. He that is Entrusted with the Sword, and dares not do Justice, on every one that dares do Jnjustice, is affraid of the Creature, but makes very bold with the Creator. Pa. 15. [The Kings of the Eath have given their Power to Anti Christ. How have they earn'd their Titles?All Christian Kings Anti-Christianiz'd▪ Eldest Son of the Chuach; The Catholick, and most Chri∣stian King; Defender of the Faith; and the Like. Hath it not been by the Bloud of Saints? is there not in e∣very corner of These Kingdomes, the Slain and the Banish'd ones of Christ to Answer for? A Fast Ser∣mon of Apr. 19. 1649. Pa. 22.☜ Do not the Kings of all these Nations stand up in the Room of their Progeni∣tors; with the same Implacable Enmity to the Power of the Gospel? Pa. 22. There are Great and Mighty Works in hand,A Reflection upon is Ma∣jesy aer his Deet at Wocester. in this Nation. Tyrants are punish'd; the Jaws of Op∣pressors are broken; bloudy Revengefull people in Wars, disappointed, A Thanksgiving Sermon for the Scots defeat at Worcester, Octo, 24. 1651. P. 2. [What is This Prelacy?Prelacy Anti-Christian. A meer Antichristian En∣croachment upon the Inheritance of Christ, Pa. 5. [A Monarchy of some hundred years continuance, allways affecting,A Pedant tri∣umphing over Charles the II. and Monarchy it self. and at length wholly degenerated into Tyranny; destroy'd, pull'd down. Swallow'd up a great mighty Potentate that had caused terrour in the Land of the Living, and laid his Sword under his head, brought to Punishment for Blood, P. 6.
And calling the King Ty∣rant.[If any persons in the World had cause to sing the Song of Moses, and the Lamb, We have this day. The Bondage prepared for us was both in Spirituals, and Temporalls, about a Tyrant full of Revenge; and a Discipline full of Persecution, hath been our Contest: whether the Yoke of the One and the Other, should by the Sword and Violence, be put upon our Necks, and Consciences, is our Controversy, Pa. 7. Are These Fit Agents for Unity and Peace?Is it not a Prodigious boldness for such Spirits as These, to obtrude themselves, either upon the Go∣vernment, or the People, as men of Scruple, and the most competent Agents for the Promoting of Vnity, and Peace? And you your self Mr. Baxter, have not been out neither at this great work of Reforming Confusion, as your own Confessions in some measure, but your Conversation and Writings do Abundant∣ly bear Witness. Richard True to the King, but he mistook the King.Mr. Richard here I must confess, furnishes you with a Salvo that Ignatious Loyola himself would have blush'd at. You were ever True to the King, you say, but you did not know Who was King. Some would have him to be where he was NOT, and Others would not allow him to be where he WAS. Sir, This do∣ctrine might have done well enough in a Pulpit at Coventry,Baxters Restauration Sermon. Asserts the Presbyterian Loyalty. Makes the King a Subject, and worse. Pleads for Presbytery, without a word of resto∣ring the King. when you were helping the Lord against the Mighty; but from such a Restauration Sermon, the Lord deliver us! There is first not one word of Restoring the King in't, though it was a Fast that had a Particular Regard to That Debate. 2. It Asserts the Loyalty of the Presbyterians, and yet at the same time, supposes the Supreme Power in the Two Houses, which, in few words makes the Late King both a Subject, and (with Reve∣rence) a Rebell. 3. The Setling of the Presbytery, for that's allways the English of their SOUND DO∣CTRINE,
and CHURCH GOVERNMENT, Pa. 46.) is violently prest as the first thing to be done. Give FIRST to God, the Things that are Gods. 43. with a Pharisaical Ostentation of the Conscionable, Prudent, Godly, People of the Land, Pa. 46. in opposition to the Prophane. You could not do any thing in the world more to obstruct his Majestys Return, and yet you are pleased to make this Sermon an Instance of your Zeal to advance it. Ri· [The Parliament did not raise War against the Person or Authority of the King,The War raisd for King and Pariaent. nor did I ever serve them on any such Ac∣count: but to defend themselves against the Kings Mis-guided will. Holy Common-Wealth. Pa. 476. Their Commissions, (all that ever I saw) were for King and Parliament. We had Two Pro∣testations, and a Solemn League and Covenant Impos'd upon the Nation, to be for King and Parliament. And if Dclaations,Their Oaths & Covenants were fast and loose at plea∣sure. Professions, Commissions, and National Oaths and Covenants will not tell us, what the cause of the War was, thn there is no Disco∣very. Ibid. Pa. 477. Mo. These Commissions,The pretext of the War, Religion; the Cause, Ambi∣tion. Oathes and Covenants tell you the Pretext of the War, but you must go to their Proceedings, and Practices to find the Cause of it. The Two Houses Seize the Kings Towns, Magazins, Forts, and Shipping.The Loyal Presbyteians usurp Sove∣reign Power. They violently take the Militia into their own hands; Vote an Ordinance of Both Houses as binding as an Act of Parliament. Declare his Ma∣jestys Commissions Voyd, Issue out Orders for Se∣curing the Kingdome: Vote the Maintaining of a War, and the Seizing of his Majestys Magazins; Se∣quester the Church and Crown Revenues: and justi∣fy all these Injuries, as done in pursuance of their Protestations, and Covenants, and This is your way now of being FOR the King. Suppose that any man had beaten you, and Plundred ye, and Imprison'd ye, and abus'd your Friends for your sake, and a body should
tell you all this while that this man was FOR Mr. Baxter.The Two Houses were the King in the Covenant. If you were really for the King: why would not For the King according to the Oath of Allegiance do the businesse as well as For the King according to the Covenant? Or how came you to Alienate your self from his Majesties Iurisdictino, and to turh Subject, to the Two Houses? Who Absolv'd you from the One Oath,No Reconci∣ling of the Co∣venant King & the Legal. or who Authoris'd you in the Other? or when you found that the King in the Covenant clash'd with the King in the Oath of Allegeance, why did you not rather comply with the Law, then with the Usurpation? For it is Impossible to be True to both Interests, under so ma∣nifest an Opposition. You see the Colour of the War, and I shall not need to tell you that the Cause of it was Ambition, of Dominion, which was exercised to the highest degree of Tyranny. Ri. Richard holds Oaths to Princes to be DispensableIf a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall sinfully dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants, chuse and Covenant with Another; they may be obliged by their Latter Co∣venants, notwithstanding the Former. Holy-Common-Wealth. Pag. 188. Ba. Baxter holds Oaths of Al∣legiance to be Indispensable.That cannot be, my Friend; for we hold it [Impious and Papal to pretend to absolve Subjects from their Oaths to their Sovereign. Holy Com. Pa. 359. [It is not in Subjects Pow∣er, by Vows to with-draw themselves from Obedience to Au∣thority. Non-Confor. Plea. P. 213. Mo. But why can ye not now dispense with your Covenants, as well as you did formerly with the Oath of Allegeance? Ri. Richard will hate the Co∣venant bind∣ing as it is a Vow.Part of This Covenant is [against Popery, Superstition, and Profaneness; and all that is against Sound Doctrine and God∣linesse, &c. which the Non-Conformists take to be Lawful and Ne∣cessary things. Non-Conf. Plea. 1st. Part. P. 142. But the Con∣troversy
is not This, and That, but whether as a Vow made to God, it binde to things Necessary. P. 143. Ba. Soft a little.The League and Covenant and Vow and Covenant. This that you speak of is the League and Covenant, not the Vow, and Covenant. The Latter was on∣ly a Bond of Confederacy to assist the Parliaments Forces against the King; and taken by the Lords ane Commons Iun. 6. 1673. and then Ordred Iun. 27. to be taken all over the Kingdome. But the Other was Composed afterwards and upon closing with the Scots accomodated to the Scottish Model, and Order'd, Feb. 2. 1643. to be taken throughout England and Wales,The League and Covenant Impos d. and Entitled, For Rformation, and Dfence of Reliion; the Honour and Happiness of the KING, &c. [By this Covenant, you are bound, not only to an Extirpation of Bishops,Baxter is his own onessor nd bsolves himsef. but to endeavou the Introducing of a Scottish Presbytery: How can you then dispence with an Admittance of the Primates Episcopacy, as you propounded, in Contradiction to the Terms of that En∣gagement? Mo. Favour me with a word I pray'e. Did ye not Cove∣nant [to preserve and defend the Kings Majestys Person, and Au∣thority?] Ri. Yes,The Cove∣nan for the King, quali∣fy'd for Rei∣gion. If the King be against Reli∣gion the Co∣venant is a∣gainst him. [in the Preservation and Defence of the True Religion. Ba. But in case of the Kings Opposing it, we are still Ob∣liged [to continue therein, against all Opposition, and o promote the sam, according to our Power, against all Lets, and Impediments whatsoever. See the Covenant. Mo. Let it suffice Gentlemen that your Party destroy'd the King; it is no great matter How. Ri. [As to the Death of the King, I have in the times of Vsur∣pation, proved that the Presbyterians detestd it.Richard lays the Death of the King to Oliver. That it was a Proud Conquering Army, by the Contrivance of Ol. Cromwell, and the applause of a Few Phanatiques that did it by the consent of a small care of the Old Parliament, called the Rump, that durst not trust the King in Power. Non-Conf. Plea. part. 2. Preface.
Ba. The Baxteri∣ans attack'd the King.Prethee Dick Speak truth and shame the Devil. What did we raise Armyes for? And Attaque the King himself in the Head of his Troops? Wee'l maintain That, by our Principles, and Aphorisms. [War is not an Act of Government, but Hostility. Men are not in Reason to be supposed to Intend their Enemies Good, if they fight we are to blieve, they would Kill:And they fough to kill. and Nature believeth not Killing to be an Act of Friend∣ship. Holy Common-Wealth. Pa. 422. Baxtrs Un∣feigne Re∣penance. do Unfeignedly Repent that I did no more for eace in my Place then I did; and that I did not pray more heartily againt Conntion▪ and Wr, bfor it cam: and spake no more against it thn I  that I spae so much to blow the Coals. For his  forivensse of the Lord, through the Pretious bod of t Grt Reconciler. The hatred of strife, and War, ad Love of Pae, and Obsrvation of the Lamentable Miscariages sice,Mr. Baxter consulted the Word of God about Oppo∣sing the King. have call'd me often to search my heart, and try my ways by the word of God; whether I did Lawfully engage in That War, or not: (which I was confi∣dent then, was the Greatest outward service that ever I per∣formed to God. And whether I Lawfully encouraged so many Thousands to it. Holy Common-Wealth. Pa. 485.486. Mr Baxter would be the same man if another King were to be De∣pos'd and Murthered. Mr. Baxter very cautious of Treason a∣gainst the two Houses. Baxter fails foul upon Ri∣chard.[But yet I cannot see that I was mistaken in the main Cause; nor dare I repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to do again, in the same State of Things. I should do all I could to prevent such a War, but if it could not be prevented, I must take the same side as then I did. And my Judgment tells me, that if I should do otherwise, I should be Guilty of Treason or disloyalty against the SOVEREIGN POWER of the Land, and of Peridiousnesse to the Common-Wealth, and of prefer∣ring Offending Subjects, before the Laws, and Justice; and the Will of the King above the safety of the Common-wealth, and consequently above his own Wellfare. Ibid, And then for you so Impudently and Impertinently— Mo. Nay, let's have none of this, Gentlemen I beseech ye,The Modera∣tor interposes why You Two are Old Acquaintances; Fellow-Labourers, Fellow-Sufferers, and One Womans Children as we say.— Ba. I shall not eat my words I assure ye; I may forget my self perhaps,Baxter vindi∣cates Oliver. but I am not a man for Recantations. I say again, that it was Impudently and Impertintly done to reflect upon
Oliver Cromwell, as if he had done an Ill thing. My Holy Com∣mon-wealth [was written while the Lord Protctor (rudently, Piously, Faithfully, to his Immortal Horrour,A prudent, pious, Faith∣ful Prince. how ill soever you have used him) did Exercise the Government. Holy Common wealth, Preface to the Army. [And I have forborn to change any One Word of it all, that you may see the worst of my Intendments. And that True Principles will stand in all Times, and Changes, though to the shame of those Changes that make bad Times. Ibid. These are my own words, and do you think that I would ever have bestowed upon a detestable wretch, the Epi∣thetes of PRUDENT, PIOUS and FAITHFUL? And again; If Oliver had not been a Religious, and Gratious Prince,Baxter prays that Richard Cromwell may▪ Inherit the Piety of his Father. can you Imagine that I should ever have treated his Son Richard with this Complement? [We pray that you may INHERIT a Tender care of the Cause of Christ. Key for Catholiques, Ep. Ded. which shews both that Oliver had a Tendernesse for Christs Cause; and necessarily Implys that the Cause he Managed was the Cause of Christ. And then you shuffle it again upon the Phanatiques, and the Rump, that durst not trust the King with Power.The Presbyte∣rians Dis∣arm'd the King, and the Independents Kill'd him. Why prethee what Power did we allow him? We took away his Arms and his Men, and his Money, and his Credit, and his Towns, and his Ships, and his Laws, and his Liberty, and all the Ensignes of Royalty: and the Maxims whereupon we supported our Pro∣ceedings, did his besinesse. The Two Houses and the Army were no more then the Gun and the Ball; The one gave fire and the other kill'd him. Mo. Mr. Baxter; I (as you say) you do Vnfeignedly Repent, that you spake so much Formerly to blow the Coals.Baxter re∣pens, and then epents of his Repen∣tance. Why are ye blowing of them again? You carry'd Thousands you say, into the War, and Engged in it your self, and would do the same thing over again upon the like Occsion: And your Judgment tells you that it were Treason against the Sovereign Power of the Land to do otherwise. According to This Doctrine, a Remnant of the Lords and Commons may do as much to This Kg as they did to his Father, and the Presbyterians Pulpis shall ju∣stify the Prooceding. You do Generously however to own your Positions. But yet methinks you should have some re∣gard to the dismal Consequences that have nsu'd upon this Controversy.
Ba. [It were too great Folly, by Following Accidets, that were then unknown,Baxter thanks God for his Blessings upon this Nation in consequence of the Rebel∣lion. for me to Judge of the Former Cause. That which Is Calamitous in the Event, is not allways sinfull in the Enterprize. Should the Change of Times make me forget the State that we were formerly in, and Change my Judgment, by losing the sense of what then conduced to it's Enformation, This Folly and forgetfullnesse would be the way to a sinfull, and not an Obedient Repentance. Nor can I be so Unthankful as to say, for all the sins and Miscarriages of Men since, that we have not received much mercy from the Lord: Holy Common-wealth. Pa. 487. When Godlynesse was the Common Scorn, the Prejudice, and shame most lamenably prevail'd to kep men from it,The Blessed Difference be∣twixt the Go∣vernment of the Late King, & of Cromwell and so encouraged them in Wickednesse: But through the great mercy of God, many Thousands have been converted to a Ho∣ly, upright Life, proportionably more then were before, since the Reproach did cease, and the Prejudice was removed, and Faithfull Preachers took the Place of Scandalous ones, or Ignorant Readers. When I look upon the Place where I live, and see that the Families of the Ungodly are here one, and there one in a street, as the Families of the Godly were hereto∣fore (though my own Endeavours have been too weak and cold) it orceth me to set up the stone of Remembrance, and to say [HITHERTO HATH THE LORD HELPED US. Ibid. [Oh the sad, and Heart-piercing Spectacles that mine Eyes have seen in four years space. [This was Jan. 15. 1649.] [In this Fight, a dear Friend falls down by me: From ano∣ther, a Pretious Christian bought home wounded, or dead: Scarce a month, scarce a week, without the sight or Noise of Bloud. Saints Rest, P. 139. Mo. Here's first a most Evangelicall accompt of the blessed Effects of a Civill War:Baxters Com∣fortable Effects of a Civill War. The Blessed Times we had till the Army got the better of the Two Houses [The Propagation of Holynesse. And Then, a most Remarkable Calculation of the date of your Ca∣lamities, which commences precisely from the Armies get∣ting the Ascendent of the Two Houses, without any respect to the Outrages both upon the Church and State, while the Pres∣byterians Govern'd. Ri. Pray'e will ye [patiently read over the Representation, r Letter of the London Ministers to the Lord Generall, Jan. 18. 1648.
Mo. Very well, and since you are pleas'd to cast the Cause, and the Integrity of your Party upon That Issue, wee'l see what they say. [It is allready sufficiently known (besides all former Miscar∣riages) what Attempts of late have been put in Practice against Lawfull Authority: Letter P. 3.London-Mini∣stes Letter to the Lord-Ge∣neral. Ian 18. 1648. The Armies Crime wa the opposing of the Parlia∣ment, and Im∣prisoning te King without Leave. Only a Si∣zure of the Kings Person. But an Vnpa∣ralll'd Vio∣lene upon te Members of the House. Being men of Eminent Worth and In∣egity. [This Lawfull Authority was a Faction of the Two Houses] Especially by the Late Remon∣strance, and Declaration, published in Opposition to the Pro∣ceedings in Parliament. [Hre's the Crimen lesae Majestatis.] [As also by seizing, and Imprisoning the Kings Person with∣out the Knowledge, and Consent of Parliament. Ibid. [Here's only a plain Seizure of the Kings Person, without the Parliaments Privity or Leave; No Condmnation of the Thing it self, furthr then as it was done without his Masters Consent. Nor was the King more a Prisoner in the hands of the Army, then he had been at Newcastle, in the hands of the Presbyterians.] But now they come to [That late Vnparall'd violence offer'd to the Members of it; forcibly hinding above one hundred of them (if we mistake not the Number) from sitting in Parlia∣ment: Imprisoning many of their Persons; though many of them are known to us to be men of Eminent worth, and Inte∣grity; and who have given most Ample Testimony of their Real Affection to the good of the Kingdome. Ibid. Pray'e take notice, that it was upon the Members, an Un∣parallel'd violence; upon the King, no more then a Simple Sei∣zure; and methinks they might have bestowed some kind Epi∣thete upon his Majesty, as well as upon the Eminent and Worthy Members. But 'tis only the bare King; and That's All. [And besides All This, [There is an Intent of Framing and contriving a New Model, as well of the Laws, and Govern∣ment of the Kingdom, as of the Constitution of a new kind of Representative. All which Practices we cannot but Judge,A Factious Renant, th Magistraes which God ht set ove us. to be manifestly opposite to the Lawfull Authority of those Maje∣strates which God hath set over us; and to the Duty and Obe∣dience, which by the Laws of God and man, and by our mani∣fold Oaths, and Covenants, we stand obliged to render to them. Ibid.
The London· Ministers Me∣diation little lesse then Treason.You are not aware, Mr. Richard, that to Justify the Do∣ctrine of these Letters falls very little short of Justifying down∣right Treason; unlesse you can shew a Law that places the Su∣preme Power in the Two Houses. Gods Ordi∣nance violated when Magi∣strcy is op∣pos'd.[The Fear of God therefore, (whose Ordinance is violated, when Magistracy is opposed) makes us affraid of medling with Those who without any Colour of Legal Authority, meerly upon the Presumption of strength, shall attempt such Changes as these are. And we annot but be deeply Affected with Grief and Astonishment,The Divines fear ull of op∣posing God, in an Ordinance of the Two Houses. to see that an Army raised by Autho∣rity of Parliament, for the Preservation of the Priviledges thereof, and of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, should con∣trary to their Trust, and many engagements, do That which tends to the Manifest subversion of them All. P. 4. None of these scruples in the case of the King.Pray'e where was the Fear of Cod, when the King was op∣posed? what Legal Authority had the Two Houses over his Majesty, more thn the Army had over the Two Houses! Or by what Law did That Parliament raise That Army? Th Presbyte∣rians rue to the Faction from the be∣ginnng.[We have not forgotten those Declared Grounds and Prin∣ciples, upon which the Parliament first took up Arms: and up∣on which we were induced to joyn with them: (from which we have not hitherto declared, and we trust through Gods Grace, we NEVER SHALL.) Pa. 5. The Standard of the Presby∣teian Loyalty why not as tender of a breach of Trust, accor∣ding to Law, as against it?We have here in few words, the Judgment, and the Resolu∣tion of the Presbyterian Divines, and the standard of their Loyalty, from the Lips of the very Oracle of the Party. I would fain know now which wa the fouler breach of Trust, That of the Two Houses toward his Majesty, to whom both by Law and Conscience they were obliged, (besides so many Gra∣tious Concessios) or that of the Army, to the Two Houses! The one being like the Robbing of an Honest man, and the o∣ther, the Pillaging of That Thief: Over and above that the Army was Trayn'd up in the Trade of turning out their Masters. There was no Intent to di∣vest the King of hi Legal Right.[And moreover; although the PARLIAMENT thus too up Arms for the defence of their Persons & Priviledges, and the
Preservation of Religion, Laws, and Liberties; yet was it not their Intention, thereby to do violence to the Person of the King, or divest him of is Regal Authority, and what of Right belongeth to him. Pa. 7. Do but shew me now any one Essential of Sovereignty which those people left hi, if they could take it away,But he had a Righ to nothing then, for te ook all away. and I will be answerable to forfei my head for't. But still it is but what [of Righ] blongeth to him; and That's a Salvo for all the Violences Imaginable. [We disclam, detest, and abhor the Wicked,The Presby∣terians ell us they are no Jesit. and bloudy Teents, and Practices of Iesuits (the whrst of Papists) Con∣cerning the opposing of Magistrates, by Private persons, and the Murthering of Kings by any, though under the most speci∣ous, and Colourable Pretenses. Pa. 11. This is All, which upon that desperate Crisis of State was said for that Pious and unfortunate Prince:Not one word for the King in the whole Letter. the saving of the King, being (if any) Incomparably the least part of the Mi∣nisters business. Beside that the dethroning of him was more Criminal then the beheading of him. And in such a case, it would have been no longer a Murther, when they should once have voted the Fact to be an Execution of Justice. [We desire (Say they) that you would not be too Confident on former successes.The Army in Gods way wile they joyn'd with the Presbye∣rians. Sworn to pre∣serve his Ma∣jesties· Perso and Priviled∣ges of Parli∣ament. Wo absolv'd the Presbyte∣rins of their former Oaths. If God have made you prosper while you were in his way, this can be no Warrant for you to walk in ways of your Own. P. 12. [So that the Old Cause is Gods still, to this very day.] And besides; [you have egaged your selves by an Oath to preserve his Majestys Person, and the Priviledges of Parlia∣ment; and This is most clear, that no Necessity can justify Perjury, or dispense with Lawfull Oaths. Pa. 15. I should be glad to know now, how you came to be absolv'd of the Oath of Allegiance, or how you can honestly pretend to Stand up for any Interest, that renders the King Accounta∣ble to his Subjects. Ba. [Yet if I had taken up Arms against the ParliamentIf Baxtr had serv'd the king he had been a Traytor.
in That War, my Conscience tells me I had been a Traytor, and Guilty of Resisting the Highest Powers. Holy Com. Pa. 433. Mo. At This Rate, the King was a Traytor on the other side. Ba. Baxters Holy Com. wealth, to e taken as Non-Scriptus.Why do you cite the Holy Common Wealth, so often? for I have desired that the Book be taken as non Scriptus. Non-Con. lea 2d part. Pref. Mo. A shft, not a Recantation.And would not any Malefactor that were deprehend∣ed in the manner, say as much as this amounts to; and wish that the thing might be taken as Non Factum? This is rather a Shift, then a Retractation. For the Apho∣isms ere eel'd di∣rectly against the King.And then again; it is a wonderfull thing that you should overshoot your self so much upon a Subject that was expresly [Suited to the demands, and doubts of Thse Tims,] Holy Com. Pa. 102. That is to say; The Restoring of the King was the point then in Agitation, and out comes your Book of Aphoriss expresly to possesse the People against it. Ba. If you would have a Recantation more in Form, [I do here freely Profess that I repent of all that er I thougt,Bate Re∣cantation. Sayd, Wrote, or did, since I was Born, against the ace of Church or State, Against the King, his Person, or thority, as S∣preme in himself; or as Dvative in any of his Officers, M∣gistrats, or any Commissioned by him. 2d Admonition to Bag∣shaw. Pa. 52. Mo. A Repentance that will passe neither upon God, nor ManThis Mock Repentance is a Trick that will not pass ei∣ther upon God or Man. The Kings Headsman might have Sayd as much, and yet account that execrable Office a meri∣torious work. You are at your Fast Sermon again; Always Obe∣dient to the Highest Powers, but divided somewhere about the Receptacle of the Sovereignty. You ask God forgivenesse for all that ever you Thought, Sayd, Wrote, or Did, against the King, and the Publick-Peace. And what signifies This Repentance, so long as you persist in maintaining, that all the violences act∣ed upon the Person, Crown and Dignity of his Sacred Majesty, in the Name of the King and Parliament, were not AGAINST the King, but FOR him, This is All, but the Hypothesis of a
Transgression. Lord forgive me all that ever I did amiss. That is to say, if ever I did any thing amiss. But I charge my self with no Particulars. Why do ye not Touch the Thesis that you con∣demn; and say This, That, and tother Aphorisme I Renounce? Nay, why do ye not Reform and Correct your mistakes, and state the matter aright, toward the bringing of These people into their Wits again, that have been Intoxicated by your false Doctrine, and Poyson'd from your very Pulpit? Ba. [If you Quarrell with my Repentance as not In Parti∣culars enow; I answer you,Baxter Re∣sons why his Repenance is not Particular that as in the Revocation of the Book, I thought it best to Revoke the whole, (though not as Re∣tracting all the Doctrine of it) because if I had named the Par∣ticular Passages, some would have said I had mentioned too Few, and some too many, and few would have been satisfi'd. Admon. to Bagshaw. Pag. 53. Mo. You have Mark'd [Revoke,Mr. Baxters Pi Fraus.] and [Retract] with an Emphatical Character, to give to Understand, that you do not Retract, though you do Revoke, and you have put them in Italique, to shew that there lies a stresse upon Those two Words. You Revoke the whole [Book] you say, not as Retract∣ing all the Doctrine of it: If by Revoke you mean Call in, or Sup∣prss; you might as well call back your Breath again, as the ve∣nome that was diffused by those Aphorisms. And then to say that you do not [Retract All the Doctrine of it] does not ne∣cessarily Imply, that you Retract any part of it. Or if you do,A Jesuitism. your Repentance is yet Frivolous, for want of distinguishing the Right from the Wrong; that your Disciples may not take the One from the Other. Your Apprehension indeed of saying too much,For fear of too Much or too Little, Mr. Bater con∣fesses just no∣thing at all. or too little if you should come to Particulars, is very Reasonable: For to please the Lovers to their Prince, Church, and Countrey, you must not leave one Seditious, or Schismatical Principle behind ye. But then on the other side, if you come to pronounce the Levying of Arms, the making of a Great Seal, and Exercising other Acts of Sovereignty, without, and against the Kings Commission, to be High Treason by the Established Law, you are lost to all Intents and Purposes, with your own Party. So that for fear of disobliging the One side or the Other, by Con∣fessing
too much, or too little, you have resolved upon the middle way of confessing just nothing at all. Ba. Mr. Baxter proceeds in is repentance[I do Repent (again) that I no more discouraged the spirit of pevish Quarrelling with Superiours, and Church-Or∣ders; and (though I ever disliked and opposed it, yet) that I somtimes did too much Encourage such, as were of this Temper, by speaking too sharply against Those things which I thought to be Church-Corruptions:He ever oppo∣seth what he sometimes en∣couraged. A Baxterism. and was too loth to displease the Con∣tentious, for fear of being Uncapable of doing them good, (knowing the Prophane to be much worse then They) and meeting with too few Religious persons, that were not too much pleased with such Invectives. Ibid. Mo. This Clause of Repentance, is every jot as much a Riddle to me as the former. You did not sufficiently discourage the spirit of Quarrelling with Superiours. [Which spirit you your self Raised.] You were a little too sharp upon what you thought to be Church-Corruptions,'s very Re∣pentances are Calumnies. [So that here's a Bit, and a Knock, You were a little too sharp; but it was against Corrupi∣ons in the Church; Your very Repentances are Calumnies. But you were willing to oblige a Contentious Religious Party that was pleased with Invectives, you could have done them no good else. And what good I beseech ye did you do them by it, but mislead, and confirm them in Principles of Disobedience? on∣ly you consider'd you say, that the Prophane were much worse then the Other. He Repents and Relapses in the same breath.What is the reason that Mr. Baxter will be perpetually thus Inconsistent with himself; First you Repent for no more Dis∣couraging, and then (by a side wind) for Encouraging; and be∣fore the Repentance is out of your Mouth, you are at it again, with your CHURCH-CORRUPTIONS, and your opposition of the PROPHANE forsooth to the Godly, to Enflame the D∣vision, and to Harden the Non-Conformists in their Dissent. Now as to your Stigmatizing Character of Prophane, There is a Personal Prophanenesse,Prophanness in Habit, and in Conspiracy and there is a Prophanenesse of Associ∣ation, and Confederacy. There are many men I know, that have gotten so diabolical a Habit of Swearing, Cursing and Blaspheming the holy name of God, that they can hardly speak Ten words without an Oath, or a Curse: This is withot dispute a most abominable Sin; But it is withall so Disagree∣able,
and so offensive, that it gives a man a Horrour for the Imitation, and Practice, of so Unprofitable, and so Monstrous a Crime; and though it be a grievous Wickedness, it is not of so dangerous an Example. But what say you to Sacramental Leagues against Order, and Law? To the forcing of a whole Nation either to Swear or starve?A Covenan∣ting Prophan∣nesse worse then a Perso∣nal. to the calling God into a Conspiracy against Government and Religion? To the Rob∣bing of Altars; demolishing of Temples; dethroning of Kings; degrading of Bishops? &c. And all This, in the Name of the most High God, and with hands held up unto the Lord. But go on with your Repentance. Ba. [I do Repent (also) that I had not more Impartially and dilligently Consulted with the best Lawyers that were a∣gainst the Parliaments Cause,He repents that he did not advise with Lawyers. (for I know of no Controversy in Divinity about it, but in Politiques and Law;) and that I did not use all possible means of full Acquaintance with the Case. Ibid. [And that for a little while the Authority of such Writers as Mr. Richard Hooker, Lib. I. Eccles. Polit. and Bishop Bilson,An Invidious Refleion up∣on Hooker. and other Episcopal Divines did too much sway my Judgment toward the Principles of Popular Power. [And seeing the Parliament Episcopal, and Erastian; and not hearing when the War began, of Two Presbyterians amongst them all, nor among all their Lord Liutenants, Generalls, Major Generalls, or Colonells, till long after; I was the Easi∣lyer drawn to think, that Hookers Political Principles had been commonly Received by all; which I discerned soon after upon stricter Enquiry, to be Unsound, and have my self written a Confutation of them. Pa. 53. Mo. This way of Dodging, in one of the Prophane (as you stile us) would have been Iesuitical.Jesuitical Dodging▪ Here's only a bare wish that you had made a stricter Enquiry into the Cause, but no Acknowledgment that you were in the Wrong. And again, If you knew of no Controversy in Divinity about it; why are all your Writings stuffed with such a Huddl of Texts for Obe∣dience to the Two Houses? What did you search the Word of God for, in the Case? Holy Com. Pa. 486. were misled by Mr. Hookers First Book of Ecclesiastical  Favour of Popular Power;Why could not Hooker set him Right to the Church, as well as wrong to the State. Hookers popu∣lar poer no∣thing to Co∣ordination. why would ye not let him set
the Right in your Ecclesiastical olitiques, and in your Duty to the Authority, and Discipline of the Church, to make ye some amends? the Biasse which you will have him to take, in fa∣vour of Popular Power, being not one jot to your purpose, but regarding only the Specification of Government, and not the Fountain; and wholy Forrein to your Phansy of a Co-ordination: Whereas That Great mans discourse in vindication of the Rites and Injunctions of the Church comes directly to your Point: and stands as sirm as a Rock against all the Insults of Calumny, and Opposition; without any pretense to a Reply. But you serve Mr. Hooker in This, and the King himself, and the English Clergy in Othr Cases,Baxters Wri∣tings ae a di∣rect Satyr up∣on Govern∣ment. as you do the Bishops in your Church-History: you turn over Indexes and Common-Places for matter of Reproach against them, and then obtrude upon the World, the Frailties of some, and your own most Uncharitable mi∣stakes of Others, for the History of the Order; but not one word of Their Virtues. (It would make a black book, the Story of the Presbytery drawn up at the same Rate.) It is your way still, under a Pretext of advancing the Mistical Church, to depress the Visible, and to put the people out of Love wth both Civill and Ecclesiastical Constitutions. Ba. [Pray'e do but observe and see of what manner of per∣sons the Visible Church hath ben Constituted,B's quarrel to the Visible Church. in all Ages of the World, till now. In the first Church, in Adams Family, a Cain, In a Church of Eight persons, the Father and Pastor overtaken with Grosse Drunkenness, and one of his Sons was a Cursed Cham. In a Church of six persons, Two of them perish'd (in Sodom (in the flames among the Unbelievers, and a Third turn'd into a Pillar of Salt: The Two remaining Daughters, committed Incest. In Abrahams Family, an Ishmael; in Isaacs, an Esau: even Rebecca, and Iacob guilty of deceitfull Equivo∣cation; an Abraham and Isaac deny'd their Wives to save them∣selves in their Unbelief. In Iacobs Family a Simeon and Levi, that sold their brother Ioseph. Of the Church of the Isralites in the Wilderness but Two permitted to enter into the Land of Promise, &c. [The Ten Tribes were drawn by Ieroboa to Sin, by setting up Calves at Dan in Bethel, and making Priests of the Vilest of the People; and forsaking the Temple, and the True Worship of God and the Lawfull Priests. And these Lawfull Priests at Ierusalem were Ravening Wolves and Greed
Dogs, and careless, and cruell Shepherds. The false Pro phets who deceived the People were most Accepted.] Ch Div. Pa. 35.6.37. And if you run through the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Colosse, Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Laodicea.] Pa. 39.40.41. you'le finde it to be the same case. Mo. But what's your end in all This? Ba. [Not to make Sin less Odious, nor the Church or God∣ly less Esteemed: but to shew you the Frame of the Visible Church,The Reasons of B's Unkind∣ness to the Vi∣sible Church▪ in all Generations, and how it differeth from the Iewish; lest you should take on you to be wiser then God, and to build his house after a better Rule then his Gospel and the Primitive Pattern. Ibid. Pa. 36. Mo. This is by Interpretation, The Non-Conformists are the Invisible Church;He makes Dis∣senters the In∣visible Church and Confor∣mists the Vi∣sib. and the Episcopall Clergy are the Raven∣ing Wolves, and the Greedy Dogs, and all the Sons of the Church of England, are the Church Visible, According to your most ob∣liging way of Allusion. But there's one thing I forgot. You say, the Presbyterians did not begin the War; which with your Favour is a great mistake, and yet not a pin matter to the case in Question; whether they did or not. Did not the Kirk lead the Dance, and the Republican Faction in England pay them their wages,Presbyterians began the War and call them their Dear Brethren for their pains? And then the Presbyterian war was denounc'd in the Pulpi, and in the Parliament-house too, long before the Repub∣lican broke out openly in the Field. What if the first Publick Sticklers, were not at that time Declar'd Presbyterians? They were yet in the Conspiracy against Bishops, though under another Notion; and quickly after they Listed themselves under That very Profession, as the best cover in nature for their purpose; for That Schisme was never without a State-faction in the Belly on't. But nothing is more Notorious, then the Intelligence that was held, from the Beginning, betwixt the Republican Ca∣ball, and the Presbyterian Divines! The one drew the Bellowes, and the Other Play'd the Tune. And take notice likewise, That Presbyterian was a mark of the Faction rather then a note of the Religion, and used in Contradistinction to Royallist.A State Facti∣on as well as a Schisme. But Pray'e finish your Repentance.
Ba. B's Implicite Repentance.For [All the rest of my Sins in this business, which I know not of Particularly, I do Implicitly and generally Repe of, and ask of God to give me a particular Conversion, &c.] Ibid 53. Mo. B's account soon cast up.If you have told all the Particulars you know of, yo Account, Mr. Baxter, is soon cast up. You begin with a Genrall Supposition. All that ever I Thou, Said, &c. without any One Instance; or Acknowledgement. If you had sayd, I have committed many Sins of This kinde, and  That, it had been something. Your Second Branch of Repentance, is for no more discouragi Peevishnesse toward Superiours; and Then sometimes too  Encouraging it by being too Sharp your self against what yo took to be Church Corruptions. Why Sorry for no MORE dis∣couraging,A General Particular Repentance. when you were so far from discouraging at all, th on the Contrary, you Repent in the same Period, for too  Encouraging? This is, at the best; but a Lame and a Gene Particular Repentance.Rebellion and Peevishnesse. That which you make no more of th the Spirit of Peevish Quarrelling (as if the people had only  upon a Nettle) you should have spoken out, and call'd it the Spirit of Contumacy, and Rebellion. And what is it that yo charge upon your self here, more then that you were a little too Mealy-mouth'd?B. Repents of being too mea¦ly-mouth'd. But wher's your Vindication of the Chr-Orders you mention? where's your Determination which  the Right Superiours. Why do ye not tell the People that yo were mistaken in the Opinion of our Church-Corruptions; and Instruct them in their Duties of Obedience to God, and the King? Without so doing, That which you call Repentance, is ol a Snare to the Multitude, and a Scandal to the Government. Your next Pang of Repentance, is for not Consulting te best Lawyers that were against the Parliament, more Imparti∣ally and dilligently then you did. A Repentance wihout a Confession.Is This the Repentance, Mr. Baxter, of a Confessor? A R∣pentance, without a Confession: an arrant peice of Artifice, ad Design, to put on the Disguise of a Recantation, and witho any charge or discharge of Conscience, to keep in with Boh Parties. The Sin does not Ly in your not Advising with Law∣yers concerning the State of the Controversy, but in Plungig your self and Others into Bloud, hand over head, contrary to the Laws of God and man, without so much as consulting the
grounds of the Quarrell. To the Royallists it looks like an excuse of your Disloyalty to the King; as who should say; 'Tis true, I was to blame: It was a Poynt of Law,And an abuse upon Both Parties. and I should have taken better Advise upon't. And if the Other Side accuse you as a desertor of the Cause, you can acquit your self There too, that you have not Repented of any one Poynt to their Prejudice. If it be not as I say, and that you mean Good Faith, do but pub∣lish your Loyalty to the World, in the manner, or to the effect Following, and I'le ask your Pardon. I Do Declare, that the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,Mr. Baxter's Test. are still the Kings Subjects, and that it is not Lawfull for them to exercise any Act of Sovereign Power, without or A∣gainst the Kings Command, or Consent. I do lkewise declare that the War, Raised by the pretended Authority of the Lords and Commons in 1642. with all their Orders, Ordinances, and Impositions in pursuance thereof, were also unlawfull: And that All Acts of Hostility done by Them or their Order, against the King, or the Par∣ty Commssioned by hm, during the Command of the Earl of Essex, were Acts of disloyalty, and Rebellion. If you be really the man that you would be thought to be, you'le never Boggle at This Test: But if This will not down with ye, (let me tell you Sir, that to my knowledge worse then this, has) you will make me think of the Lady in the Proverbs, that [Eateth, and wipeth her Mouth, and saith I have done no Wicednesse.
Ba. Mr Baxter's Challenge.You Reflect in These Reproaches either upon my Parti∣cular Principles, or upon the Principles of the Party, or upon Both. As to my self; [If any man can prove, that I was Guilty of, hurt to the Person, or destruction of the Power of the King, or of Changing the Fundamental Constitution of the Common-Wealth] &c. Holy Com. Pa. 489.490. [I will never gain-sy him if he call me a most persidious Rebell; and tell me that I am Guilty of far greater Sin, then Murther, Whoredome, Drunkenesse, or such like. Ibid. Or if they can solidly Confute my Grounds, I will tha them, and Confesse my Sin to all the World. Ibid. Ri. Richard takes him up and proves him guilty as o the Kings Person.Nay Brother Baxter, you must give Me leave to put in  Word now; and first to your Practice, then to your Grounds. Di not you animate the Party that was in Arms against the King;  much as any man, and was That no hurt to his Person? [Remem (say you to the Army) how far I have gone with you in the W — And shall I be affraid of my Old most Intimate Friends? &c. Holy Com. Pref. Will you have it now that This Army, your O, and intimate Friends, did no Hurt to his Majesties Person? A now bethink your self, of your Challenge in the Preface to your Ho Common wealth.An Opposer of the Kings Power. [Prove that the King was the Highest Pow, in the time of Divisions, and that he had Power to make  War, which he made, and I will offer my Head to Iustice as a ∣bell.] Is not This Destructive of the Kings Power? And is not  a Change of the Fundamental Constitution of the Common-wea,  say that [the Members of Parliament considered disjunctly,  Subjects,And the Fun∣damental Constitution. but that Conjunctly, as a House or Body, they  the Sovereignty.] Holy Com. Pa. 433. And again, pa. 462. [Te the Parliament hath a part of the Legislative Power, (eve  ENACTING, and not only of Proposing) is undoubted. Ba. Nay if you go to That Richard, I shall call You to A∣compt for your Practises and Propositions too. Do not you re∣member a certain Dedicatory Epistle,He acknow∣ldgeth the Protectors Soveraignty. And blesseth the Providen∣ces that brought Ri∣chard to the Government. to Richard Protector, i your Key for Catholiques, where you have these words? [Gi not leave to every seducer to do his worst to damn mens Sol when you will not Tolerate every Traytor to draw your Amie or PEOPLE into Rebellion.] And again, [This is one tht rejoyceth in the present happiness of England, and honoureth all the Providences of God, by which we have been brought  what we are.] Do not you here acknowledge Richard the Pr∣tectors
Sovereignty? and blesse all the Providences that have brought matters so Comfortably about? Ri. Ay, Ay, Baxter;Richard had his Principles from Baxter. Thats a Doctrine you taught me in your Commonwealth. [I am bound to submit to the Present Government, as set over us by God, and to Obey for Conscience-sak, and to behave my self as a Loyal Subject towards Them.Baxter make the Protectrs Title as good as the Kings. For a Full and Free Parliament hath own'd it, and so there is notoriously the Consent of the People, which is the Evidence that former Princes had to Iustify their Best Titles. Pa. 484. Whereas in Truth neither was This a Free Parliament, nor any Parliament at all; neither ws your submission to the present Power, an Act of Conscience, for the same Consci∣ence would have oblig'd you as well to the King, upon the same Grounds. Ba. In good time Mr. Richard: And who taught ye, I wonder your Complements to Prince Richard in the Five dispu∣tations? Where you Addresse your self [To His Highnesse, Ri∣chard, Lord Protectour of the Common-Wealth of England,Baxters Ad∣dresses to Ri∣chard Prote∣ctor. Scot∣land, and Ireland.] Ep. Ded. And further [ Your Zeal for God will kindle in your SUBJECTS, a zeal for you. The more your Life & Government is Divine, the more Divine will you appear; and therefore, the more Amiable, and Honourable to the Good, and Reverend to the Evill. Parliaments will Love and honour you, and abhor the Motions that tend to a Divisi∣on, or your Iust Displeasure. Ministers will heartily pray for you, and prayse the Lord for his Mercies by you, and Teach all the People to Love, Honour and Obey you. The People will Rejoyce in you; and you will be lov'd or Fear'd of All. Such Happinesse attendeth Serious Piety, when Impiety, selfish∣nesse, and Neglect of Christ, is the shame and Ruine of Prince and People. I crave your Highnesse Pardon for this Boldness, and your Favourable Acceptance of the Tender'd Service of, A Faithfull Subject to your Highness, as you are an Officer of the Universal King, Richard Baxter.
Ri. Baters Reso∣lution in ree Cases, expresly to keep out the King.I' keep still to my Old Master Doctour of the Aphorisms, [If a Person enter into a military State against the People, and by Them be Conquered, they are not obliged to Restore him, unless there be some other Special Obligation upon them, beside their Allegeance.] Thes. 145. And moreover [If the Person dispossest, though it were Vnjustly▪ do afterward become Vncapable of Government, It is not the Subjects duy to seek his Restitution.] Thes. 146. And yet again [Whosoever explls the Sovereign, though Injuriusly, and resolves to revive the Common-Wealth, rather then he shall be restored: and if the Common-Wealth may prosper without his Restauration, It is the Duty of such an Injur'd Prince, for the Common Good to resign his Govern∣ment; and if he wll not, the People ought to Iudge him as mde In∣cable by Providence, and not to seek his Restitution to the Apparent Ruine of the Common-Wealth.] Thes. 147. Mo. Praye let me put in a Word betwixt ye. What do you call Incapacitys? Ba. [When Providence depriveth a man of his VNDER∣STANDING,Baxters Inca∣paciies for Government. He is Materia Indisposita, and Vncapable of Go∣vernment, though not of the Name.] Thes. 135. [If God per∣mits Princes to turn so WICKED, as to be Uncapable of Go∣verning,Dominion is founded in Grace. Want of Pow∣er deposes a Prince. So as is consisent with the Ends of Government, he permits them to depose Themselves.] Thes. 136. Again; [If Providence Statedly disable him that was the Sovereign, from the executing of Laws, Protecting the Just, and other Ends of Government, it maketh him an Uncapable Subject of the Power and so deposeth him.] For a Government so Impotent, is None. A capacity for the Work and Ends is necessary in the Person; and when That ceaseth, the Power ceaseth.] Hl. Comm. Pag. 137.138. Ri. And then you say further, Thes. 153. That [Any thing that is a sufficient Sign of the Will of God, that This is the Person, by whom we should be Governed, is enough (as Ioyned to Gods Laws) to ob∣lige us to Consent, and Obey him, as our Governour.) Vpon which Ground, you your self do Iustify all that I have either said, or doe, in submission to Richard. And so you do likewise in your Thesis 149. [If the Rightfull Governour be so long dispossest, that the Common-Wealth can be no longer be without Government,A Case against his Majesties estauration. but to the apparnt hazzard of it's Ruine, we ought to Iudge that Providence has disp∣sest
the Former, and presently consent to another.] We must not say, that [because we cannot have such a man, wee'l have none, but be Vngoverned; This is to break an Express Commandement, and to cast off the Order and Ordinance of God, for a Persons sake.] P. 162. And then there's another thing; You put all the Cases that ever you could muster up, against the Kings Return. [If a King (you say) dissolves the Government he can be no Governour.Cases of For∣feiture. If an Enemy, no King. A destroyer cannot be a Ruler, and Defender; He proclaimeth Hostility, and is Therefore not to be Trusted.] Pa. 539. Ba. Well, well? Richard. If you had pleased, you might have found out some other Aphorismes, where I have done as much Right I'm sure to Sovereign Power as any man living.Baxter asserts Obedience at all hazzards. Do not I say Thes. 326. That [It is the Subjects Duty to de∣fend their Prince, with their Strength, and hazzard of their Lives, against all Forreign and Domestique Enemies, that seek his Life, or Ruine?] Ri. If you speak This to the Cause in Question;Baxter against the King though the Parliament had been in the wrong. how will you come off where you say [If I had known that the Parliament had been the Beginners; and in most fat, yet the Ruine of our Trustees, and Representives, and so of all the Security of the Nation, is a Pu∣nishment greater then any fault of theirs against a King, can from him deserve: and That Their sauls cannot disoblige me from defend∣ing the Common-Wealth.  Owned not all that ever they did: but I took it to be my Duty to look to the mayn End. And I knw that the King had all his Power for the Common Good, and therefore had none against it; and Therefore that no Cause can Warrant him, to make the Common-Wealth the Party, which he shall exercise Hostility against.] Ho. Com. Pa. 480. [All this smed plain to me] And [When I found so many things Conjunct, as Two of the Three Estates against the Will of the King Alone, the Kingdoms Representatives and Trustees assaulted in the Guarding of our Liberties, and the Highest Court defending them against offending Subjects,. does n love to rub old sores. and sek∣ing to bring them to a Legal Tryal; and the Kingdoms Safety, and the Common Good, involved in their Cause (which may be more fully manifested,Neutrality a sin, and Trea∣chery o serv the King. but that I would not stir too much in the E∣vils of times past;) All these, and many mre concurring, perswa∣ded me, that it was Sinfull to be Neutrals, and Treachrous to be against the Parliament in that Cause.]—[It were a wonder if so many humble, honest Christians, fearful of sinning, and Praying
for Direction,Te praying Rebels against the Loyall Damme's. should be all mistaken in so weighty a Case, and so many Damme's all in the Right.] pa. 481. Ba. Very Learnedly apply'd. But do not I say Pa. 437▪ That [if a Parliament would wrong a King, and depose him Unjustly,A just way of Deposing a King imply'd. and change the Government, for which they have no Power, the Body of the Nation may refuse to serve them in it, yea, may forcibly restrayn them? If they Notriously betray their Trust, not in some Tolerable matters, but in the Funda∣mentalls,A Parliament may betray their Trust 100. or Points that the Common Good dependeth on, and engage in a Cause that would destroy the Happynesse of the Common-wealth; It is then the Peoples duty to forsake them, an cleave to the King against them, if they be Enemies to the Common-wealth.] Pag. 438. Ri. Tho a Prince be injur'd, the people may joyn with his Enemies.Now I beseech ye Mr. Baxter be pleased to Compare pa. 43. with pa. 424. where you lay down This Thes [Though some injry to the King be the Occasion of the War, it is the Duty of all the P∣ple to defend the Common-wealth against him; Yt so, as tht ty protest against That Injury.] Ba. But what say ye all this while to the Case of making Cont to an Usurper?No Obedience due to an U∣surper. [When it is Notorious (say I) that where a ma has no Right to Govern, People are not bound to Obey him, unlesse by Accident.] Thesis 339. Ri. [We detest their Oinion, who think that a strong and prspe∣rous Vsurper,Usurpr rsmust be oppos'd may be defended, against the King, or that the Kig is not to be defndd against him, to the hazzard of our Estates,  Lives.] Non-Conf. 2d. part. Pa. 77. [Meer Conquest with Consent,They have no true power. is no Just Title.] Ibid. P. 108. And again, [Vsrp have no True Power, nor do their Commands bind anb one in Consc∣ence to formal Obedience:Who are U∣surpers. nor may they be set up and defended agai the Lawfull Governour.] Pa. 55. [And Those are Vsurpers  by Force or Fraud depose the Lawfull Governour and take his place. Ibid. [If Vsurpers claim the Crown, the Suject must Iudge wh is their King and must defend his Right.The people to be Judges.] Non-Con. Plea. 70. Ba. But what if the People shall Miss-Judge? [All things are not destructive to the Common-wealth,The people may mis∣judge. that are Judg'd so by Dissenting Subjects.] Holy Com. Pref. [Nor are Subjets
allow'd to Resist,Baxt. laments the losse of the late Ru∣les. Sworn, and sworn, to King Lords nd Commons. The Lords & Commons rule alone, and he Govern∣ment not changed. whenever they are consident that Rulers would destroy the Common-wealth.] Ibid. [Oh how happy would the best of Nations under Heaven be, If they had the Rulers that our Ingratitude hath cast off.] [Our old Consti∣tution, was King, Lords, and Commons, which we were sworn and sworn, and sworn again to be faithfull to, and to Defend. The King with-drawing, the Lords and Commons Ruled alone, though they Attempted not the Change of the Species of Government. Next This, we had the Major part of the House of Commons in the Exercise of Sovereign Power, the Corrupt Majority, (as the Army call'd them) being cast out.] Ibid. &c. 'Tis no matter for the Following Revoluti∣ons; [To resist, or depose the Best Governours in all the world, that have the Supremacy, is forbidden to Subjects on point of Damnation. Ibid. Ri. Pray'e hold your hand a little Mr. Baxter.Baxter charg'd wih conra∣diction. If the Govern∣ment was i King, Lords, and Commons, how came the Two Houses o Rule Alone, with an Vsurpation? And without changing the Species of the Government? or how came we, that you say were sworn over and over to all Three, to depose the Head, and Submit to the other Two; and to let the Government sink from a Monachy, into a Aristocracy? and why might not the Commons, cast out the Lords, and the Army the Commons, as well as the Two Houses cast off the King? Especially by your own Comment upon, [Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers.] Ho. Com. 3E9.The Higher Poers  the Govenor in possession. Where you expound the Higher Power, to be Intended of the Governours in Actual Possession. What hindred this Agument from holding, when the King was in Actual Possession? Ba. [A people may give an Honourary Title to the Prince, and not give the same to Others,'Tis not th Nme tht makes the King. that have part in the Sove∣reignty.] [So that Names are not the only Notes of Sovereign∣ty. Wherefore one must not Judge of the Power of Princes by their Titles, or Names.] Ho. Com. Pa. 432.The peope Judges of the King and o the Law. [The Law saith the King, shall have the Power of the Militia, supposing it to be against Enemies, and not against the Common-wealth, nor them that have part of the Sovereignty with him. To Resist him here is not to Resist Power, but Usurpation, and Private Will. In such a Case, the Parliament is no more to be Resisted then he, because they are also the Higher Power.] Ho. Com.
Pa. 431.Seize the Kings Reve∣nue, and e is no longer a King. And there's more in't yet. [If a Prince be statedly made a Begger, or forsaken, or Ejected by a Conqueror, and so Uncapable of Governing, if it be but pro Tempore, the Subjects for That time, (that have no opportunity to Restore him) are disobliged from his Actual Government. [Pa. 139. Ri. So that the Sizing of a Prince's Revenue, deposes him from  Soverignty, and descharges his Subjects of their Obedience. But I took [Inferior Magistrates to be Subjects of the King as well as the meanest men;Inferiour Ma∣gistrtes still Subjes. Richard eer True to te Crown. and to have no more Power to Depose, or take up Arm against him, then other Subjects.] Non-Con. Plea, 2d. part p. 5. And [In all the times of Vsurpation, and since, I said, and wrote, that the Kings Person is Inviolable, and to be Iudg'd by none, either Per, or Parliament, and that it is none but Subjects, that they my call to Account, Iudge, and Punish.] Pref. Ba. The Law of Natue i a∣bove the Law of the Land.I shall leave [Others to Judge, in what Cases Subjes may Resist Kings by Arms; We shall only Conclude, that no Humane Power can Abrogate the Law of Nature, Non-C. Plea. 2d. Part Pa. 57. Ri. Modest Sub∣jects study their own Duty not te Kings.And may not the Two Houses be Resisted by the Law of Na∣ture as well as they oppo the King? [Mod Subjcts should rather study what Laws God hath made for Themselves, then what  he hath made for Kings; and what  Own duty th wht i the Kings: [Thugh  are not bound to be .] Non-Con. Plea, 2d. Part. Pa. 48. Ba. Sovereign Power not to be retrined by te people.Nay I am as little for Restraining of Sovereign Power as any lesh breathing. [It is not sae or Lawfull for the Peo∣ple to Limit, or Restrain the Sovereign Power, from disposg so far of the Estates of All, as is necessary to the safety of Al, which is the End of Government.] Thesis 115. Nay [A Go∣vernour cannot Lawully be Restrayned by the People from preserving them.] Thes. 120. [For the Multitude are Cove∣tous,The Multi∣tude no Judges of Govern∣ment. Tenacious, Injudicious, and Incompetent Judges of the Necessities, or Commodity of the Common-wealth.] Pa. 115. Ri. But what was it you were saying e'en now of the Best Gover∣nours in the World?
Ba. I was saying, that [the Best Governours in all the World that have the Supremacy have been Resisted or deposed in England. I mean 1. Them that the Army called the Crrupt Majority: or an Hundred Forty and Three Imprison'd, and Secluded Members of the Long Parliament, who, as the Ma∣jority, had, you know what power.The Seclued Members and the wo Crm∣wells te bet Governors. 2. The Powers that were last layd by. I should with great Rejoycing give a Thousand Thanks to That man, that will acquaint me of One Nation up∣on all the Earth, that hath better Governours in Sovereign Power (as to Wisdome and Holyness Conjunt) then those that have been Resisted, or deposed in Engl. Ho. Com. Pref. Ri. You Speak of the Secluded Members,Rebellion to oppose the spreme Ru∣lers. and the Two Crom∣wells. But they all came in by Violence; And [I know none of the Non-Conformists that take it not for Rebellion, to pull down or st up orcibly by the Sword, any thing against the Supreme Rler, or With∣out him] R. Bs. Letter to Mr. Hinckly. Pa. 8. Ba. [The Parliament did Remonstrate to the Kingdom, the danger of the Subversion of Religion, and Liberties,The Paria∣me tod us our danger. and of the Common Good and Interest of the People whose Trustees they were] Ho. Com. Pa. 471. And [If a Nation Regularly chuse a Representative Body, of the most Noble, Prudent, In∣terested Members, to discern their dangers and the Remedies, and preserve their Liberties and Safety, the People temselves are to discern These Dangers, and Remedies by THEIR eyes.] Thes. 356.And we wee bund to  with Their Eyes▪ And I think [it was time for us to believe a Parlia∣ment concerning our Danger, and Theirs, when we heard so many Impious persons rage against them] Pa. 472. [the Irish professing to raise Arms for the King, to defend his Prerogative and their own Religion against the Parliament. I say, in such a time as This, we had Reason to believe our entrusted Watch∣men, that told us of the danger, and no Reason to suffer our Lives and Libertyes to be taken out of their Trust, and whol∣ly put into the hands of the King. We had rather of the two,TheKing him∣sel opposed and Baxte eoved to jusify it. be put upon the Inconvenience of Justifying our Defence, then to have been Butcher'd by Thousands, and fall into such hands as Ireland did.] Pa. 473. But [all the Wars that have been since the Opposition to the Parliament, and Violence done to the Person of the King: were far from being own'd by the Com∣mon
Sort of the Now Non-Conformists, &c.] Non-Conf. Plea. Pa. 138. Ri. You were saying a while agoe as I remember, that a Parlia∣ment that destroys Fundamentals, is an Enemy to the Common-Wealth, and the People ought to oppose them. Pray'e Say:  not the Freedome and Right of the Electors, as much a Fundamen∣tal,A Fundamen¦tal detroy'd. as the Priviledge, and Trust of the Elected? How comes it then that you propound the Reducing of Elections to the Faithfl, honest Upright men,] &c. Pref. to the Ho. Com. Ba. Baxter de∣fends it. Parliaments may be cor∣rupt.Let me speak afterwards of the Necessity, and of the Utility of This Cause. 1. [It is known that Parliaments quà Tales, are not Divine, Religious, Protestant, or Just. The Six Articles by which the Martyrs were burnt, were made by a Parliament. All the Laws for the Papal Interests in the days of Popery▪ have been made by them. They have often Followed the Wills of Princes to and fro, and therefore they are not Indefectible, nor Im∣mutable, as such. Ho. Com. Pa. 243. Mo. Very right; and all the late Orders and Ordinances  Sequestring Crown and Church-Revenues,Instances of Parliamenta∣ry Corup∣tions. Commitments, Plunders, Decimations and the like, were made by that which you call a Parliament. But see now in what a Condition Tht people must be, that sees with the Parliaments Eyes, in ca of such Parliaments, as you suppose: and the Remedy you pre∣scribe, is worse then the disease; for take away the Freedome of Choyce, and the Persons Chosen are a Faction rather then a Parliament. Ba. 2. [It is known that there are Mambers of Vario minds in them all,Votes may be crried by Fa∣ction. and sometime, the miscarrying Party is so strong, that by a few more voices they might brsng Misery o the Common-wealth.] Ibid. Mo. A appers to our cost.This we have found in severall cases upon Experiment; to the Ruine of three Kingdomes. Ba. The major part of Ele∣ctors are ill me.3. [It is well known that in most parts, the Majo-Vote of the Vulgar that are Chusers are Ignorant, selfish, of
Private Spirits, ruled by mony, and therefore by their Land∣lords, and other Great and Powerful men, and withall, they are bitterly distasted against the Serious, diligent Practice of Religion, according to the Rules of Christ.] Ibid. 4. [It is therefore apparent, that if they had their Liberty,And will chuse others like themslves. They would chuse such as are of their minds; and it was by Pro∣vidence, and Accident that heretofore they did not so.] Ibid. Mo. Here's a Compendious Model Mr. Baxter of your Project [for the due Regulation of the Electours,Baxter's mo∣del for Reg∣lation of Elections. The Peoples Right of Ele∣ction taken a∣way by partial qualifications. A Faction packt under he name of a Parliament. and Electi∣ons of Parliament] Thes. 211. First, you propound to take a∣way from the People of England, their Ancient, and Undoubt∣ed Right of Chusing their own Representatives. 2. to Unqua∣lify all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of the Land that are Well Affected to the Government of Church and State. And 3ly. To Pack a Faction under the name of a Parliament of your own Leaven. Or if that will not doe, 'tis but employ∣ing the Rabble again to give the House a swinging Purge, and you are at your Journeys End. Proceed. Ba. 5. [It is certain, that the Wars,The People are disoblig'd, and not trust∣ed with chu∣sing their own Representa∣tive. the Change of Church-Government, and Forms of Worship, the Differences of Reli∣gious men, and the many Sects that have lately risen up among us, and the strict Laws of Parliament about the Lords day, &c. and Specially their Taxes, have deeply discontented them, and exasperated them against such as they think have caused these, so that many would now purposely design Their Ruine.] Ibid. In fine, [Without Regulating Elections, what Probabi∣lity is there, but the next that is chosen by a Majority of Votes, with absolute Freedom, will undoe all that hath been done; and be revenged to the full on all that were so odious to them, and Settle our Calamity by a Law? Mo. This is a more Candid Account Mr. Baxter,The peole sick of their Representa∣tive. then you Intended it. For the People may well be allow'd to have Cur∣sed the Authours of those bloudy Broyles; The Prophaning of our Temples; The suppressing of our Church-Government, and Liturgy, the Propagating of so many Sects and Schisms; and bringing the Nation to Grone under Their Taxes, like the Asse under the Burthen. But how is That the Peoples Re∣presentative, that Shuts the people out of the Election, and acts
both Without, and Against their Consent? The Tenth part of this encroachment upon the Common Liberty, from the King, would have been Cry'd out against, as Arbitrary And Tyrannicall. But what way would you direct for the Limiting of the Qualifications? ba. The Pastors to approve of the Electors.[Let all Pastors in England, that are Approved, have an Instrument of Approbation, and all that are Tolerated, an Instrument of Toleration; and let no man be a chuser or a Ruler that holdeth not Communion with an Approved or To∣lerated Church, and is not signify'd under the Pastors hand, to be a Member thereof.] Thes. 219. Mo. A most excellent Invention to advance the Empire of Presbytery,The Empire of Presbytery. and enslave all other degrees and Perswasions of men whatsoever. Ba. [The Humble Petition and Advice determineth, that under the Penalty of a Thousand pounds,The Petition and Advice concerning Elections. and Imprisonment till it be paid, no person be Elected and sit in Parliament but] [Such as are persons of known Integrity, fear God, and of Good Con∣versation.Baxters ad∣mirable Expe∣dient. They are sworn also for Fidelity to the Protector, &c.] A more excellent Act hath not been made, for the happynesse of England, concerning Parliaments, at least, since the Refor∣mation.☞] Ho. Com. 257.258. Mo. But what is it that you mean by this Known Integrity? or who are to be the Iudges of it?His qualifica∣tions accepted. I take That man that Pub∣lickly Sacrifices his Life, his Fortune, his Family, and his Free∣dome to the service of his Prince and Countrey, according to the Law, to be a man of Known Integrity: and him that Acts in opposition to the Law, and to his duty, to be clearly the con∣trary.The Pharisee and the Pub∣lican. I take the Publican, that smites his breast, and crys, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner; to have more of the Fear of God in him, then the Pharisee, that Prays in the Market Place, and thanks God that he is not as Other men are: And I take him to be of as Good a Conversation, that submits quietly to the Rules of the Government; Reverences Authority, and contents him∣self with his Lawful Lot, As he is that values himself upon Out∣braving Publique Order, Reviling his Betters; Living upon the spoil, and devouring the Bread of the Oppressed.
What would you say now to the turning of the Tables, and setting up of your Qualifications on the other side? and to the Kings excluding of the Non-Conformists by an Oath of Fideli∣ty to himself,What if the King should take upon him so? as your Richard [excluded delinquents in the late E∣ections.] Ho. Com. P. 244. [So that the People durst not go according otheir Inclinations.] Ibid. But why do I argue from your Pra∣ctises, when your Positions do naturally leade to the same unduty∣full Ends? Ba. [My dull Brain could never find out any one point of difference in Theology, about the Power of Kings,Baxtr fdes Presbyterian and Episcopal Loyalty the same. and the Duty of Obedience in the People, between the Divines called Presbyte∣rians, and Episcopal. If you know any, name them me, and tell me your Proofs. R.B's. Letter to Mr. Hinckly,] Pa. 26. Ri. 'Tis a Confounding of your Metaphysicks methinks with your Politiques, to talk of Points of Theology,Baxter con∣founds hisM∣taphsiycks with his Po∣liicks. in matters of Ci∣vil Power and Obedience; without distinguishing between our Credenda and Agenda, Notion and Practice; Supernaturall Truths and Moral Duties. And why [The Divines CAL∣LED Presbyterians] and not rather the Presbyterian Divines? For they are not ALL, Presbyterians, that are so CALLED; and there's a great deal of difference betwixt the Principles of Presbyterian Divines, as Presbyterian, and the  of those very Presbyterians, as they are range undr he Bnner of a Civil Interest. But over and above all Thi, you have carry'd it a great deal oo far, to say that the Episcopal, and the Presbyteri∣an Divines hold the same Principles in the Point of King and Sub∣ject. You shuld rather have acknowledg'd▪ the disagreements, and maintain'd the Piciple. We hold, 1. [Tht the Parliament by the Constitution,Presbyterian Positions. have part of the Soveret.] Ho. Com. Pa. 457. [2. That the Sovereign∣ty is joyntly i Kg, Lords and Commons, as Three Estates.] 465. [3. The Parliaent have a Power of Enacting Laws as well as of roposing them.] Pa. 462. Whereas The Episcopal Party pronoce the Sovereignty to be only in the King;Episcopal Po∣sitions. 2. They assert the Kings sole Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, whatsoever as well Ecclesiastical, as Civill, and 3. That the two Houses have no share at all in the Sanction. We hold likewise that It was Treason to resist the Parliament, as the Enemy did, apparently in Order to their Subver∣sion.] Ho. Com. 478.Presbyt. Posit. [That the Parliament was the highest In∣terpreter
of Laws that was then Existent, in the Division.] Ibid. And so we find that every step of the Parliamentary War was Iustify'd by the Assembly, and the whole Current of the Presbyterian-Di∣vines:Episc. Posit. The Episcopal Clergy Vnanimously declaring themselves to the contrary. Who but the Assembly July 19. 43. in the Names of Themselves and Others,The Assembly crys out for bloud. And stir up the people. to call for the Execution of Iustice, on All delinquents? Husband 2d. Vol. of Collections, 241. And who a∣gain, Aug. 10. 1643. but The Divines of the Assembly that are Re∣iants of the Associated Counties, and now Attending the Assembly, are desired to go down into their several Counties, to stir up the people in Those severall Counties, to rise for their Defence.] Ibid. 285. So that in the Main, we differ upon the very Constitution of the Go∣vernment; the Power of the Prince, the Duty of the Subject, and upon every point of the Parliamentary War: And we are no lesse divided upon the Scheme of Forms, and Ceremonies. Ba. Mr. axter ne∣ver wrong'd any man.[Prove that I or any of my Acquaintance ever practised Ejecting, Silencing, ruining men for things Unnecessary; yea or for Greater things. Whom did we ever forbid to Preach the Truth? Whom did we cast out of all Church-Mainte∣nance? Whom did we Imprison!] R. R's. Answ. to Dr. Stillingfleet. Pa. 97. Ri. You forget your self Brother: and I am for speaking the Truth, though I shame the Devill.Richard re∣freshes his memory. Pray look into Mercurius Rusticus his Ac∣compt of the London Clergy that were Ejected, Silenced, and Ruin'd by Order of Parliament: See his Querela Cantabrigiensis, for the Heads, Fellows, and Students, of Colledges, that were There Ejected, Plunder'd, Imprison'd, or Banish'd for their Af∣fections to the King, and the Establish'd Religion. Consider th You your self took the liberty to Graze upon another mans Pastre: And all these Violence were carry'd on by your Encouragement, In∣fluenced by your Approbation; and the Principal directors of the, extold to the Skyes,Mr. Baxters Governours. as the [Best Governours for Wisdome ad Holynesse,] Ho. Com. Pref. under the Cope of Heaven. Ba. A Plot upon the Presbyte∣ians.But however, [Either they must prove that we hold Rebellious Principles, or they shew that they do but in Plot accuse us.]
I know very well that [The Transproser Rehearsed, Pa. 48. saith Mr. Baxter in his Holy Common-wealth mayntainteth that he (the King) may be called to Account by any Single Peer.A bloudy slander.] [Must we say nothing to such bloudly slanders? Never such a Thought was in my mind, nor word spoken or Written by me. But▪ all is a meer False-Fiction: Nay in all the times of Usurpation, and Since, I said and Wrote, that the Kings Person is Inviolable, and to be Judg'd by none, either Peer, or Parliament, and that it is none but Subjects that they may call to accompt, and Judge, and Punish; and that neither the King may destroy or hurt the Kingdome, nor the Kingdome the King, (much lesse a Peer) but their Union is the Kingdomes Life. And the very Book Accused, goeth on such Principles,Alas! the Ho. Com. a most Innocent Book. and hath not a word meet to tempt a man in his Witts to This Accusation. Judge now by this one Instance, and by the Cry of the Plotters now against Us, [Catilina Cethegum,] seeking our destruction, and the Parliaments, as supposed to favour us (which for ought I know never did any thing for our Relief, or Ease) whether it be meet, that I should dye in silence under such horrid Accusa∣tions:Mr. Baxter lies under horrid Accu∣sations. Against which I appeal to the Great and Righteous Judge, before whom I am shortly to appear, begging his Par∣don and Reforming Conviction whereever I Erre.] Apr. 16. 1680. Non-Con. Plea, 2d Part. Preface. last Page. Mo. Be not so Transported Mr Baxter at the bloudy Slander, as you call it:Mr. Baxter transported. for the very excusing of your self after This Man∣ner, falls heavier upon you, then the Accusation it self. There was a Gentleman of a Good Family, that had Stol'n a Silver-Spoon; and it was layd home to him, as a mighty Aggravati∣on of the Crime, tat a man of his Quality could let him∣self so low, as to pilfer for such a Trifle. Ay Sir, Says he, you say very Right, if That had been All; But in good Faith Sir, my Aym was at the Great Tankard, If it had been a Single Peer, it had been indeed a bloudy Slander; But your Ayme was the calling of the King to an Account, by the Authority of the Two Houses. And then you are pleased to blesse God for the next Change that call'd Them to Account too:Any Govern∣ment but the Right. for you give the Two Vsurpers much better Words, then any you could af∣ford to the Lords Annoynted. You call Them the Higher Powers, and enjoyn Obedience to Them upon the pain of Damnation; which is a Favour you would never allow to his Late Majesty.
Any Government but the Right will down with ye, and Still That which was a Rebellion in the Enterprize, proves to be a Providence in the Execution. But do you say Mt Baxter, that you have allways asserted the Kings Person to be Inviolable, &c. and that the very Bo accused goeth on such Pronciples? Why then it is no hurt to the King, to be Assaulted, despoyl'd of his Regalitys; Deposed, Im∣prisoned, Try'd, Condemn'd and Executed. For the King you say is but a Title of Respect, not a Character of Power: a Nominal, Empty businesse.A King is a name of Res∣pect not Power. A kinde of Dignity, Party-perpale, Half-Prince, half-Subject; and 'tis but taking him on the Popular side, and you may do what you will with him. This is the Chimera of a Prince, according to your Aphorismes: A kind of Mock-Majes set up, for every Seditious Libertine to throw a Cudgell at. You make his Authority to be so Conditional, and Precarious, that he is upon his good behaviour for his Crown.The Kings Authority made precari∣ous. If his Admi∣nistration be not answerable to the Ends of Government: If he wants either Power, or Money, or Grace, or Vnderstanding; or (which is worst of All) If the Licentious Rabble will but say, that he wants This,And under several Inca∣pacities. or That, hee's gone, and Deposed, pso facto, as an Unqualifi'd Person. For according to your Thes, The Multitude are to be the Judges of These Incapacities▪ I is a hardy Adventure, M. Baxter (unless you can make Alm∣nacks) to set up such Positions as These, at This time of day. 'Tis True, They were printed in Fifty-nine, But they are no Resum'd, and Avow'd in Eighty. But your Patience yet a little further Sir. Is it such a Horrid Accusation, to say that Mr Baxter Mi∣tains the King,Baxters Hor∣rid Accusa∣tion. may be call'd to Account by a Single Peer? Cons∣der first, that it is a Church-man charges it upon you, and yo are before-hand with him: for you have over and over, set forth Those of the Church-way (without exception either of King,His Character of ou Church∣men. Lords, or Commons) to be a Crew of Superstitious, Forml, Prophane Wretches that out of a meer Enmity to Godlynesse, set themselves in Opposition to the ways of Christ. Take notice again, if you have not deliver'd the Doctrine aforesaid in ex∣presse Termes, It is already made appear that you have said as much as That amounts to. And over and above the Whyms of your Aphorismes; your Thirteenth Chapter, of the Late Wars is one of the Rudest and the falsest pieces of Calumny against the Late King, that I know anywhere Extant.
Your Appeal upon This One Instance (as you call it) for E∣quity of Iudgement, and Liberty of Speech, would move the very Stones in the Walls, to give you a Hearing. And yet if, I had been of your Counsell Mr. Baxter, you should have be∣thought your self, before you Exclaim'd, whether the En∣quiry into the Subject-matter of your Complaint, might not possibly lay open something that was worse, As un∣doubtedly it has; for This Holy Commonwealth of yours, is a kind of (send me well deliver'd of the Word) a kind of Theologi∣co-Political Whole-Sale Shop; and furnished with Cases,Baxters dam∣nable Cases of Conscience. of all Sorts and Sizes. for the Consciences of the Weak, and the Pre∣tentions of the Malitious. In One Case, the King is Dispossest by Providence; In another, he is deposed for Incapacity; In a Third, he must not so much as dare to Return, even if the Door wer set open to him: In Such or such a case, the People are bound not to Re-admit him; and in such another, they may if they please, but they are not oblig'd to't: and every one of These Cases, Calculated for this very Poynt, which was at That Time in Agitation. Insomuch, that the Appli∣cation of your Arguments was yet more Criminal then the Errour of them. But what do ye mean, I beseech ye, by the Cry of the Plot∣ters against ye?Baxt. dreams of a Plot up∣on him. As if they knew their Friends no better then So. Their business is the Subversion of the Government, and of the Protestant Religion, that falls with it. What should they cry out for against the Separatists, that are all this while, doing the Papists business to their hands? The Kings Wittnesses Speak no such matter; but on the Contrary; that the Priests and Jesuits make use of the Schismatiques toward our Com∣mon Ruine. So that by Plotters in This place Mr. Baxter, it is Intended (I presume,) according to your Wonted Be∣nignity) not the Popish Plotters, but the Episcopal Plotters a∣gainst ye; which (as you would gladly have the World to believe) Seek your Destruction, and the Parliaments, as supposed to Favour ye &c. Now to my thinking, the Parliaments Destructi∣on, and Ours, would have run every jot as well, as Our De∣struction and the Parliaments. Beside that it is not yet come to That Pass I hope, that Parliaments, and Schismatiques,The Cart be∣fore the Horse must Stand or fall together. Neither can I Imagine why This Par∣liament should be suppos'd more Inclinable to favour ye, then
former Parliaments have been. The Reasons for Vniformity are the same now that ever they were; and the same, Here, as in other Places. And then the boldnesse, and Importunity of the Dividers encrease the necessity of the Injunction. If you have forgotten the Common Votes, and Addresse of Feb 25. 1662. upon This Subject, Pray let me remember you of them. Resolved, &c. Nemine Contradicente. That the humble Thanks of This House, be returned to his Ma∣jesty,Votes for U∣niformity. for his Resolution to maintain, the Act of Vniformity. Resolved, &c. That it be presented to the Kings Majesty, as the humble Ad∣vise of the House, that no Indulgence be granted to the dissent from the Act of Vniformity. For these Reasons. Reasons against Toe∣ration.1. It will establish Schisme, by a Law, amd make the  Government of the Church Precaeious, and the Censures of it, of no moment or Consideration at all. 2. It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdome of a Parli∣ment to passe a Law at One Session for Vniformity, and  the next Session, (the Reasons of Vniformity continuing still the Same,) to passe Another Law to frustrate, or Weaken the Ex∣ecution of it. 3. It will expose your Majesty to the Restlesse Importunity of every Sect or Opinion, and of every single person also, who shal presume to Dissent from the Church of England. 4. It will be a cause of encreasing Sects, and Sectaries,  Numbers will weaken the true Protestant Religion so far, tht it will at least be difficult for it, to defend it self against the. And which is yet further Considerable, those Numbers which by being Troublesome to the Government, find they can arrive to  Indulgence, will as their Numbers encrease, be yet more Troub∣some, that so at length they may arrive to a General Toleration; which your Majesty hath declar'd against; and in time, some pre∣lent Sect, will at last contend for an Establishment, which for  can be fore-seen, may end in Popery.
5. It is a thing altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of Convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the Me∣thod, and Proceedings of the Laws of England. Lastly, It is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence Proposed will be so far from tending to the Peace of the Kingdome, that it is rather likely to Occasion great Disturbance. And on the Con∣trary; that the Asserting of the Laws, and the Religion Esta∣blished, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable means to produce a settled Peace, and Obedience throughout your Kingdome: Because the Variety of Professions in Religion, when openly divulged, doth directly distinguish men into Parties, and withall gives them opportunity to count Their Numbers; which considering the Animosities that out of a Religious Pride will be kept on foot, by the severall Factions, doth tend directly, and In∣evitably to open disturbance. Nor can your Majesty have any security, that the Doctrine or Worship of the severall Factions, which are all govern'd by a severall Rule, shall be Consistent with the Peace of your Kingdome. And if any Persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdome, We do in all Humility dclare, that we will for ever and in all Occasions, be ready with our utmost Endeavours, and Assistance, to adhere to, and serve your Majesty,☜ according to our bounden Duty, and Allegiance. Only one Word more: and That must be to tax you with Infinite Ingratitude; in saying, that [Parliaments,Mr Baxters Ingratitude. for ought you know, never did any thing for your Relief or Ease] what do ye think of the Act of Indemnity, I beseech ye? Was it Nothing? to give you your Lives, Liberties, and E∣states again, when all was Forfeited? Nay and it is come to that Point now too; that those very Instruments that were forgiven by the King, for the Ruin of the Church and Three Kingdoms, will not at this day forgive his Majesty, for En∣deavouring according to the Advice of his Parliament, to Re∣establish and Preserve them. Ri. If you would understand us aright,How to un∣derstand the Presbyterians. you must repair to our [Declarations, Professions, Commissions, National Oaths and Covenants,] and the Like. Ho, Com. Pag. 477. And pray Observe the Tenor of our Stile, Addresse. Protestations, and o∣ther Proceedings.
[Your Majesties most Humble, and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons,Words. Dec. 14. 1641. [Most Humble and Faithf Subjects,] Dec. 15. [Most Humble and Obedient Subjects,] Exact Collections. a. 2. Mo. And now put That Libellous Remonstrance of Dec. 15. in the Scale against Three or Four Words of Course,Practises. of the same date. Ri. The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Com∣mons,Words. your Faithful and Loyall Subjects, &c. Ibid. Pa▪ 44. Dec. 31. 1641. Mo. This was a Message to his Majesty for a Guard, which the King most graciously offer'd them,Practises. but One of his Chusing it seems would not do the Businesse. Ri. [Your most faithful and Obedient Subjects, the Lords and Commons in this Present Parliament.Words.] &c. Ibid. Pa. 65. Jan. 29. Mo. They Petition'd to have the Tower of London, and all oeher Forts,Practises. and the whole Militia of the Kingdom to be FORTH∣WITH put into the hands of such Persons, as both Houses should Recommend, &c, Ex. Coll. Jan. 29. 1641. And what did his Majesty now get by the Complement? Ri. Words.[Your Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons,] &c. Ibid. Feb. 22. 1641. Pa. 80. Mo. His Majesties Humble and Loyal Subjects, are pleas'd to de∣clare in this Petition;Practises. that if the King does not Instantly grant them their Petition about the Militia, they are bound by the Laws of God and man to take the Militia into their own hands. Ri. Your Majesties most Loyal, and Obedient Subjects, the Lords and Commons;Words.] &c. Ib. Mar. 1. 1641. Pa. 92. Mo. In this Petition they threaten to dispose of the Militia by the Authority of the Two Houses.Practises. They Order his Majesty where to dispose of his Person: and absolutely deny the Kings Pow of the Militia, but by Authority and consent of Parliament.
Ri. Your most Dutyful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Com∣mons,] &c. Ib. 138. Apr. 1642.Words. Your Majesties most Loyal and Faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons, &c.] Ib. Apr. 8. 1642. Pa. 141. Mo. Very Good! And the Former of These was for Leave to remove the Magazin at Hull, to the Tower of London:Practises▪ And the Other was to divert the King from going into Ireland to supptesse the Irish Rebellion: (which had certainly been done) and to tell him, that if he went contrary to the Advice of his Parliament, They were resolved, in his Absence, not to sub∣mit to any Commissioners he should appoint: but to preserve, and Govern the Kingdome by the Counsell and Advice of Par∣liament.] &c. Ri. Your Majesties Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in his Parliament.] Ibid. 258. May 1642.Words: Mo. Here His Majesties Loyal Subjects presse the King to disband his Troops at York,Practiss. or otherwise they'le take the Quiet of the Kingdome into their own Care. And passe These fol∣lowing Votes. Resolved upon the Question. 1. That it appears that the King (seduced by wicked Counsells) intends to make War against the Parliament. &c.The War charg'd upon the King. 2. That whensoever the King maketh War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of the Trust reposed in him by his People, Contrary to his Oath, and tending to the Dissolution of This Government. 3. That whosoever shall serve, or Assist him in such Wars,Treason to serve the King. are Traytors by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdome, and have been so Adjudg'd by Two Acts of Parliaments, and ought to suffer as Traytors.] &c. Ri. Your Majesties most humble and Faithful Subjects,Words. the Lords and Commons in Parliament.] &c. Ib. Jun. 2. 1642. Pa. 307. Mo. This was the Petition that Accompanied the Nineteen Pro∣positions:The 19. De∣posing Propo∣sitions. demanding from the King [the discharge of all his Ministers and Embassadors, and none to be taken into their Places but what the Parliament shall approve. That all matters of State may be transacted only in Parliament; the Privy Counsell to be by Them appro∣ved from time to time and supply'd. All Great Officers to b Chosen by
their Approbation: They to have the Education of the Kings Children, and the Choyce of their Servants. No Mach to be treated of without them. A Reformation of Church-Government and Liturgy to be contrived by their Advice: The Militia to be settled in them till settled by a Bill; and all Proclamations against it to be recalled. New Oaths for Privy Councellors, and Iudges. All Iudges and Officers to hold their Places, Quamdi se bene Gesserint: Parliament-Iu∣stice upon all Delinquents. An Amnestry with such exceptions as the Parliament shall advise. All Forts and Castles under Gouernours ap∣proved by Parliament. All Forces to be Disbanded; and a Prohi∣bition of any Peers hereaft to be made, from Sitting or Voting in Parliament, without the Consent of Both Houses.] Are not these the Propositions think ye, of Most Humble and Faithful Subjects? Ri. Words.Yo ur Majesties Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Ibid. Sept. 24. 1642. Pa. 617. Mo. Practises.His Majesties Loyal Subjects had now sent the Earl of Essex to fall upon the Kings Army, and desired his Majesty to leave them and come to his Parliament: And they Petition'd his Majesty to the same Purpose again. Pa. 630. And so as the Humour took them, to the very Treaty at the Isle of Wight: But whether These were the Actions of Rebells, or Loyall Sub∣jects, be you your self the Judge. Ri. Words.Well, But what say ye to the Stile of [We your Humble and Loyal Subjects of both Kingdomes.] Appendix to Husbands Ex. Coll. 2d. Part. Fol. 22. Jan. 13. 1645. Mo. These were the Humble, and Loyal Subjects, that, in the same Paper,Practses. Refused his Majestys Proffer of a Personal Trea with Them at Westminster. [Your Majesty (say they) desires  Engagement, not only of the Parliament, but of the Lord Mayor, Al∣dermn, Common-Councill and Militia of the City of London;  Chief Commanders of Sir. Tho. Fairfaxes Army; and Those of the Scots Army; which is against the Privileges and Honour of the P∣liamen, those being Ioyn'd with them, who are Subject and Subordi∣nate to their Authority. At the same rate they Proceeded in Their Professions; [They desire only to Lay a Foundation of Honour,Their Profes∣sions. Safety, and Happiness to the Kings Person and Throne.] Ex. Coll. dec. 14. 1641. [The
Greatnesse and Prosperity of his Majesty, and his Royal Posterity.] Ib. Dec. 15. Pa. 2. [His Majestys greatnesse and Honour] b. Mar. 1.41. Pa. 94. [Honour and greatnsse] Mar. 2. P. 102. [Honour, Safety, and Prosperity of your Majesty] Mar. 16. P. 118. [We seek nothing but your Majesties Honour] Mar. 15. P. 123. [The Safety of his Majesties Person, and his Royal Posterity] May 5. 42. Pa. 173. [Our most Dutyfull care for the Safety of your Royal Person] May 9. P. 180. [For the Preserving and Mayntaining the Royal Honour, Greatness, and Safety of your Majesty, and Posterity] Jan. 2. 42. P. 310. And then see their Remarkable Protestation of Octob. 22. 1642.In the pre∣sence of the Almighty. [We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assem∣bled, do in the Presence of Almighty God, for the Satisfaction of our Consinces, and the Discharge of That Great Trust which lyes upon us, make this Protestation and Declaration to The Kingdome and Nation, and to the whole World; That no Private Passion or Re∣spect, no Evill Intention to his Majestys Person, no design to the Pre∣judice of his Iust Honour and Authority, Engaged us to rayse Forces, and take up Arms against the Authours of This War, wherewith the Kingdome is now Enflamed] Ibid. Pa. 663. [Without any Intention or desire, (as we do here professe before the Ever-living God) to hurt,A Rebellion in teName of the everla∣sting God. or Injure his Majesty, Either in his Person, or Iust Power.] b. P. 666. I could give you Instances of this kind, without End, and as many, of the gross and Unquestionable violations of These Pro∣fessions; For every Order they past, and every istol that they Fired, was a poynt-blank Contradiction, to their Pretensions. Beside that in the same Breath, they Usurped all the Regalities of the Crown, and yet Wrote Themselves, His Majesties most Obedient SUBJECTS.Covenant. Loyalty. So that This Stile of Loyalty was at the same time a Blind to the Well-meaning Multitude, and a Note of Confederacy among Themselves: a Loyal Subject, according to the Covenant, Importing, in plain Terms, a Traytor, in the eye of the Law. And yet the Cause, and the Obligation of this Covenant, and the Pro∣ceedings upon it, are openly Asserted at This very day. Ba. Yes, yes; There's The Counterminer, the Popish Dialogue,Slanders upon he ham es Presbyterians. and many others, that continue lowdly to Accuse us, and make men believe that we are Plotting a new War, and that our Prin∣ciples are Rebellious &c.] Non Conf. Plea. 2d Part. Pref. Mo. What do ye think of maintaining,Presbyteins Positions. that [Whatsoever the Tw Houses declare for Law, must pass for Law, without Controul,
both upon King and People] Ex. Coll. 297. [That they may do what∣ever they please] Ibid. [That the Major Part of Both Houses are the absolute Masters of the Lives and Liberties of the Subject?] Ibid. [That no member of the House of Commns be medled with for Trea∣son, Felony &c. Without Leave of the House.] Ibid. [That th Sv∣reignty resides in the two Houses, and that the King has no Negtiv Voice] Ibid. That there lyes no Treason against the Person of the King. Ibid. [That the Two Houses may Depose the King and not be blame for so doing. Ibid. Now in calling Those people that did all This, [The Bell Governors in the World] as in the Preface to your Holy Common-Wealth:Mr. Baxters best Goer∣nors in the world. And in Vindicating That Book, from any Principles of Disloyalty toward the Person of the King, as you do, toward the close of your Preface as to the 2d. Part of the Non-conformists Ple Apri. 16. 1680. What is This, but the Asserting of Rebellio Principles? And the Preaching of the old Doctrine to the people over again, What Is it but the Preface to another War? Ba. [What have we done these Twenty years against the King or State?The Innocent Non-Confor∣mists. Unless it be our Crime to live under Reproach, and Scorn, and Poverty. and sometime Imprisonments; and ne∣ver once so much as Petition a Parliament, either to Pitty us, or to Hear us once Speak for our Selves &c.] Ibid. If any Odd per∣sons, or whosoever have said or done any thing against the King or Kingdome, or their Neighbours Right or Peace, or have been Guilty of any Fraud, Drunkennesse, Perjury or Immorality be∣sides their Vnavoidable Non-conformity, let them be punisht as the Law requires, but let not the Innocent, yea Thousands be Slandered, and Designed to Destruction for Them.] Ibid. Mo. If you Speak of the Nonconformists, they have justifi'd, from Sixty to Eighty,The princi∣ples of the Late Rebelli∣on revived. all the Indignities that were put upon the Government, from Forty, to Sixty: and there is not any one Se∣ditious, or Schismatical Principle of the Old Stamp, which they have not afresh, Reviv'd, and Recommended to the People. And for the Moderation you boast of, I dare be answerable to pro∣duce almost as many Hundreds of Clamorous Libels against A∣thority from the Dissenting Party, as you reckon Years of Si∣lence,Mr. axters Odd persons. and Forbearance. But these are ODD Persons you say; and so is every Dissenter in the Kingdom: for Ten Millions of men, are but as so many Individuals, when disencorporate, and Lpp'd off from the Body. If I durst be so bold Sir, I should venture to
say that Mr. Baxter himself is one of the ODDEST persons that I know in the whole Party. You have First, a Perswasion,He Himsel One. to your self; for you are neither a Presbyterian, nor an Independent, nor an Anabaptist, nor of any Tribe of the Division that ever yet had a Nam to be known by; but a pure Original, and a ristian of your own making: You have Secondly, as Peculiar a Conscience too; that had rather leap a Precipice, then keep the Kings high-way. It rises and falls like a Weather-Glasse, upon Change of Ayre: and makes St. Paul blow Hot or Cold at plea∣sre: [Let every soul be Subject to the Higher Powers] requires Obedience to Dick Cromwell, upon pain of Damnation, and Disobedience to Charles the First, upon the same penalty, (as we have had it already.) And then you have this further Advantage,Mr. Baxter his on King and Pop. Sir, that you are your own King, and your own Pope; you Pre∣scribe your own Laws, and Grant your own Pardons. Ba. You may prate as long as you will. [I am against the Im∣posing of Mystical Ceremonies, as Crossing, or Surplice] &c.Baxters A∣gument a∣gainst Ce∣monies. Five Disp. Pa. 467. [For to Impose new Symbolicall Rites upon the Church, which Christ hath not Imposed, doth seem to me an Vsurpa∣tion of his Sovereign Power.] Ibid. [And to accuse Christ of Igno∣rance, or Negligence, in that he himself hath not Imposed them.] And so doth it Imply an Accusation of his Laws, and of the Holy Scriptures, as if they were Insufficient,] Ibid. 468. [And These Im∣positions seem to be plain Violations f These Prohibitions of God, in which we are forbidden to Add to his Worship, or diminish FROM IT.] 469. And moreover; [God hath allready given us so perfect a Directory for his Worship, that there is nothing more that we can reasonably desire.] Ib. 481. Ri. Now for my part, I am for the Amiable way. [Christians should not be Over-busy in Prying into the work of their Governours;The Cse wll Resolved. nor too forward to suspect their dterminations.] [The Duty of O∣beying them being Certain, and the Sinfulnesse of the thing Com∣manded, being Uncertain, and Unknown, and only Suspected; we must go on the surer side.] Ibid. 484. [In disobeying the Law∣full Commands of our Superiours, we disobey Christ.] Ibid. 485. Be∣side that [Disobedience in matters of Circumstance, will exclude, and Overthrow the Substance of the Worship it self. Pa. 486.
POSTSCRIPT, To the Reader MR. Baxter has certainly given, in this Extract, the  blow to the Non-conformists that ever they  For there are no Arguments against That Party like their  against Themselves. To the clearest Evidences of , and Reason, they'le oppose Clamour, and Passion;  make a shift to wriggle themselves Off and On, with  drawn Texts and Riddling distinctions. But when the very  of That Interest comes to play Fast and Loose, and shift  Conscience with the Season, the Masque is then taken off;  there can be no Denyal of the Fact, so there can be no  the Hypocrisy. How comes Toleration to be a Sin, under  Presbyterians, and a Duty under the Bishops? How comes it  be Damnation, in the case of the Late King, and Richard  well, to Obey the Former, and destroy the Latter? Even  to Mr. Baxters own Exposition, which is, that by St.  Higher Powers, is Intended Those in Actual Possssion? How  Bishops to be Antichristian, at one time, and Warrantable at ? Or the Civil Magistrate to have more power in  matters, under an Vsurper, then under a Lawful  How comes an Episcopal Vniformity to be more a Persecution  a Presbyterian? Or a Common Prayer-Book more Intolerable  a Directory? What can more expose the Credit of the  then this double-dealing in the Foreman of the Party? to  Mr. Baxter Lye down in One Opinion, and Rise, in Another▪  Accomodating his Scruples to every Crisis of State? And Consummate the Iniquity of the Pretense; He has no soone veigled the People into a Schisme, but he presently  with a Plat-form of Sedition: and having wrought a  from the Ecclesiastical, he falls to work, in his Cases and , upon the Foundations of the Civill Government. The End.
