L3117 13659918 101092
THE French King's DECREE AGAINST Protestants, Prohibiting them the Exercise of their Religion, &c. To which is added A Brief and True Account of the Cruel PER∣SECƲTION and inhumane Oppressions of those of the Reformed Religion, to make them Abjure and Apostatize. Together with the Form of Abjuration the Revolting Protestants are to Subscribe and Swear to. And a Declaration of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh in favour of those of the Reformed Religion, who shall think fit to settle themselves in any of his Dominions. Also a Letter from Father la Chese, Confessor to the French King, to Father Petre, Jesuit and Great Almoner to the King of England, upon the Method or Rule he must observe with His Majesty, for the Conversion of His Protestant Subjects in England, &c. Newly Translated from the French. Licensed, January 18. 1688/9. London, Printed for the Author, and Sold by the Book∣sellers of London and Westminster, 1689.
A Decree of the King, Prohibiting all Publick Ex∣ercise of the Pretended Reformed Religion in his Kingdom, wherein he Recalls and totally Annuls the perpetual and irrevocable Edict of King Henry IV, his Grandfather, given at Nantes, full of most gracious Concessions to Protestants. LEWES, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Navarre, to all present and to come, Greeting. King Henry the Great, Our Grand-Father of Glorious Me∣mory, desiring to prevent, that the Peace which he had procured for his Subjects, after the great Losses they had sustained, by the long continuance of Civil and Foreign Wars, might not be disturbed by occasion of the Pretended Reformed Reli∣gion, as it had been during the Reign of the Kings, his Predecessors; had, by his Edict given at Nantes, in the Month of April, 1598. regulated the Conduct which was to be observed, with Respect to those of the said Religion, the Places where they might publickly exercise the same, appointed extraordinary Judges to administer Ju∣stice to them: And lastly, also by several distinct Articles, provided for every thing, which he judged needful for the maintenance of Peace and Tranquility in his Kingdom, and to diminish the Aversi∣on which was between those of the One and Other Religion: and this, to the end that he might be in a better condition for the taking some effectual Course (which he was resolved to do) to re-unite those again to the Church, who upon so slight Occasions had with∣drawn themselves from it. And forasmuch as this intention of the King, Our said Grand-Father, could not be effected, by reason of his sudden and precipitated Death; and that the Execution of the foresaid Edict was interrupted during the Minority of the late King, Our most Honored Lord and Father, of glorious Memory, by rea∣son of some new Enterprizes of those of the Pretended Reformed Re∣ligion, whereby they gave occasion for their being deprived of seve∣ral
Advantages, which had been granted to them, by the aforesaid Edict: notwithstanding, the King, Our said late Lord and Father, according to his wonted Clemency, granted them another Edict at Nismes, in the Month of July, 1629 by means of which the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom being now again Re established, the said late King, being animated with the same Spirit and Zeal for Religi∣on, as the King Our said Grand-Father was, resolved to make good Use of this Tranquility, by endeavouring to put this Pious Design in Execution: but Wars abroad, coming on a few years after, so that from the Year 1635. to the Truce which was concluded with the Princes of Europe, in 1684. the Kingdom having been only for some short Intervals altogether free from Troubles, it was not possible to do any other thing for the Advantage of Religion, save only to di∣minish the number of Places permitted for the Exercise of the Pre∣tended Reformed Religion, as well by the Interdiction of those which were found Erected, in prejudice to the Disposal made in the said Edict, as by suppressing the Mixt Chambers of Judicature, which were composed of an equal number of Papists and Protestants; the Erecting of which was only done by Provision, and to serve the pre∣sent Exigency. Whereas therefore, at length, it hath pleased God to grant, that Our Subjects enjoying a perfect Peace, and We Our selves being no longer taken up with the Cares of Protecting them against our Enemies, are now in a Condition to make good Use of the said Truce, which we have on purpose facilitated, in order to the applying our selves entire∣ly to the searching out of Means, which might successfully effect and accomplish the Design of the Kings, Our said Grand-father and Fa∣ther, and which also hath been ☞* Our Intention ever since we came to the Crown; We see at present, (not without a just Acknowledgment of what We owe to God on that Account) that Our Endeavours have attained the End We propos'd to Our selves for as much as the greater and better part of Our Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, have already embraced the Catholick; and since by means thereof the Execution of the Edict of Nantes, and of all other Or∣dinances in favour of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, is become useless, We judge that We can do nothing better towards the entire effacing of the Memory of those Troubles Confusions, and Mischief, which the Progress of that false Religion have been the cause of in Our Kingdom, and which have given occasion to the said Edict, and
to so many other Edicts and Declarations which went before it, or were made since with reference thereto, than by a Total Revocati∣on of the said Edict of Nantes, and the particular Articles and Con∣cessions granted therein, and whatsoever else hath been Enacted since, in favour of the said Religion. I. We make known, that We, for these and other Reasons Usthereto moving, and of Our certain Knowledge, full Power and Authority Royal, have by the present Perpetual and Irrevocable Edict, Suppressed and Annulled, do Suppress and Annul the Edict of the King, Our said Grand-Father, given at Nantes, in April 1598. in its whole extent, to∣gether with the particular Articles ratified May 2. next following, and Letters Patent granted thereupon; as likewise the Edict given at Nismes, in July 1629. declaring them null and void, as if they had never been Enacted; together with all the Concessions granted in them, as well as other Declarations, Edicts and Arrests, to those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, of what Nature soever they may be, which shall all continue as if they never had been. And in pursuance hereof, We Will, and it is Our Pleasure, That all the Churches of those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, scituate in Our Kingdom, Coun∣tries, Lands, and Dominions belonging to Us, be forth with demolish'd. II. We forbid our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, to Assemble themselves, for time to come, in order to the Exercise of their Religion in any Place or House, under what pretext soever, whether the said Places have been granted by the Crown, or per∣mitted by the Judges of particular places; any Arrests of Our Council, for Authorizing and Establishing of the said places for Ex∣ercise, notwithstanding. III. We likewise Prohibit all Lords, of what condition soever they may be, to have any Publick Exercise in their Houses and Fiess, of what quality soever the said Fiess may be, upon penalty to all Our said Subjects, who shall have the said Exercises performed in their Houses or otherwise, of Confiscation of Body and Goods. IV. We do strictly Charge and Command all Ministers of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, who are not willing to be Converted, and to embrace the Catholick, Apostolick and Roman Religion, to de∣part out of our Kingdom and Countries under our Obedience, 15 days after the Publication hereof, so as not to continue there beyond the said term, or within the same, to Preach, Exhort, or perform any other Ministerial Function, upon pain of being sent to the Galleys.
V. Our Will and Pleasure is, That those Ministers who shall be Converted, do continue to enjoy during their Lives, and their Wi∣dows after their Decease, as long as they continue so, the same Exem∣ptions from Payments and Quartering of Souldiers, which they did enjoy during the time of their Exercise of the Ministerial Function. Moreover, We will cause to be paid to the said Ministers, during their Lives, a Pension, which by a third part shall exceed the appointed Allowance to them as Ministers; the half of which Pension shall be continued to their Wives, after their Decease, as long as they shall continue in the state of Widow-hood. VI. And in case any of the said Ministers shall be willing to be∣come Advocates, or to take the Degree of Doctors in Law, we Will and Understand that they be dispensed with, as to the three Years of Study, which are prescribed by our Declarations, as requisite, in or∣der to the taking of the said Degree; and that, after they have pass'd the ordinary Examinations, they be forthwith received as Doctors, paying only the Moiety of those dues, which are usually paid upon that account in every University. VII. We Prohibit any particular Schools for Instructing the Chil∣dren of those of the Pretended Reformed Religion; and in general, all other things whatsoever, which may Import a Concession, of what kind soever, in favour of the said Religion. VIII. And as to the Children which shall for the future be Born of those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, Our Will and Plea∣sure is, That henceforward they be Baptized by the Curates of our Parishes; strictly charging their respective Fathers and Mothers to take care they be sent to Church in order thereto, upon Forfeiture of 500 Livres, or more, as it shall happen Futhermore, Our Will is, That the said Children be afterwards Educated and brought up in the Ca∣tholick Apostolick and Roman Religion, and give an express Charge to all Our Justices, to take care the same be performed accordingly. IX. And for a Mark of our Clemency towards those of our Sub∣jects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, who have retired them∣selves out of our Kingdom, Countries and Territories, before the Publication of this our present Edict, Our Will and Meaning is, That in case they return thither again, within the time of four Months, from the time of the Publication hereof, they may, and it shall be lawful for them, to Re-enter upon the Possession of their Goods and Estates, and enjoy the same in like manner, as they might have done,
in case they had always continued upon the place. And on the contra∣ry, that the Goods of all those, who within the said time of four months, shall not return into our Kingdom, Countries, or Territories under our Obedience, which they have forsaken, remain and be Confisca∣ted in pursuance of our Declaration of the 20th. of August last. X. We most expresly and strictly forbid all our Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, them, their Wives or Children, to depart out of our said Kingdom, Countries, Territories under our Obedience, or to Transport thence their Goods or Effects, upon Pe∣nalty of the Gally, for Men, and Confiscation of Body and Goods for Women. XI. Our Will and Meaning is, That the Declaration made against those who shall relapse, be Executed upon them according to their Form and Tenor. ☞ Moreover, those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, in the mean time, till it shall Please God to enlighten them, as well as others, may abide in the several respective Cities and Places of our Kingdoms, Countries, and Territories under our Obedience, and there continue their Commerce, and enjoy their Goods and Estates, with∣out being any way molested upon account of the said Pretended Re∣formed Religion; upon condition nevertheless, as aforementioned, that they do not use any publick Religious Exercise, nor assemble themselves upon the account of Prayer or Worship of the said Reli∣gion, of what kind soever the same may be, upon forfeiture above specified of Body and Goods. Accordingly, We Will and Command our Trusty and Beloved Counsellors, the people holding our Courts of Aids at Paris, Bayliffs, Chief Justices, Provosts, and other our Justices and Officers to whom it appertains, and to their Lieutenants, that they cause to be Read, Published, and Registred, this Our present Edict in their Courts and Jurisdictions, even in Vacation time, and the same keep punctually without contrevening or suffering the same to be contrevened; for such is Our Will and Pleasure. And to the end to make it a thing firm and stable, we have caused Our Seal to be put to the same. Gi∣ven at Fountainbleau, in the Month of October, in the Year of Grace 1685, and of Our Reign the XLIII. Signed LEWES. Le Tellier. VISA. This signifies the Lord Chancellors Perusal. Sealed with the Great Seal of Green-wax, upon a Red and Green string of Silk.
REgistred and Published, the King's Attorney General requiring it, in order to their being Executed according to Form and Tenor; and the Copies being Examined and Compared, sent to the several Courts of Justice, Bailywicks, and Sheriffs Courts of each District, to be there Entred and Registred in like manner; and charge given to the Deputies of the said Attorney General, to take care to see the same Executed, and put in Force; and to certifie the Court thereof. At Paris, in the Court of Vacations, the 22th, of October 1685. Signed De la Baune. A Letter of the French KING to the Elector of Branden∣burgh, Sept. 6. 1666. Brother, I Would not have discoursed the Matter You write to Me about, on the behalf of My Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, with any other Prince, besides Your Self: But to shew You the par∣ticular Esteem I have for You, I shall begin with telling You, that some Persons, disaffected to my Service, have spread Seditious Pamphlets among Strangers; as if the Acts and Edicts that were Pass'd▪ in favour of My said Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, by the Kings My Predecessors, and Confirm'd by My Self, were not kept and exe∣cuted in My Dominions; which would have been contrary to My Inten∣tions: for I take care that they be maintained in all the Priviledges, which have been Granted them, and be as kindly us'd as My Other Sub∣jects. To this I am Engaged both by My Royal Word, and in Acknow∣ledgment of the Proofs they have given Me of their Loyalty, during the late Troubles, in which they took up Arms for My Service, and did vi∣gorously Oppose, and successfully Overthrow the ill Designs which a Re∣bellious Party were contriving within My own Dominions, against My Au∣thority Royal. I pray God, &c. BROTHER, &c.
A short Account of the Violent Proceedings, and unheard of Cruelties, which have been Exercised upon those of Montau∣ban, and which continue to be put in Practice in other Places, against those of the Reformed Religion in France, for to make them Renounce their Religion. ON Saturday the 18/th of August, 1685. the Intendant of the Up∣per Guienne, who Resides at Montauban, having Summoned the Principal Protestants of the said City to come before him, repre∣sented unto them, That they could not be ignorant, that the Absolute Will and Pleasure of the King was, to Tolerate but One Religion in his Kingdom, viz. The Roman Catholick Religion; and therefore wished them readily to comply with the same: And in order there∣to, advised them to Assemble themselves, and consider what Resolution they would take. To this Resolution some answer'd, That there was no need of their Assembling themselves upon that Ac∣count; for a smuch as every one of them in particular, were to Try and Examine themselves, and be alwaies in a readiness to give a reason of the Faith which was in them. The next Day the Intendant again commanded them to Meet to∣gether in the Town House, which, he ordered, should be left free for them from Noon till Six of the Clock in the Evening: Where meeting accordingly, they Unanimously resolved as they had Lived, so to persist till Death in their Religion: Which Resolution of theirs there were some Deputed by them to declare to the Intendant; who presenting themselves before him, he who was appointed Spokes∣man, began to Address himself to the Intendant in these Words: My Lord, We are not unacquainted, how we are menaced with the grea∣test Violence.—Hold there, said the Intendant (interrupting him) No Violence. After this the Protestant continued; But whatever Force or Violence may be put upon us,—Here the Intendant inter∣rupting him again, said, I forbid you to use any such Words: Upon which Second Interruption, he contented himself to assure him in few Words, That they were all resolved to Live and Die in their Reli∣gion. The Day after, the Battalion of La Ferre, consisting of 16 Com∣panies entred the City, and were followed by many more. The
testants all this while dreaming of no other Design they had against them, but that of ruining their Estates, and Impoverishing them, had already taken some Measures how to bear the said Tryal; they had made a Common Purse, for the Relief of such who should be most burthen'd with Quartering; and were come to a Resolution to possess what they had in Common: But, Alas! how far these poor Souls were mistaken in their Accounts, and how different the Treat∣ment they received from the Dragoons was, from what they had ex∣pected, I shall now Relate to you. First therefore, in order to their Executing the Design and Pro∣ject they had formed against them, they made the Souldiers take up their Quarters in one certain place of the City; but withal, appoint∣ed several Corp de Guards to cut off the Communication which One part of the City might have with the Other, and possess'd themselves of the Gates, that none might make their Escape. Things being thus ordered, the Troopers Souldiers and Dragoons began to practise all manner of Hostilities, and Cruelties, wherewith the Devil can Inspire the most In human and Reprobate Minds: They mar'd and defac'd their Houshold▪ stuff, broke their Looking-Glasses, and other like Utensils and Ornaments; they let their Wine run about their Cellars, cast abroad and spoil'd their Corn, and other Alimentary Provisions: And as for those things which they could not break and dash to pieces, as the Furniture of Beds, Hangings, Tapistry, Lin∣nen, Wearing Apparel, Plate, and Things of the like Nature; these they carried to the Market-place, where the Jesuits bought them of the Souldiers, and encouraged Roman Catholicks to do the like. They did not stick to Sell the very Houses of such, who were most resolute and constant in their Profession. It is supposed, ac∣cording to a Moderate Calculation, that in the time of four or five daies, the Protestants of that City were the poorer by a Million of Money, than they were before the entring of these Missionaries. There were Souldiers, who demanded Four hundred Crowns apiece of their Hosts for spending-Money; and many Protestants were forced to pay down Ten Pistols to each Souldier, upon the some Account. In the mean time, the outrages they committed upon their Persons were most detestable and Barbarous; I shall only here set down some few, of which I have been particularly inform'd. A certain Taylor called Bearnois, was bound and drag'd by the Souldiers to the Corp de Guard, where they Boxed and Buffetted him all Night, all which
blows and Indignities he suffered with the greatest constancy Imagi∣nable. The Troopers who Quartered with Monsieur Solignac made his Dining Room a Stable for their Horses, tho the Furniture of it was Valued at 10000 Livres, and forc'd him to turn the Broach till his Arm was near burnt, by their continual casting of Wood upon the Fire. A Passenger as he went through the said City saw some Souldiers beating a poor Man even to Death, for to force him to go to Mass, whilst the constant Martyr to his last Breath, cryed, He would never do it, and only requested they would Dispatch and make an end of him. The Barons of Caussade and De la Motte, whose Constancy and Piety might have inspired Courage and Resolution to the rest of the Citizens, were sent away to Cahors. Monsieur D' Alliez, one of the prime Gentlemen of Montanban, being a Vene∣rable Old Man, found so ill▪ Treatment at their hands, as it's thought he will scarcely escape with Life. Monsieur▪ De Garrison, who was one of the most considerable Men of that City, and an intimate Friend of the Intendant, went and cast himself at his Feet, imploring his Protection, and conjuring him to rid him of his Souldiers, that he might have no force put upon his Conscience; adding, That in Recompence of the Favour he beg'd of him, He would willingly give him all he had, which was to the Value of about a Million of Livres; but by all his Entreaties and Proffers, he could not in the least pre∣vail with the Intendant; who gave order, that for a Terror to the meaner sort, he should be worse used than the rest, by dragging him along the Streets. The Method they most commonly made use of, for to make them Abjure their Religion, and which could not be the product of any thing but Hell, was this; Some of the most strong and vigorous Souldiers, took their Hosts, or other persons of the House, and walk'd them up and down in some Chamber, continually tickling them and tossing them like a Ball from one to another, without giving them the least Intermission, and keeping them in this condition for three daies and nights together, without Meat, Drink, or Sleep: When they were so wearied and fainting, that they could no longer stand upon their Legs, they laid them on a Bed, continuing as before to Tickle and Torment them; after some time, when they thought them somewhat recovered, they made them rise, and walked them up and down as before, sometimes Tickling, and other times Lashing them with Rods, to keep them from Sleeping. As soon as one Par∣ty
of these Barbarous Tormenters were tyred and wearied out, they were Relieved by others of their Companions, who coming fresh to the Work, with greater Vigour and Violence reiterated the same Course. By this Infernal Invention (which they had formerly made use of, with success; in Bearn and other places many went Dictracted, and others became Mopish and Stupid, and remain so. Those who made their Escape, were fain to abandon their Estates, yea, their Wives, Children, and Aged Relations, to the Mercy of these Barbarous, and more than Savage Troops. The same Cruel∣ties were acted at Negreplisse, a City near to Montauban; where these Bloody Emissaries committed unparallel'd Outrages. Isaac Favin, a Citizen of that Place, was hung up by his Arm-pits, and tormented a whole Night, by pinching and tearing off his Flesh with Pincers; though by all this they were not able to shake his Con∣stancy in the least. The Wife of one Rouffion, a Joyner, being vio∣lently dragg'd by the Souldiers along the Streets, for to force her to hear Mass, dyed of this cruel and inhumane Treatment, as soon as she reach'd the Church Porch. Amongst other their Devilish Inventions, this was one: They made a great Fire round about a Boy of about Ten Years of Age; who continually, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, cryed, My God, help me; and when they saw the Lad resolved to Dye so, ra∣ther than renounce his Religion, they snatch'd him from the Fire, when he was at the very point of being Burnt. The Cities of Caus∣sade, Realville, St. Anthonin, and other Towns and Places in the Up∣per Guinne, met with the same Entertainment, as well as Bergerac, and many other Places of Perigord, and of the Lower Guinne; which had a like share of these cruel and inhumane Usages. The forementioned Troops marched at last to Castres, to commit the same Insolencies and Barbarities there also: And it is not to be doubted, but that they will continue, and carry on the same course of Cruelties, where ever they go; if God, in Pity and Compassion to his People, do not restrain them. It is to be feared, (for it seems but too probable) that this dreadful Persecution in conjunction with those Artifices the Papists make use of to disguise their Religion, and to perswade Protestants, that they shall be suffered to Worship God as formerly, will make many to comply with them, or at least make their Mouths give their Hearts the Lye, in hopes of being by this means put into a condition to make
their escapes, and returning to that Profession, which their weakness hath made them deny. But, Alas! this is not all; for those poor Wretches, whom by these Devilish ways of theirs, they have made to Blaspheme and Abjure their Religion, as if this were not enough, must now become the Per∣secutors and Tormentors of their own Wives and Children, for to oblige and force them to Renounce also; for they are threatned, that if within three days time they do not make their whole Family Re∣cant in like manner, those rough Apostles (the Dragoons) shall be fain to take further pains with them, in order to the perfecting of their Conversion. And who after all this can have the least doubt, but that these unhappy Dragoons are the very Emissaries of Hell, whose very last Efforts and Death struglings these seem to be? This Relation hath given a short view of some of those Sufferings, the Reformed have undergone, but not of all: It is certain, that in divers places they have tryed to wear out their Patience, and over∣come their Constancy by applying Red-hot Irons to the Hands and Feet of Men, and to the Breasts of Women. At Nantes they hung up several Women and Maids by their Feet, and others by their Arm-pits, and that stark Naked, thus exposing them to publick View, which assuredly is the most cruel and exquisite Suffering can befall that Sex; because in this case their Shamefac'dness and Modesty is most sensibly touched, which is the most tender part of their Soul. They have bound Mothers that gave Suck unto Posts, and let their little Infants lye Languishing in their sight, without being suffered to Suckle them for several days, and all this while left them crying, moaning, and gasping for Life, and even Dying for Hunger & Thirst, that by this means they might Vanquish the Constancy of their Ten∣der-hearted Mothers, Swearing to them they would never permit they should give them Suck till they promised to Renounce their Pro∣fession of the Gospel. They have taken Children of Four or Five Years of Age, and kept them from Meat and Drink for some time, and when they have heen ready to faint away and give up the Ghost, they have brought them before their Parents, and horribly Asseve∣rated, that except they would Turn, they must prepare themselves to see their Children Languish and Dye in their presence. Some they have bound before a great Fire, and being half Roasted, have after let them go: They beat Men and Women outragiously; they drag them along the Streets, and Torment them day and night.
The ordinary way they took, was to give them no rest; for the Souldiers do continually Relieve one another for to Drag, Beat, Torment and Toss up and down these Miserable Wretches, with∣out Intermission. If it happen that any by their Patience and Con∣stancy do stand it out, and Triumph over all the Rage and Fury of those Dragoons, they go to their Commander and acquaint him, they have done all they could, but yet without the desired success; who in a Barbarous and Surly Tone, answers them; You must re∣turn upon them, and do worse than you have done; the King Com∣mands it; either they must Turn, or I must Burst and Perish in the At∣tempt. These are the pleasant Flowry Paths, by which the Papists allure Protestants to return to the Bosome of their Church. But some it may be will object; You make a great noise about a small matter, all Protestants have not been exposed to these Cruel∣ties, but only some few obstinate Persons: Well, I will suppose so, but yet the Horror of those Torments Inflicted on some, hath so fill'd the Imagination of these Miserable Wretches, that the very thoughts of them hath made them comply; it is indeed a Weak∣ness of which we are ashamed for their sakes, and from whence we hope God will raise them again, in his due time; yet thus much we may alledge for their excuse, that never was any Persecution, upon pretence of Religion, carried on to that pitch, and with that Politick Malice and Cruelty that this hath been; and therefore, of all those which ever the Church of Christ groan'd under, none can can be compar'd with it. True indeed it is, that in former Ages it hath been common to Burn the Faithful under the Name of Here∣ticks; but how few were there exposed to that cruel kind of Death, in comparison of those who escaped the Executioners hands? But, behold here a great People at once Oppress'd, Destroy'd, and Ruin'd by a vast Army of prodigious Butchers, and few or none escaping. Former, yea late times have given us some Instances of Massacres; but these were only violent Tempests, and sudden Hurricanes, which lasted but a Night, or, at the most, a few daies, and they who suf∣fered in them were soon out of their pains, and the far greater num∣ber escaped the dint of them: but how much more dreadful is the present condition of the Protestants in France? And to the end we may take a true view and right measures of it, let us consider, that nothing can be conceived more terrible, than a State of War; but what War to be compared with This? They see a whole Army of
Butcherly Cannibals entring their Houses, Bateering, Breaking, Burn∣ing, and Destroying whatever comes to hand; Swearing, Cursing and Blaspheming like Devils; beating to excess, offering all man∣ner of Indignities and Violence; diverting themselves, and striving to out-vy each other in inventing New Methods of Pain and Tor∣ment; not to be appeased with Money, or good Chear; foaming and roaring like Ravenous raging Lyons; and presenting Death, at every moment; and that which is worse than all this, driving People to Distraction, and senseless Stupidity, by those Devilish Inventions we have given you an Instance of in the Relation of Mentauban. Moreover, This Persecution hath one Characteristical Note more; which, without any Exaggeration, will give it the Precedence in History for Cruelty, above all those which the Church of God ever suffered under Nero, Maximinus, or Dieclesian; which is, The severe Prohibition of departing the Kingdom, upon pain of Confiscation of Goods, of the Gally, of the Lash, and perpetual Imprisonment. All the Sea-Ports are kept with that Exactness, as if it were to hinder the Escape of Traytors, and common Enemies: All the Prisons of Sea-Port-Towns are cramm'd with these miserable Fugitives, Men Women, Boys, and Girls; who there are Condemned to the worst of Punishments, for having had a desire to save themselves from this dreadful Persecution, and deluging Calamity. This is the Thing which is unparallel'd; and of which we find no Instance: This is that Superlative Excess of Cruelty, which we shall not find in the List of all the Violent and Bloody Proceedings of the Duke of Al∣va: He Massacred, he Beheaded, he Butchered; but at least, he did not Prohibit those that could, to make their Escape. In the last Hungarian Persecution, nothing was required of the Protestants, but only that their Ministers should Banish themselves, and Aban∣don and Renounce the Conduct of their Flocks; and because they were unwilling to obey these Orders, therefore it is they have Groan'd under so long, and so Terrible a Persecution, as they have done, But this Hungarian Persecution is not to be compared with that we are speaking of; for the Fury of that Tempest dis∣charged it self upon the Ministers only; no Armies were Im∣ploy'd, to force the People to change their Religion, by a thousand several waies of Torment; much less did it ever enter the Thoughts of the Emperors Councel, to shut up all the Protestants in Hungary, in order to the destroying of all those who would not abjure their
Religion; which yet is the very condition of so many wretched Per∣sons in France, who beg it as the highest Favour at the Hands of their Merciless Enemies, to have Leave to go and beg their Bread in a Foreign Country; being willing to leave their Goods, and all other outward Conveniencies, behind them, for to lead a poor, mi∣serable, languishing Life in any Place, where only they may be suf∣fered to Dye in their Religion. And is it not from all this most ∣parent, that those Monsters who have inspired the King with th Designs, have refin'd the Mystery of Persecuting to the utmost, and advanc'd it to its highest pitch of Perfection? O Great God! who from thy Heavenly Throne doest behold all the Outrages done to thy People, haste Thee to help us! Great God, whose Compassions are Infinite, suffer thy Self to be touched with our extream Desolation! If Men be Insensible of the Calamities we suffer, if they be deaf to our Cries, not regarding our Grones and Supplications; yet let thy Bowels, O Lord, be moved, and affect Thee in our behalf. Glorious God, for whose Names sake we suffer all these things, who knowest our Innocence and Weakness, as well as the Fury and Rage of our Adversa∣ries, the small Support and Help we find in the World: Behold, we perish, if thy Pity doth not rouze Thee up for our Relief. It is Thou art our Rock, our God, our Father, our Deliverer: We do not place our Confi∣dence in any, but Thee alone: Let us not be confounded, because we put our Trust in Thee. Haste Thee to our Help; make no long tarrying, O Lord, our God, and our Redeemer! A Letter sent from Bourdeaux, giving an Account of the Persecution of those of the Protestant Religion in France. SIR, WHat you have heard concerning the Persecution of those that are of our Religion, in the Land of Bearne, Guinne, and Be∣rigord, is but too true; and I can assure you, that they who have given you that Account, have been so far from amplifying the Mat∣ter, that they have only acquainted you with some few particulars; yet am I not so much surprized at the difficulty you find to perswade your self, that the things of which your Friends Inform you, are true: In cases of this Nature, so amazingly unexpected, we are apt of∣ten
to distrust our own Eyes; and I profess to you, that though all places round about us Echo the Report of our Ruine and Destructi∣on, yet I can scarcely perswade my self it is so indeed, because I can∣not comprehend it. It is no matter of surprize, or amazement, to see the Church of Christ afflicted upon Earth, forasmuch as she is a stranger here, as well as her Captain, Lord and Husband, the Holy and Everlasting blessed Jesus was; and must, like Him, by the same way of Cross and Suffering, return to her own Country, which is above. It is no matter of astonishment, to find her from time to time suffering the worst of usage, and most cruel Persecutions; all Ages have seen her exposed to such Tryals as these, which are so necessary for the Testing of her Faith, and so fit a matter of her Fu∣ture Glory. Neither is it any great wonder, if, amidst these sore Tryals, vast numbers of those who made Profession of the Gospel, do now Renounce and forsake it: We know that all have not Faith; and it is more than probable, that they who do not follow Christ, but because they Thrive by it, and for the Loaves, will cease to be of his Retinue, when he is about to oblige them to bear his Cross, and deny themselves. But that which seems Inconceivable to me, is, that our Enemies should pitch upon such strange ways and me∣thods to destroy us, as they have done, and that, in so doing, they should meet with a success so prodigious and doleful. I shall as brief∣ly as I can endeavour to give you an account of so much as I have understood of it. All those thundring Declarations, and destructive Arrests, which continually were Sued for, and obtain'd against us, and which were Executed with the Extremity of Rigour, were scarce able to move any one of us. The forbidding of our Publick Exercises, the demo∣lishing of our Churches, and the severe Injunction that not so much as Two or Three of us should dare to Assemble, in order to any thing of Divine worship, had no other effect upon the far greater part of us, than to Inflame our Zeal, instead of abating it; obliging us to Pray to God with greater Fervor and Devotion in our Closets, and to Meditate of his Word with greater Application and Attention. And neither the great wants, to which we were reduced by being depriv'd of our Offices and Imploys, and all other means of Living, and by those insupportable charges with which they strove to over-whelm us, as well by Taxes, as the Quartering of Souldiers (both which were as heavy as could be laid upon us) nor the continual trouble
we were put to by Criminal or other matters of Law, which at the Suit of one or other were still laid to our charge, tho upon the most frivolous and unjust pretences imaginable; I say, all these were not able to wear out our Patience, which was hardned against all Cala∣mties: insomuch as the design of forcing us to abandon the Truth of the Gospel, would Infallibly have been Ship-wrack'd, if no other means had been taken in hand for this purpose. But, Alas! Our Enemies were too Ingenious, to be bank'd so; and had taken out Ruine too much to Heart, not to study for means effectual and pro∣per to bring-about their desires: They call'd to mind what Prodi∣gious success a new kind of Persecution had had of late Years in Pocton, Aunix, and Xaintonge, which the Intendants of those places had be∣thought themselves of; and they made no difficulty to have Re∣course to the same, as to a means Infallible, and not to be doubt∣ed of. I must tell you, Sir, That we had not the least thought that ever such violent Methods as these, would have been pitched upon, as the means of our Conversion: We were always of Opinion, that none but Dennuieux's, and Marillacs, could be fit Instruments for such like Enterprizes; neither could we ever have Imagin'd, that Gene∣rals of Armies, who account it a Shame and Reproach to Attack and take some paultry Town or Village, should ever debase themselves to Besiege Old Men, Women, and Children in their own Houses; or that ever Souldiers, who think themselves ennobled by their Swords, should degrade themselves so far, as to take up the Trade of Butchers and Hangmen, by tormenting poor Innocents, and inflicting all sorts of Punishments upon them. Moreover, we were the less in expectation of any such thing, be∣cause at the self-same time they Treated us in this manner. they would needs perswade us, That the King's Councel had disapproved the Design: And indeed, it seem'd very probably to us, that all Reasons, whether taken from Humanity, Piety, or Interest, would have made them disavow and condemn a Project so Inhumane and Barbarous: Yet now, by Experience, we find it but too true, that our Enemies are so far from rejecting the said Design, that they carry it on with an un∣parell'd Zeal and Application, without giving themselves any further trouble to effectuate their Desires, than that of doing these two things. The First of which was, to Lull us asleep, and to take away from us all matter of Suspition of the mischief they were hatching against
us; which they did by permitting some of our Publick Exercises of Religion, by giving way to our Building of some Churches, by set∣tling Ministers in divers places to Baptize our Children, and by pub∣lishing several Arrests and Declarations, which did intimate to us, that we had reason to hope we should yet Subsist for some Years: Such was that Declaration, by which all Ministers were ordered to change their Churches every three years. The other was, to secure all the Sea-Ports of the Kingdom, so as none might make their escape, which was done by renewing the Antient Prohibitions of departing the Kingdom without leave, but with the addition of far more severe Penalties. After these precautions thus taken, they thought themselves no longer oblig'd to keep any measures, but immediately lift up the hand, to give the last blow for our Ruine. The Intendents had or∣der to represent to us, That the King was resolved to suffer no other Re∣ligion in his Kingdom besides his own, and to Command us all in his Name, readily to Embrace the same, without allowing us any longer respite to consider what we had to do, than a few days, nay, hours; threatning us, That if we continued obstinate, they would force us to it by the extre∣mity of Rigour; and presently Executing these their Menaces, by filling our Houses with Souldiers, to whom we were to be left for a Prey; and who, not content with entirely Ruining of us, should besides exercise upon our Persons all the Violence and Cruelty they could possibly devise: And all this to overcome our Constancy and Perseverance. Four Months are now past and gone, since they began to make use of this strange and horrible way of Converting People, worthy of, and well becoming its Inventors. The Country of Bearne was first set upon, as being one of the most considerable Out-parts of the King∣dom, to the end that this mischievous enterprize gaining strength in its passage, might soon after over-whelm, and as it were deluge all the other Provinces in the same Sea of the uttermost calamity. Mon∣sieur Foucaut the Intendant, went himself in Person to all the places where we were in any numbers, and commanded all the Inhabitants that were of the Protestant Religion, under the Penalty of great a∣mercements, to Assemble themselves in those places he appointed to them; where being accordingly met together, he charged them in the Kings Name to change their Religion, allowing them only a day or two to dispose themselves for it: He told them, The great num∣bers of Souldiers were at hand, to compel those that should refuse to yield
a ready obedience; and this threatning of his being immediately fol∣lowed by the Effect, as Lightning is by Thunder, he fill'd the Houses of all those who abode constant in their resolution to Live and Die Faithful to their Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, with Souldiers; and Commands those insolent Troops (flesh'd with Blood and Slaughter) to give them the worst Treatment they could possibly devise. I shall not undertake, Sir, to give you a particular Account of those Excesses and Out-rages, these enraged Brutals committed in Executing the Orders they were charged with; the Relation would prove too tedious and doleful: It shall suffice me to tell you, That they did not forget any thing that was Inhuman, Barbarous, or Cruel, without having regard to any Condition, Sex or Age; they pull'd down and, demolished their Houses; they spoil'd, dash'd to pieces, and burnt their best Moveables and Houshold-stuff; they bruised and beat to Death Venerable Old Men; they dragg'd Honourable Ma∣trons to Mass, without the least pity or respect; they bound and Fet∣ter'd Innocent Persons, as if they had been the most Infamous and Profligate Villains; they hung them up by their Feet, till they saw them ready to give up the Ghost; they took Red-hot Fire-shovels, and held them close to their bare heads, and actually applied them to other parts of their Bodies; they Immur'd them within four Walls, where they let them perish for Hunger and Thirst: And the Con∣stancy wherewith they suffer'd all these Torments, having had no other effect, but that of augmenting the Rage of these Furies, they never ceased inventing new waies of Pain and Torture, till their In∣humanity at length had got the Victory, and Triumphed over the patience and Faith of these miserable Wretches. Insomuch, that of all those many numerous Assemblies, we had in that Province, as that of Pan, d'Arthes, d'Novarre, &c. there are scarcely left a small number, who either continue constant in despite of all these Cruel∣ties, or else have made their escape into Spain, Holland, England, or elsewhere, leaving their Goods and Families for the prey to these merciless and cruel Men. Success having thus far answered their Expectation, they resolved to lose no time; but vigorously prosecuting their work, they imme∣diately turned their Thoughts and Arms towards Montaubam▪ where the Intendant having Summoned the Citizens to appear before him, bespeaks them much of the same Language, as was used to those of Bearne; whereunto they having returned about the same Answer, he
orders 4000. Men to enter the City, and makes them take up their Quarters, as at Bearne, only in the Houses of Protestants; with ex∣press Command to Treat them in like manner, as they had done those of Bearne: And these inhuman Wretches were so diligent and active in Executing these pitiless Orders, that of 12 or 15000. Soul, of which that Church did consist, not above 20 or 30 Families are escaped; who, in a doleful and forlorn Condition, wander up and down the Woods, and hide themselves in Thickets. The ruin of this Important Place, drew after it the Desolation of all the Churches about it; which were all Enveloped in the same common Calamity, as those of Realmont, Bourniquel, Negreplisse, &c. Yet was not the condition of the Churches in the Upper Guienne more sad and calamitous, than that of those of the Lower Guienne, and of Perigord; which this horrible Deluge hath likewise over-whelm'd. Monsieur Bouslers, and the Intendant, having shared the Country between them; Monsieur de Bousters taking for his part Agenois, Tonnein, Clerac, with the adjoyning places; and the Inten∣dant having taken upon him to reduce Fleis, Monravel, Genssac, Car∣tillon, Coutras, Libourne, &c. The Troops which they commanded, in the mean time, carrying Desolation to all the Places they passed through, filling them with Mourning and Despair, and scattering Terror and Amazement amongst all those to whom they approached. There were at the same time 17 Companies at St. Foy, 15 at Ne∣rac, and as many in proportion in all other parts: So that all Places being fill'd ith these Troops, accustom'd to Licentiousness and Pil∣lage, there is not any one of the said places, where they have not left most dreadful marks of their Rage and Cruelty; having at last, by means of their exquisite Tortures, made all those of our Religion submit themselves to the Communion of Rome. But forasmuch as Bergerat was most signally famous for the long Trials it had most gloriously endured, and that our Enemies were ve∣ry sensible of what advantage it would be, to the carrying on of their Design, to make themselves Masters there also, at any price whatso∣ever; they accordingly fail'd not to attempt the same with more Re∣solution and Obstinacy, than any of the forementioned Places. This little Town had already, for three years together, with ad∣mirable patience and constancy, endured a thousand ill Treatments, and Exactions from Souldiers, who had pick'd them to the very Bones: for besides that, it was almost a continual passage for Soul∣diers;
there were no less than Eighteen Troops of Horse had their Winter Quarters there; who yet in all that time had only gain'd three Converts, and they such too as were maintain'd by the Alms of the Church. But to return: The design being form'd to reduce this City, two Troops of Horse are immediately ordered thither, to observe the In∣habitants, and soon after 32 Companies of Foot enter the Town: Monsieur Bouflers and the Intendant of the Province, with the Bishops of Agen and Perigueux, and some other Persons of Quality, tender themselves there at the same time, and send for 200 of the chiefest Citizens to appear before them; telling them, That the Kings Ex∣press Will and Pleasure was, they should all go to Mass; and that in case of Disobedience, they had order to compel them to it: To which the Citizens Unanimosly answered, That their Estates were at the dispose of his Majesty, but that God alone was Lord of their Consciences; and that they were resolved to suffer to the utmost, rather than do any thing contrary to the motions of it. Whereupon they were told, That if they were so resolved, they had nought else to do but to prepare them∣selves to receive the Punishment their Obstinacy and Disobedience did de∣serve; and immediately 32 Companies more of Infantry and Caval∣ry enter the City (which, together with the 34 Companies before∣mentioned, were all Quartered with Protestants) with Express Com∣mand not to spare any thing they had, and to exercise all manner of Violence upon the Persons of those that entertain'd them, until they should have extorted a Promise from them, to do whatsoever was Commanded them. These Orders then being thus Executed, according to the desires of those who had given them, and these miserable Victims of a Barbarous Military Fury, being reduc'd to the most deplorable and desolate con∣dition; they are again sent for to the Town-house, and once more pressed to change their Religion; and they answering with Tears in their eyes, and with all the Respect, Humility, and Submission imgina∣ble, That the Matter required of them, was the only thing they could not do, the extreamest Rigor and Severity is denounc'd against them; and they presently made good their Words, by sending 34 more Compa∣nies into the City, which made up the full number of an hundred; who encouraging themselves from their numbers, and flying like en∣raged Wolves upon these innocent Sheep, did rend and worry them in such a manner, as the sole Relation cannot but strike with Horror
and Amazement. Whole Companies were ordered to Quarter with one Citizen; and Persons whose whole Estate did not amount to 10000. Livres, were taxed at the rate of 150. Livres a day: When their Money is gone, they sell their Houshold-stuff, and sell that for two pence, which hath cost 60. Livres; they bind and fetter Father, Mother, Wife and Children: Four Souldiers continually stand at the door, to hinder any from coming in to succour or comfort them: they keep them in this condition, two, three, four, five, and six days, without either Meat, Drink, or Sleep: On one hand the Child cries, with the Languishing accent of one ready to Dye, Ah my Father! Ah my Mother! What shall I do? I must Dye, I can endure no longer: The Wife on the other hand cries; Alas! my Heart fails me, I Faint, I Dye! Whilst their cruel Tormentors are so far from being touch'd with Compassion, that from thence they take occasion to press them afresh, and to renew their Torments, frighting them with their Hel∣lish Menaces, accompanied with most execrable Oaths and Curses; crying, Dog, Bougre, What, will not thou be Converted? Wilt not thou be Obedient? Dog, Bougre, Thou must be Converted, we are sent on purpose to Convert thee: And the Clergy, who are witnesses of all these Cruelties, (with which they feast their Eyes) and of all their Infamous and abominable words, (which ought to cover them with horror and confusion) make only a matter of sport and laughter of it. Thus these miserable Wretches, being neither suffered to Live nor to Dye, (for when they see them fainting away, they force them to take so much as to keep Body and Soul together) and seeing no other way for them to be delivered out of this Hell, in which they are continually Tormented, are fain at last to stoop under the unsup∣portable Burthen of these extremities: So that excepting only a few who saved themselves by a timely Flight, preferring their Religion before all Temporal Possessions, all the rest have been constrained to go to Mass. Neither is the Country any more exempt from these Calamities, than Towns and Cities; nor those of the Nobility and Gentry, than Citizens. They send whole Companies of Souldiers into Gentlemens Houses, who Treat them in the most outragious and violent manner conceivable; insomuch that not a Soul can hope to escape, except it may be some few, who like the Believers of old, wander in Desarts, and lodge in Dens, and Caves of the Earth. Futhermore, I can assure you, that never was any greater con∣sternation,
than that which we are in here at present; the Army, we hear, is come very near us, and the Intendant is just now Arrived in this City; the greater part of the most considerable Merchants are either already gone, or casting about how best to make their escape, abandoning their Houses and Estates to their Enemies; and there are not wanting some Cowardly Spirits, who, to avoid the mischief they are preparing for us, have already promised to do whatsoever is required of them. In a word, nothing is seen or heard in these parts but Consternation, Weeping and Lamentation; there being scarce a Person of our Religion, who hath not his Heart pier∣ced with the bitterest Sorrows, and whose Countenance hath not the Lively Picture of Death Imprinted on it: and surely, if our Ene∣mies Triumph in all this, their Triumph cannot likely be of any long continuance. I confess, I cannot perswade my self to entertain so good an opi∣nion of them, as to think that ever they will be ashamed of these their doings, so Diametrically opposite to the Spirit of the Gospel; for I know the Gospel, in their accounts, passeth for a Fable: but this I dare averr, that this Method of theirs will Infallibly lay waste the Kingdom, which according to all appearance, is never like to recover of it; and so in time, they themselves will be made as sensible of these miseries, as others now are. Commerce is already in a man∣ner wholly extinct, and there will need little less than a Miracle to recover it to its former State. What Protestant Merchants will henceforward be willing to engage themselves in Trade, either with Persons without Faith; and who have so cowardly betray'd their Religion and Conscience, or with the Outragious and Barbarous Per∣secuters of the Religion, which they profess? and who by these cour∣ses declare openly and frankly, that it is their Principle, not to think themselves oblig'd to keep their word with Hereticks. And who are those, of what Religion soever, that will Negotiate with a State ex∣hausted by Taxes and Subsidies, by Persecutions, by Barrenness and Dearth of several years continuance; full of a despairing People, and which Infallibly will e're long be full of those that are proscrib'd, and be bathing in its own Blood. And these miserable Wretches, who have been deceived by those who have told them, That it would never be impos'd upon them to abjure their Religion, and who are stupified by the extremity of their Sufferings, and the terror of their bloody and cruel Enemies, are wrapt
up in so deep an Astonishment, as doth not permit them to be fully sensible of their Fall: But as soon as they shall recover themselves, and remember, that they could not Embrace the Communion of Rome, without absolutely Renouncing the Holy Religion they Profes∣sed; and when they shall make a full Reflection upon the unhappy Change they have been forced to make; then their Consciences be∣ing awakened, and continually reproaching their Faint-hearted∣ness, will rend them with Sorrow and Remorse, and inflict Tor∣ments upon them, equal to those the Damned endure in Hell; and will make them endavour to be delivered from this Anguish, and to find Rest in the constant Profession of that Truth, which they have unhappily betray'd. And on the other-side; Their Enemies will be loath to take the Lye at this time of the Day; and therefore will endeavor, through fear of Punishments, to oblige them to stay in that Abyss of Hor∣ror, into which they have precipitated them: But because all the Sufferings they can possibly threaten them with, will be no ways considerable, when compared with those Tortures their Conscien∣ces have already inflicted upon them, and where with they threat∣en them in case of a Relapse, they will be constrained to drag them to the Place of Execution, or else seek to rid themselves of them all at once, by a general Massacre, which many good Souls have so so long desired. I hope, Sir, You will not be wanting in your most earnest Prayers to beg of God, that He would be pleased to take pity of these misera∣ble Wretches; and make the Heart of our Sovereign to relent towards us; That he would Convert those, who in their Blindness think they do Him Service, by putting us to Death; That He would cause his Voice to be heard by them from Heaven, as to St. Paul; Saul, Saul, Why Persecutest thou me? And make the rest the Examples of his Ex∣emplary Justice: Finally, That He would grant, That all those who have denied Him, being touched with a True Repentance, may, with St. Peter, Go out, and Weep bitterly. I am, SIR, Yours, &c.
An Extract of a Letter, containing some more Instances of the Cruel and Barbarous Ʋsage of the Protestants in France. BUt this, Sir, is not the thing which troubles me most, at this time; there's another cause of my Grief, which is but too just, and even pierceth my Heart with Sorrow; and that is, The Cruel Persecution, which the Poor Protestants of France do suffer, amongst whom I have so many near and dear Relations: The Torments they are put to, are almost Incredible; and the Heavenly Courage, wherewith some of them are strengthned by their Great Captain and Leader, to undergo them, is no less amazing and wonderful: I shall give for Instance one or two of these Champions, that by them you may judge of the rest. A Young Woman was brought before the Council, in order to oblige her to abjure the Truth of the Gospel; which she boldly and manfully refusing, was commanded back again to Prison; where they shaved her Head, and sing'd off the Hair of her Privities; and having stript her Stark-Naked, in this manner led her through the Streets of the City; where many a blow was given her, and Stones flung at her. After this, they set her up to the Neck in a Tub full of Water; where after she had been for a while, they took her out, and put upon her a Shift dipt in Wine, which as it dry'd, and fluck to her Sore and Bruised Body, they snatch'd off again; and then had another ready, dipt in Wine to clap upon her: This they repeated six several times; and when by this Inhumane usage, her Body was become very Raw and Tender, they demanded of her, Whether she did not now find her self disposed to Embrace the Catholick Faith? for so they are pleased to term their Religion: But she, be∣ing strengthned by the Spirit and Love of Him, for whose Names sake she suffered all these Extremities, undauntedly answer'd; That she had before declared her Resolution to them, which she would never al∣ter; and that, though they had her Body in their Power, she was resol∣ved not to yield her Soul to them; but keep it pure and undefiled for her Heavenly Lover; as knowing, that a little while would put an end to all her Sufferings, and give a Beginning to her Enjoyment of Everlasting Bliss: Which Words of hers, adding Fuel of their Rage, who now despaired of making her a Convert, they took and fastned her by her
Feet, to something that served the turn of a Gibbet, and there let her hang in that Ignominious Posture, with her head downwards till she expired. The other Person I would instance in, and whom I pity the more, because (for ought I know) he may yet survive, and still continue under the Tormentor's Hands, is an Old Man; who having, for a great while, been kept close Prisoner (upon the same account as the former) in a deep Dungeon, where his Companions were Darkness and Horror, and filthy Creeping things, was brought before his Judges, with Vermin and Snails crawling upon his Mouldred Gar∣ment; who seeing him in that loathsom condition, said to him: How now Old Man, does not your Heart begin to Relent? and are not you willing to Abjure your Heresie? To which he answer'd: As for Heresie, I profess none; but if by that Word you mean my Religion, you may assure your selves, that as I have thus long Lived, so, I hope, and am resolved by the Grace of God, to Die in it: With which answer they being little pleased, but furiously incensed, bespoke him in a rougher Tone: Dost thou not see, that the Worms are about to devour thee? Well, since thou art so resolved, we will send thee back again, to the loathsom Place from whence thou camest, that they may make an end of thee, and consume thy obdurate Heart: To which he reply'd, with the words of the holy patient Job; Novi postquam vermes confoderint (Corpus) istud, in carne mea me vissurum esse Deum. I know that af∣ter Worms have eaten this Body, that in my Flesh I shall see God. And having so said, he was sent back to his loathsom dark Abode; where if he be still, I pray God to give him patience and strength to hold out to the End, that so he may obtain the Crown of Life. I should be too tedious, in giving you all the particulars of their Cruelty, and of the Sufferings of the Protestants; yet I cannot well forbear acquainting you with what lately I am most credibly inform'd of; which take as follows: Some Dragoons, who were Quartered with a Person, who they could by no means oblige to Renounce his Religion; upon a time, when they had well fill'd them∣selves with Wine, and broke their Glasses at every Health they drank; and so fill'd the Floor, where they were, with the Frag∣ments; and by often walking over, and treading upon them, re∣duced them to lesser Pieces and Fractions: And being now in a mer∣ry Humour, they must needs go to Dance; and told their Host, That he must be One of the Company; but withal, that he must
first pull off his Stockins and Shooes, that the might move the more nimbly: In a word, they forc'd him to Dance with them bare∣footed, upon the sharp Points of Glass; which when they had con∣tinued so long as they were able to keep him on his Legs, they laid him down on a Bed; and a while after stript him stark naked, and rolled his Body from one end of the Room to the other, upon the sharp Glass, as beforementioned; which having done, till his Skin was stuck full of the said little Fragments, they returned him again to his Bed, and sent for a Chyturgeon, to take out all the said pieces of Glass out of his Body; which you may easily conceive, could not be done without frequent Incisions, and horrible and most ex∣tream pain. Another Person being likewise troubled with the un∣welcom Company of these Dragoons, and having suffered extream∣ly at their hands, without the expected success of his Conversion; one of them on a time looking earnestly upon him, told him, That he disfigured himself, with letting his Beard grow so long: But he an∣swering, That they were the cause of it, who would not let him stir out of door, for to go to the Barber: The Dragoon reply'd, I can do that for you as well as the Barber; And with that told him, He must needs try his Skill upon him: And so fell to work; but instead of shaving him, flea'd all the Skin off his Face. One of his Companions coming in at the Cry of this poor Sufferer, and seeing what he had done, seemingly blam'd him for it, and said, He was a Bungler; and then to his Host, Come, your Hair wants Cutting too, and you shall see, I will do it much better than he hath shav'd you: And there∣upon begins, in a most cruel manner, to pluck the Hair, Skin, and all, off his Head, and flea'd that as the other had done his Chin. Thus making a Sport and Merriment of the extream Suffering of these miserable Wretches. By these inhuman, and more than Barbarous means it is, that they endeavour to overcome the most resolved patience, and to drive People to Despair and Faint-heartedness, by their Devilish In∣ventions. They refuse to give them Death, which they desire; and only keep them alive to torment them, so long till they have vanquish'd their Perseverance; for the Names of Martyrs, and Re∣bels, are equally odious to their Enemies, who tell them, The King will have Obedient Subjects, but neither Martyrs nor Rebels; and that they have received Orders to Convert them, but not to Kill them.
Sir, I beg your Pardon, for having so long Entertain'd you with these more than Tragical Passages; and that you would not be want∣ing to recommend the Condition of these Poor, Destitute, Afflicted, and Tortured Persons, to the Bowels of Compassion of our Heaven∣ly Father, that He would be pleased not to suffer them to be Tem∣pted above what he shall give them Grace to bear: Which is the Hearty Prayer of, Your Faithful Friend, T. G. Since the First Publishing of This, some further Particulars (repre∣senting the Horror of this Persecution) are come to hand; which take as follow: THey have put Persons into Monasteries, in little narrow holes, where they could not stretch their Bodies at length; there Feed∣ing them with Bread and Water, and Whipping them every day, till they did Recant: They plunged others into Wells, and there kept them till they promised to do what was desired of them: They stript some Naked, and stuck their Bodies full of Pins: They tyed Fathers and Husbands to the Bed-Posts, forcing their Wives and Daughters before their Eyes: In some Places, the Ravishing of Wo∣men was openly and generally permitted: They pluck'd off the Nails and Toes of others: They Burnt their Feet, and blew up Men and Women with Bellows, till they were ready to Burst. In a word, They exercised all manner of Cruelties they could invent; and in so doing; spared neither Sex, Age nor Quality. The Profession of the Catholick, Apostolick, and Roman Faith, which the Revolting Protestants in France are to Subscribe and Swear to. IN the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. I Believe and Confess with a firm Faith, all and every thing and things con∣tained in the Creed, which is used by the Holy Church of Rome, viz. I Receive and Embrace most sincerely the Apostolick and Ecclesia∣stical
Traditions, and other Observances of the said Church. In like manner, I receive the Scriptures, but in the same Sense as the said Mother Church hath, and doth now understand and Expound the same; for whom and to whom it only doth belong to judge of the Interpreta∣tion of the Sacred Scriptures: And I will never take them, nor under∣stand them otherwise, than according to the unanimous Consent of the Fathers. I profess, That there be truly and properly Seven Sacraments of the New Law, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary for the Sal∣vation of Mankind, altho' not equally needful for every one, viz. Bap∣tism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extream Unction, Or∣ders and Marriage; and that they do confer Grace; and that Baptism and Orders may not be reiterated, without Sacriledge: I receive and admit also the Ceremonies received & approved by the Catholick Church, in the solemn Administration of the forementioned Sacraments. I receive and embrace all and every thing, and things, which have been determined concerning Original Sin and Justification by the Holy Council of Trent. I likewise profess, that in the Mass there is offered up to God, a true, proper, and Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and Dead; and that in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly, really, and Substan∣tially, the Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ; and that in it there is made a change of the whole Substance of the Bread into his Body, and of the whole Substance of the Wine into his Blood; which change the Catholick Church calls Transubstantiation. I confess also, That under one only of these two Elements, whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is received. I constantly believe and affirm, that there is a Purgatory; and that the Souls there detained, are relieved by the Suffrages of the Faithful. In like manner, I believe that the Saints Reigning in Glory with Jesus Christ, are to be Worshipped and Invocated by us, and that they offer up Prayers to God for us, and that their Reliques ought to be ho∣noured. Moreover, I do most stedfastly avow, that the Images of Jesus Christ, of the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, and of other Saints, ought to be kept and retained, and that due Honour and Veneration must be yielded unto them. Also I do affirm, that the power of Indulgences was left to the Church by Christ Jesus, and that the use thereof is very beneficial to Christians.
I do acknowledge the holy Catholick, Apostolick, and Roman Church, to be the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches; and I profess and Swear true Obedience to the Pope of Rome, Successor of the Blessed St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. In like manner, I own and profess, without doubting, all other things left defined and declared by the Holy Canons and General Councils, espe∣cially by the most Holy Council of Trent; and withal, I do condemn, reject, and hold for accursed, all things that are contrary thereto; and all those Heresies which have been condemned, rejected, and accursed by the Church. And then Swearing upon the Book of the Gospel, the Party Recant∣ing, must say: I Promise, Vow, and Swear, and most constantly Prosess, by Gods Assistance, to keep intirely and inviolably, unto Death, this self-same Catholick and Apostolick Faith, out of which no Person can be Saved; and this I do most truly and willingly profess, and that I will to the utmost of my Power endeavour that it may be maintain'd and upheld as far as any ways belong to my Charge; so help me God, and the Holy Virgin. The Certificate which the Party Recanting, is to leave with the Priest, when he makes his Abjuration. IN. N. of the Parish of N. do Certifie all whom it may Con∣cern, That having acknowledged the Falseness of the Pre∣tended Reformed, and the Truth of the Catholick Religion, of my own Free will, without any Compulsion, I have accord∣ingly made Profession of the said Catholick Roman Religi∣on in the Church of N. In the hands of N. N. In Testimony of the Truth whereof, I have Signed this Act in the presence of the Witnesses whose Names are under Written, this — day of the month of the — Year of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord the King, and of our Redemption.—
A Declaration of the Elector of Brandenburg, in Favour of the French Protestants, who shall settle themselves in any of his Dominions. We Frederick William, by the Grace of God. Marquess of Branden∣burg, Arch-Chamberlain, and Prince Elector of the Holy Empire; Duke of Prussia, Magdeburg, Juilliers, Cleves, Bergen, Stettin, Pomerania; of the Cassubes, Vandals, and Silesia; of Crosne, and Jagerndorff; Burg-grave of Noremberg; Prince of Halberstadt, Minde, and Camin; Earl of Hohenzollern, of the Mark and Ra∣vensberg; Lord of Ravenstein, Lawneburg, and Butow, do declare and make known to all to whom these Presents shall come. THat whereas the Persecutions and Rigorous Proceedings which have been carried on for some time in France, against those of the Reformed Religion, have forced many Families to leave that Kingdom, and to seek for a Settlement else∣where, in strange and Foreign Countries; We have been willing, being touched with that just Compassion, We are bound to have for those who suffer for the Gospel, and the Purity of that Faith We profess, together with them, by this present Declaration, Sign∣ed with our own Hand, to offer, to the said Protestants, a sure and free Retreat in all the Countries and Provinces under our Dominion; and withal, to declare the several Rights, Immunities, and Privi∣ledges, which We are willing they shall enjoy there, in order to the Relieving and easing them, in some measure, of the burthen of those Calamities, wherewith it hath pleased the Divine Providence to afflict so considerable a part of his Church. I. To the end, that all those who shall resolve to Settle themselves in any of our Dominions, may with the more Ease and Convenience Transport themselves thither, We have given Order to our Envoy ex∣traordinary with the States-General of the Ʋnited Provinces, Sieur Diest, and to our Commissary in the City of Amsterdam, Sieur Romswinkel, at our Charge, to furnish all those of the said Religion (who shall address themselves unto them) with what Vessels and Provisions they shall stand in need of, for the Transportation of themselves, their Goods and Families, from Holland to the City of Hamburg: where then our Councellor and Resident for the Circle of the Lower Saxony, Sieur Guerick, shall furnish them with all conveniences they may stand in
need of, to convey them further, to whatsoever City or Province they shall think fit to pitch upon, for the place of their Abode. II. Those who shall come from the Parts of France about Sedan, as from Champagne, Lorain, Burgundy, or from any of the Southern Pro∣vinces of that Kingdom, and who think it not convenient to pass through Holland, may betake themselves to the City of Frankfort up∣on Maine; and there address themselves to Sieur Merain, our Coun∣cellor and Agent in the said City, or in the City of Cologne to Sieur Lely, our Agent, to whom We have also given Command to fur∣nish them with Money, Pasports, and Boats, in order to the carry∣ing them down the River Rhine, to our Dutchy of Cleves and Mark: or in case they shall desire to go further up in our Dominions, our said Ministers and Officers shall furnish them with Address, and Conve∣niences, for to Arrive at those several respective places. III. And forasmuch as the said our Provinces are stored with all sorts of Conveniences, and Commodities, not only for the necessity of Living, but also for Manufactures, Commerce, and Trade by Sea, and by Land, those who are willing to Settle themselves in any of our said Provinces, may choose such place, as they please, in the Coun∣try of Cleve, Mark, Ravensberg and Minde, or in those of Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Prussia. And forasmuch as We conceive, that in our Electoral Marquisate, the Cities of Stendel, Werbe, Rathenow, Brandenburg, and Frankfort; and in the Country of Magdeburg, the Cities of Magdeburg, Halle, and Calbe; and in Prussia, the City of Koningsberg will be most commodious, as well for the great abundance of all necessaries of Life, which may be had there at cheap Rates, as for the convenience of Trade and Traffick; We have given charge, that as soon as any of the said French Protestants shall arrive in any of the said Cities, they shall be kindly received and agreed with about all those things, which shall be thought needful for their Settlement. And for the rest, leaving them at their full Liberty to dis∣pose of themselves in whatsoever City or Province they shall judge most commodious, and best suiting with their Occasions. IV. All the Goods, Houshold-stuff, Merchandize, and Commo∣dities, which they shall bring along with them, shall not be liable to any Custom or Impost; but shall be wholly exempt from all Char∣ges and Impositions, of what Name or Nature soever they may be. V. And in case that in any of the Cities, Towns, or Villages where the said Persons of the Reformed Religion do intend to settle them∣selves,
there be found any Ruinous and decay'd Houses, or such as stand empty, and which the Proprietors are not in a condition to re∣pair, We will cause the same to be Assigned to them, the said French Protestants, as their Propriety, and to their Heits for ever; and shall content the present Proprietors, according to the value of the said Houses; and shall wholly free the same from all Charges, to which the same might stand ingaged, whether by Mortgage, Debts, or any other way whatsoever. Furthermore, Our will is, That they be fur∣nished with Timber, Quick Lime, Stones, Bricks, and other Materi∣als they may stand in need of, for the repairing of whatsoever is de∣cay'd or ruinous in any of the said Houses; which shall, for six Years, be exempt from all sorts of Impositions, Free-Quarter, and all other Charges whatsoever: Neither shall the said French, during the time of six Years, be lyable to any Payments whatsoever, but what are chatgeable upon things of daily Consumption. VI. In Cities or elsewhere, where convenient places shall be found for to build Houses, those of the Reformed Religion, who shall make their Retreat into our Dominions, shall be fully Authorized and Im∣powered to take possession of the same, for themselves and their Heirs after them, together with all the Gardens, Fields, and Pasture-Grounds belonging to the same, without being oblig'd to pay any of the dues and charges, with which the said places, or their dependances may be Incumbred. Moreover, for the facilitating their Building in any of the said places, We will cause them to be furnished with all the materials they shall stand in need of; and will over and above allow them Ten Years of Exemption, during which they shall not be ly∣able to any other charges or payments, besides the dues charged upon things of daily spending. And furthermore, forasmuch as Our intent is, to make their Settlement in our Dominions the most easie and commodious for them that may be; We have given command to our Magistrates and other Officers in the said Provinces, to make enquiry, in every City, for Houses that are to be Lett, into which it shall be free for the said French to enter, and take up their Lodging as soon as they shall Arrive; and do promise to pay for them and their Families for Four Years, the Rent of the said Houses, provided that they engage themselves, within the said Term, to Build in such places as shall be Assigned for them, in manner, and upon condition as aforesaid. VII. As soon as they shall have taken up their Habitation in any
City or Town of our Dominions, they shall immediately be made Free of the place, as also of that particular Corporation, which by their Trade of Profession they belong to; and shall enjoy the self-same Rights and Priviledges, which the Citizens, Burgesses, and Free∣men of the said places or Corporations do enjoy, and that without being obliged to pay any thing for the said Freedom, and without be∣ing lyable to the Law of Escheatage, or any other of what Nature soever they may be, which in other Countries are in force against Strangers; but shall be look'd upon, and Treated upon all accounts, in the same manner, as Our own Natural Subjects. VIII. All those who are willing to undertake and establish any Ma∣nufactures, whether of Cloth, Stuffs, Hats, or any other whatsoever, shall not only be furnished with all the Priviledges, Patents, and Franchises, which they can wish for, or desire; but moreover We will take care that they be assisted with Moneys, and such other Pro∣visions and Necessaries as shall be thought fit to promote and make their undertaking successful. IX. To Country-men and others, who are willing to Settle them∣selves in the Country, We will cause a certain extent of Ground to be allotted for them to Till and Cultivate, and give Orders for their being assisted and furnished with all things necessary for their Sub∣sistance, at the beginning of their Settlement; in like manner as we have done to a considerable number of Swiss Families, who are come to dwell in Our Dominions. X. And as for any business of Law, or matter of difference which may arise amongst those of the Reformed Religion. We do grant and allow that in those Cities where any considerable number of French Families shall be Settled, they be Authorized to choose one from amongst themselves, who shall have full power to decide the said dif∣ferences in a friendly way, without any formality of Law whatso∣ever: And in case any Differences shall arise between the Germans and the said French, that then the said Differences shall be decided joyntly by the Magistrate of the Place, and by the Person whom the French shall have Chosen for that purpose, from amongst them∣selves. And the same shall be done when the Differences of French∣men, amongst themselves, cannot be accommodated in the foremen∣tioned friendly way, by the Person thereto by them Elected. XI. In every City, where any numbers of French shall Settle them∣selves, We will maintain a Minister, and appoint a convenient place
for the Publick Exercise of Religion in the French Tongue, according to the Custom, and with the same Ceremonies which are in use amongst the Reformed in France. XII. And forasmuch as such of the Nobility of France, who, here∣tofore, have put themselves under Our Protection, and entred into our Service, do actually Enjoy the same Honours, Dignities, and Immu∣nities with those of the Country; and that there are many found amongst them, who have been raised to the chief Places and Charges of our Court, and Command over Our Forces; We are ready and willing to continue the same Favour to those of the said Nobility, who for time to come shall Settle themselves in our Dominions, by be∣stowing upon them the several Charges Honours and Dignities, they shall be found fitted for. And in case they shall purchase any Man∣nors or Lordships, they shall possess the same with all the Rights, Prerogatives and Immunities, which the Nobility of our own Do∣minions do of Right enjoy. XIII. All these Priviledges and Advantages forementioned shall not only be extended to those French of the Reformed Religion, who shall Arrive in our Dominions (in order to their Settling there) af∣ter the same Date of this Declaration; but also to those, who before the date hereof, have settled themselves in our Countries, provided they have been forced to leave France upon account of their Religi∣on; they of the Romish Profession being wholly excluded from any part or share therein. XIV. In every one of Our Provinces, Dutchies, and Principalities, We shall appoint and Establish certain Commissioners, to whom the French of the Reformed Religion, may have Recourse and Address themselves upon all occasions of need; and this not only at the begin∣ning of their Settlement, but also afterwards. And all Governours and Magistrates of Our Provinces and Territories, shall have order by Vertue of these Presents, as well as by other particular Commands, We shall from time to time Issue forth, to take the said Persons of the Reformed Religion into their Protection, and to maintain them in all the Priviledges here before mentioned, and not suffer the least hurt or injury to be done unto them, but rather all manner of Favour, Aid and Assistance. Given at Postdam, Octob. 26. 1685. Frederick William.
A Letter from Father La Chese, Confessor to the French King, to Fa∣ther Pere, Jesuit, and Great Almoner to the King of England, up∣on the Method or Rule he must observe with His Majesty, for the Con∣version of His Protestant Subjects. Most Reverend Father, WHen I compare the Method of the French Court (which declares against all Heresies) with the Policy of other Princes, who had the same Design in former Ages; I find so great a difference that all that passes now adaies in the King's Council is an impenetrable Mistery: and the eyes of all Europe are opened, to see what happens; but cannot discover the Cause. When Francis I. and Henry II. his Son undertook to Ruin the Reformation, they had to struggle with a Party which was but beginning and weak, and destitute of Help; and consequently easier to be overcome. In the time of Francis II. and Charles IX. a Family was seen advanc'd to the Throne by the Ruin of the Protestants, who were for the House of Bourbon. In this last Reign many Massacres hapned, and several Millions of Hereticks have been Sacrificed, but it answer'd otherwaies: and his Majesty has show'd (by the peace and mild waies he uses) that he abhors shedding of Blood; from which you must perswade his Britannie Majesty, who naturally is inclin'd to Roughness, and a kind of boldness, which will make him hazard all, if he does not politickly ma∣nage it; as I hinted in my last, when I mentioned my Lord Chancellor. Most Reverend Father, to satisfie the desire I have to shew you by my Letters the Choice you ought to make of such Persons fit to stir up, I will in few words (since you desire it) inform you of the Genius of the People of our Court, of their Incli∣nations, and which of them we make use of; that by a Parallel which you will make, between them and your English Lords, you may learn to know them. Therefore I shall begin with the Chief: I mean our great Monarch. It is certain that he is naturally good, and loves not to do Evil, unless desir'd to do it. This being so, I may say, he never would have undertaken the Conversion of his Sub∣jects, without the Clergy of France, and without our Societies Correspondence abroad. He is a Prince enlightned; who very well observes, that what we put him upon, is contrary to his Interest, and that nothing is more opposite to his Great Designs, and his Glory; he aiming to be the Terror of all Europe. The vast number of Male∣contents he has caused in his Kingdom, forces him in time of Peace to keep three times more Forces, than his Ancestors did in the greatest Domestick and Foreign Wars: which cannot be done, without a prodigious Expence. The Peoples fears also begin to lessen, as to his Aspiring to an Universal Monarchy: and they may assure themselves he has left those thoughts! nothing being more oppo∣site to his Designs, than the Method we enjoyn him. His Candor, Bounty, and Toleration, to the Hereticks, would undoubtedly have open'd the doors of the Low Countries, Palatinate, and all other States on the Rhine, and even of Switzerland: whereas things are at present so alter'd, that we see the Hollanders free from any fear of danger; the Switzers and City of Geneva, resolv'd to lose the last drop of their Blood in their defence; besides some diversion we may expect from the Empire, in case we cannot hinder a Peace with the Turks; which ought to hasten his Britannick Majesty, while he can be assured of Succors from the most Christian King.
Sir, his Majesties Brother is alwaies the same, I mean, takes no notice of what passes at Court. It has sometimes happen'd, the King's Brothers have acted so, as to be noted in the State; but this we may be assur'd will never do any thing to stain the glory of his Submission and Obedience: and is willing to lend a helping hand for the Destruction of the Hereticks; which appears by the instances he makes to his Majesty, who now has promised him to cause his Troops to enter into the Pala∣tinate the next Month. The Dauphin is passionately given up to Hunting, and little regards the Conversi∣on of Souls; and it does not seem easie to make him penetrate into business of Mo∣ment; and therefore we do not care to consult him which way, and how, the He∣reticks ought to be Treated. He openly laughs at us, and slights all the Designs, of which the King his Father makes great account. The Dauphiness is extreamly wit∣ty; and is without doubt uneasie to shew it in other matters besides Complements of Conversation. She has given me a Letter for the Queen of England; wherein after her expression of the part she bears on the News of her Majesties being with Child, she gives her several advices about the Conversion of her Subjects. Most Reverend Father, She is undoubtedly born a great enemy to the Protestants; and has promoted all she could with his Majesty, in all that has been done, to hasten their Ruin; especially having been bred in a Court of our Society, and of a House whose hatred against the Protestant Religion is Heraditary; because she has been raised up by the Ruine of the German Protestant Princes, especially that of the Pa∣latinate. But the King having caused her to come to make Heirs to the Crown, she answers expectation to the utmost. Monsieur Louvois is a Man who very much observes his duty, which he performs to admiration; and to whom we must acknowledge France owes part of the glory it has hitherto gained, both in regard of its Conquests, as also the Conversion of Hereticks; to which latter I may say, he has contributed as much as the King: he has already shewed himself Fierce, Wrathful, and Hardhearted, in his Actions to∣wards them; though he is not naturally inclin'd to Cruelty, nor to harrass the peo∣ple. His Brother the Archbishop of Rheins, has ways which do not much differ from those of his Soul; and all the difference I find between is, That the Arch∣bishop loves his own glory, as much os Monsieur de Louvois loves that of his Maje∣sty. He is his own Idol; and give him but Incense, and you may obtain any thing. Honour is welcome to him, let it come which way it will. The least thing provokes this Prelate; and he will not yield any thing deregetary to his Paternity. He will seem Learned; he will seem a great Theologian, and will seem to be a good Bishop, and to have a great care of his Diocess; and would heretofore seem a great Preacher. I have hinted in my last; the Reasons why I cannot altogether like him; which are needless to repeat. The Archbishop of Paris is always the same; I mean, a gallant man; whose pre∣sent Conversation is charming, and loves his pleasures; but cannot bear any thing that grieves or gives trouble; though he is always a great enemy of the Jansenists, which he lately intimated to Cardinal Camus. He is always with me in the Coun∣cil of Conscience, and agrees very well with our Society; laying mostly to Heart the Conversion of the Protestants of the three Kingdoms. He also makes very good Obser∣vations, and designs to give some Advice to your Reverence, which I shall convey to you. I do sometimes impart to him, what you write to me, My Lord Kingston has embrac'd our good Party: I was present when he Abjur'd in the Church of St. Denys; I will give you the Circumstances some other time. You promised to send me the Names of all heretick Officers who are in his Maje∣sties
Troops; that much imports me; and you shall not want good Catholick Offi∣cers to fill up their places. I have drawn a List of them who are to pass into Eng∣land; and his most Christian Majesty approves thereof: Pray observe what I hinted to you in my last, on the Subject of the Visits, which our Fathers must give to the Chief Lords, Members of the next Parliament; those Reverend Fathers, who are to perform that duty, must be middle-aged, with a lively Countenance, and fit to per∣swade. I also advised you in some of my other Letters, how the Bishop of Oxford ought to behave himself, by Writing incessantly, and to insinuate into the people the putting down the Test; and at the same time cal the storm, which the Letter of Pensionary Fagel has raised. And his Majesty must continue to make vigorous Prohibitions to all Booksellers in London, not to print any Answers: as well to put a stop to the Insolency of Heretick Authors; as also to hinder the people from Read∣ing them. In short, you intimate to me, That his Majesty will follow our Advice: It's the quickest way, and I cannot find a better, or fitter, to dispossess his Subjects from such Impressions as they have received. His Majesty must also, by the same Declaration, profess in Conscience, that (if complyed with) he will not only keep his Word, to maintain and protect the Church of England; but will also confirm his Promises by such Laws, as the Protestants shall be contented with. This is the true Politick way; for by his granting all, they cannot but Consent to something. His most Christian Majesty has with great success experienced this Maxim: and though he had not to struggle with Penal Laws and Tests, yet he found it convenient to make large Promises, by many Declarations; for, since we must dissemble, you must endeavour all you can to perswade the King, it is the only method to effect his Designs. I did also in my last, give you a hint of its importance, as well as the ways you must take to insinuate your selves dextrously with the King, to gain his good will. I know not whether you have observed what passed in England some years since, I will recite it, because examples instruct much. One of our Assisting Fathers of that Kingdom (which was Father Parsons) having written a Book against the Succession of the King of Scots, to the Realm of England: Father Creighton, who was also of our Society, and upheld by many of our Party, defended the Cause of that King, in a Book Intituled, The Reasons of the King of Scots, against the Book of Father Parsons: and though they seem'd divided, yet they understood one another very well; this being prcticed by order of our General, to the end, that if the House of Scotland were Excluded, they might shew him who had the Government, the Book of Father Parsons; and on the other hand, if the King hapned to be restored to the Throne, they might obtain the good will, by shewing him the Works of Father Creighton: So that which way soever the Medal turn'd, it still prov'd to the advantage of our Society. Not to digress from our Sub∣ject, I must desire you to read the English Book of Father Parsons, Intituled, The Reform of England; where, after his blaming of Cardinal Pole, and ade some ob∣servations of Faults in the Council of Trent, he finally concludes, That suppose Eng∣land should return (as we hope) to the Catholick Faith in this Reign, he would re∣duce it to the State of the Primitive Church: and to that end all the Ecclesiastical Revenue ought to be used in common, and the Management thereof committed to the care of Seven Wise Men, drawn out of our Society, to be disposed of by them as they should think fit. Moreover, he would have all the Religious Orders forbid∣den on Religious Penalties, not to return into the Three Kingdoms, without leave
of those Seven Wise Men: to the end, it might be granted only to such as live on Alms. These Reflections seem to me very Judicious, and very suitable to the pre∣sent State of England. The same Father Parsons adds, That when England is reduced to the True Faith, the Pope must not expect, at least for five years, to reap any benefit of the Ecclesi∣astical Revenue; but must leave the whole in the hands of those seven Wise Men; who will manage the same to the benefit and advancement of the Church. The Court goes this day for Marli, to take the Divertisements which are there prepared: I hope to accompany the King, and will entertain him about all business; and accordingly as he likes what you hint to me in your Letter, I shall give you no∣tice. I have acquainted him with his Britannic Majesties Design, of Building a Ci∣tadel near White-Hall; Monsieur Vauban, our Engineer was present: after some dis∣course on the importance of the Subject, his Majesty told Monsieur Vauban, that he thought it convenient he should make a Model of the Design, and that he should on purpose go over into England, to see the Ground. I have done all I could to sus∣pend the Designs of our Great Monarch, who is alwaies angry against the Holy Fa∣ther: both Parties are stubborn: the Kings natural Inclination is, to have all yield to him; and the Popes Resolution is unalterable. All our Fathers most humbly salute your Reverence. Father Reine Ville acts wonderfully about Nismes amongst the New Converts; who still meet, notwith∣standing the Danger they expose themselves to. I daily expect News from the Frontiers of the Empire, which I shall impart to your Reverence, and am with the greatest Respect, Paris, March, 7. 1688. Yours, &c. FINIS.
