M1306 12593695 63986
March 2. Matters of great Note and Consequence. 1 Divers Questions upon his Majesties last Answer concerning the Militia Resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament to be of dangerous consequence. 2 A true relation of the Strange and untimely deathes which hath successively befalen all the Nobility and others, which have beene the posses∣sors of Shirborne Castle, in Dorset-shire since that it was unlawfully usurped and taken from the Church by King Stephen in Anno Dom. 1100. Which Castle is now in the possessi∣on of George Lord Digby, and how the case stands with him I leave to the Courteous Reader to Censure. Whereunto is added, certaine Articles of High Treason against the said Lord Digby. London, Printed for George Thompson 1641.
THat this answere of his Majesty is a denyall to the  of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the . Resolved, That those that advised his Maiesty to give this answere, are enemies to the , and mischievous Projec∣tors against the defence of the Kingdome. Resolved, that this denyall is of that dangerous consequence, that if his Maiesty shall persist in it; It will hazard the peace and  of all his Kingdomes, unlesse some speedy remedy be apply∣ed by the wisedome and authority of both Houses of Parliament. Resolved, that such parts of this Kingdome as have put them∣selves into a Posture of defence against the common danger, hath done nothing but what is , and  approved by the house. Resolved, that if his Maiesty shall remove into any remote parts from his Parliament, it will be a great hazard to the Kingdome; and a great preiudice to the Proceedings  the Parliament. Resolved, that these houses holds it necessary,  his  may be desired, that the Prince may come unto Saint Iames,  fome other convenient place about London, and there to continue. Resolved, that the Lords be desired to ioyne with this house in an humble request unto his Maiesty; that he will be pleased to re∣side  His Parliament; that both houses may have conveni∣ence of accesse unto him upon all occasions. Resolved, that the Lords be moved to ioyne with this house in some ,  finde who were the  that gave his Maiesty this advice, that they may be removed from his Maiesty, and brought to condigne punishment. Resolved, that no Charter can be granted by the King, to create a  in any Corporation,  the Militia of that place, without consent of Parliament. Resol. That the Lords shal be moved to  this Resolved, that the  shall be  Committee that may ioyn with a Committee of a proportionable number of this house; to consider, and prepare what is  to , or upon a∣ny thing else that may arise upon this answer of his  concerning the , and concerning the Prince.
A True relation of the un∣fortunate and untimely deaths of all the Nobillity and others, which ever since King Stephens time have possessed Shirborne Castle. OSmond Earle of Dorset, a Norman by birth, and a great favourite of the Conquerours, had Sherborne given him by the conquerour, a∣mongst divers other advancements afterwards, upon the Vacancie of the See of Salisbury, Osmund, forsaking the temporall authority, and being in great grace with the King, became Bishop of that See, and got the Castle of Sherborne to be annexed to that Bishopprick, setting a curse upon them that did goe about to pluck the same from that godly and pious use, it being really given to the Church. This Bishop was a man of that great integrity and holinesse, that he was canonized at Rome, and set downe in our Almanack for a Saint. This Castle, with the land thereunto apperaining, conti∣nued in the Bishops untill the time of King Stephen; at which time one Roger being Bishop of Salisbury (who reedisied both the Castle of Sherborne, and the Castle of the , commonly called the Vize) being well knowne to be a Bishop of great wealth; the said King
wanting Money for many purposes, but especially for the compassing of a Mariage betweene Eustace his one∣ly Sonne, and Constantia the French Kings sister, seized upon the wealth of the said Bishop in the Castle of the Devices, and tooke away the Castle of Sherborne from the Bishopprick, and kept it in his owne hands. Not long after, the right heire to the Crowne, Maude the Empresse, and Henry fift Empresse her sonne invaded England with such power, as that King Stephen was dri∣ven by composition to make Henry fift Empresse heire apparent to the Crowne, and dsinherit Eustace his owne naturall Sonne as appeares by the records after that time, while the said Castle continued in  Crowne, great and many troubles arose to the King; sometimes the Father was divided against the Sonne; sometimes the Sonne against the Father; the  of this king∣dome against the King, and the King against the Bar∣rons: from the King this Castle was granted to some of the Noble race of the Mountaculs, and while  had it, two of them lost their heads successively one after the other, as appeares by the records, and in the time of King Edward the  one Robert Wynill being Bishop of , brought a writ of right against William Munta∣cule Earle of  for the said Castle,  hee proceeded so farre, as that their Champions were en∣tred  to try the  for it. But the King tooke up the matter, and ordered the Bishop to give a summe of Money to the , which was done accor∣dingly, and the Castle restored to the Bishopprick. The said  continued , untill the time of King   sixth, all which time the Duke  So∣merset got  lease thereof, who granted the same
Sir Iohn Horsey, the best of his ability that ever was of that name in those parts; after which, within halfe a yeare the Duke of Somerset lost his head, as appeares by the records, and Sir Iohn  declined in his estate untill he became so extreordinary poore that he was outlawed for ten pounds. King Edward dying, and Ni∣colas Heath Archbishop of Yorke being Lord Chancel∣lour of England, Capon Bishop of Sarum exhibited a Bill in  against the said Sir Iohn Horsey, shewing that the lease which he had made to the Duke was by  and threats, and for feare of his life; upon which Bill the Lord Chancellour releived him, and de∣creed the Castle for the Bishop. After that it continu∣ed in the Bishopprick, untill about the thirry three of  Elizabeth. At which time Sir Walter  got it into his , wh ch also lost his head, as ap∣peares by the records, and by reason of his attainder it came again to the Crowne, and so from the Kings most  Majesty unto the most noble and hopefull Prince Henry, who held it not full a yeare, and so retur∣ned to the Crowne, and thence shortly after it came to the Earle of ; with whom how the case then stood, let them to whom it appertaineth judge. Since his attainder it was granted to Sir Iohn Digby Vice∣Chamberlaine to the King, now Earle of Bristoll a man of great merit, and the said Earle of Bristoll after the said castle was a short space in his  setled the same on his eldest sonne, the now Lord George Digby in whose possession the same now really is, and in what case he now standeth, I leave to determine of the curtious rea∣der  these severall Articles following. All which may be a warning unto those sacrilegions
persons who thinke all things well , which they can get from the Church, but let them take  of these things least that worse then they doe not fall up∣on them. Articles of Impeachment against the Lord George Digby, by the Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament assembled, in maintenance of their ac∣cusation whereby he standeth accused with High Treason in the Names of all the Com∣mons in England. 1. THat the said Georg Lord Digby, in or about the moneth of Ianuary 1641. malitiously and trayterously endeavo∣red to perswade his Majesty to leavie forces against his Liege Subjects within this Kingdome, and the said Lord Digby did in or about the same moneth, actually levie forces within this Realme, to the terrour of his Majesties Subjects. 2. That the said Lord Digby, and about the said moneth of Ianuary, and at other times , maliciously, and trayterous∣ly, labour to raise a jelosie and discention betweene the King and his people, and to possesse his Maiestie that hee could not live with safety of his person amongst them, and did thereupon traiterously endeavour to perswade his Maiesty to betake him∣selfe to some place of strength for his defence. 3. That the said Lord Digby, in or about the same moneth of Ianuary, and at other times, did malitiously and traiterously endeavour to stirre up ielousies and discensions betweene the King and his Parliament: and to that end and purpose, did the same moneth of , wickedly advise the framing of certaine false and scandalous Articles of high Treason against the L. Kimbolton, Denzil Hollis Esquior, Sir Arther  Barronet, Iohn Hamden, Iohn Pym, and Master Stroud Esquiors And  perswade his Maiestie accompanied with divers Soul∣dier,
and others in warlike manner to come in person into the House of Cemmons sitting in Parliament, to demand the said Members of the said House, to the apparent endangering of his Maiesties person, and the high violation of the priviledges, and being of Parliaments. All which matters were done, by the said George Lord Dig∣by, trayterously and wickedly to alienate the hearts of his  Liege People from his , and set division between them, and stirre up warre within this Kingdome. FINIS.
