M2869 12630192 64727
THE Most blessed and truest NEWES FROM IRELAND, SHEWING, The fortunate successe of the Protestants, And Gods just vengance on the Rebels. WITH A List of the Protestant Commanders, and the chief of the Rebels Commanders, and the Townes that the Protestants have relieved. With the humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Ministers, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of Lancaster, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. With his Majesties Answer thereunto. London, Printed for T. W. and G. H. 1642.
A List of the Protestant Commanders, and the chiefe of the Rebels Commanders, and the Towns tht the Protestants ave releeved. The Protestant Commanders Lord Ormond. Lord Brabason. Earle of Baramore. Lord Lisly. Earle of Kildare. S. George Wentworth Captain Armstrong Lord Pore. S. Thomas Lucas. Lord Thomond. Sir Rich. Greenvile. Colonell Monk. Captain Scout. Lord Lambart. Lieut. Col. Loftus, Sir Iohn Sherlock. Serj. Major Wan. Serj. Major Paget. Serj. Ma. Willoughby The chiefe Rebels. Earle of Care. L. Vis. Mountgarret L. Vis. Herne. Lord Dunsane. L. Bar. of Dunbony. L. Bar. of Logmoe. Earle of Wickloe. Earle of Waxford. Ear. of Catherlaugh Lord Muskre. Lord L. Lord Dlvin. Lord Arkin. Col. Fitz. Gerard. Captaine Demsey. Col. Hugh Birne. Tow reved by the Protestants. Athy. Killtrush. Drogheda. Cast. Tippar. Castle Catherlaugh. Cloughgrenan. Wiglee. Ballilenon. Cast. Rebon. Stradbally. Ballinkill. Dent. Knockardnegurrath. Burrs. Knocknemease. O Duns. int. Clogham. Kingsale.
Blessed Newes from Ireland. SIR, SInce many idle rumours are divulged a∣mong you, concerning the present con∣dition of Ireland, some of which are im∣probable, other are so doubtfull, that men have just cause of suspition not to believe. My purpose is therefore at this time inten∣ded perfectly to resolve you of the truest affaires, and most reall estate of all Ireland. The Lord Ormond, the Earle of Kildare, the Lord Brhan, Cap. Armstrong, Quarter-master Generall of the Horse, and Sir George Wentworths troupe, under the command of Captaine Herman, every one with their severall forces over∣came the Castle Tippar, which the Rebel had possest, taking from thence great stone of Ammunition, who marching onwards with great courage to Kiltullin, burned by the way many Villages of the Rebels; and from thence marching to Athy, burnt the Castle and Towne of Kish, belonging to the Rebellions Co∣lonel Fitz-Gerald; from thence they took great store of provision, which the rebels before had taken from the English. Then Sr. Patrick Wymes bringing us a fresh supply of souldiers, consisting of 500. Foot, and 100. Horse, the English Army marched to the Castle of Ca∣therlagh, where the Lord lin, Earle of West-Meath, the Lord Mountggarrat, the Lord Lopon, resisted them
with strōg forces, but our men had undaunted spirits, and feared them not in the least respect, and wee ha∣ving the advantage of them, being on a hil, gave them three vollies of shot, before they came within shot of us, and continuing very eager with them, we took the L. Muskgroo prisoner, & slew about nine score more, then they fled & yeelded up the Castle. From thence we marched to Cloughgrenan, a castle of great strength, and conquered that also; but the Rebels perceiving their approach, fired the towne; but Captain Harman knowing that part of the Countrey very well, fol∣lowed them, and slew a great number of them, and re∣lieved 5 hundred Protestants, exceedingly distressed there. Then we marched on, and relieved Captaine George Grehams Castle called, Ballilenon; and by the help of the Lord Lievtenants, and Sir Thomas Lucas troups, Castle Rebon and Pert were removed. Mar∣ching to Stradbally, we slew many passing over the Ri∣ver Barron, where the Rebels are encamped; and mar∣ching to his Majesties fort of Mary-borough, by the helpe of the Lord Lislyes forces, they relieved Bally∣nekill: Marching onwards, wee killed threescore Re∣bels at Knockardnegurrah, the other fled, and yeelded up the towne. The Lord Lievtenant, the Earle of Baramore, the Lord Poore, Earle of Alentia, the Lord Thomond, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Richard Grenvile, Captaine Armestrong, and Captaing Scout, with their severall Troups & Forces, relieved Burros, the Duke of Buckinghams Castle, and passing the River Noare, neere unto Florence, Fitz-Patrick, there was a stone Cause-way over a Bog, and passing thereby, we killed many Rebels, and relieved three hundred English Prisoners. Then they relieved Knocknemease, and in
the morning Burr, and put foure or five hundred En∣glish therein, who had endured a long siege by the rebels. In their returne back they burnt the Country of O Duns, till they came to Castle-Ruffe, and by the help of Colonell Monke, and Captaine Treswel, the one commanding the Lord Generals, and the other the Lord Lislyes Horse-Troops, slew foure hundred at the pssage of Portnehint, possest by the rebels. S. Pa∣tricke relieved the English in Ballynekill, who were in great distresses for want of victuals, sending the eigh∣ty Barrels of Wheat and Beere belonging to Demp∣sey, a notorious rebell: all whose villages they burnt, especially the Territory of Clanmaleero. Foure miles from Athy at the Bridge of Magainy, were about seven thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse of the rebels, conducted (as the Prisoners taken told us) by Viscount Mountgarrat, the Lord Viscount Ikerin, the Earle of Care, the Lord Dunsane, the Lord Astry, the Lord Baron of Dunbony, the Baron of Loghmoe, and most of the principall rebels, of the Counties of Wickloe, VVexford, Catherlaugh, Kildare, Kilkenny, and Queens County, who drew up part of their Forces to Pankardstown, neere Grang Mellon. By the directions of the Lord Generall, Corner Butler, and Cornet Ma∣grah, were sent to discover the rebels, and their For∣ces being understood to be so great, a Councell of of Warre was called, and it was debated what reso∣lution was fittest to be taken. It was concluded, that two thousand foure hundred foot, and foure hundred horse should be raised against them, and put into this order of marching: First, Cornet Pollard, with thirty Horse and forty Firelocks, as a Vantcurriers, and for∣lorne hope. Then the baggage belonging to the
horse. In the next place six Troops of horse led by Sir Tho. Lucas, Comissary Generall for the Horse in two divisions. Then followed the baggage of the foot Vieres. Next Captain Edmund Matthew, the Lord Pillon, son to the Earle of Roscommon, the Lord Bra∣bason, sonne to the Earle of Meath, Sir Robert Farrer, Collonell John Barry, Serjeant Major John Oagle, every one in the severall ranks and orders. Then fol∣lowed foure divisions of foot, each consisting of three hundred. The Artillery and Ammunition followed. Then two Troops of horse by Sir Richard Greenvile, after him Lievtenant Devalier. And the Lord Or∣mund marched in the reere. On the left hand there lay of the rebels, the Lord Mountgarrat, Earle of Care, and Colonell Hugh Birne: against them marched Sir Iohn Sherlocke, Lieutenant Collonell of the Lord Lambarts regiment, Lievtenant Collonel Lofins, Ser∣jeant Major VVarren, Serjant Maior Pageat, Seriant Maior VVilloughby and encountred very sharply with them, and slew three hundred and seventy rebels, and the rest fled. They have taken Waterford, Arkloo, Wash∣ford, and some other Towns, but we hope to recover them very suddenly. And when more happy fortune, and convenient successe shall be given us, I will trans∣port the truth thereof unto you. In the meane time, I beseech you to accept the affectionate love of, From Athy, May 14. 1642. Your most indulgent friend, John Barry.
The humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Mi∣nisters, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of Lancaster. Shewing to Your Sacred Majesty, OVr heart-breaking sense and sorrow for the unhap∣py Rents and Dstractions in your Majesties Domini∣ons, especially in the Session of so grave and godly an Assembly, (most graciously conveened by Your Majesty) en∣deavouring the glory of Almighty God in the Reformation of Religion, and the honour and weale of Your Majesty, and Your Realms, in setling and securing your Royall Throne in plenty & peace. But perceiving the long and remote distance of your Majesty from that Honourable Assembly, to have distracted the hearts of your good Subjects, and animated the Popish and malignant party amongst us, and fearing it may expose us to the danger and fury of a forraigne foe, retard the setling of the weighty affaires in our Land, and the subduing of the Rebels in Ireland; and finding your Majesties late reso∣lution for that expedition, to threaten danger to your Royall Person, farre more worth then ten thousand of us. We therefore your Majesties most loyall Subjects out of our zeale to Gods true Religion, your Majesties honour and safety, and the peace and welfare of your Dominions; and out of the deepe sense and apprehension of our interest in the same, do in all humility present and prostrate our selves, and supplication at your Royall feet, beseeching your Ma∣jesty to return to your great Councell (there presentative body of your Kingdome) in whom this Nation hath so farre consided, that they have intrusted them with their lives, li∣berties; and in which multitude of Counsellours there is health and stedfastnesse, and whereby the Royall Throne may be established in Righteousnesse, and we with the rest of your Faithfull Subjects shall continually praise and pray for your prosperous and happy Raigne over us.
At the Court at, Yorke the 10 of May, 1642. His Majestie hath expressely commanded me to give you this His Answer to your Petition. THat this Petion, as some others of this nature is grounded upon mis-information, and being grieved and highly essended to see how his good people have been and are abused by the false rumors and intelligences, which have procured, causlesse feares and apprehensions, referres the Pe∣titioners to the Answers hee hath given to the Declaration presented to Him at Now market, and to the Petition pre∣sented to Him the 26. of March last at Yorke, wherein His Majesty saith, you will clearely perceive, that He is not gone, but driven from his Parliament: His Majesty likewise, for your further information of His proceedings and in∣tentions, recommends to your view and consideration, His two Messages, and Declaration concerning Hull, and His Message touching the Reasons of His refusall to grant the Militia, all which, when they shall be fully represented to the rest of your County, He doubts not, but that you will rest very well satisfied of His consent and resolution for the main∣taining of, and governing His people by the Law of the Land, His unmoveable resolution for the maintenance and de∣fence of the true Protestant Profession, and the suppressi∣on of the barbarous Irish Rebellion, and His Majesty saith, That he believes you may then finde reason to petition the Parliament to comply with his Majesties just desires, and gracious offers, which is the only way safely and speedily to cure, the present distractions of this Kingdom, and with Gods blessing to put a happy end to the Irish rebellion: for the ef∣fecting whereof, as his Maiesty hath often said, he will nei∣ther spare paines, nor decline any hazzard of his Person or fortune. Edward Nicholas. FINIS.
