M320A 99829405 33844
A Malicious Man makes Reasons. To the Honourable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses. in Parliament Assembled. The Humble Petition of Prince Butler prays your Honours if you think it good Countenance, or no good Countenance, Right, or Wrong, Money, or no Money, Bawdy, or not Bawdy, Bastard, or no Bastard, Irish or no Irish, Alive, or Dead, to desire his Majesty and Secretary, by an Address, (whether they are, or will be ill inform'd, or not) to give or not give him positively without blushing, trembling, doubting, undervaluing, or scorning, an o∣pen general Letter to their Ambassadors a∣broad, that the Ambassador where he Ar∣rives, (whether he is or will be ill infor∣med or not) may desire the King, or Prince with his Secretary, to hear himself read his Grievances publickly or privately be∣fore them, and after a clear hearing to an∣swer him as they please; and the said Am∣bassador may give, or not give him Bed, and Bread, until he gets his answer in Wri∣ting, or not in writing from Court. And he prays your Honours, to desire his Ma∣jesty to give, or not give him Travelling-Money to Vienna, the Emperors Court, and he will pray. One Reason is good until another is told, and sometimes both Reasons are good; And the Injurer makes Reasons. The Petitioner prays to be heard at your Bar and he prays your Honours to give, or not give him a Certificate of all the Villanies and Shams, you may or shall hear reported of him by orders of Prince Pamphylion to the King, or your selves, without saying any thing to the contrary. He prays your ignorant Honours, Ill infor∣med or not, Disdainful or not, Scornful or not, Purse-proud or not, Bribed any of you all in general or not, to read this present Case Nicely. and Attentively, from the first to the last word in it; like Honourable, Famous, Sen∣sible, Attentive, Just, Judicoius, Pious, and compassionate Judges, as ye are, and ought to be; and not to use it as Young, or old Rich or poor malicious People uses often Cases and Pa∣pers; and not to own and prove the King and your selves barbarous, cruel, and inhuman Peo∣ple, to himself, in incredible Afflictions and Miseries these 20. Years.
